 
 
25 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2021-22 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning 
and Married Accommodation Project
 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning 
and Married Accommodation Project’ (Demand No. 20)] 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning   

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Twenty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2021-22 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning 
and Married Accommodation Project
 
Presented
Laid
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)
 
2 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2021-22) 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning 
and Married Accommodation Project’ (Demand No. 20)] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   8.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    8.12.2021 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
  
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
            
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) ……………………....….........           4 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….….............             5 
 
CHAPTER  I Report………………………………………………………………….....       6 
       
 
CHAPTER II A) Observations/ Recommendations which have been  
  accepted by the Government …………………………………….     14 
 
 B) Observations/ Recommendations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon............         69 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
 do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
 Government …………………………………                                            71 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon …………………...        72 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
 awaited………………………..........................................................        74 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  
 (2021-22) held on 17.11.2021.………......................................................           76 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
 Recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
 on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 
 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence 
 Planning and Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’                                 78 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2021-22)  
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Kunwar Danish Ali   
3 Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
4 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
5 Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
6 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
7 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser  
8 Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
9 Dr. Ram Shankar Katheria 
10 Shri Sridhar Kotagiri  
11 Smt. Rajashree Mallick 
12 Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
13 Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar 
14 Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy 
15 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
16 Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
17 Shri Prathap Simha 
18 Shri Brijendra Singh 
19 Shri Mahabali Singh  
20 Shri Durga Das (D.D.) Uikey 
21 Vacant  
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22 Dr. Ashok Bajpai  
23 Shri N. R. Elango 
24 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
25 Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi  
26 Shri Sharad Pawar 
27 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao  
28 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
29 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
30 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D.P. Vats (Retd.) 
31 Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
2.  Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
3.  Smt. Shilpa Kant  - Committee Officer  

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2021-22), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-fifth Report of the Committee 
on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-first Report on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, 
Defence Planning and Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’.  
2.  The Twenty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.03.2021. The Report contained 33 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in November, 2021 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 17.11.2021. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
01 December, 2021 Chairperson 
10 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-first 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants for the year 2021-22 on Capital Outlay 
on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and Married 
Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’ of the Ministry of Defence which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.03.2021. 
 2.         The Committee's Twenty-first Report contained 33 Observations/ 
Recommendations on the following aspects:- 
 
Para No.  Subject 
1-3 Capital Outlay on Defence Services 
4 Projections and Allocations in respect of three services 
5 Additional Allocation 
6 Ratio for Capital and Revenue Outlay 
7-8 Modernization of Defence Forces 
9-10 Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
11 Non Lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund – Defence Renewal Fund 
12-13 Defence Procurement Policy 
14 Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
15-17 Increasing Dependence on Foreign Suppliers for Military Hardware 
18-19 Extreme Cold Weather Clothing System  
20-22 Offset Clause 
23-25 Import Contents in OFB and DPSUs 
26-29 Five Year Defence Plans 
30 Married Accommodation Project (MAP) 
31-33 Current status of Phase II and III of MAP  
  
 3.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. However, the replies on 
Recommendation Nos. 18 and 19 have been termed as “classified” by the Ministry and 

7 
 
have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairperson in a sealed cover. These replies have 
been placed under ‘accepted’ category. Reply to the Recommendation No 5 has not 
been received from the Ministry as it is under approval. Therefore, reply no. 5 has been 
treated as an “interim reply” and is kept under Chapter V. The remaining replies have 
been examined and categorised as follows: 
  
(i) (A) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government:  
             Para Nos. 
1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30 and 31 
 
(27 Recommendations) 
 
(Please see Chapter II (A) of the Report) 
 
 (B) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government and commented upon: 
 
 Para Nos. 21, 32 and 33  
(3 Recommendations) 
 
(Please see Chapter II (B) of the Report) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
                         Nil 
(0 Recommendation) 
(Please see Chapter III of the Report) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration and to be commented upon: 
 
  Para No. 10                         
(1 Recommendation) 
(Please see Chapter IV of the Report) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
 
             Para Nos. 5 and 11 

8 
 
(02 Recommendations) 
(Please see Chapter V of the Report) 
 
4.         The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments 
made in Chapter I of this Report and final replies to the Recommendations/ 
Observations for which only interim replies have been given by the Government 
to be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than six months of 
the presentation of this Report. It goes without saying that Action Taken 
Statements which are due to be submitted within six months of the presentation 
of this Report, see the light of the day within the prescribed timeline. 
  
A. CREATION OF SEPARATE HEAD FOR COMMITTED LIABILITIES AND NEW 
SCHEMES 
Recommendation No. 10 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
           “The Committee learn that at present, there is no separate allocation of funds for 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes under Defence Services Estimates and 
the funds for it are allocated under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) 
Head.  The Committee observe that the allocation in the 2021-22 for Army is 
Rs.30,636.90 crore against projection of Rs. 39,977.00 crore.  For Navy 
(excluding Joint Staff) the allocation is Rs. 31,031.02 crore vis-à-vis projection of 
Rs. 65,888.96 crore which is less than the half of the projected amount.  The 
allocation for Air Force stands at Rs. 49,320.77 crore against the projection of 
Rs. 72,180.06 crore.  In addition it is ensured by the Ministry that urgent and 
critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to the operational 
preparedness of the Defence Services. The Committee find it contradictory in 
comparison to amount of funds actually allocated under BE-2021-22 for the three 
services especially Navy being a capital intensive force.  Ministry had sought 
additional funds of Rs. 61,198.12 crore at RE stage in 2021-22 under 
Modernization Head but only Rs. 24,272.50 crore were provided to 
them.  Considering this grim situation towards allocation in Capital Acquisition 
Fund, the Committee in their 7th Report had recommended the Ministry of 
Defence to create a dedicated fund for Committed Liabilities and New 
Schemes.  As no progress has been observed by the Committee in this regards, 
the Committee again urge the Ministry to create a separate dedicated Head for 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes from the next Budget onwards, so that 

9 
 
there are no difficulties faced in matching the deadlines in the payment towards 
already committed purchases and latest weaponry could be procured under New 
Schemes.”  
 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“The outstanding contractual commitments which are overdue or commitments 
which are likely to arise during a period on account of completion in contractual 
milestone constitute committed liabilities over that period. This amount of 
committed liabilities is dynamic in nature and depends on contracts concluded 
at a particular point of time, contractual milestones due to be fulfilled over a 
defined period and the associated slippages, if any. New Schemes constitute 
new projects/proposals that are at various stages of procurement/approval and 
are likely to be fructified over a defined period (usually a financial year). The 
forecasted amount for new schemes also keeps on changing with reference to 
their fructification/finalization. On conclusion of contract with respect to a “new 
scheme” the same becomes a committed liabilities and payments have to be 
scheduled as per fulfilment of contractual milestones. Thus, the Capital 
Acquisition (modernization) segment of the Capital Budget comprises of both 
committed liabilities and new schemes.  
It is submitted that in the Defence Services Estimates, the allocation under 
Capital Acquisition (modernization) is made through specific/separate Minor 
Heads which caters to both the Committed Liabilities and New Schemes.” 
 
7. The Committee find from the reply of the Ministry that the Capital 
Acquisition (modernization) segment of the Capital Budget comprises both 
‘Committed Liabilities’ and ‘New Schemes’ through ‘minor heads’ under Capital 
Acquisition (modernization). As the additional funds provided to the Ministry 
under Modernisation Head at RE stage in 2021-22 stood at Rs. 24,272.50 crore 
against the projection of Rs. 61,198.12 crore, which in the opinion of the 
Committee is very abridged amount even given to conservative estimates.  This 
has a rippling effect once divided further into sub-heads.  The amount provided 
evidently stands even less than fifty percent of the projection.  The Committee, 
therefore, in no uncertain words opine that it would be in the best interest and in 

10 
 
fitness of things for the Ministry to create two separate Heads namely Committed 
Liabilities and New Schemes. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 B.  OFFSET CLAUSE 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 The Committee have been apprised that as on date, a total of 56 Defence offset 
contracts have been signed in MoD. The total offset obligations are estimated at 
approx US$ 13.03 billion to be discharged over a period from 2008-2027. Out of 
the total contracted obligations US$ 3.57 billion has been discharged by the 
vendors, of which US $ 1.93 billion has been accepted in audit and the balance 
claims are under clarification/examination. The Committee are of the view that 
the Ministry of Defence would take appropriate measures for clearing balance 
claims which are under clarification/examination which would result in further 
strengthening of Defence Industrial Base. 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  “As per the updated status, till April, 2021, a total of 56 Defence offset contracts 
have been signed in MoD. The total offset obligations are estimated at 
approximately US $ 13.03 billion to be discharged over a period from 2008-2027. 
Out of the total contracted obligations, US $3.67 billion has been discharged by 
the vendors, of which US $2.16 billion has been accepted in audit and the 
balance claims are under clarification/ examination. With the introduction of end-
to-end online submission and verification of offset claims through the offset 
portal, the process of audit and disposal of offset claims has become more 
transparent, efficient and accountable.” 
 
10. The Committee note that till April, 2021, a total of 56 Defence offset 
contracts have been signed in MoD which have offset obligations estimated at 
approximately US$ 13.03 billion, to be discharged between the years 2008-2027. 
The Committee observe with restrain that a considerable period of time has been 
elapsed and to be precise thirteen years have passed and  the Ministry has been 
able to dispense only US$ 3.67 billion out of the total contracted obligations.  The 
Committee, therefore, has no option at this stage but to reiterate their earlier 

11 
 
recommendation and desire that the Ministry of Defence should take precise 
measures to expedite the procedure for clearing balance claims at the earliest. 
The Committee would also like to be apprised about the updated position of 
settlement of balance claims at the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements. 
  
C. MARRIED ACCOMODATION PROJECT (MAP) 
 
Recommendation No. 32 
  
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee feel that budget constraints are always there in capital intensive 
projects like MAP, and the Committee appreciate the decision of the Ministry to 
complete the targeted number of dwelling units through AMWP. At this stage the 
Committee only desire the Ministry to get this proposal accepted at the earliest 
and start with the construction of Dwelling Units as soon as possible so that it 
does not get delayed further.” 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
  “Against total requirement of 1,98,881 Dwelling Units 1,17,118 Dwelling Units 
have already been completed under Phase-I and Phase-II. As of now 10,661 of 
Phase-II are in various stages of planning and execution. The Phase-II is likely to 
be completed by Dec 2023. Rs 100 crore were allotted for preparation of DPRs 
for 24,592 Dwelling Units of Phase-III which are at advance stage of completion. 
Now, as per decision taken in the DMA, the Draft CCS Note for foreclosure of 
MAP Phase III and to execute the remaining works through the AMWP route is 
under preparation.” 
  
13. The Committee find that out of 1,98,881 Dwelling Units only  1,17,118 
Dwelling Units have been completed and 81,763 of their numbers are yet to be 
completed under Phase-I and Phase-II. The Committee also take serious note of 
the delay in commencement and execution of the three phases of MAP as not 
even one of them is complete thus far even after a considerable lapse of time. The 

12 
 
Committee take note of the fact that the draft CCS Note for foreclosure of MAP 
Phase III and for executing the remaining works through the Annual Major Works 
Programme (AMWP) route is under preparation. In this regard, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry formalizes a concrete plan bringing forth the pragmatic 
time lines, and making concerted efforts to expedite the matter and complete the 
construction of the remaining number of dwelling units in all the three phases of 
MAP. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress and latest status 
in this regard at the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements. 
 
D.  PLAN TO EXTEND MAP IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR 
Recommendation No. 33 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“During the course of evidence, when the deliberations on the proposal or plan to 
increase MAP in Jammu and Kashmir was taking place, it was informed that as 
peace is returning to the Kashmir Valley, there will be a requirement of putting 
more accommodation in the valley. The Committee, welcome the idea of 
increasing the number of dwelling units in Kashmir Valley and accordingly 
recommend that emphasis should be given on completing required number of 
Dwelling Units (DUs) at the earliest so that our Armed Forces would be in a 
better state of mind to serve the nation.” 
 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“The construction of Dwelling Units in Jammu & Kashmir as per the approved re-
distribution and re-location plan was considered to be undertaken in MAP Phase- 
III, which would now be executed through the AMWP route, once the CCS 
approval is received for foreclosure of MAP Ph-III. The additional requirement of 
Dwelling Units at Jammu and Kashmir will also be taken into consideration while 
finalising the AMWP. ” 
 
16.       The Committee observe that as peace has returned to the Kashmir valley, 
there would be an obvious increase in demand for more dwelling units in Jammu 
and Kashmir. Considering additional requirement of Dwelling Units under MAP 

13 
 
in  Jammu and Kashmir by the Ministry of Defence is commendable, nevertheless 
the Committee desire that concrete steps should be taken to finalise the matter at 
the earliest so that our Armed Forces do not have to fret about the housing 
whether they're living on or off base and consequently serve the country in the 
most efficient manner.  The Committee also desire that details of dwelling units to 
be constructed through Annual Major Works Programme Route should be 
intimated to the Committee at the time of furnishing of Action Taken Statements.  

14 
 
CHAPTER II (A) 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Capital Outlay on Defence Services 
 
Recommendation No. 1-3: 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note from the information submitted by the Ministry that Capital Outlay 
provides allocation for Land & Construction Works of the three Services and other 
departments. In other words, it caters for the expenditure incurred on durable assets of 
Defence Services, i.e., Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Defence Ordnance 
Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Director 
General Quality Assurance(DGQA), National Cadet Corps (NCC), Married 
Accommodation Project, National Defence Academy,  Rashtryia Rifles etc.    
 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee further note that during the year 2020-21, the Ministry allocated  
Rs.3,47,088.28 crore under Defence Services Estimates vis-à-vis the projection of 
Rs.4,76,247.97 crore which is 7.44% increase over BE 2020-21. In Capital Budget the 
Ministry was allocated Rs. 1,35,060.72 crore as BE of 2021-22.  Out of this head for 
the Capital Acquisition (including DGOF supplies) Ministry has been allocated Rs. 
1,11,463.21 crore; for Land and Works of three services (including Married 
Accommodation Projects) Rs. 11,537.01 crore and for DRDO, DGOF and other 
Defence Departments Rs. 12,060.50 crore.  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
The Committee are glad to note that there is an increase in the allocation of the budget 
in the Capital Head vis-à-vis budgetary allocations in 2019-20 and 2020-21. The 
Committee note that there is an allocation of Rs. 3,62,345 crore for Ministry of Defence 
for Defence Services and other organizations excluding Defence Pensions in 2021-22 
which is Rs. 24,792.62 crore or 18.78% more as compared to 2020-21. The 
Committee commend the Ministry for their persistent pursuance of Ministry of Finance 
at various levels for approval of this enhanced budgetary allocation and expect that the 
Ministry of Defence would utilize this budget for developing and acquiring the most 
modern state of the art fighting platforms, which can match Northern and Western 

15 
 
neighbors in the light of current security threats on the Northern frontiers of the 
country. The Committee further note that the Ministry could utilize only Rs. 2,33,173.70 
crores (upto Dec. 2020) out of RE of Rs. 3,43,822.00 crore in 2020-21 at the time of 
furnishing action taken replies to the Committee. The Committee further hope that the 
Ministry utilizes the entire allocated budget under Capital Outlay in 2020-21 and the 
projected allocation in 2021-22 to enhance this acquisition of latest weaponry, air craft, 
ships, tanks and capital intensive projects including land, building and other 
infrastructure.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 In FY 2020-21, an amount of Rs. 1,13,734 Crore was allocated in Budget 
Estimates (BE) and Rs. 1,34,510 Crore in Revised Estimates (RE)under Capital Head. 
Against these allocations, expenditure of Rs. 1,34,407.50 Crore (i.e. 99.92% of RE 
2020-21) has been done till March (Final-as on 19.05.2021), 2021. It may be 
appreciated that Ministry has utilized the entire budget allocated under Capital head. 
 It may also be added that necessary instructions are issued from time to time for 
compliance with financial propriety norms and avoidance of overspending/ 
underutilization of funds. The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to 
ensure optimum utilization of available resources.  If required, additional funds will be 
sought at appropriate stages. 
 
Projections and Allocations in respect of three services 
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee observe that since 2015-16, none of the three Services have 
been allocated the same amount that has been projected by the Ministry at BE or RE 
State.  The gap between the RE figures for Army in 2015-16 was at the time of Rs. 
3614.86 core which has increased to Rs. 5735.89 crore in 2020-21.  For Navy the 
difference was Rs. 5412.14 crore in 2015-16 at RE stage which has become Rs. 
14,226.4 crore in 2020-21.  For Air Force the gap was Rs. 5338.63 crore in 2015-16 
which increased to Rs. 17,871.27 crore in 2020-21 at RE stage.  The Committee further 
note that at BE stage in 2021-22 the gap between the projected and allocated budget 
for Army, Navy and Air Force in Rs. 14,960.2 crore, Rs. 37,667.23 crore and Rs. 
23,925.79 crore which are remarkably high.  The Committee are of the view that in the 
present scenario of conflict with our neighbouring countries especially at borders of our 
country, such situation is not conducive for preparation of the country to bring it at par 

16 
 
with them or making it even better than theirs by possessing capital intensive modern 
machines which are imperative to tilt the result of war in our favour and also increase 
deterrence capabilities of our country. Taking into account the trend of sharp decline in 
the allocation of funds vis-à-vis projections under Army, Air Force and Navy, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should not make any reductions while 
allocating budget for Capital Head for any of the Services in the Demands for the 
coming years.  The Committee also recommend the Ministry to take steps to acquire 
funds at the stage of Revised Estimate Stage and at the time of Supplementary Grants 
keeping in view the operational preparedness of the three forces equally.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on ceilings received, funds are allocated to the Services/organizations 
taking into consideration pace of expenditure, committed liabilities, approval stage of 
various projects/schemes, absorption capacity etc. Though the allocations received are 
not as per projections made, additional funds are being sought at Supplementary/RE 
stage taking into account expenditure pattern during the year, pending committed 
liabilities etc.  Also, if required, through reprioritization, it is ensured that urgent and 
critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of 
the Defence Services. 
 
Ratio for Capital and Revenue Outlay 
Recommendation No. 6 
 The Committee observe that the ratio for Capital and Revenue outlay this year 
can find some solace as it has improved from the ratio of 83:17 in 2015-16 to 80:20 in 
2021-22.  However, the ratio is way short of the ideal ratio of 60:40 (Revenue : Capital) 
in case of Army.  With respect to other services the ratio between the Revenue and 
Capital seems to be near the ideal ratio of 60:40.  Although the Ministry has almost 
achieved the target of ideal ratio for total outlay in 2020-21 and 2021-22, still the 
Committee, recommend that measures should be taken to bridge the gap and achieve 
ideal ratio of 60:40 (Revenue : Capital) in respect of Army and other Services. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The higher growth in the revenue expenditure of the Services is mainly attributable 
to the fact that Army is manpower intensive with a large portion of its expenditure 
devoted to Salaries. This skews the revenue-capital ratio in favour of revenue 

17 
 
expenditure in overall sense and for Army in particular. Maintaining ideal 
revenue/capital ratio for Army will broadly depend on reduction of manpower, which can 
prove detrimental to security of the nation.  However, efforts are made to improve the 
revenue/capital ratio from ongoing pattern by minimizing revenue expenditure.    
 Overall, Revenue to Capital Ratio for Defence Services was 65:35 in BE 2020-21 
and 61:39 in BE 2021-22. Navy and Air Force are Capital Intensive in nature and the 
same is being reflected in the distribution of funds in the Revenue and Capital Segment 
of the respective Services.  For Navy, Revenue to Capital Ratio was 46:54 in BE 2020-
21 and 41:59 in BE 2021-22 and for Air Force this ratio was 41:59 in BE 2020-21 and 
37:63 in BE 2021-22. 
It may also be added that ceilings are received separately for Revenue (Salary 
and Non-Salary) and Capital, based on which funds are allocated to services. The 
procedure followed for allocation involves trend of expenditure, projections made by the 
services, Committed Liabilities to be fulfilled, absorption capacity etc. Therefore, it may 
not be possible to maintain a particular ratio in favour of Capital or Revenue. However, 
every effort is made to ensure that no project/ proposal is shelved for want of funds. As 
and when required, additional funds are sought and requirements reprioritized ensuring 
optimum utilization of available resources. 
Modernization of Defence Forces 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that the Modernization of Defence Forces involves the 
acquisition of new state-of-the-art platforms, technologies and weapon systems to 
upgrade and augment Defence capabilities and it is a continuous process based on 
threat perception, operational necessities and technological changes to keep the Armed 
Forces in a state of readiness to meet the entire spectrum of security challenges. As per 
the assertion of the Ministry, the Government attaches the highest priority to ensure that 
the Armed Forces are sufficiently equipped to meet any operational requirement. This is 
achieved through induction of new equipment and technological upgradation of 
capabilities. The equipment requirements of the Armed Forces are planned and 
progressed through a detailed process which includes 15 Year Long Term Integrated 
Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a five year Service-wise Capability Acquisition Plan, a two 
year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and deliberations by the Defence Acquisition 
Council chaired by the Raksha Mantri. 
Reply of the Government 
  Statement of facts, therefore, no action is required. 

18 
 
Modernization of Defence Forces 
Recommendation No. 8 
 The Committee further note that an overview of the BE, RE and AE on 
Modernization for capital acquisition since 2016-17 shows that Actual Expenditure is 
more than the allocated funds even after RE Stage.  Although the Ministry has utilized 
Rs. 70,570.81 crore out of BE of Rs. 90047.80 crore in 2020-21 by December, 2020, 
the Committee hope that the target of full utilization of funds is achieved under this head 
by the end of F.Y. 2020-21. The Committee are given to understand that modernization 
of Armed Forces through procurement of new equipment and upgrading of existing 
equipments and systems is a continuous process which are progressed as per the 
approved Capital Acquisition plans, therefore, the Committee recommend that  
enhanced and adequate budgetary allocation should be made under Capital Head for 
modernization purpose so that the procurement and upgrading procedures should be 
carried out without any hurdle of shortage of funds.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 21-22, an allocation of Rs. 1,11,463.21 Crore (i.e. an increase of 
Rs.21,415.41 Crore over BE 20-21) has been made under Modernisation (Capital 
Acquisition) Head. Funds are allocated to the Services taking into consideration pace of 
expenditure, committed liabilities, approval stage of various projects/schemes etc. 
Though the allocations received are less than projections made, however, based on 
expenditure pattern during the year, additional funds are sought at Supplementary/RE 
stages.  Also, if required, through reprioritization, it is ensured that procurement and 
upgrading procedures are carried out without any hurdle of shortage of funds 
 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
9. The Committee find that Committed Liability refers to payments anticipated 
during a financial year in respect of contracts concluded in previous years.  Under the 
Defence Services Estimates, Committed Liabilities constitute a significant element in 
respect of the capital acquisition segment, since one project may span several financial 
years.  As such, it is important to track the element of Committed Liabilities which holds 
first charge on the budget allocation.  Inadequate allocation for committed liabilities 
would definitely lead to ‘default situation’ on contractual obligations. New Schemes 

19 
 
include new projects/ proposals which are at various stages of approval and are likely to 
be implemented in near future. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply of the Government is combined for Recommendation No. 9 and 10. 
 
 
PROCUREMENT POLICY 
 
Defence Procurement Policy 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
The Committee find that the policy for procurement of Defence equipment for the 
Armed Forces aims to ensure timely procurement of military equipment, systems and 
platforms as required by the Armed Forces in terms of performance capabilities and 
quality standards, through optimum utilisation of allocated budgetary resources. The 
policy also seeks to ensure that the highest degree of probity, public accountability, 
transparency, fair competition and level-playing field are achieved in the process of 
procurement. In addition, self-reliance in Defence equipment production and acquisition 
is steadfastly pursued as a key aim of the policy. The policy is implemented through the 
mechanism of Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). The Committee also find that 
the Defence Procurement Procedure 2016 has been revised as Defence Acquisition 
Procedure 2020 which is driven by the tenets of Defence Reforms announced as part of 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan. In order to promote indigenous design and development 
of defence equipment ‘Buy {Indian-IDDM (Indigenously Designed, Developed and 
Manufactured)}’ category which was introduced in 2016 and was accorded top most 
priority for procurement of capital equipment, has been retained in DAP 2020. The 
Committee were also informed that Ministry of Defence has notified a ‘Negative list’ of 
101 items for which there would be an interim embargo on the import beyond the 
timeline indicated against them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 These are observations of the Committee based on the information provided by 
MoD. Therefore, no further action is envisioned. 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
 The Committee are hopeful that new Defence Acquisition Procedure will make 
the procedure fast track and the Services will get the supply of arms, equipment and 
ammunition in time and promote self reliance at the same time. The Committee note the 
noble intentions of the Ministry in the form of DAP 2020, nevertheless they recommend 
that concerted efforts of all stakeholders i.e. the Ministry, DPSUs, OFB, the Armed 

20 
 
Forces and private sector are indispensible for realisation of the goal of Self Reliance in 
Defence Sector for which all efforts should be done by the Ministry so as to maximize 
the gains from each of the above. 
Reply of the Government 
  To ensure self-reliance in procurement of defence equipment and achieve self-
reliance in Defence production following measures have been introduced in Defence 
Acquisition Procedure (DAP) – 2020:- 
(i) Notification of a list of weapon/ platforms for ban on import – This would 
encourage production of these weapons/ platforms in India. 
 
(ii) Indigenisation of import spares – Explore willingness of Foreign vendors to 
progressively undertake manufacture of amongst other things, spares in India. 
 
(iii) New category of Buy (Global – Manufacture in India) – The new category 
enables ab-initio indigenisation of spares. 
 
(iv) Co-production through Inter Government Agreement. The newly added provision 
enables establishing co-production facilities through IGA and also explores 
import substitution. 
 
(v) Make Category. Make II & Make III (newly introduced in DAP 2020) categories 
further the objective of self-reliance by involving greater participation of Indian 
industrial eco-system including private sector. 
 
(vi) FDI in Defence Manufacturing. Introduction of New category Buy (Global – 
Manufacture in India) encourage Foreign OEMs to set up ‘Manufacturing / 
Maintenance entities’ through its subsidiary in India. The definition of Indian 
Vendor has also been aligned to the new FDI policy. 
 
(vii) Offset Guidelines. The revised Offset Guidelines are focused towards 
development of Defence ecosystem while giving incentives to ToT and Defence 
Manufacturing, at the same time encouraging MSMEs & Defence Industrial 
Corridors. 
 
 
  

21 
 
Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
Recommendation No. 14 
 From the information submitted by the Ministry, for ensuring accountability and 
transparency in Defence Procurement cases, the Committee note that measures for 
promoting Probity, Public Accountability and Transparency in Defence capital 
procurements, include execution of Pre Contract Integrity Pact (PCIP) for all cases 
above Rs. 20 crore to ensure corruption free procurement process (binding agreement 
between parties that their officials will not offer or accept bribes), guidelines for handling 
of complaints provide for time bound disposal of complaints which are aligned to CVC/ 
DOP&T guidelines, instructions issued for ascertaining vigilance status of L1 vendor 
before seeking approval of the Competent Financial Authority (CFA) and guidelines for 
penalties in business dealings with entities and capacity assessment for shipbuilding 
entities notified. As accountability and transparency is extremely imperative in the 
Defence Procurement Procedures, the Committee recommend that the above 
measures be strictly followed and firm monitoring mechanism be put in place for early 
procurement of weapon systems. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Defence is committed to maintaining the highest standards of probity, 
transparency and accountability in the defence procurement process and to follow the 
laid down procedure and policies thereof.  
 
Increasing Dependence on Foreign Suppliers for Military Hardware 
Recommendation No. 15 & 16 
15. The ever increasing import of arms and equipments has been a cause of worry for 
the Committee. On being largest importer of the arms and equipment in the World, the 
Ministry apprised the Committee that no authoritative and official information of India 
being the largest importer of Defence equipment is available as no country officially 
reveals information on import of Defence equipment. However, in the report published in 
February 2017 by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), India 
has been shown as the largest importer of Defence equipment for the year 2012-16. 
The Committee learnt that capital procurement of Defence equipment is undertaken 
from various domestic as well as foreign vendors, as per extant Defence Procurement 
Procedure (DPP), based on threat perception, operational challenges and technological 
changes so as to keep the Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet the entire 
spectrum of security challenges. 

22 
 
16. The Committee note that during the last four financial years (2016-17 to 2019-20), 
Out of total 213 contracts, 90 contracts worth about Rs.1,76,569.10 crore have been 
signed with foreign vendors including USA, Russia, Israel, France, etc. for procurement 
of Defence equipment for Armed forces. The Defence equipment imported during this 
period includes helicopters, aircrafts, missiles, rifles, artillery guns, simulators and 
ammunition. 
Reply of the Government 
  Statement of facts, therefore, no action is required. 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
The Committee also note that during the year 2020-21 (upto 21.01.2021), total 
expenditure on foreign contracts under capital Acquisition budget for the Defence 
Forces was 24384.63 crore which is a crucial percentage of the BE for the Financial 
year 2020-21. The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry to bring down the 
expenditure on imports, as the expenditure has come down from Rs 31058.34 crore in 
2019-20. The Committee recommend that ways and means should be forced so that 
Ordnance Factories, DPSUs, DRDO and Private Industries work in coordination to 
produce not only import substitute products but also expand their export potential so 
that the country become an exporter of defence equipment.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production has taken several initiatives to 
reduce the import of Defence items. Some of the initiatives are enumerated as under: 
 Indigenization Policy: Policy for Indigenization was notified by Department of 
Defence Production on 08 March, 2019, with the objective “to create an industry 
ecosystem. It is estimated that Defence PSUs will reduce the import bill through 
indigenization of products and processes.  
 
 Indigenization Portal (SRIJAN portal): SRIJAN portal (srijandefence.gov.in) to 
promote indigenization was launched on 14 Aug 2020. As on date i.e, 24.06.2021, 
10714 items, which were earlier imported by DPSUs//OFB/SHQs, have been 
displayed on the portal. The Indian industry has shown interest for 2799 displayed 
items so far. DPSUs/OFB/SHQs are interacting with these industries for 
indigenization of the items as per extant procedures. 
 

23 
 
 Implementation of Make-II – The Make-II framework (Industry funded prototype 
development) for implementation by DPSUs/OFB was notified on 11.02.2019. 
DPSUs/ OFB have identified 1728 items under Make-II. These items are at various 
stages of development process.  
 
 Long Term Orders -“Framework for placing Long Term Orders by DPSUs” has 
been approved by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri on 04 Nov 2019. Under this Framework, 
the procuring organization may aggregate demand of the item for a long period of 
upto 10 years, in cases where it finds challenges in indigenization. 
 
 Positive lists of Indigenisation:  Ministry of Defence has notified two positive list 
of items, for which there would be an embargo on the import beyond the timeline 
indicated against them. This is a big step towards self-reliance in defence. This 
offers a great opportunity to the Indian defence industry to manufacture these items 
using their own design and development capabilities to meet the requirements of 
the Armed Forces. The fn issued in May 2021. This list includes some high 
technology weapon systems like artillery guns, assault rifles, corvettes, sonar 
systems, transport aircrafts, light combat helicopters (LCHs), radars, Helicopter with 
all up weight, next generation corvette, Border Surveillance system, Land Based 
MRSAM weapon system, Rocket RGB-60 HE with fuse, Amoured Dozor, Anti –
material Rifle, Counter Mine Flail, Instant fire Detection and suppression system for 
tanks and many other items to fulfill the needs of our Defence Services. 
 
 Enhanced domestic procurement for FY 2021-22 i.e. 64.09% of the total 
procurement i.e.  Rs. 71438.36 Crore. 
 
In addition to the above, DPSUs have also taken initiatives to promote 
indigenisation. The details of such initiatives are as below:  
HAL: HAL has adopted multifarious approach for reducing dependence on import of 
Defence equipment, which includes indigenous design and development, in-country 
manufacture under license from OEMs, mid-life upgrade of existing platforms, MRO of 
available platforms and indigenization of imported systems and LRUs wherever feasible 
have been taken up by HAL ever since inception. 
HAL's product profile includes Su-30 MKI, LCA Tejas, Dornier Do-228, Hawk, Basic 
Trainer Aircraft HTT-40, ALH Dhruv, Light Combat Helicopter (LCH) and Light Utility 
Helicopter (LUH). These aircraft/ helicopters are required by the Indian Armed Forces 
for modernisation and strengthening of their fleet. 

24 
 
 
Further, in order to reduce the import bill through indigenization of products and 
processes, there is a need to ensure timely placement of orders and induction of 
indigenous platforms manufactured and developed by HAL, under "Make in India".  
HAL has been regularly allocating 6-8% of its annual turnover towards R&D 
expenditure. The main platform under in house designed and development are HTT40, 
Basic Trainer Aircraft, HTFE-25 and HTSE-1200 engines, Hawk-I and Indian Multirole 
Helicopter.  
lndigenisation is an ongoing activity at the HAL for providing support to manufacturing 
as well as Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services for all projects throughout 
their service life. To ensure use of Make in lndia components, equipment and services 
for fostering self-reliance and to manage obsolescence for sustenance of fleets, HAL 
continuously undertakes indigenisation of various items of foreign origin fitted on HAL 
platforms to reduce dependence on imports. Every year HAL indigenizes sizeable 
number of imported items with considerable Foreign Exchange (FE) savings through its 
extant procedure. During 2019-20, HAL has indigenized around 1500 items. 
HAL has taken significant progress in the past couple of years in respect of 
Indigenisation/ Make in India in line with Government initiatives as given below to 
encourage private participation for promoting domestic manufacturing capabilities of 
defence equipment in the country. These initiatives will help in reduction in import 
content and encourage/ create local aerospace ecosystems in the country. 
 Indigenisation through Make-II’ Procedure: A framework for implementation of 
‘Make-II’ Procedure at DPSUs/ OFB has been issued by MoD in Feb, 2019. In line 
with Make-II framework of MoD, HAL Make - II procedure was made and 
implemented at HAL in Dec 2019. HAL has also identified items to be indigenized 
through Make-II procedure and the same is hosted in HAL’s website. EOIs of these 
items are being issued in phased manner to take up for indigenisation under Make-
II and till date HAL has issued EoIs for more than 600 items till date for 
indigenisation under Make-II. 
 
 Hosting of Govt. Test Facilities for utilization by Private Vendors: HAL has 
hosted more than 85 types of test facilities available at HAL for utilization by 
Industries on payment basis. These facilities are being extensively utilised by both 
govt. organizations and Indian private companies. More than 500 no. of enquiries 
on utilization of test facilities received and completed. More than 55 vendors (Indian 
Private Vendors and Govt. Organisations) have utilized the test facilities till now. 

25 
 
 Uploading of imported items in Srijan Defence Portal: MoD has developed and 
launched Srijan Defence Portal (an indigenization portal) to support Indian 
Industries with opportunities for Make In India in Defence.  It acts as an interface or 
link between DPSUs and Indian private vendors for indigenization of imported 
components including alloys and special materials. HAL has uploaded more than 
4800 nos. of imported items till date in the portal. 
 
 Participation in Defence Industrial Production Corridors: Government has 
announced to develop two defence industrial production corridors in Uttar Pradesh 
& Tamil Nadu to promote domestic production of defence equipment by public 
sector, private sector, and MSMEs [Micro, Small, and Medium-sized Enterprises]. 
HAL has planned capital investment of Rs 1200 Crs for the growth of UP Corridor 
and approx. Rs. 646.09 Crs has been spent till Jan, 2021. 
 
 Hosting of items in HAL Website: Apart from items identified under Make-II, HAL 
has hosted around 300 imported systems and sub systems of mechanical, 
electrical, avionics, instrumentation categories in HAL’s website under ‘Make in 
India’ to  enable private industries to take up for indigenization through HAL’s extant 
indigenisation procedure. Contact details of division wise nodal officer for each item 
are also provided in the website www.hal-india.co.in under ‘Make in India’. 
 
 Implementation of Third Party Inspection (TPI): To further ‘Make in India’ efforts, 
Policy Document on utilization of Third Party Inspection (TPI), released in Dec 
2018. Six TPI bodies have been approved and empanelled jointly with DGAQA, till 
date. Three divisions of HAL are already availing the services of TPI. 
 
 Special Focus on MSME: MSMEs have also been granted relaxation in the 
registration and profitability criteria for consideration as eligible “Indian Vendor” for 
participation in the ‘Make in India’ initiative by GoI. MSME associations are being 
involved for carrying out feasibility studies for indigenisation projects. HAL Make-II 
procedure has earmarked projects with estimated cost (Design & development 
phase and Procurement phase) not exceeding Rs 250 Lakhs, for MSMEs/Startups. 
 
 Implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order: 
HAL has implemented the Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India), Order 
2017 issued by DIPP vide letter dt.15th Jun 2017 and its subsequent amendments.  
 
 Organizing/participation in exhibitions/ seminars: HAL is organizing, 
participating and supporting various exhibitions/ seminars/ webinar organized with 
MOD’s initiatives to promote Indigenization and vendor development.  

26 
 
 Support to Vendors: HAL also provides requisite technical support to private 
vendors during Indigenous development, prototype development and testing. HAL 
regularly organizes Vendor Meet for capacity building of domestic players. Majors 
structures for LCA like wing, front fuselage, rear fuselage and structures for Su-30 
MKI like Vertical Fin, Stabilizer, Slat, cannard  are realized through private vendors 
by extended all technical support. 
 
 
BEL: Import bill reduction can be achieved through self-reliance in terms of 
manufacturing as well as design & development within the country. Following steps are 
being taken in BEL to enhance indigenisation. BEL has identified 360 items for 
indigenisation under Make-II. 
Manufacturing: BEL is investing in Industry 4.0 technologies in areas of Manufacturing, 
Supply Chain and other broader digital transformation initiatives with specific, focused 
technology that span the entire organization. The upcoming manufacturing Plants of 
BEL i.e. ‘Defence Systems Integration Complex’ at Palasamudram, Advanced EO and 
IIR seeker manufacturing facility at Nimmaluru and Land based EW Systems at 
Ibrahimpatnam and future plants will leverage the specific technologies of Industry 4.0.  
It is planned to incorporate Industry 4.0 Standards in the new Unit being established, in 
discussion with the Industrial Consultant being selected. This will include surveillance 
and remote monitoring of critical processes, automation & control of production 
(particularly inspection & testing) processes where feasible, automatic collection & 
compilation of process data, Data analysis for continual process improvements, etc. 
This is expected to be operational by the year 2022-23. BEL can quickly diversify into 
new technology segments through necessary partnerships and scale up manufacturing. 
e.g., BEL has manufactured and supplied 8153 nos. ventilators to several State 
Governments. 
R&D: With an aim to reduce the need for foreign ToT based products (which involve 
heavy imports), BEL will continue to take the following steps towards design & 
development of products indigenously: 
BDL: BDL has taken up 6% reduction in import of items during 2020-21 in MoU. BDL 
has identified 80 items for indigenisation under Make-II- Indigenization of products like 
Konkurs-M ATGM, Invar –ATGM, Milan -2T ATGM, LWT XP and Varunastra has been 
established by 96.3%, 87.9%, 71%, 91% and 86% respectively. Product wise 
Indigenization levels are as follows: 
  

27 
 
 
Product Achieved Remarks 
Konkurs-M 96.3% Further Indigenization is not viable/economical. 
Invar 87.9% Indigenization up to 95% is under progress & will be 
completed by 2022. Further 5% of Indigenization is not 
viable /economical. 
Milan 2T 71% As per the contract 71% of Indigenization is completed 
Remaining 29% is supplied by OEM as a kit.(Being all time 
import) 
LWT-XP 91% 91% is already indigenized and further 8% import content 
is from tier II vendor and 1% is direct import by BDL. 
Varunastra 86% 86% is already indigenized and further 14% import content 
is from tier II vendor. BDL is not importing any item from 
overseas supplier. 
 
BEML: BEML has given major thrust to Self-Reliance and already achieved 
indigenization levels of over 90% in the mainline Mining & Construction products, over 
80% in Rail coaches & EMU's, and High Mobility Vehicles (HMV) and over 65% in Metro 
cars. The overall import content depends on product mix manufactured each year.  
To further enhance indigenization, BEML invited ‘Expression of Interest’ for 
manufacturing and technology partnerships with reputed global OEMs looking to 
establish and / or expand their supply chains / manufacturing base in India for the 
manufacture of various goods and/or service business in the areas of Defence & 
Aerospace, Rail & Metro, Mining & Construction, Engines and aggregates with the 
overarching objective of “AtmaNirbhar Bharat”. Positive Responses have been received 
and is under compilation. 
Towards protecting the Intellectual property of the Company, the Innovation Cell has 
succeeded in filing 206 IPRs since setting up, including 51 IPR during 2020-21 (Upto 
end Dec’2020) covering innovations in product design, manufacturing and operations. 
Eight patents have been awarded so far. BEML Limited have also instituted Awards to 
identify and encourage R&D engineers. 
The Company is also engaging with premier academic institutions, R&D establishments 
like DRDO and ARAI and Industry Partners to leverage technology for the benefit of 
customers such as introducing AI features in machines. 
Steps taken by Company to bring down Import level: 

28 
 
• Indigenisation Committee has been formed at each manufacturing division having 
members from R&D, Planning, Purchase and Production. The indigenization 
activity is monitored at corporate level on regular basis. 
• For the year 2020-21, Company has taken up indigenization of 214 items under 
Atmanirbhar Bharat for Srijan Portal. Development orders have already been 
placed for 188 items & sample accepted for 67 items.  
• The Company is also working towards 'ZERO IMPORT' policy and published EoIs 
for indigenous development of 850 items being imported. Development orders 
have already been placed for 663 items & sample accepted for 234 items. Further, 
efforts are on for indigenous development of balance items. 
• BEML has entered into ToT for indigenous manufacture of High Mobility Vehicle 
cabins. Further, plans are afoot for local manufacture of defence spares and 
propulsions for Metro Cars / EMUs through JVs.  
 
MIDHANI: MIDHANI has developed several important materials which include special 
steels, super alloys and titanium alloys for strategic application like Defence, Space and 
Energy. The indigenous development of these materials has reduced the dependency 
of India on import from other nations. Some of the major indigenous efforts are 
mentioned below. 
a) High-pressure compressor disc to HAL for Adour engine of Jaguar Aircraft  
b) Titanium sea water filters and high-pressure valves for nuclear submarine. 
c) Composite Armour for Mi 17 helicopter.  
d) Light weight body Armour product based on BhabhaKavach 
e) High temperature super alloys Superni 617, Superni 740, Superfer 800L 
required for Advanced Ultra Supercritical Power Plants to be built in India.   
f) Heaviest titanium alloy (74 kg) Castings for Naval applications 
g) First time supply of titanium components & subassemblies for Nuclear 
Applications 
h) Development of grid fin component for Gaganyaan mission of ISRO 
MIDHANI has also identified 10 items for indigenisation under Make-II. 

29 
 
MDL: 
1. MDL has set-up a dedicated Department of Indigenisation in Oct 2015 to boost and 
strengthen the indigenisation effort and to provide focused impetus to the Hon’ble 
Prime Minister’s vision of “Make-in-India”. 
2. MDL has launched a separate “Atmanirbhar Bharat” Webpage in MDL website as a 
part of Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan. The process of indigenisation, various 
items/equipment indigenised, items required to be indigenized (EoIs) are displayed 
under the webpage. The webpage is being regularly updated.  
3. A compendium of items indigenised was inaugurated and published on the MDL 
website as a part of Atmanirbhar Bharat week to demonstrate success stories. 
4. MDL has hosted 518 imported items for around Rs 2050 Crores on the MoD/DDP 
initiated website www.srijandefence.gov.in. MDL is interacting with the Indian firms 
showing interest in listed products. 
5. MDL contributed Rs 25 Crores to Defence Innovation Organisation (DIO). MDL has 
made contribution of Rs 40 Lakhs to FORGE Coimbatore in FY 2018-19 and in FY 
2020-21, contribution of Rs 40 Lakhs under CSR is made to IIT Madras Incubation 
Cell. DIO throws the challenges related to Defence to the Start-ups & MSMEs for 
the solutions. Start-ups & MSMEs are supported with the funding for prototype 
development. 
6. Since setting up of Indigenisation Department, MDL has successfully indigenized 
some of the major items/equipment through the Indian Industries. Indigenisation of 
these items has not only resulted in considerable cost savings to the exchequer but 
also helped India in becoming self-reliant as far as these items/equipment are 
concerned.  The details of the items/equipment are as under: -  
S 
No  
Item / System 
Description  
Earlier Source of Import Now Indigenised By  
1 Bridge Window Glass M/s Saint Gobain, Spain M/s Jeet & Jeet Glass, Jaipur 
2 MCT Glands M/s Roxtec, Sweden. M/s Wallmax, Faridabad. 
3  SICADS  M/s Smiths Detection, 
Germany.  
M/s L&T(SEC), Bengaluru & 
DRDE Gwalior  
4 Asbestos Free Gaskets M/s Naval Group, France M/s James Walker -Imarco, 
Mumbai 
5 E Glass cloth with 
adhesive tape for 
insulation 
M/s Hexcel, France M/s James Walker -Imarco, 
Mumbai 

30 
 
S 
No  
Item / System 
Description  
Earlier Source of Import Now Indigenised By  
6 Ruch Sealing M/s Naval Group, France M/s Pilot Gaskets & 
Engineers, Mumbai 
7 High Temperature 
Gaskets  
@ 650 Deg C 
M/s Naval Group, France M/s PGE Gaskets, Mumbai 
8 Helo Landing Grid M/s Naval Group, France 
M/s L&T, Mumbai 
M/s Seetha Technologies, 
Chennai  
9 Annealed Copper 
Gasket 
M/s Naval Group, France M/s James Walker -Imarco, 
Mumbai  
10 Ventilation Valves M/s Axima , France 
M/s Johnson Control, UK 
M/s Chamunda Valves, 
Ahmedabad 
11 Remote Controlled 
Valves (for IPMS) 
M/s Thompson Valves, UK. M/s DelVal, Pune  
12 NBC Filters M/s Axima, France M/s Nikhitish Engg Pvt. Ltd, 
Pune  
13 AC Plants for 
Submarines 
M/s SNORI France M/s Shree Refrigeration, 
Karad 
14  Battery Loading Trolley 
for Submarines 
M/s Naval Group, France M/s SEC Industries, 
Hyderabad 
 
7. To reduce import dependence for ongoing and future projects, the various items/ 
equipment targeted for the indigenisation in FY 2020-21 & FY 2021-2022 are as 
follows:  
S.No. Float S.No Move 
1 Magazine Fire Fighting System 
along with CFEES, DRDO 
1 Ref Plant for Submarine 
2 Battery Loading Trolley for SSK 
Submarine 
2 Poly Chloroprene Rubber Band/ 
Continuity Straps 
3 RSS Screens for Ships 3 Static Frequency Converters for 
Submarines (MAKE II) 
4 GRP panel for Submarines 4 Shock Mounts for Submarines 
5 Soda Lime for Submarines 
(MAKE II) 
  
 
8. It may be noted that contracts are awarded to Shipyards by the Indian Navy (IN) 
giving exact details of equipment fit in the ships/submarines. The source of 
procurement for majority of the equipment/items is thus frozen right at the time of 
conclusion of the contract, leaving little/no scope for the shipyards to suomoto effect 
any change both in the equipment fit or the vendor(s) from whom the equipment can 
be sourced. The equipment fit for each class of the ship also varies considerably. 
Further, the number of vessels in each project is also limited to 3 to 4 ships. 

31 
 
Considering the time required for building ships and the requirement of a particular 
equipment/item as per the PERT/construction schedule, it is generally not a feasible 
option to begin indigenization of the items, post award of the contract and make it 
available for a given project as per the required schedule, except in case of minor 
equipment/systems. 
 
9. If shipyards were equipment/system manufacturers, as is the case with BEL, HAL, 
BDL, BEML, then it is feasible to continuously enhance indigenisation content. 
However, shipyards are mainly integrators, where equipment are procured from 
vendors and integrated as per the user requirements.  
10. Shipyards use a large number of yard materials such as weld consumables, lifting 
appliances, electrical machineries, tools & accessories, etc. In case of MDL, most of 
these items which were earlier imported, have been indigenised and are now 
sourced from Indian vendors. 
11. It is possible for shipyards to undertake indigenization of shipborne items, presently 
being imported, if it is known with certainty that the indigenized items would be used 
in designated shipbuilding projects during construction and operation life of the 
ships. The Indian Navy has to play a proactive role in ensuring the same.  
GRSE: The last two Projects executed by GRSE namely, ASW Corvettes and Landing 
Craft Utility (LCU) for Indian navy has over 90% indigenous content. GRSE has 
indigenized 22 major shipbuilding items and has taken up ten more items for 
indigenisation. GRSE also has a comprehensive ‘5 YEAR INDIGENISATION PLAN’ for 
developing equipment worth approximately 400 Crores towards ensuring that 
indigenization targets for ongoing projects are met. GRSE has identified items for 
development under indigenisation for next five years and furnished to DDP under five 
year indigenisation plan. 
5 YEAR INDIGENISATION PLAN/ YEAR WISE MILESTONES FOR AATMA NIRBHAR 
BHARAT  
Sl. FY No. of 
Products 
Name of Products 
1 2019-20 2 
(INR 0.63 Cr) 
1.     Helo Connecting Gear for RLHTS. (INR 0.13 Cr/Ship 
set) 
2.     Mast Design, Construction and Integration on board 
Composite superstructure of Vessel. (INR 0.50 Cr/Ship 
set) 
Indigenous development of above 02 products 
completed. 
2 2020-21 11 
(INR 144.0 Cr) 
1.   10T Telescopic Deck Crane. (INR 9.0 Cr/4 Ships) 
2.   Potable Pedestrian (Assault) Bridge. (0.20 Cr/Item) 
3.   Data Acquisition and Processing System (DAPS). (INR 
85.0 Cr/4 Ships) 

32 
 
5 YEAR INDIGENISATION PLAN/ YEAR WISE MILESTONES FOR AATMA NIRBHAR 
BHARAT  
Sl. FY No. of 
Products 
Name of Products 
4.   Double Lane Portable Steel Bridges. (INR 2.0 Cr/Item) 
5.   7 Items of 1MW DA, (INR 47.8 Cr/all items for 28 ship 
set) viz,  
i.   Alternator with Accessories,  
ii.   DA Acoustic Enclosure,  
iii.  Control Systems,  
iv.  Battery Charger with Accessories,  
v.   Fuel Consumption Meter,  
vi.  Coupling Accessories & 
vii. Base Frame.  
Indigenous development of 02 product under Sl. No. 2 
& 4 above completed. Others are in active progress for 
time bound completion. 
 
3 2021-22 2 
(INR 8.25 Cr) 
1.     3T Telescopic Deck Crane. (INR 3.35 Cr/4 Ships) 
2.   HP Air Fittings & Reducing Station. (INR 4.9 Cr/4 
Ships) 
4 2022-23 3 
(INR 185.52 Cr) 
1.   Telescopic Helo Hangar. (INR 40.0 Cr/4 Ships) 
2. Magazine Fire Fighting System for various 
compartments storing explosive on board. (INR 144.0 Cr/8 
Ships) 
3.   Window Wipers. (INR 1.52 Cr/ 8 Ships) 
5 2023-24 2 
(INR 95.0 Cr) 
1. Horizontal offset reduction Gear box designed to 
transmit 4.3MW. (INR 50.0 Cr for 12 items/6 Ships) 
2.  Planetary Epicyclic Gear box designed to transmit 
25MW. (INR 45.0 Cr for 6 items/ 6 Ships) 
 
GSL: As part of Government’s efforts to achieve self-reliance in Defence Production, 
GSL has taken steps to support the Government’s initiative and has indigenously 
developed several designs of following ships / platforms included in list of 101 items for 
import embargo: 
(i) Offshore Patrol Vessels 
(ii) Waterjet Fast Attack Crafts 
(iii) Survey Vessel  
(iv) Pollution Control Vessel 
(v) Next Generation Missile Vessel  
(vi) Multi-Purpose Vessels 
(vii) Anti-Submarine Warfare Shallow Water Crafts 
 
From the above indigenously developed designs, GSL has constructed & delivered 
Offshore Patrol Vessels, Waterjet Fast Attack Crafts and Survey Vessels to Indian 

33 
 
Navy, Indian Coast Guard and exported to Navies of Friendly Foreign Nations. The 
indigenously developed designs have saved the country’s considerable amount of 
foreign exchange. The delivery of ships had contribution from private industries as part 
of supply chain of components / services there by creating opportunity for local industry 
in developing and manufacturing indigenous products and achieving Government of 
India’s goal of self-reliance. 
05 CG OPV Project: GSL has put in concerted efforts for indigenization in respect of 
components which were being imported hitherto to reduce dependencies on overseas 
vendors. For the ongoing 05 CG OPV project, GSL has successfully indigenized 
following major equipment which were previously imported and the details of cost 
savings achieved is given below: 
Sl. Equipment Vendor 
% of 
Indigenous 
content 
Total savings 
(for 05 Nos Ships) 
Rs. in Cr 
1 Gear Box M/s. Walchandnagar Industries 
Limited, Pune 
85% 32.5 
2 Steering Gear 
System 
M/s. Geeta Engg Works Pvt Ltd., 
Thane 
97.50% 1.65 
3 Fin Stabilizer System In collaboration with M/s. Naiad 
Dynamics, UK 
40% 2.40 
4 Heli Landing Grids In collaboration with M/s FHS, 
Germany 
50% 1.75 
5 Water Tight Doors M/s Automobile Corporation of 
Goa Limited 
100% 0.35 
6 Weather Tight Doors M/s Zuari Engg. Works 100% - 
 
This has helped GSL in increasing the indigenous content from 62% for the previously 
executed similar project to 72% for the existing 05 nos Offshore Patrol Vessel project for 
Indian Coast Guard. 
Project 1135.6. Under Make in India initiative, GSL has been entrusted with indigenous 
construction of 02 follow-on ships of Teg class (P 1135.6) and the contract was signed 
on 25 Jan 2019 with the Indian Navy. The execution of this project will result in 
developing indigenous capability in construction of high-tech Naval ships, which are 
hitherto being acquired from foreign countries. Many major items have been identified 
for indigenisation. It is likely to achieve 60-70% Indigenization content, which will be 
significant improvement against 02 ships being imported from Russia. With such large 
indigenous content, the dependency on Russian firms for spares and services support 
would reduce drastically. 

34 
 
Indigenisation road map for P1135.6 Project: GSL has identified equipment for 
P1135.6 Frigate project for IN for indigenisation. The year-wise indigenization plan is as 
given below: 
Year wise Indigenisation Plan for P1135.6 
Sr. No. Item 
Year 2020-21 
1 Auxiliary Control System (ACS) 
2 Fin Stabilizers with Controls 
3 Steering Gear System 
4 Shakti EW System 
Year 2021-22 
1 HP / LP Air Compressors 
2 Emergency Air Compressors 
3 COTS NAV radar 
4 ICCP System 
5 Echo Sounder 
6 Advanced Composite Communication System (ACCS) 
7 LYNX U2 Gun Fire Control System 
8 UASS (Upper Air Sounding System) 
9 Anti Fouling and Anti Corrosive System 
10 EM Log 
11 PGD Cables 
12 Hull Fittings- Manholes, Ladders, Guard Rails  
13 Bollards of  03 Sizes 
14 Combat Management System (CMS)  
15 Anchor handling fittings 
16 APMS + 2MSBs 
17 IRL 
Year 2022-23 
1 LED Lights & Fittings 
2 ITTL  
3 INS-SA RLG 
4 SWISS 
5 SRGM  
6 AK 630  
7 EON 51 
8 GT intake for Boost Engine  
9 GT intake for Cruise Engine 
10 Mooring & Towing fittings and Ropes 
Year 2023-24 
1 Window wiper System 
2 Galley Items 
Year 2024-25 
1 7.5M RIBs 
 

35 
 
Modernisation of Yard. GoI has funded the modernisation of GSL yard to enhance 
GSL capabilities and infrastructure capacity. Infrastructure Modernisation plan is being 
implemented in phases of which phase 1, 2, 3A & MCMV GRP complex under Ph 4 
have been completed. Implementation of balance phases (3B & MCMV Command 
Control Office building as part of Phase 4) are in progress. On completion of 
Modernisation plan, GSL will have the capability to build high technology Glass-Fibre 
Reinforced Plastic (GRP) vessels indigenously with the help of foreign technology 
provider. 
MoUs/ Collaboration Agreements. Following MoUs/Collaboration agreements have 
been entered into/ are being renewed with foreign firms to jointly manufacture defence 
platforms/equipment: 
(a) M/s. Naiad Dynamics Ltd., UK for indigenous manufacture and assembly of 
Steering Gear and Fin Stabilisers. 
(b) M/s. FHS, Germany for indigenous manufacture of Heli Landing Grid, Traversing 
System and Hanger doors. 
(c) M/s. DCNS, France (now Naval Group), for setting up advanced Submarine 
Escape Training Tower (SETT), IPMS Simulator and Combat Management 
Simulator for Submarines for the Indian Navy. 
(d) M/s. Wartsila, France to indigenously manufacture and supply of CPP Stern Gear 
for ships built for the Indian Navy and Coast Guard, etc. 
HSL: Indigenisation is being promoted by HSL by avoiding imported equipment and 
sourcing equipment / machineries from domestic vendors wherever feasible and 
permitted. The list of items being imported and 5 year Indigenisation Plan through 
import substitution / MAKE II (tabulated below) has been prepared. 
S.No Year Methodology Item / Equipment Amount  
(Rs Cr) 
1 2019-20  Import 
Substitution 
Dynamic Positioning System 14.00 
2 2020-21  MAKE-II Gear Box 5.2 MW, RO Plant 
Alternator 5.2MW and STP 38.87 
3 2021-22  MAKE-II Flight Deck safety net system 2.00 
4 2022-23  MAKE-II Air vent hoods of NW300 & 
above sizes 1.50 
5 2023-24  Import 
Substitution 
Pneumatic Quick Closing 
valves 4.20 

36 
 
 
Following efforts have been made by HSL in order to harmonize Defence Procurements 
with the ‘Make in India’ initiative: 
(a) Provisions contained in ‘Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India), order 
2017’, issued by DPIIT, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, have been 
incorporated in Purchase Manual for implementation. 
(b) MAKE-II Procedure has been incorporated in the Purchase Manual in order to 
indigenize imported items through development of prototype. 
(c) Relaxation of norms (prior experience and prior turnover) for MSMEs and start-
ups in all public procurements, subject to meeting quality and technical 
specifications. 
(d) Alignment to payment terms i.e; provision of advance payments to MSMEs. 
(e) Deemed registration of vendors (Vendors registered in other Defence PSUs are 
to be considered as deemed Registered). 
(f) Efforts are being made to identify Tier-I & Tier-II Vendors so as to facilitate 
development of import substitutes. 
(g) ‘Make in India’ Portal has been created in the HSL Website to attract vendors. 
The contact details of Nodal Officer have been provided in the portal. The list of 
items which are hitherto being imported are displayed on the website with an 
intent to Indigenise. 
(h) With a view to familiarize the Vendor, a special link ‘Information to Vendors’ has 
also been incorporated in the HSL portal, which provides information like 
Guidelines for vendor registration, commercial questionnaire for indigenous and 
foreign suppliers, HSL Standard business  terms & conditions, List of items 
imported to be Indigenised, materials, equipment & works, HSL Manual on 
procurement of materials and services, MSMEs – List of items reserved for 
purchase from small scale industries, Vendor registration form – Supplier ,Vendor 
registration Form- Contractor etc. 
(i) A direct link to the ‘Make in India’ Page of GoI (http://www.makeinindia.com)   
has also been provided in the portal. 
Further, following are the steps taken by Department of Defence Production to enhance 
their export potential so that the country become an exporter of defence equipment: 

37 
 
a) Export Promotion cell under DDP, MoD is formed to co-ordinate and follow-up on 
export related action including enquiries received from various countries and 
facilitate private sector and public sector companies for export promotion.  
 
b) Defence Attaches have been mandated for export promotion of Indigenous 
defence products of both public and private sector. Also a scheme for Export 
promotion of Indian Defence Equipment Manufactured in India by Indian Defence 
Attache has been rolled out wherein Defence Attachés are provided financial 
support to promote export of indigenous defence equipment abroad.  
c) Subject to strategic considerations, domestically manufactured defence products 
are being promoted through Lines of Credit/Funding. Defence Lines of Credit 
(LOCs) are extended to sovereign governments to enable buyers in those 
countries, to import goods and services from India on attractive credit terms. 
d) An export booklet containing all the major platforms/systems/sub-systems of 
DPSUs/OFB and private companies dealing in manufacturing of defence 
products was conceptualized, published and circulated to all the Missions 
abroad. It is also available on DDP website. 
e) An online portal has been created through which export leads received from 
various stakeholders are being disseminated directly to the Indian Defence 
Exporters who are registered on the portal.  
f) In order to boost defence exports, webinars are being organized with Friendly 
Foreign Countries (FFCs) under the aegis of DDP, MoD through Industry 
Associations with active participation from Indian Defence Industries.  
g) Geographical countries/regions have been allocated to DPSUs/OFB for focused 
export promotion of Indigenous Defence Platforms/equipment in their countries of 
allocation. 
Efforts undertaken by the DPSUs to boost Defence export are enumerated as under:  
HAL: So far, HAL’s Exportable Platforms have been Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) 
Mk III–Dhruv and Do-228 aircraft. Presently, in the rotary wing side ALH-Mk-IV & Light 
Combat Helicopter (LCH) and in the fixed wing segment and Light Combat Aircraft 
(LCA)-Tejas have also been added to the basket of HAL’s exportable Aircraft Platforms.  
In the near future, Hindustan Turbo Trainer (HTT)-40 and Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) 
will also be pitched in the export market.With the introduction of above Platforms in the 
Export Market, HAL envisages the enhancement in Exports in the coming years. 

38 
 
HAL has adopted multi-pronged approach for enhancing exports with major activities as 
below: 
1. Export Strategy: 
HAL has drawn up an elaborate Export strategy. Extensive Market study has been done 
and Target Countries in 4 regions namely SAARC, South East Asia, Africa and Indian 
Ocean regions have been identified for export of HAL Products & Services. In addition 
Latin America and Middle East countries are also being explored for possible Business 
opportunities.  
In Oct 2020, eight select countries have been allocated to HAL by Export Promotion 
Cell (EPC), MoD, for promotion of Products & Services of entire Indian Defence 
Industry. 
Notwithstanding the above, Global RFI/RFPs are also being tracked and responded 
wherever HAL Platform/Products matches the requirement. 
2. Establish Marketing & Distribution / Service network abroad:  
As on date, HAL has engaged Channel Partners in several of the shortlisted Target 
Countries. The engagement of Channel Partners/Marketing Agent/Distributors/Business 
Development Consultants for promotion of Export business in other target Countries are 
in process, on an on-going basis.  
3. Interaction with Defence Attaches / Missions: 
Regular interactions with the Defence Attaches / Indian Missions in the target countries. 
Further to the above, regular interactive sessions with Foreign Defence Attaches / 
Foreign Missions are also being conducted in order to establish rapport and formal 
network for gathering Business Intelligence 
4. Foreign Supplier Registration: 
In order to track / receive Global RFI/RFPs directly from the customer, HAL has 
registered in the procurement portals of various Countries. Registration in other 
countries is also being done on on-going basis. 
5. Export through G-2-G route: 
Export opportunity is also being pursued through G-2-G channel in certain target 
countries which follows G-2-G route for Platforms namely Do-228 and ALH.  The effort 
includes exports utilizing GoI Line of Credit (LOC). 

39 
 
6. Offsets / Association with Global players: 
HAL has been leveraging Defence Offset business opportunities & accruing benefits 
including the exports from Defence Offset arising out of Indian MoD Contracts/Programs 
HAL has signed Letter of Intent / MoU as Indian Offset Partner for liquidating Offsets 
with various leading global OEM’s. 
7. Branding & Promotion: 
As part of Brand building and Promotion for reaching out to prospective customers, HAL 
has been participating in prestigious International Air Shows & Exhibitions considering 
the business opportunities in the region. Also HAL is the Nodal Agency for organising 
Aero India and Defexpo, which helps to project the Company’s Brand Image. 
Flying display by joint participation with IAF and other Stake holders like ADA to 
showcase the capabilities of HAL Products to Overseas Customers is also being 
undertaken. 
8. International Certification of HAL Platforms for Civil use: 
The process of obtaining International Certification is in progress and this will help HAL 
Platforms export in the civil market.  
Interactions with EASA, Germany was held along with DGCA. In-principle consent was 
received that DGCA could give type certification for HAL built Do-228. Similarly EASA 
certification for Dhruv-ALH is also being progressed. 
9. Efforts in other diversified areas:  
Following are other potential areas being targeted for enhancement in export sales 
apart from sale of Platforms & ROH Business: 
 Pilot Training. 
 Aircraft Upgrades.  
 Indigenous upgrade on Licenced platform.  
 Design Work Packages  
 Export of indigenously Designed & Developed Avionics 
BEL: Efforts being put by BEL to increase the exports are detailed below: 
BEL has a dedicated International marketing Division for providing an increased thrust 
for harnessing the export potential of BEL Products, systems & capabilities. BEL has 
identified the key market segments for exports and has a structured market plan. BEL is 
actively involved in the process to generate & pursue business leads and provide 

40 
 
innovative cost effective solutions to the customers. BEL has adopted the following 
strategies to increase its business share in global arena: 
• Strategically opened Overseas Marketing Offices at six locations in Indian Ocean 
Region, Middle East Region and America. 
• Approach more Companies/Integrators/OEMs to be their global Supply Chain 
Partner.  
• Identify representative/partner to enter new markets & maximize global reach. 
• Closely working & collaborating with various major Foreign Aerospace & Defence 
Companies to meet their Offset obligations in various RFPs of MoD, India on 
account of offset policy incorporated in Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). 
• Established strategic alliance with Indian & Overseas Platform Manufacturers 
/Integrators/Shipyards to jointly look out for export opportunities by offering proven 
indigenous products/solutions. 
• Increased frequency to visit/invite/interact with key customers/partners for in-depth 
understanding of their requirements, acquisition process and to establish long-term 
customer relationship for enhancing export business. 
• Continuously in touch with Indian Embassies/High Commissions abroad & Foreign 
Embassies in India to identify and explore/tap more business. 
• Increased thrust for quick innovation and keeping the process in place for future too 
for its product/solutions as per the ever-evolving global requirement. 
• Efforts towards participating in Government tenders in foreign countries. 
• Regularly interact with MoEA, India for supply of products/systems under Line of 
Credit (LoC)/Grants to friendly countries to India. 
• Apart from Defence products, BEL is also exploring markets in developing & third 
world countries for civil products like Solar Power Generation, Smart Cities, etc. 
• BEL has also started to look for generating business in turnkey solutions based on 
its software capabilities & Artificial Intelligence under secure environment. 
•  Participate in 3 to 4 International exhibitions every year. 
BEML: BEML has organized Webinars in Senegal, Kenya, Zambia, Azerbaijan, Saudi 
Arabia, Abhu Dhabi, Oman and Sri Lanka for promotion of Defence exports. 

41 
 
BEML has written to 25 Defence Attaches in Africa, Middle East & Neighbouring 
Countries for export of Defence products and had a discussion with Sri Lanka Defence 
attaché for supply of Aircraft Towing Tractor (ATT). 
BEML has registered with Defence Portals of Foreign Countries like Philippines and 
Singapore. 
Kenya region has been allotted to BEML by DDP for carrying out all the export 
promotional activities on behalf of all DPSUs / OFB. BEML branch office at Kenya has 
been registered on 28th Jan 2021. 
BEML has floated Global EoI for widening the market network through appointment of 
authorised representatives and service provider. BEML has planned to appoint 
representative in Africa, Middle-East and Neighbouring Countries and has already 
appointed representative for Defence products in Bangladesh. 
BEML is on the verge of receiving order for Aircraft Towing Tractor (ATT) from 
Bangladesh Air Force. Further, orders for Heavy Recovery Vehicle (HRV) and Pontoon 
Bridging System (PMS) under Indian Defence Line of Credit are being pursued in 
Bangladesh. 
BEML has organized Global outreach program with EXIM Bank of India and ECGC for 
Promotion of BEML Defence products through EXIM Bank’s Global offices. BEML has 
signed 8 MoUs in DefExpo-2020 and 11 MoUs in Aero India-2021 to further enhance 
the exports of Defence equipment. 
BDL: BDL has proved itself during the last four years and achieved turnover on an 
average of Rs. 4000 Cr. per annum. BDL has also established its capacity to meet the 
requirement of IAF CMDS and many platforms are fitted with BDL CMDS. 
Apart from regular supplies to Indian Armed Forces, BDL is also exporting Torpedoes to 
friendly neighboring countries. Ministry is encouraging exports in a big way by issuing 
SOP on exports, ease of license to export.  BDL has bagged 4 export orders out of 
which 2 orders has already executed and balance two orders will be completed in 2020-
21. 
Capacity enhancement by modernisation has also been done which will be helpful for 
further export. of ATGMs and SAM.  For achieving exports, BDL has regular interaction 
with the overseas customers. Offset implementation also offers a major opportunity to 
achieve export targets. BDL is interacting with aero-space majors in Europe and Russia 
to exploit opportunities arising out of offsets. BDL has given thrust on Export of Weapon 
Systems. . 

42 
 
MIDHANI: 
Inadequate capacity utilization and Defence Exports: MIDHANI has been fully 
utilizing its capacity towards manufacture of Special alloys. MIDHANI focuses on export 
of Titanium, Super alloy based products. In FY 19-20, about Rs 11 Cr. export sales has 
been achieved. In FY 19-20, the following steps have been taken by MIDHANI to 
improve exports: 
a) NADCAP certification is under process to target global aerospace market  
b) MIDHANI registered as a Vendor in EGYPT Defense Production Unit - HELWAN 
ENGINEERING INDUSTRIES COMPANY. 
c) UNIPOL has approved MIDHANI as a Global Supplier for Turbo Charger 
Application used as one of the important components in automobile industry. 
MDL: Every defence ship and submarine construction project is unique due to customer 
specific requirements and their strategies. These projects are long gestation projects.  
Shipyards have to collaborate with the customer in detailed designing which requires 1-
2 years. Thereafter, production commences and achieving of turnover starts. 
With an intention of increasing the turnover, MDL is putting in efforts for bagging export 
order. MDL has put in following efforts to enter the export market: 
• Global Export Participation 
 
 Projects  Vessels 
RFI Response 27 140 
RFP Response 5 56 
Total 32 196 
 
• Agency Agreement signed for following Countries: 
 
 Egypt, Israel, Middle East, Myanmar, Ghana, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Niger, 
Liberia, Philippines, Bangladesh 
 Communication in progress with Thailand 
 
• Participation in Trade shows/ Exhibitions:  
 
 International Military Technical Forum, Russia from 21-26 Aug 18  
 Euro Naval, Paris from 23-26 Nov 18 
 EDEX, Cairo from 02-05 Dec 18 
 Langkawi International Marine and Aerospace Exhibition(LIMA), Malaysia from 
26-30 Mar 19 
 ISDEF 2019, Israel, Jun 19 

43 
 
 IMDEC 2019, Accra Ghana, Jul 19 
 DSEI 2019, UK, Sep 19 
 DSEI 2019, Japan, Nov 19 
 
• Already approached Indian Embassies, High Commissions located in several 
countries 
 
Proposed Steps for Creating assets for the Blue Water Economy 
MDL under its corporate plan has emphasized on creation / development of new 
infrastructure facilities to meet its future business requirements. In this context, the last 
major CAPEX was executed between year 2010 to 2016 at an estimated cost of Rs. 
1034 Cr. Further it is also decided to identify the shortcomings of infrastructure 
considering future projects which are likely to be announced by Indian Navy from year 
2020 to 2030 and the Refit market for commercial vessels. 
GRSE: The shipyard has completed its Modernisation with an aim to build quality ships 
in reduced timeframe with Modular Construction Technology. Post major modernization 
and infrastructural augmentation, GRSE now can construct 20 ships (i.e. 08 Large ships 
& 12 Medium/ Small ships) concurrently. Presently, GRSE has the order for 
construction of 17 warships & other vessels which includes 02 Nos. ships for export. 
Upgradation of facilities of Raja Bagan Dock (RBD) unit of the company is underway. 
On completion of this upgradation by FY 2023-24, the shipbuilding capacity will increase 
from 20 to 24 ships concurrently. For continually utilizing the augmented capacity in 
future, GRSE has responded to RFPs/RFIs of Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard for 
construction of around 40 Ships.  
Inline with MoD thrust on Defence Exports, GRSE is exploring opportunities to grab 
export orders for major platforms (warships & other vessels). GRSE has also adopted a 
strategy of engaging with the authorities of the target market countries for export of its 
products. The company is also regularly supplying Bailey-type portable steel Bridges 
and its components to the neighbouring countries such as Nepal & Bhutan and efforts 
are on to further enhance the export of portable steel Bridges. 
As part of continual and committed endeavor towards Export Promotion, GRSE has 
taken up aggressive marketing initiatives and also appointed Marketing Reps in foreign 
countries such as Phillipinies, Myanmar& Bangladesh.  
GRSE also intends to participate in Philippines Corvette Acquisition Programme (PCAP) 
under G2G Agreement with favourable Line of Credit (LoC). GRSE is negotiating with 
various authorities of Bangladesh for supply of different types of Vessels and recently 

44 
 
emerged as lowest bidder against Global Tender for supply of 08 Nos. FRP Patrol 
Boats for Bangladesh Fisheries. 
As a result of continual and relentless marketing initiatives, GRSE has recently 
bagged the following major export orders as follows:- 
(i) Export order of 12.73 Million USD for supply of 01 No. Ocean Going Passenger & 
Cargo Ferry Vessel to Republic of Guyana. Contract signed on 13 Jan 2021. 
(ii) Export order of Rs. 100 Cr. Approx. for supply of 01 No. Fast patrol Vessel Govt. of 
Seychelles. Contract signed on 03 Feb 2021. 
GRSE’s role and proposals with regard to creation of assets for the Blue Water 
Economy are given below:- 
(i) GRSE can supply Trawler, Barge, Pontoon, Tug etc for incentivising deep sea 
fishing to achieve its full potential. 
(ii) GRSE can supply Survey Vessel and Marine Acoustic Research Ship (MARS) for 
Potential Fishing Zone Advisories as a service to IORA (Indian Ocean Rim 
Association) countries. 
(iii) GRSE can provide Bulk Carriers, Passenger Ferries, Barge, Pontoon, Tug, 
Offshore Patrol Vessel for Short Sea Shipping. 
(iv) To support creation of Coastal Economic Zones, GRSE can supply Passenger 
Ferries, Hovercrafts, Boats, Barge, Pontoon, Tug and Inshore Patrol Vessel for 
operations at CEZ. Further, setting up of repair facility for such ships could be 
considered. 
(v) Appropriate vessels for the activity can be designed & built by GRSE as per 
specifications to commercialize ocean debris collection and offer support to small 
island states. 
GSL: GSL is striving to increase the export turnover and GSL’s roadmap for export plan 
for five years is given below:- 
Financial Year 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
Exports 
 (Rs. Cr) 300** 300** 300 # 300 # 
 
 

45 
 
FY 2020-21 to 2022-23: 
** Export figure for above Financial Years includes the following: 
• Proposal for construction and delivery of Landing Ship Tank and Cadet Training 
Ship for Nigerian Navy. LoC is approved by MEA. Cabinet approval is awaited from 
Nigerian side. 
• Supply of 04 FIBs for Comoros and 01 Floating Dock to Sri Lanka are under active 
consideration by Govt. of India.  
• Training to Myanmar Navy. 
 
FY 2023-24 to 2024-25: 
# Expected RFP for 06 OPVs/02 Corvettes program for Philippine Navy. 
a) In order to increase export revenue, GSL has submitted the proposals to various 
countries viz. Philippines, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Myanmar, Egypt, Bangladesh, 
Kenya, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Vietnam, Indonesia, Madagascar, Qatar, West Africa 
for design and construction of different variants of vessels/platforms. Response is 
awaited from these countries. Further GSL is participating in various exhibitions 
and showcasing its product range and advance technological capability to increase 
the export turnover. In the recent past, GSL has participated in the following 
Physical and Virtual Exhibitions: 
Physical Version: 
• DEFEXPO 18, Chennai.  
• ARMY 2018 in Russia,  
• Euro Naval 2018 in France, 
• ARMY 2019 in Russia, 
• IDEX 2019 in Abu Dhabi, 
• LIMA 2019 in Malaysia, 
• ISDEF 2019 in Israel, 
• DSEI 2019 in UK 
• DEFEXPO 2020 in Lucknow.  

46 
 
• ARMY 2020 in Russia, 
• AERO INDIA 2021 in Bengaluru 
 
On Line (Virtual) Version: 
• Euronaval 2020 - in Paris, France. 
• Korea Maritime Trade Show (KOMTS-20) 
• Bharat Shakti Defence Attache Conclave 
• FICCI Global Defence Cooperation  
Blue Water Economy:- 
(i) Shipbuilding is the backbone of blue water economy providing seafaring 
platforms for optimal utilisation of marine resources and complementing the revenue 
earning sources of the State. GSL being one of the major shipbuilders in the country, 
has been provider of various kinds of vessels, systems and related marine products. 
These include the following: 
(a) Offshore Patrol Vessels, Pollution Control Vessels, Interceptor Crafts, Fast 
Attack Crafts and Boats for maritime security of territorial waters. The same 
is essential to secure the shipping lines in the Indian waters and provide 
secure environment for gainful utilisation of marine resources. 
(b) Survey vessels have been designed and constructed indigenously for the 
Indian Navy, which have successfully undertaken survey of the Indian 
waters, providing valuable navigational and exploratory aid in the region. 
(c) Fishing exploratory vessels have been provided to fisheries research institute 
which have provided valuable research in fishing activities in the Indian 
waters and optimised efforts in fishing. 
(d) Regular repairs have been undertaken for the defence as well as commercial 
seafaring platforms. This has resulted in maintaining sound health of vessels 
and optimal performance at sea. 
(e) Active participation in the Sagarmala initiative of the GoI wherein GSL has 
shown keen interest in design and construction of river cargo and passenger 
vessels for the Project. The Shipyard has constructed a ferry for the Varanasi 
terminal. Also Tugs are being constructed for Assam Govt for operation in the 

47 
 
Brahmaputra river. The Shipyard is looking forward for active participation in 
the future construction programs of the Project. 
(f) Passenger vessels have been provided to Andaman and Nicobar 
Administration, which have been a boon in terms of transportation of men 
and material in the far off Islands. 
(g) LPG carriers are being constructed for Lakshadweep Islands. 
(h) A total of 38 deliveries have been made to various foreign countries, thereby 
contributing to the exports. 
(ii) Future Plans. The Shipyard will strive to optimally use the waterfront for 
following activities in the future: 
(a) Exploratory vessels for research and exploration, which is essential to 
harness the marine resources. These also include polar research vessels for 
exploration by Indian research agencies in the harsh Polar Regions. 
(b) Unmanned and intelligent platforms for aid in the security, exploration and 
extraction of marine resources. 
(c) Plan to explore opportunities in commercial shipbuilding for cargo as well as 
passenger segment. 
(d) Continue to provide high end platforms equipped with modern systems for 
maintaining security and peace in Indian waters and facilitating peaceful 
atmosphere for exploitation of marine resources. 
HSL: Hindustan Shipyard Ltd., strategically located on the East Coast of the Indian 
peninsula, at Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, is engaged in shipbuilding, ship repairs, 
submarine construction and refits as well as design and construction of sophisticated 
state-of-the-art offshore and onshore structures. Direct sea access, excellent 
infrastructure, skilled work force, rich expertise garnered over the years in building 193 
vessels (including 11 wellhead platforms) and repairing 1986 vessels of various types 
enable HSL to offer competent services for the defence and maritime sectors. The yard 
was brought under the administrative control of the Ministry of Defence on 22 Feb 2010. 
It is pertinent to mention that HSL has completed all the legacy projects (13 Nos) 
pending since 2010 during the last four years. HSL has recently started making profits. 
However, HSL is ineligible to participate in international tenders and execute export 
orders due to its negative net worth. Despite strong growth momentum and after having 
posted operating and net profits for the past four consecutive years, the shipyard’s 
negative net worth resulting from legacy issues is yet to be completely neutralized. 

48 
 
Although the yard’s negative net worth has been improved from over Rs 1000 Cr to less 
than Rs 600 Cr, it has been an impediment in participating in tenders for export orders. 
 
Extreme Cold Weather Clothing System  
Recommendation No. 18 
 
 The Committee observe that Extreme Cold Weather Clothing System (ECWCS) 
which is a three layer clothing being procured for soldiers deployed in Super High 
Altitude Areas like Siachen. The Committee were apprised that for it, quality of supply is 
monitored and the procurement is based on effectiveness of the item determined 
through user trials carried out under actual operational conditions. It is also ensured that 
procurement is done only from user approved sources and DGQA make certain that 
there is zero deviation between bulk supply and user approved sample determined. In 
addition, user satisfaction on quality during usage is monitored through suitably 
feedback processes. In case of any quality issue during usage, the user can raise a 
defect report as per Army Order 323/166, based on which detailed technical 
investigation is then carried out by DGQA to verify the claims of the user and ascertain 
reasons for defect. 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
 The Committee find under Private Sector Participation for Extreme Cold Weather 
Clothing System (ECWCS) all the present user approved sources are private 
manufactures, whether foreign or Indian and out of these, one is an indigenous 
manufacturer.  The Committee hope that in due course of time after the implementation 
of DAP 2020, the Ministry would take proper steps to promote indigenous production of 
ECWCS and explore more possibilities of manufacturing it in the country.  The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry of Defence should put in place a definite 
mechanism to ensure that the end product should be at par with the foreign products in 
terms of quality. 
Reply of the Government 
The replies on Recommendation Nos. 18 and 19 have been termed as 
“classified” by the Ministry and have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairperson in a sealed 
cover. These replies have been placed under ‘accepted’ category. 
 

49 
 
Offset Clause 
Recommendation No. 20 
  The Committee note that Offsets under Defence Capital Acquisition were 
introduced in the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) in 2005 based on the 
recommendation of Kelkar Committee. The Offset guidelines in DPP have been 
amended 6 times thereafter. As per Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP 2020) offset 
provisions are applicable only on “Buy Global” categories of capital acquisitions. The 
offset provisions apply in capital acquisition contracts which are more than Rs. 2,000 
crore. However, the offsets are not applicable to procurements under “Fast Track 
Procedure” and in “Option Clause” cases if the same was not envisaged in the original 
contract. No offsets will be applicable in all ab-initio Single Vendor Cases including 
procurements based on Inter Governmental Agreements /Foreign Military Sales 
(IGA/FMS). It is relevant to note that offset applicability on Indian companies under ‘Buy 
Global’ cases do not arise in case the indigenization component is 30% or more. Offset 
contracts are co-terminus with the main procurement contract and signed along with the 
main procurement contract after approval of Competent Financial Authority (CFA). The 
period of offset discharge can be extended on exceptional ground by a maximum period 
of 02 years. The DAP stipulates eligible products/services for discharge of offset 
obligations which covers defence products and Maintenance, Repair and Operations 
(MRO) related to helicopters and aircrafts. The responsibility for fulfilment of offsets 
obligations lies with the main vendor.   
However, the vendor is permitted to discharge his obligations through Tier-I sub-
vendors based on their work share. In case of investment and/or transfer of technology 
the offset discharge can be permitted by entities other than vendor/Tier-I Sub-vendor on 
case to case basis. The vendors are free to select their Indian Offset Partners (IOP) 
from DPSU/OFB/DRDO/Private Industry. The Offset Policy further allows vendors to 
submit offset details at later stage after signing of the contract i.e. either at the time of 
seeking offset credits or one year prior to discharge of offset obligations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
No Comments, being a matter of fact. 
Recommendation No. 22 
While appreciating that the Defence Offset Monitoring Wing is effectively 
discharging its duties, the Committee recommend the Ministry to be more cautious and 
transparent as the scope of Offset has been increased from Rs. 300 crore to Rs. 2,000 

50 
 
crore or more. The Ministry should also try to establish some import substitute products 
industry while discharging the 30 per cent obligation. 
Reply of the Government 
In the Defence Offset Guidelines, which has been promulgated as part of Defence 
Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2020, the following reforms have been done: 
i)  The thrust of Guidelines is to have enabling provisions to attract investment and 
technology. 
ii)  It is expected to enhance capability in the domestic defence manufacturing 
sector and promote ‘Make in India’ initiative. 
iii)  Investment in defence manufacturing including in Defence Industrial Corridor 
could be through FDI. 
iv)  The eligible defence products have been streamlined to ensure high technology 
based investments through offsets. 
v)  To incentivise transfer of technology to Indian industry/DRDO/OFB/DPSUs and 
to attract direct investment, higher multipliers have been provided. 
vi)  Higher preference has been given for purchase of defence products as 
compared to components. 
vii)  Investments have been incentivised through higher multipliers: 
viii)  Discharge of Offset obligations through entities other than vendor/Tier-I sub-
vendor has been envisaged for investments/ Transfer of Technology on case to 
case basis. 
ix)  Flexibility to provide details of products and Indian Offset Partners (IOPs) at 
later stage even after signing of contract. 
x)   End-to-end online submission and verification of offset claims through the offset 
portal to ensure greater transparency, accountability and efficiency. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 23 & 24 
Recommendation No. 23 
 The committee find that in spite of the Make in India Policy executed by the 
Government, there exist imports in terms of value and percentage in the Defence 

51 
 
Production Units. In OFB as already brought out, the average import rests around 8.5% 
in 2019-20. In HAL, which is currently manufacturing platforms for various aircraft, the 
import content in value terms is around 35 percent. In BEL, the import content uptil 3rd 
quarter of 2020-21 is around 28 percent which was merely 34% in the year 2015-16. 
Likewise, in BEML, the import content upto September, 2020 was 16.76% in terms of 
net value of production. In BDL, during 2019-20, it registered 10% in comparison to 
7.7% during 2016-17. MDL has intimated that their import content for the warships and 
submarines under construction ranges between 58% to 70% the import content of GSL 
upto December, 2020 was 25% which was increased from the average of about 19% in 
2019-20. GRSE has also supplied its figures which have also increased to 12.38% upto 
2nd quarter of 2020-21 from that of 6.95% during the year 2019-20. HSL has also 
maintained almost the same figures in terms of import content which is around 26.29% 
between April to December, 2020 in comparison to 21.09% during the year 2019-20. 
Recommendation No. 24 
 While taking note of the above figures in regard to import contents, the 
Committee at this stage would not like to recommend anything which would adversely 
affect the pace and quality of the production of various assets. Nevertheless, they would 
like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken to reduce the import contents in future. 
They would also like to recommend that all-out concerted efforts be undertaken not only 
within the Defence Production Units but from private manufacturers also by sharing their 
co-expertise developed in terms of research and development. The detailed note may 
be supplied to the Committee for their perusal at the time of furnishing the Action Taken 
replies.  
Reply of the Government 
 Department of Defence Production is striving hard and making all possible efforts 
to make India a self-reliant country.  Following are measures and concrete steps to 
reduce the Import Contents in future.  
1. The Department of Defence Production has notified “Policy for Indigenization of 
components and spare used in Defence platforms for DPSUs/OFB” on 08 March, 
2019. The objective of the Policy is to create an industry ecosystem which is able 
to indigenize the imported components (including alloys & special materials) and 
sub-assemblies for defence equipment and platform manufactured in India and to 
leverage the said capability to create export market.  
2. SRIJAN portal (srijandefence.gov.in) to promote indigenization was launched on 
14 Aug 2020. As on date i.e, 24.06.2021, 10714 items, which were earlier 
imported by DPSUs//OFB/SHQs, have been displayed on the portal. The Indian 

52 
 
industry has shown interest for 2799 displayed items so far. DPSUs/OFB/SHQs 
are interacting with these industries for indigenization of the items as per extant 
procedures. 
3. DPSUs/OFB/SHQs have indigenized/placed SO for 1753 items (spares and 
components) in 2020-2021. 
 
4. Long Term Orders -“Framework for placing Long Term Orders by DPSUs” has 
been approved by Hon’bleRakshaMantri on 04 Nov 2019. Under this Framework, 
the procuring organization may aggregate demand of the item for a long period of 
upto 10 years, in cases where it finds challenges in indigenization. 
 
5. Positive lists of Indigenisation:  Ministry of Defence has notified two positive list of 
items, for which there would be an embargo on the import beyond the timeline 
indicated against them. This is a big step towards self-reliance in defence. This 
offers a great opportunity to the Indian defence industry to manufacture these 
items using their own design and development capabilities to meet the 
requirements of the Armed Forces. The first list of 101 items was released in Aug 
2020 and 2nd positive list of Indigenisation of 108 defence has been in May 
2021. This list includes some high technology weapon systems like artillery guns, 
assault rifles, corvettes, sonar systems, transport aircrafts, light combat 
helicopters (LCHs), radars, Helicopter with all up weight, Next generation 
corvette, Border Surveillance system, Land Based MRSAM weapon system, 
Rocket RGB-60 HE with fuse, AmouredDozor, Anti –material Rifle, Counter Mine 
Flail, Instant fire Detection and suppression system for tanks and many other 
items to fulfill the needs of our Defence Services. 
 
6. MDL has progressively increased the Indigenous content in Shipbuilding projects. 
The indigenous content has been increased from 42% in Project 15 (Import 
content 58%) to 75% in ongoing Project 17A (Import content 25%) and 72% in 
Project 15A (Import content 28%). 
 
Further, DRDO has taken following initiatives to reduce import content and to promote 
indigenisation: 
i). New Transfer of Technology (ToT) policy: ToT policy with nil ToT fee for 
Development Partner cum Production Partner (DCPP)/Development Partner 
(DP)/Production Agency (PA) industry. Also nil royalty will be charged from 
industry for supply to Services MHA/Govt. agencies. 2% royalty will be 
chargeable for export and products for commercial markets. 
 

53 
 
ii). Industry as Development cum Production Partner (DcPP): DcPP / Production 
Agency (PA) / Lead System Integrator (LSI) participation for Mission Mode and 
System level Technology Demonstration Projects. 
 
iii). Technology Development Fund: Technology Development Fund (TDF) has 
been established to encourage R&D and indigenization by industry. Under this 
scheme, uptoRs 10 Crores granted to encourage participation of public/private 
industries especially Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)/ 
Startups and to promote Self- Reliance in Defence Technology by design and 
development of technologies/ prototypes; Indigenisation of imported systems/ 
components and new systems as part of Make-in-India Initiative.  
Recommendation No. 25 
 The Committee note that the Government of India has enhanced FDI in Defence 
Sector up to 74% through the Automatic Route for companies seeking new defence 
Industrial license and up to 100 % by Government Route wherever it is likely to result in 
access to modern technology. The Committee was given to understand that this FDI 
limit was increased from 49% to 74% to ensure that it will come along with the 
technology also. The FDI limit has been made attractive enough to make the foreign 
investors share their technology also otherwise, they will have the control of the entire 
company. The Committee are convinced with the idea of the Ministry but desire that the 
Ministry should ensure that despite raising the limits of FDI to as high as 74% the 
purpose of self-reliance should not be defeated. In this context, the Committee 
recommend that in addition to the measures taken for making FDI more attractive, 
focused efforts may be undertaken by the Ministry to strengthen R&D base of the 
country so that the technologies/ systems / accessories intended to be made available 
in the country through the FDI route be cent-percently designed and developed by 
Indigenous defence sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry vide Press Note No. 4 (2020 Series) dated 17.09.2020, has allowed FDI under 
automatic route upto 74% and above 74% through government route wherever it is 
likely to result in access to modern technology or for other reasons to be recorded. 
Further, in order to boost research and development infrastructure in the country, 
Department of Defence Production (DDP) has taken below mentioned measures –  

54 
 
i. Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP)- 2020 promulgated in Oct 2020 is driven 
by the tenets of Defence Reforms announced as part of ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat 
Abhiyan’.  
ii. In order to promote indigenous design and development of defence equipment 
‘Buy {Indian-IDDM (Indigenously Designed, Developed and Manufactured)}’ 
category has been accorded top most priority for procurement of capital 
equipment. 
iii. The ‘Make’ Procedure of capital procurement has been simplified. There is a 
provision for Government funding up to 70% of the prototype development cost 
for Design & Development of equipment, systems, major platforms or upgrades 
thereof.  
iv. Procedure for ‘Make-II’ category (Industry funded), introduced in DPP-2016  is 
aimed  at encouraging indigenous development and manufacture of defence 
equipment. The procedure incorporates number of industry friendly provisions 
such as relaxation of eligibility criterion, minimal documentation, provision for 
considering proposals suggested by industry/individual etc.  
v. An innovation ecosystem for Defence titled Innovations for Defence Excellence 
(iDEX) has been launched in April 2018. iDEX is aimed at creation of an 
ecosystem to foster innovation and technology development in Defence and 
Aerospace by engaging Industries including MSMEs, Start-ups, Individual 
Innovators, R&D institutes and Academia and provide them grants/funding and 
other support to carry out R&D which has potential for future adoption for Indian 
defence and aerospace needs. 
vi. Reforms in Offset policy have been included in DAP 2020, with thrust on 
attracting investment and Transfer of Technology (ToT) for Defence 
manufacturing, by assigning higher multipliers to them. 
vii. Government has notified the ‘Strategic Partnership (SP)’ Model in May 2017, 
which envisages establishment of long-term strategic partnerships with Indian 
entities through a transparent and competitive process, wherein they would tie 
up with global Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) to seek technology 
transfers to set up domestic manufacturing infrastructure and supply chains. 
viii. Under Buy and Make (Indian) category of DAP-2020, Indian vendor(s) can tie-
up with a foreign Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM), for indigenous 
production involving transfer of technology of critical technologies. 
ix. Buy(Global-Manufacture in India) category of DAP-2020 refers to an outright 
purchase of equipment from foreign vendors, in quantities as considered 
necessary, followed by indigenous manufacture of the entire/part of the 
equipment and spares/assemblies/sub-assemblies/maintenance along with 
repair and overhaul (MRO) facility (only in cases where these are part of the 
main contract) for the equipment, through its subsidiary in India/through a joint 

55 
 
Venture/through an Indian Production Agency(PA)(with ToT of critical 
technologies to the Indian PA), meeting a minimum of 50 % Indigenous Content 
(IC) on cost basis of the Base Contract price. 
 
In order to strengthen R&D base in India DRDO has taken the following steps: 
1. New Transfer of Technology (ToT) policy:ToT policy with ‘nil’ ToT fee for 
Development Partner cum Production Partner (DCPP)/Development Partner 
(DP)/Production Agency (PA) industry. Also nil royalty will be charged from industry for 
supply to Services MHA/Govt. agencies. 2% royalty will be chargeable for export and 
products for commercial markets. 
2.  Industry as Development cum Production Partner (DcPP): DcPP / Production 
Agency (PA) / Lead System Integrator (LSI) participation for Mission Mode and System 
level Technology Demonstration Projects. 
3. Technology Development Fund: Technology Development Fund (TDF) has 
been established to encourage R&D and indigenization by industry.Under this scheme, 
uptoRs 10 Cris granted to encourage participation of public/private industries especially 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)/ Startups and to promote 
Self- Reliance in Defence Technology by design and development of technologies/ 
prototypes; Indigenisation of imported systems/ components and new systems as part 
of Make-in-India Initiative.  
4. Dare to Dream Innovation Contest: Pan India contest for promotion/ support to 
innovators/ Start-ups against the defined requirements has been launched.  
5.  Exclusive Technologies/ Systems for Industry to Develop: In Aug 2020, in 
line with the aim of ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat, DRDO has identified a list of 108 systems 
(hosted on DRDO website) which will be designed, developed and  manufactured by 
industry only and will not be taken up by DRDO itself for development. DRDO may 
provide scientific/technological support and testing support wherever required for the 
development of these systems and subsystems on case to case basis. 
6. Positive List of Indigenisation: Negative list for import of 1037 Systems/Sub-
Systems/Components has been forwarded to Dept. of Defence Production, of which a 
number of items were placed in the 101 import Ban list promulgated by DMA. The 2ndlist 
promulgated by DMA also has DRDO developed systems. 
7. Access to Test Facilities of DRDO: Test Facilities of DRDO are extended to 
Indian Industry on payment basis.  

56 
 
8. Free Access of DRDO Patents: Policy for free access of DRDO Patents by 
Indian Industries has been implemented. 
9. DRDO Procurement Manual-2020 (PM-2020): A new version of highly simplified 
and industry friendly DRDO Procurement Manual-2020 (PM-2020) released by Hon’ble 
RM to encourage more participation of Indian industry, including start-ups and MSMEs 
in Defence R&D for achieving ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’.  
10. MoUs with Defence Industrial Corridors: MOU has been signed with Tamil 
Nadu and UP Defence Industrial Corridors to impart skill training, hand-holding and 
providing guidance in all aspects related to technology.  
11. Introduction of Defence Courses:  
 PG & Diploma Courses at Gujarat University, Ahmedabad and Elective 
Courses in B. Tech at IITRAM, Gandhinagar - MoUs signed and course have 
started from 3rd Feb 2021. 
 Syllabus for M. Tech. in Defence Technology (compulsory & elective courses) 
has been finalised in collaboration with AICTE & DRDO Labs. Regular course 
on M. Tech. in Defence Technology has been included in the Approval 
Process Handbook (APH) 2021-22. 
 
12. DRDO-MoE Collaborative Ph.D. Programme: DRDO-MoE Collaborative 
Program for Ph.D. students to work on current problem areas related to defence 
technologies. Ph.D. scholars registered with selected universities can carry out research 
work in DRDO labs on mutually agreed problems related to defence technologies. The 
Ph.D. scholar shall be guided by University and DRDO lab shall provide the co-guide.  
13. Paid Apprenticeship Scheme: DRDO aims to improve the skill of manpower 
required at different level for defence R&D and manufacturing in private industry. 3500 
skilled operators / supervisors / engineers shall be trained each year at DRDO labs. The 
apprenticeship will be of one year duration. Stipend shall also be paid as per Ministry of 
Labour guidelines. 
14. Certificate courses on AI & Cyber Technologies for 1000 graduates each: 
Both courses (first batch) successfully completed – 500 each. Second batches have 
started. 
15. Internship at DRDO Labs: Internship to 5000 Engineering Students / Research 
Scholars is being arranged every year in DRDO labs to promote research culture 
amongst youngsters. 

57 
 
R& D efforts put on by the DPSUs are described as under: 
HAL: Aerospace domain is a highly technology intensive domain and R&D is a thrust 
area at HAL. HAL has 10 R&D centers working on different technology segments in the 
Aerospace domain, both for fixed wing and rotary wing platforms. HAL spends around 
6- to 8% of its sales towards R & D. Further, to enhance its thrust on R&D, HAL has 
created a R&D Corpus with contribution of 10% of operating profit after tax. 
HAL has to its credit designed and developed 17 state-of-the-art indigenous products 
which include Advance Light Helicopter (ALH), Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), Light 
Combat Helicopter (LCH), Light Utility Helicopter (LUH), Basic Turboprop Trainer 
Aircraft (HTT-40). 
The major Design and Development programs currently progressing at HAL include 
LCA Mk1A, Indian Multirole Helicopter (IMRH), 200 kg RUAV, 25kN Turbo-Fan Engine, 
1200KW Turbo-Shaft engine. In addition, HAL is the principal Design partner with ADA 
for Design and development of LCA MK II and AMCA. 
In addition, various other technology development projects have been launched to 
increase self-reliance in critical areas like Engines, Aircraft Display Systems, Mission 
Computers, Aircraft Flight Control Systems for Helicopter etc. HAL has tied up with 
premier academia in the country and has established 6 Chairs at IITs / IISc for 
conducting research and product development activities on niche areas.   
HAL believes in inclusive growth and has been instrumental in nurturing a competitive 
aviation eco-system in India by way of collaborating with private industries as 
outsourced partners.  More than 30% of HAL’s man-hours have been outsourced 
including several critical work packages, resulting in enhancing the manufacturing 
capability of Indian private sector including MSMEs. HAL aims to be a lead aerospace 
integrator, primarily through robust private partnership. HAL is also utilizing private 
vendors in design and development of systems, examples include Smart Cockpit 
Display System, Multi-Function Display, Solid State Flight Data Recorder etc., to name 
a few. 
 
MRO facilities have been established by HAL to support its products for the entire life 
cycle of products. MRO facilities are established for airframe, engines, avionics and 
accessories to meet the annual arising from the defence services. 
With probable orders to be received for Light Combat Helicopter (LCH), Light Utility 
Helicopter (LUH), HTT-40, addl SU-30MKI aircraft along with existing orders for LCA 

58 
 
MK1A and ALH, the need to ensure maximum utilization of existing Defence & 
Aerospace facilities in the country under “Make in India”, will be fulfilled.  
 
BEL: BEL generally does not import fully finished Defence equipment. However, for the 
design, manufacture & supply of Defence equipment, the company resorts to imports 
only for some of the special Components/Raw materials, proprietary items/sub-systems 
etc., (input material) that are not being manufactured in the country. Around 87% of 
BEL's turnover, on an average is, generated from products based on indigenous 
technology and the remaining mere 13% is on foreign ToT. The import content during 
2019-20 was around 27% on value of production. BEL continuously strives to minimize 
the dependence on import of these items through consistent efforts on indigenization, 
outsourcing from domestic industry, vendor development, and collaborative R&D 
process involving Indian Private Industry including MSMEs etc.  
Towards achieving the objectives of self-reliance by continuous reduction in imports, 
BEL has evolved clear Roadmaps for Indigenization, including Make-II process and 
Collaborative R&D projects to develop products. Some of the major specific measures 
deployed to enhance indigenization to minimize import content are listed below: 
 Items with large quantities & high future business potential are being targeted for 
Indigenization. 100 such items have been uploaded in BEL Website. Projects with 
order available or higher probability of acquisition are selected on priority. Projects 
with estimated prototype cost of upto Rs.25 lakhs are reserved for MSMEs/Start-
ups. 
 Commonly Generic items are being targeted to build indigenous vendor base 
(Crystals, Filters, Power Supply, Convertors, Mechanical items, Raw Materials, 
Transformers, Connectors, and Cables etc). 
 EoIs for 56 items under Make-II have been published on BEL’s e-Procurement 
portal. Responses received for 29 items and are in various stages of 
indigenization. Till date, 1900 items are uploaded on 'Srijan' (DDP) Portal for 
indigenization. 
 Preference to indigenous components/Sub-Assemblies over imported without 
compromise on quality & certification requirements. 
 As part of CPSE Conclave action points of GoI, BEL has identified specific projects 
for Indigenization as part Challenges pertaining to "Minimizing Import Bill" and 
"Integration of Innovation & Research" through which various projects have been 
taken up for indigenization in collaboration with other CPSEs/OFB.  

59 
 
 Indigenization is one of the major avenues of BEL's Cost Reduction efforts where 
the company sets annual targets for achieving. Reduction in Import as a % of 
Revenue from Operations over the previous year is one of the Performance 
Criteria under MoU signed with Ministry.  
 Import bill reduction can be achieved through self-reliance in terms of 
manufacturing as well as design & development within the country. Following 
steps are being taken in BEL to enhance indigenization: 
R&D: With an aim to reduce the need for foreign ToT based products (which involve 
heavy imports), BEL will continue to take the following steps towards design & 
development of products indigenously: 
o Collaborations with National Labs (e.g., DRDO), academia and societies:  
Radars Naval 
systems 
Missile 
Systems Comm. EO & 
Lasers Encryption Futuristic technologies 
LRDE NSTL, 
NPOL 
RCI, 
DRDL 
DEAL, 
DRDL IRDE CAIR, SETS 
IITs (Kanpur, Karagpur, 
Hyderabad, Roorkee), 
IIIT-Jabalpur, IISc 
 
o Import substitution of several expensive Modules & sub-systems in various 
business segments. These include: Maritime Domain Awareness-Decision 
Support Software for NC3I, Radars (e.g., Coastal Surveillance Radar, Compact 
Tactical Surveillance Radar, X-Band Active Phased Array Radar), Head Up 
Displays (e.g., Su-30 Aircraft), Digital Mobile Radio (DMR), Satellite On The Move 
(SOTM) (e.g., Ku Band SOTM), Chassis (e.g., Dip Brazed Chassis for Digital Flight 
Control Computer (DFCC), Power Systems (e.g., PSU of Atulya Radar), 
Communication equip. (Radios, Switches, Gateways etc.) for Missile programs 
(QRSAM, Akash-NG, CIWS, etc.), Zoom Lens & Electro-Optics Sight Systems, AI 
based solutions and Traffic Management for Smart Cities, Railways (RTIS), Metro 
Railways etc. 
o Setting indigenization targets for every Business Unit & monitoring the progress. An 
indigenisation committee has been entrusted with this responsibility. Make-II 
process is being adapted to build an Indian eco-system. Some of the on-going 
efforts are as follows: 
  

60 
 
 
Sl# Subsystem Indian partner 
1 5kVA UPS for ADTCR 
3 MSMEs identified 2 Rugged 24" LED Display 
3 Line Interface and Detector Unit 
4 OFC Cable Assy. EoI Re issued as no 
response from MSMEs 5 Voltage Controlled SAW Oscillator 
6 Gyro sensor based True North Finder (TNF) 
EoI being prepared – to be 
issued to MSMEs 
7 Power Supply 5V/60A 
8 VCOs (120MHz, 80MHz, 80MHz, 350MHz) 
9 SFP Transceivers (9 variants) 
10 Multi Output Power Supply To be Identified  
11 Electronically Tunable High Power Microwave 
Band Pass Filter 
Multiple MSMEs identified 
12 Electronically Tunable Microwave Band Pass 
Filter 
13 Microwave Low Noise Amplifier 
14 Dehydrator with SNMP 
15 Wormed Gear Box 
16 Rugged UPS 
Multiple MSMEs identified 17 Fibre Optic Gyro (single Axis) 
18 Fibre Optic Gyro (+/-150deg/Sec) 
19 8:1 High Power Combiner 
 
o Strengthening the two Central Research Labs (CRL), BEL Software Technology 
Centre (BSTC) and  Product Development & Innovation centre (PD&IC) for 
development of cutting edge futuristic and critical (cost extensive) technology 
Modules through: 

61 
 
 CRL, 
Bengaluru CRL, Ghaziabad BSTC PD&IC 
Current 
Manpower 253 187 249 225 
 
o Empanelment of collaborative partners: 
 
Service Providers R&D 
Consultants Design  Production  R&D Solution 
Empanelment  in 
2019-20 177 39 35 31 
 
BEML: BEML Limited has its own world-class composite R&D establishment and is 
engaged in for Design & Development of products and continuous upgradation of 
existing products to meet customer requirements. The R&D expenditure is around 2 ~ 
3% of its turnover. Over 65% of sales turnover is thru in-house R&D developed 
products. 
The Company launched “Make in India” Products 150T & 190T Dump Trucks, 180T 
Electrical / Hydraulic Excavators and 850HP Bulldozer successfully. These biggest 
electric drive dump trucks, excavator and bulldozer were designed and manufactured 
for the first time in India and are major import substitution products for the Mining sector. 
After successful trials, orders have been received for supply of 5 numbers of 180T 
Electrical Excavators, 7 numbers of for 150T and 8 numbers of 190T high end dumpers 
and are under execution. Additionally, Trial-cum sale order was received from M/s. CIL 
for 2 nos. of 850HP bulldozers and 1 no. of 180T Hydraulic excavator. 
Indigenously Designed & Developed Arjun Armoured Repair & Recovery Vehicle in 
association with M/s. CVRDE, has undergone trials and orders are expected which will 
result in substantial FE savings for the Country.  
Design & Development of Metro car for Kolkata Metro Rail Corporation Limited was 
successfully completed and all 14 train sets were delivered to the customer. Catenary 
Maintenance Vehicle (CMV) was successfully designed & developed and supplied to 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation. 

62 
 
The Company has developed and supplied the country’s first unmanned train operated 
(driverless) metro rolling stock for supply to MRS1 project of Mumbai metro line 2A and 
line 7. 
The Company is also working with industry partners to leverage technology for the 
benefit of customers such as introducing AI features in machines. During the year 2019-
20, three following AI based products were developed: 
 Mobile Medical Health Diagnostic System,  
 Sleep / Fatigued operator alert system on Dump Trucks,  
 Predictive maintenance of Mining equipment thru big data analytics and Machine 
learning algorithms. 
Further, BEML Limited has identified the following AI projects for development: 
 360° Surrounding View Monitoring System: FY 2020-21 – Under progress 
 Intelligent machine controlled Robotic arm for Weapon loading – Mounted Gun 
System: FY 2021-22 - Under progress 
 Autonomus Dozer: FY 2021-22 - Under progress  
 Autonomous All Terrain Surface Vehicle: FY 2022-23 
 Autonomous All terrain Ground Vehicle with remote camera for reconnaissance:           
FY 2023-24. 
MIDHANI: MIDHANI R&D efforts are focused in the area of : 
 Alloy / Product Development 
 Process Development / Improvement  
 Technology collaboration  
 
MDL:  MDL is recognised as an In-House R&D unit by Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (DSIR). Details on MDL R&D is detailed below: 
 
1. In-house Activities: MDL has identified the need to leverage the knowledge and 
expertise of people across the organization for technological excellence. 
Specialist Groups have been set up to enable personnel evolve best practices, 
improve processes and procedures based on experience and learning. The 
Specialists Groups functioning in warship design divisions are as follows: 
a) Propulsion System Integration(PSI): Propulsion Shafting Installation & 
Alignment Problems and resolution; ‘Shaft Designer’ software 

63 
 
b) Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC): Improvements in design 
c) Finite Element based structural Analysis (FEA): Structural Analysis - Warship 
construction & block transportation / handling; equipment & seats strength 
analysis. 
d) Engineering Materials Application: New Engineering Materials for Warships. 
e) Ergonomics and Human Factors Engineering(HFE): Improved ergonomics and 
habitability; aesthetics and interior design on board P15A Ships 
f) Noise and Vibration Assessment: Identification and implementation of noise and 
vibration reduction measures on-board ships 
g) RCS management: Detailed study 
h) Virtual Reality: VRL Utilization 
i) Weight monitoring and control:  Identification and implementation new Weight 
Monitoring techniques for warships 
j) Standardization Group: Standardization of products / fittings 
k) Development of Basic Design of Various ships like Offshore Patrol Vessel, 
Dredgers, Floating Dock, Missile Vessel, Launch Boats etc 
2. R&D in collaboration with Universities/Start ups  
a) MDL, in association with  IIT Madras incubated start-ups is carrying out the 
development of three ArtificaialIntelligene(AI) projects as follows: 
 Development of Remotely Operated Vehicles. 
 Artificial intelligence (AI) enabled weld inspection with computerized 
radiography. 
 AI enabled robotic weld inspection using advanced phased array technique 
to replace manual radiography. 
b) Following are other R&D projects in progress: 
 Ergonomic and Human Machine Interface (HMI) Enhancement in Machinery 
and Accommodation compartments for Naval ships in collaboration with NID 
Ahmedabad.  
 Aerodynamic simulation studies by Wind tunnel & Computational Fluid 
Dynamics with IISc, Bengaluru. 

64 
 
GRSE: GRSE is a DPSU Shipyard primarily engaged in construction of Warships for 
Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard and manufacturing of Bailey Bridges of different 
types, Deck Machinery items and Marine Pumps. The Diesel Engine Plant at Ranchi is 
for the Assembly, Testing and servicing of Marine Diesel Engines. All R&D activities of 
this Shipyard are associated with these core activities only. Hence this recommendation 
is not applicable for the Shipyard. 
GSL: (a) Research & Development is a major thrust area and at present GSL has a 
well-established R&D centre which has been recognized and registered as in-house 
R&D unit by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), Ministry of 
Science and Technology, GoI. GSL is the first shipyard to have this unique distinction of 
having this recognition. The major objective of the R&D facility at GSL is to develop 
products to support the Indian Defence Forces and friendly Indian Ocean Rim countries. 
In line with the above, GSL’s major area of R&D is in developing products in the area of 
ocean surveillance, patrolling and vessels required for the security of the EEZ of India 
and Indian Ocean Rim countries.  
(b) Over the years, GSL has developed design of various types of vessel which are 
constructed and currently in service. The design and development of these vessels are 
the outcome of an intensive R&D activity undertaken by GSL over the years. Following 
vessels are designed in house and constructed by GSL:  
a. Coastguard Offshore Patrol Vessels,  
b. Naval Offshore Patrol Vessels, 
c. Advance Offshore Patrol Vessels for export  
d. Fast Patrol Vessels,  
e. Export class Fast Patrol Vessels 
(c) GSL also invests time and manpower into developing designs anticipating the 
market needs. Following in-house designs were also undertaken successfully:  
(i) Design and development of Pollution Control Vessels  
(ii) Design and development of Landing Ship Tank  
(iii) Design and development of Cadet Training Ship 
(iv) Design and development of Next Generation Offshore Patrol Vessel 
(v) Design and development of Coastal Patrol Vessel 
(vi) Design and development of Next Generation Missile Vessel 
(vii) Design and development of Multi-Purpose Vessel 
(viii) Design and development of Survey Training Ship 
(ix) Development of Hull form and General arrangement for 60 meter Patrol 
Vessel for Indian Ocean Rim Countries 
 
(d) GSL has tied up with IIT Goa for various CFD Design and Development analysis. 

65 
 
(e) Continuous efforts will be made to enhance R&D capabilities.   
HSL: There is no exclusive R&D unit in the Shipyard. However, HSL has a well-
equipped Design & Drawing Office, which in the past has developed in-house design for 
a number of vessels. HSL’s design department has been recognized as in-house R&D 
unit by Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR), Ministry of Science & 
Technology.  
 The major R&D projects which were already completed are as below: 
(a) Innovative Installation of Diffraction Fence on OSS   
(b) Innovative Method for Installing HT Cables 
(c) CFD for Air Intake System 
(d) Design of 10 T Bollard Pull Tug for Indian Navy 
(e) Design of Berthing Pontoon for DGNP (V) 
 Detailed design of following projects were undertaken in 2019: 
(a) Four 50 T tugs for Indian Navy  
(b) Three flap gates for Indian Navy 
 In-house designs of following ships have been undertaken in the year 2019, for 
which bid designs have been submitted: 
(a) Two Pollution Control Vessels for Indian Coast Guard 
(b) Eight Fast Patrol Vessels for Indian Cost Guard 
(c) One 500 passenger vessel for SCI 
 Functional and details design of Diving Support Vessel s is carried out in house by 
external agency. 
 In addition to the above designs, in-house design capabilities are being enhanced 
by undertaking design of a wide variety of ships such as Multipurpose Cargo 
Vessels for SCI, Offshore Patrol Vessels for Indian Navy etc, so as to progress 
towards the aim of Design department of the Shipyard becoming a ‘Centre of 
Excellence’. The R&D Expenditure as a % of Revenue in respect of HSL during the 
last three years is tabulated below:- 
Parameter Unit 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20  
R&D expenditure Rs Cr 5.57  4.38 4.75 
VoP Rs Cr 644.78  594.91 495.00 
R&D expenditure 
as % VoP % 0.86  0.73 0.96 
 

66 
 
DEFENCE PLANNING 
 
FIVE YEAR DEFENCE PLANS 
 
Recommendation No. 26-28 
 
Recommendation No. 26 
 
The Committee note that the Defence Five Year Plans are formulated to 
elaborate the necessary steps to maintain and augment Defence capabilities in line with 
the Raksha Mantri’s Operational Directive, the Long Term Perspective Planning and the 
current threat perception. These plans help to estimate the outlay required to achieve 
the planned objective. The Ministry also stated that under these Five Year Plans 
operational activities are done within the available budget allocations. For optimal and 
full utilization of allocated funds the schemes are reprioritized to ensure that urgent and 
critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of 
the Defence Forces.  
 
Recommendation No. 27 
 
The Committee in their earlier Reports have been recommending the Ministry to 
adopt measures for fool proof budgetary planning and implementation. The Committee 
are surprised to know that the 12th Plan was approved by the Raksha Mantri but the 
Ministry of Finance, however, did not approve the Plan. While formulating the guidelines 
for the 13th Defence Plan it was decided that the Plan may be sent to Ministry of 
Finance only for information and not for its approval. The Ministry of Finance will be kept 
in loop about the requirements of the Defence Forces in the coming years. The 
Committee also note from the replies submitted that non approval of the Defence Plan 
does not act as hindrance in implementation of Defence projects. Activities planned are 
likely to proceed according to available annual budget allocations and the Defence Plan 
serves only as a guide for formulating annual budgetary projections even without the 
formal approval of the Ministry of Finance.  
 
Recommendation No. 28 
 
In the 12th (2012-17) plan, the Ministry was able to spend Rs. 10,55,763.75 crore 
out of Rs. 10,95,262.55 crore allocated. However, the Committee note that in 2017-18, 
the Ministry was earmarked Rs. 262992.54 crore and the amount spent was Rs. 
2,72,559.83 crore. Similarly in 2018-19, Ministry was granted Rs.2,82,078.02 crore but 
Rs. 2,87,668.65 crore were utilized; in 2019-20, Ministry was allocated Rs. 3,16,296.07 

67 
 
crore and the expenditure was Rs. 3,18,664.58 crore.  While gleaning through the data 
supplied, the Committee note that in the past few years Ministry was able to spend 
more than the allocated amount. Therefore, the Committee desire that at the first 
place, the Ministry of Finance should desist from any cut in the financial allocations in 
annual plans for Ministry of Defence, especially when the Ministry of Defence is able to 
absorb entire allocated amount. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of 
Defence should make well calculated and enhanced demand for additional allocation 
at the time of supplementary grants, since they have an obligation to fulfil.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee are noted for compliance.The Committee 
may be assured that additional allocations sought by the Services will be projected at 
supplementary/RE stages of the current fiscal.  It is assured that the adequate funds 
would be made available for meeting the liabilities. 
Recommendation No. 29 
The Committee note that in 2020-21 the Ministry was able to utilize 
Rs.2,33,176.70 crore (upto Dec. 2020). Since the Ministry had last quarter to utilize the 
rest of the amount and there was no cap on expenditure in last quarter of the year due 
to Covid-19 pandemic situation, the Committee would like to be apprised of the figures 
of final expenditure in 2020-21. The Committee would also like to know about the 
constraints in spending the full allocated funds, if any, at the time of furnishing Action 
Taken Replies.  
Reply of the Government 
 In FY 2020-21, expenditure of Rs. 3,40,147.41 Crore (i.e. 98.93% of RE 20-21) 
upto March (Final-as on 19.05.2021) against RE 20-21 allocations of Rs. 3,43,822 
Crore.  The Ministry is able to expend almost entire allocations, therefore, issue of 
constraints in expending allocated funds does not arise. 
MARRIED ACCOMMODATION PROJECT (MAP) 
 
Recommendation No. 30 
 
 The Commitee note that Directorate General of Married Accommodation Project 
(DG MAP) was raised by Government of India under the aegis of Engineer in Chief to 
construct married accommodation for the three services, with the aim of eradicating the 
deficiency of married accommodation for service personnel. The MAP was setup to 
fulfill the promise made to the Armed Forces by the Government of India. The total 

68 
 
deficiency of two lakh dwelling units have been slated for construction in four phases. 
After construction of dwelling units over the time period, at present, there is a deficiency 
of 71,102 in all (70,432 dwelling units in respect of Army and 670 in respect of Air 
Force). 
Reply of the Government 
 The total deficiency of two lakh dwelling units had earlier been slated for 
construction in four phases. However, the third and fourth phases of MAP were 
combined in order to complete the entire requirement in three phases. Accordingly, 
planning of MAP Ph III was sanctioned for 71,102 Dwelling Units. Due to non availability 
of funds it was decided to undertake construction of Ph III in two parts viz 24,592 
Dwelling Units in  MAP Ph-III (A) and balance in MAP Ph-III (B). Planning of MAP Ph III 
commenced at 13 locations (08 packages) and the DPR for the same is in advanced 
stages of completion. However, recently, an In-Principle decision has been taken for 
foreclosure of MAP Ph-III and to execute the remaining works through the AMWP route.  
Recommendation No. 31 
 The committee note that due to reduced budgetary allocaton many constraints 
are being faced by the MAP i.e. Low satisfaction level, delay in commencement of MAP 
Ph III, delay in execution of MAP Ph III, cost escalation of MAP Ph III etc. The 
committee were informed that MAP Phase-III was planned for construction 71,102 DUs 
at an anticipated cost of Rs 23,279.70 crore. During the 56 and 57 Apex Steering 
Committee Meetings Army authorities have conveyed difficulty in providing budgetary 
support for MAP Ph-III. Consequently MAP was allotted  Rs 344.72 crore during the 
year 2020-21 against a projection of Rs 532 crore. For the year 2021-22, an allocation 
of Rs 551 crore was sought for MAP in 2021-22. However, due to the delays in 
construction due to budgetary constraints, it was decided by the Department of Military 
Affairs that maximum married Dwelling Units would be constructed through Annual 
Major Works Programme (AMWP) route. Accordingly it was proposed to process 
revised CCS Note for foreclusure of MAP Phase-III. 
Reply of the Government 
 71,102 Dwelling Units are to be constructed in MAP Ph III, where Army was the 
major stake holder as 70,432 Dwelling Units were to be constructed for Army. Due to re-
balancing of funds, it was decided by Army to restrict the planning for MAP Phase III to 
24,592 Dwelling Units and Rs 100 Crs allotted for the preparation of DPRs, which are in 
advance stage of completion. However, an in-principle decision has been taken recently 
for foreclosure of MAP Phase III to execute the remaining works through the AMWP 
route.  

69 
 
CHAPTER II (B) 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND COMMENTED UPON 
Recommendation No. 21 
The Committee have been apprised that as on date, a total of 56 Defence offset 
contracts have been signed in MoD. The total offset obligations are estimated at approx 
US $ 13.03 billion to be discharged over a period from 2008-2027. Out of the total 
contracted obligations US$ 3.57 billion has been discharged by the vendors, of which 
US $ 1.93 billion has been accepted in audit and the balance claims are under 
clarification/examination. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Defence 
would take appropriate measures for clearing balance claims which are under 
clarification/examination which would result in further strengthening of Defence 
Industrial Base. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the updated status, till April, 2021, a total of 56 Defence offset contracts 
have been signed in MoD. The total offset obligations are estimated at approximately 
US $ 13.03 billion to be discharged over a period from 2008-2027. Out of the total 
contracted obligations, US $3.67 billion has been discharged by the vendors, of which 
US $2.16 billion has been accepted in audit and the balance claims are under 
clarification/ examination. With the introduction of end-to-end online submission and 
verification of offset claims through the offset portal, the process of audit and disposal of 
offset claims has become more transparent, efficient and accountable. 
[For comments, please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation No. 32 
 The Committee feel that budget constraints are always there in capital intensive 
projects like MAP, and the Committee appreciate the decision of the Ministry to complet 
the targeted number of dwelling units through AMWP. At this stage the Committee only 
desire the Ministry to get this proposal accepted at the earliest and start with the 
construction of Dwelling Units as soon as possible so that it does not get delayed 
further. 
  

70 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Against total requirement of 1,98,881 Dwelling Units 1,17,118 Dwelling Units 
have already been completed under Phase-I and Phase-II. As of now 10,661 of Phase-
II are in various stages of planning and execution. The Phase-II is likely to be completed 
by Dec 2023. Rs 100 crore were alloted for preparation of DPRs for 24,592 Dwelling 
Units of Phase-III which are at advance stage of completion. Now, as per decision taken 
in the DMA, the Draft CCS Note for foreclosure of MAP Phase III and to execute the 
remaining works through the AMWP route is under preparation. 
[For comments, please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation No. 33 
 During the course of evidence, when the deliberations on the proposal or plan to 
increase MAP in Jammu and Kashmir was taking place, it was informed that as peace is 
returning to the Kashmir Valley, there will be a requirement of putting more 
accommodation in the valley. The Committee, welcome the idea of increasing the 
number of dwelling units in Kashmir Valley and accordingly recommend that emphasis 
should be given on completing required number of Dwelling Units (DUs) at the earliest 
so that our Armed Forces would be in a better state of mind to serve the nation. 
Reply of the Government 
 The construction  of Dwelling Units in Jammu & Kashmir as per the approved re-
distribution and re-location plan was considered to be undertaken in MAP Phase III, 
which would now be executed through the AMWP route, once the CCS approval is 
received for foreclosure of MAP Ph-III. The additional requirement of Dwelling Units at 
Jammu and Kashmir will also be taken into consideration while finalising the AMWP.   
[For comments, please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
  

71 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES. 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

72 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON. 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 The Committee learn that at present, there is no separate allocation of funds for 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes under Defence Services Estimates and the 
funds for it are allocated under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) Head.  The 
Committee observe that the allocation in the 2021-22 for Army is Rs. 30,636.90 crore 
against projection of Rs. 39,977.00 crore.  For Navy (excluding Joint Staff) the allocation 
is Rs. 31,031.02 crore vis-à-vis projection of Rs. 65,888.96 crore which is less than the 
half of the projected amount.  The allocation for Air Force stands at Rs. 49,320.77 crore 
against the projection of Rs. 72,180.06 crore.  In addition it is ensured by the Ministry 
that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to the 
operational preparedness of the Defence Services. The Committee find it contradictory 
in comparison to amount of funds actually allocated under BE-2021-22 for the three 
services especially Navy being a capital intensive force.  Ministry had sought additional 
funds of Rs. 61,198.12 crore at RE stage in 2021-22 under Modernization Head but only 
Rs. 24,272.50 crore were provided to them.  Considering this grim situation towards 
allocation in Capital Acquisition Fund, the Committee in their 7th Report had 
recommended the Ministry of Defence to create a dedicated fund for Committed 
Liabilities and New Schemes.  As no progress has been observed by the Committee in 
this regards, the Committee again urge the Ministry to create a separate dedicated 
Head for Committed Liabilities and New Schemes from the next Budget onwards, so 
that there are no difficulties faced in matching the deadlines in the payment towards 
already committed purchases and latest weaponry could be procured under New 
Schemes.  
Reply of the Government 
The outstanding contractual commitments which are overdue or commitments 
which are likely to arise during a period on account of completion in contractual 
milestone constitute committed liabilities over that period. This amount of committed 
liabilities is dynamic in nature and depends on contracts concluded at a particular point 
of time, contractual milestones due to be fulfilled over a defined period and the 
associated slippages, if any. New Schemes constitute new projects/proposals that are 

73 
 
at various stages of procurement/approval and are likely to be fructified over a defined 
period (usually a financial year). The forecasted amount for new schemes also keeps on 
changing with reference to their fructification/finalization. On conclusion of contract with 
respect to a “new scheme” the same becomes a committed liabilities and payments 
have to be scheduled as per fulfilment of contractual milestones. Thus, the Capital 
Acquisition (modernization) segment of the Capital Budget comprises of both committed 
liabilities and new schemes.  
 It is submitted that in the Defence Services Estimates, the allocation under 
Capital Acquisition (modernization) is made through specific/separate Minor Heads 
which caters to both the Committed Liabilities and New Schemes. 
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
  

74 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES 
 
Additional Allocation 
Recommendation No. 5: 
 The Committee are satisfied to find that the Ministry of Defence has put forth the 
Demand of Rs. 9,286 crore under Revenue Head (Non-Salary) and Rs. 20,776 crore 
under Capital Head as additional funds during the year 2020-21. The Committee are of 
the opinion that first and foremost priority should be given to the preparedness of 
Defence Forces and the Ministry should ensure that these additional allocation of funds 
should be utilized for critical projects and operational activities of the three services.  
The Committee also desire the Ministry to take steps for timely expenditure of the 
allocated funds  in the first two quarters itself so that requirement of additional funds is 
assessed timely and get approved from the Ministry of Finance at Supplementary 
Grants stage. 
 Reply of the Government has not been received with regard to 
Recommendation No. 5. 
 
Non Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund – Defence Renewal Fund 
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee in their various previous reports have recommended making 
Capital Budget ‘Non-lapsable’ and ‘Roll-on’ in nature. The Ministry was consequently 
asked to convey the current status of the same. The Committee were apprised during 
the oral evidence that a draft Cabinet note for Non-Lapsable Defence Modernisation 
Fund is under consideration. The Committee observe that out of the total budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 3,43,822.00 in 2020-21 only Rs. 2,33,176.70 have been utilized by the 
Ministry upto December 2020. As there is around Rs. 110,645.3 crore left unutilized 
which is to be spent in the three months of this F.Y. 2020-21, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to expedite the constitution of a Non-Lapsable Defence 
Modernisation Fund – Defence Renewal Fund, which may be meant exclusively for the 
procurement of critical defence assets at critical times. As the draft Cabinet note for 
constituting a Non-Lapsable Modernisation Fund is under consideration, the Committee 
advice the Ministry that approval may be accorded to fructify its creation at the earliest 

75 
 
so that procurement can be done unhampered without pursuing for funds to receive at 
Supplementary or Additional Grants stages. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Proposal for Creation of Non-Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund is under 
examination. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                                    JUAL ORAM 
17  November, 2021 Chairperson 
26 Kartika , 1943 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

76 
 
APPENDIX – I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2021-22) 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2021-22) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 
1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Kunwar Danish Ali   
3 Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
4 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
5 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser  
6 Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
7 Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
8 Shri Mahabali Singh  
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
9 Dr. Ashok Bajpai  
10 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
11 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D.P. Vats (Retd.) 
12 Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
2. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 

77 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
i. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘General 
Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence 
Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 
Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pensions (Demand 
Nos. 18 and 21)'; 
 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, 
Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme and Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)'; and 
 
iii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Capital Outlay on 
Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and Married 
Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports barring a few 
amendments in draft Report mentioned at Sl. No. (ii) above. 
 
4. ********* 
 
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. ******* 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** Does not pertain to the Report. 

78 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) ON 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS FOR THE YEAR 2021-22 ON CAPITAL OUTLAY ON DEFENCE 
SERVICES, PROCUREMENT POLICY, DEFENCE PLANNING AND MARRIED ACCOMMODATION 
PROJECT (DEMAND NO. 20)’  
1. Total number of Observations/Recommendations:                                                                      33 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government (please see 
Chapter II A): 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30 
and  31 
Total :      27 
Percentage:    82% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government and commented 
upon (please see Chapter II B): 
 
Recommendation Nos. 21, 32 and 33 
                                                                                                                                       Total :       3 
Percentage:    9% 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
 -Nil- 
Total :    0 
Percentage :  0% 
 
 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee, which require reiteration and commented upon (please see Chapter 
IV): 
Recommendation No. 10 
Total : 1 
Percentage:   3 % 
 
 
6. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished interim 
replies/replies awaited (please see Chapter V): 
Recommendation Nos. 5 and 11 
Total : 2 
   Percentage:   6% 