 
 
 
10 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fiftieth Report (16
road connectivity under Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and other 
agencies up to International borders as well as the strategic areas including 
approach roads- An appraisal’
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
( i ) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2020-21) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fiftieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Provision of all weather 
road connectivity under Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and other 
agencies up to International borders as well as the strategic areas including 
An appraisal’] 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka)  
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
) on ‘Provision of all weather 
road connectivity under Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and other 
agencies up to International borders as well as the strategic areas including 
 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fiftieth Report 
road connectivity under Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and other 
agencies up to International borders as well as the strategic areas including 
approach roads- An appraisal’]
Presented
Laid
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka)
 
( ii ) 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2020-21) 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fiftieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Provision of all weather 
road connectivity under Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and other 
agencies up to International borders as well as the strategic areas including 
An appraisal’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.02.2021 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.02.2021 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Provision of all weather 
road connectivity under Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and other 
agencies up to International borders as well as the strategic areas including 
 
 
 

( iii ) 
 
CONTENTS 
            
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21).……………………….....….....     (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION ..…………………………………………………….….…...............     (v) 
 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………..      1      
       
 
CHAPTER II a) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government ………………………………….      15   
 
 b) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon................   24     
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
 do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
 from the Government ……………………………………………………   27     
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon ………………….…     28   
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
 awaited………………………...........................................................      33     
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I      Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                  Defence (2020-21) held on 09.02.2021.                                       39 
 
  II     Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
         Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth 
   Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  
   Defence (2020-21).................................................................        
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

( iv ) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
 SHRI JUAL ORAM  – CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2.        Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Director 
3.  Smt. Shilpa Kant                 - Executive Officer 
2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari  
3. Kunwar Danish Ali 
4. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
5. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
6. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
7. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
9. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
10. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
11. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick  
12. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar  
13. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil  
14. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
17. Shri Prathap Simha  
18. Shri Brijendra Singh  
19. Shri Mahabali Singh  
20. Shri Kotagiri Sridhar  
21. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
24. Shri Sharad Pawar  
25. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Shri Rajeev Satav  
28. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi  
29. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
31. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

( v ) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2020-21), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Tenth Report of the Committee on 'Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fiftieth Report on ‘Provision of all weather road connectivity under Border Roads 
Organisation (BRO) and other agencies up to International borders as well as the 
strategic areas including approach roads- An appraisal’.  
 
2.  The Fiftieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 12.02.2019 The Report contained 33 Observations/Recommendations. 
The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in July, 2019. 
 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
09.02.2021 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                      Jual Oram 
09 February, 2021 Chairperson, 
20 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                                Standing Committee on Defence 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Fiftieth (50th) Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Provision of all weather road connectivity under Border Roads 
Organisation (BRO) and other agencies up to International borders as well as the 
strategic areas including approach roads-An appraisal' which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.02.2019. 
 
 
2. The Committee's Fiftieth Report contained 33 observations/recommendations on 
the following aspects:- 
 
 
Para No.  Subject 
1 Target and Achievement In Creating Physical Infrastructure Along 
the Border  
 
2 
 
BRO- Need to Concentrate in Strategic Areas 
3 
 
Construction of Indo China Border Roads (ICBRs) – Need to 
Expedite  
 
4 
 
Quality of ICBRs 
 
5 
 
Construction of Tunnels 
6 
 
Construction of Bridges 
7 
 
Key Projects – Provision of Connectivity Between Himachal 
Pradesh and Ladakh (Nemo-Padum-Darcha Road) 
 
8 
 
Provision Road Link to Last Indian Post of Lipulekh 
9 Delays – Need for Involvement of Private Companies 
10 
 
Allocation and Utilization of Budgetary Resources  
 
11 
 
Delegation of Administrative and Financial Powers 
12 
 
Pace of Expenditure - Exemption from Ministry of Finance 
 
13 Improper Utilization of Budgetary Allocations for ICBRs 
 
14 Expenditure of Rohtang Tunnel Project 
15 Expenditure on Procurement of Equipment, Plants and Vehicles 

2 
 
16 Delay in Completing Infrastructure Projects Roads, Bridges, 
Permanent Works 
17-21 Reasons for Delay in Construction of Roads - Land  Acquisition 
Issues 
 
22 Shortage of Construction Material 
23-24 Delay in Wild Life Clearances 
25 Delay in Obtaining Forest Clearances 
26 Need for Sophisticated Equipment 
27 Lack of Availability of Equipment 
28 Human Resource Issues- Shortage of Manpower 
29  Labour Shortage 
30 Air Lift Facility 
31-33 Constitution of Empowered Committees 
 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report. The replies have been 
examined and categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) (A)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
 Government: 
 
           Para Nos.1,4,8,10,11,12,14,16,24,25,26, 29,32,33. 
 
                      (14 Recommendations) 
 
(Please see Chapter II (A) of the Report) 
 
  (B) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the            
Government and commented upon: 
  
            Para Nos. 3,5 and 6 
 
   (3 Recommendations) 
 
(Please see Chapter II (B) of the Report) 
 
 
(ii)   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
Para No. 23 
   (01 Recommendation) 
 (Please see Chapter III of the Report) 

3 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration and 
to be commented upon: 
   
Para Nos.  2,17,22,27,30,31. 
    (06 Recommendations) 
(Please see Chapter IV of the Report) 
  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
Para No.  7,9,13,15,18,19,20,21,28. 
(09 Recommendations) 
(Please see Chapter V of the Report) 
 
 
4. The original Report on the subject was presented on 12th February, 2019.  
The Action Taken Replies/Notes are invariably sought from the Ministry within 
three months of the presentation of the Reports.  However, after sifting of the reply 
of the Government, the Committee infer that 9 numbers of recommendations are 
interim in nature.  At this stage, they can only recommend that replies to all such 
recommendations may kindly be furnished to the Secretariat at the earliest.  In 
future also, all concerted efforts should be made to adhere to the timelines of the 
Committee in furnishing the Action Taken Replies. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry’s response to their comments made in Chapter I of this Report and final 
replies in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later 
than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
  
A. BRO NEED TO CONCENTRATE IN STRATEGIC AREAS 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 2 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and Border Roads Development 
Board (BRDB) were set up, the Committee note, to ensure coordination 
and expeditious execution of road projects in the North and North Eastern 
States to enhance the defense preparedness and economic development 

4 
 
of the region. There is a need for BRO to concentrate on strategic works, 
along the border and hand over certain roads to other agencies. The 
Committee also note that with a large number of roads included in BRDB 
programme over the years, BRO spread its resources for the development 
of roads in the lower regions (other than higher/hilly regions) and as a result 
the development of road infrastructure in the forward areas suffered. 
 Based on the operational requirements of the Army and consequent upon 
the decision taken in the National Security Council meeting, it was decided 
that BRO may focus on core strategic functions on the borders and MoD 
along with MoRT&H will work out the modalities of separating BRO’s 
strategic road building functions from infrastructure development in left 
Wing Extremism-affected areas and other internal roads. Accordingly, 
certain roads in the hinterland, which were earlier constructed by BRO and 
are now further required to be improved, are identified to be handed over to 
other agencies so that BRO is able to utilize its resources optimally for 
construction of roads, which are of strategic importance in the border areas 
and will meet the operational requirements of the Army. The Committee are 
in agreement with the decision especially in view of the fact that many 
border roads especially Indo-China Border Roads (ICBRs), which are 
important from the strategic perspective, are running much behind their 
completion schedules. 
 
6. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:  
 
No further comments 
 
7. The Committee, while examining the subject, had noted that in the North 
and North-Eastern States, certain roads in the hinterland, which were earlier 
constructed by BRO, were handed over to other agencies so that BRO is able to 
utilize its resources optimally for construction of roads, which are of strategic 
importance. This is imperative in the case of India-China Border Roads, especially 
in view of the present security threat faced by our country when these roads have 
become crucial from the strategic perspective.  As the Ministry have not given any 
comments, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to apprise the Committee of the 
latest developments regarding construction of border roads, especially Indo-China 
Border Roads (ICBRs) which were already running behind their completion 
schedule.  The Committee would like to be kept abreast of the steps taken in early 
completion of the roads and would also like to be supplied with complete details, 
including the cost and time overruns during the last 17 months and also the new 
target dates fixed by the Organisation.   
  
B. CONSTRUCTIONS OF INDO CHINA BORDER ROADS (ICBRS) – NEED TO 
EXPEDITE 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No.3) 

5 
 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee note that Government has identified 73 roads of length 3812 Km, 
for development along the Indo-China Border. The initial target date for 
completion of these roads was 2012. Out of this, 61 roads of length 3417.50 km 
have been entrusted to BRO. Out of these, 28 roads of length of 981 km are 
completed and works on the balance roads are under progress and are in 
different stages of completion. Out of 35 General Staff roads, work has been 
completed in respect of 14 roads. Out of rest of 21 roads work has commenced 
but not yet completed. Out of 13 China Study Group roads, work relating to only 6 
roads has been completed and rest of 7 roads are still under construction. The 
same is the case with Indo Tibet Border Police roads where out of 13 roads, only 
8 has been completed and rest are still under construction. The Committee note 
that delay as mentioned by Border Road Organisation such as obtaining 
forest/wildlife clearances, difficult terrain conditions, hard rock stretches, limited 
working period, paucity of construction material, challenges posed by natural 
disasters such as flash flood of Leh in 2010, Earthquake in Sikkim in 2011, 
Uttrakhand Floods in 2013 and J&K Floods in 2014 etc is understandable. The 
revised completion schedule of 83 ICBR is 2022. The Committee also note that 
out of 11 ICBRs scheduled to be completed by the end of FY 2018-19 only three 
Nelong-Naga, Naga-Sonam and Sumna-Rimkhim have been completed. Work on 
only one road Tr Jn-Bheem Base-Dokala is near completion and has been 
completed 96 percent. Construction of all other roads i.e. Tata-Manigong-
Tadagade, Joshimath-Malari, Musapani-Ghastoli, Nacho-TCC, LGG-Mukto-Teli, 
Leh-Upsi-Sarchu and Tawaghat-Ghatiabagarh has not been completed yet 
leaving 16 to 36 work to be finished in the current financial year which seems not 
possible considering the winter season and hard working conditions. 
 The Committee hope that with the delegation of administrative and financial 
powers effected in August 2017 empowering the field level officers to approve and 
sanction projects will hasten the completion of the projects in time. Apart from the 
above measures, outsourcing of certain activities, execution of works through 
Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) mode, might also shorten the 
project execution time. In view of the above, the Committee recommend BRO to 
explore the possibility of completing all ICBRs by 2020 instead of the present 
target of 2022. 
 
9. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
 
Government has identified 73 roads for development along Indo–China 
border by 2012. Out of the 73 ICBRs, earlier, 61 ICBRs of length 3417.50 km was 
entrusted to BRO. As per the revised approval the earlier length of 61 ICBRs has 
reduced to 3323.57 km. Of these 61 ICBRs, 33 ICBRs of length 1120 km are 
completed and connectivity has been achieved in 3204.11 km of road length.  
Further, out of the 11 ICBR’s mentioned above in the recommendation of the 
Committee, 6 ICBRs are completed and the progress of remaining is as under:- 
 
Srl 
no 
Name of road Length 
(km) 
Remarks 
i Nelong - Naga 8.10 Completed ii Naga- Sonam 11.20 

6 
 
iii Tri Jn-Bheem Base -Dokala 19.72 
iv Joshimath- Malari 62.67 
v Musapani- Ghastoli 7.40 
vi Nacho- TCC 53.55 
vii Sumna- Rimkhim 14.00 Formation completed. 
viii Tato- Manigong -Tadagade 85.98 93% completed and work 
in progress 
ix LGG- Mukto -Teli 53.00 88% completed and work 
in progress 
x Leh- Upsi -Sarchu 249.62 67% completed and work 
in progress 
xi Tawaghat- Ghatibagarh 19.51 64% completed and work 
in progress 
 
The revised planning for completion of 28 remaining ICBRs based on the 
requirement of the Army is as under:- 
 (i) FY 2019-20               - 11 roads 
 (ii) FY 2020-21              – 9 roads 
(iii) FY 2021-22              - 6 roads 
(iv)  FY 2022-23             - 2 roads 
 
 
10. The Committee in their Report had recommended for expeditious 
completion of the projects of Indo-China Border Roads along with India-China 
Border.  There were 73 roads of length 3812 kms identified out of which 61 ICBRs 
of length 3323.57 km was entrusted to BRO.  The Committee find that of these 61 
ICBRs, 33 ICBRs of length 1120 km have been completed and connectivity has 
been achieved in 3204.11 km of road length.  Out of 11 ICBRs, which were 
scheduled to be completed by the end of FY 2018-19, the Ministry have informed 
that only 6 ICBRs have been completed and the rest are under progress.  As the 
FY 2019-20 has come to an end and till now construction of only 6 out of 11 ICBRs 
have been completed, the Committee recommend that BRO should take the matter 
with utmost priority and seriousness, especially keeping in view the present tense 
scenario at India and China border and to overcome the hurdles in the direction of 
shortening the project completion time.  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the latest position regarding completion of ongoing and targeted 
projects of ICBRs. 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
C. CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNELS 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 5) 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
  The Committee note that BRO is constructing tunnels at Rohtang pass, 
Theng and Sela pass to ensure all weather accessibility to our strategic 
borders. The Committee are glad to note that tunnel on Gangtok-Chunghang 
at Teng was dedicated to the nation on 7th June, 2018. The Committee note 
that Rohtang tunnel is expected to be completed by August, 2019 and the 
Sela pass by 2021. The Committee hope that these much needed tunnels 
will not miss their completion deadlines especially in view of liberalized 
delegation of powers, outsourcing of works, execution of projects through 
EPC mode, etc. 
 
12. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
 
No further comments.  
 
13. In their earlier recommendation, the Committee had desired that the Ministry 
should provide the latest developments regarding the completion of Rohtang 
tunnel and the Sela Pass, which was scheduled to be completed by August 2019 
and 2021 respectively should not miss their completion targets.  As the Ministry 
has not commented upon it, the Committee, being dissatisfied, again exhort the 
Ministry to provide the current status of these two tunnels at least at the time of 
providing action taken statements to the Committee.  In the normal course, the 
Ministry should have apprised of such details on its own.  Yet the Committee 
would like to know the reasons of delay, if any, that took place, as also the current 
factual position in this regard. 
 
 
D. CONSTRUCTION OF BRIDGES 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 
  The Committee note from the reply furnished by the Ministry that out of 20 
bridges on ICBRs, only one out of two bridges on Balipara-Charduar-Tawang 
road, five bridges out of seven on Orang-Kalaktang-Shergaon-Rupa-Tenga 
road and one out of two bridges on Joshimath-Malari road have been 
completed leaving thirteen bridges in the non completed category. All the 
twenty bridges have Probable Date of Completion (PDC) between year 2010 
to 2017. To the astonishment of the Committee, one of the bridges at Dhak on 
Joshimath-Malari road had PDC dated 31-03-2015, where, only 14.41 percent 

8 
 
work has been completed. With such pace of work, one can easily guess the 
actual date of completion of the bridge. Besides this, one bridge Tawangchu-II 
on BJG-LGG road had PDC dated 31-03-2010 but only 19.75 percent of the 
work has been completed. The Committee find that besides the above all 
other bridges are still under construction, which would result in BRO missing 
PDC by a huge margin. The Committee, therefore, desire that as these 
bridges join the roads and are very crucial in movement of personnel, BRO 
should give preference for their early completion. Considering the fact that in 
Uttarakhand bridges were washed out every year due to natural calamities, 
the Committee desire that the Ministry should contemplate a plan of action to 
address such eventualities and designing of the bridges and site chosen for 
construction should be firm and not prone to vagaries of natural causes. 
 
 
15. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
 
 The design and execution of bridges involves complex processes and 
factors considered for design and execution of bridges during planning stage 
get enhanced many times by adversity of terrains and nature. Recurring 
floods, avalanches due to global warming greatly affect the progress of 
bridges. Besides these Local problems, land clearance, forest clearances etc 
during construction period affect the completion of bridges. However, efforts 
are made by BRO to complete the bridges in time by meticulously resolving 
the issues responsible for delay in completion of bridge.  
Out of the 20 bridges, 07 bridges are completed and the present Status 
of these bridges is given below:- 
Name of road Name of 
State 
Nos of 
bridges 
Nos of bridges 
completed 
Nos of bridges 
under progress 
Balipara-Charduar-Tawang Arunachal 
Pradesh 
2 1 1 
Orang-Kalaktang-Shergaon-
Rupa-Tenga 
7 5 2 
BJG-LGG 2 - 2 
Joshimath-Malari Uttarakhand  5 1 4 
Darbuk Shyok-Daulat Beg 
Oldie 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
4 - 4 
Total 20 7 13 
 
 
16. Taking note of the fact that there are 20 bridges on ICBRs, out of which 13 
bridges are still under construction.  These bridges were to be completed between 
2010 to 2017 but they have missed their Probable Date of Completion (PDC).  
Taking note of the above fact, the Committee had recommended to speed up the 
completion of construction of all the 20 bridges.  However, the Committee have 
found that still the construction has not been completed and the work is still under 
progress.  The Committee are of the opinion that instead of the sincere efforts of 
the Ministry, the desired results could not be accomplished.  The Committee at 
this stage would like to know the reasons of delay in each and every bridge 

9 
 
totaling to 13 in number.  They would also like to know what action has been taken 
by the Ministry in the field of designing of the bridges and on what basis the sites 
are chosen.  The Committee, taking into account the pendency in the construction 
of bridges specifically in the strategically important border areas, reiterate their 
recommendation to leave no stone unturned in completion of these bridges.  The 
Committee would like to know the latest developments in this matter.   
 
E. REASONS FOR DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS – LAND ACQUISITION 
ISSUES 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 17) 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee note that there are many issues relating to acquisition of 
land which resulted in considerable delay in construction of roads, bridges and 
tunnels in the border areas. These issues include delay in joint survey for land 
acquisition, non disbursement of land acquisition payment, non transfer of land 
in the name of BRO for which land acquisition already paid, dual payment to 
forest department and civil administration for land acquisition, demand for 
additional compensation for which joint survey completed and land acquisition 
amount paid, non-demolition of structures for which price for land acquisition 
already paid etc. The Committee find that there is an abnormal delay of more 
than one and half years to carry out the joint survey for land acquisition by the 
civil administration. As a result, construction of roads from Daporijo-Taliha and 
Taliha-Nacho got delayed. In other case after making the payment for land 
acquisition in respect of Dirang Bye pass on road Balipara-Charduar-Tawang, 
the amount has not been disbursed to the land owners, due to which the 
people are not allowing BRO to construct the Bye pass. In yet another instance, 
there are 96 cases for which land acquisition amount has already been paid to 
the land owners by the civil administration but the transfer of land/mutation of 
the land is still pending with the civil administration. 
  In a case specific to Arunachal Pradesh due to the non-availability of land 
records, dual payment is required to be paid for land acquisition to both the 
forest department as well the revenue authorities for which a notification needs 
to be issued by the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh for Kimin-Potin, 
Daporijo-Taliha, Taliha-Nacho and Taliha-Tato roads making construction of 
these roads delayed. 
  The Committee also note that despite completion of joint survey of land for 
6 cases in various States, recurring demand for fresh joint survey/demand for 
additional compensation is being received by BRO and more so over demolition 
of the structures within Right of Way (RoW) for which the compensation amount 
has already paid, is yet to be done. 
 
 
18. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
  
The majority of the settlement of LA cases is based on court orders. In case of 
North Eastern states, a large number of LA cases are filed by the land owner’s 

10 
 
on account of Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 for enhanced compensation. Further, 
earlier a large number of roads in remote areas were constructed on community 
land, which was provided to BRO by the village heads and concerned locals by 
issuing NOC. Now a large number of LA cases pertaining to such roads are also 
arising due to subsequent generation not honoring /accepting the NOC. 
 
19. The Committee find that there is a delay of more than one and a half years 
to carry out the joint survey for land acquisition by the Civil Administration. This 
delay has been attributed to the subsequent generation not honoring /accepting 
the NOC which were provided to BRO for construction on community lands by the 
village heads and concerned locals. As this is causing delay in construction of 
roads, the Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry to 
deal with this onerous issue. As the pending land acquisition cases are causing 
delays in construction of roads, the Committee again recommend the Ministry to 
take up this issue with utmost seriousness and resolve them at the earliest. The 
Committee would like to know about the latest status in this regard within three 
months of the presentation of this Report.  It is needless to state that while 
furnishing the Action Taken Statements (ATNs), the impact of new Policy 
Decisions of the Government, if applicable in this scenario, should suitably be 
incorporated. 
 
 
F. SHORTAGE OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 22) 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
   The Committee further note that there is an acute shortage of quarry 
extracted construction materials in the state of Arunachal Pradesh. Out of 71 
quarries proposed by BRO, only 39 quarries have been notified by the State 
Government. Despite repeated request by BRO, rates for extracted quarry 
materials have not been fixed by the State Government since Sep 2015. The 
Committee find it surprising that despite having Empowered Committees and 
BRDB, the Ministry is not able to resolve such issues. It is obvious that if 
quarries are not available, the construction work cannot progress. The 
Committee therefore, desire that the Ministry should take the issue at the 
highest level so that these bottlenecks can be cleared in a shorter span of 
time and roads are built as per the schedule. 
 
 
21. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
 

11 
 
The present status of allotment of quarries to BRO in Arunachal Pradesh is 
as under:- 
 
 
 
 
22. The Committee find that the reply of the Ministry is not complete and there 
is not much progress regarding number of quarries being notified.  Therefore, the 
Committee desire that at the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements, they 
should be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to deal with this issue 
alongwith the latest developments that took place during this intervening period. 
 
 
G.  LACK OF AVAILABILITY OF EQUIPMENT 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 27) 
 
23. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee note that the availability of construction equipment is far 
lesser than that of authorized numbers with respect to the work load of BRO in 
2016-17. The availability vis-à-vis authorized numbers in respect of stone 
crushers of all types, a basic equipment in construction industry, is less than 
40% in 2016-17, Similarly, in case of tippers the available percentage is less 
than 50%. In respect of others such as dozers, road rollers, Hot mix plants, 
wet mix plants, etc., the availability is less than the authorized. However, in 
2017-18, the Committee find some improvement in terms of equipment 
availability, though there is shortages in terms of availability of snow clearance 
equipment, in which case the authorized vs. held is 154:41. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that BRO is deprived of certain basic 
construction equipment and snow clearance equipment in required numbers 
which may be affecting their efficiency adversely and also resulting in project 
delays. The Committee, however, appreciate that to address the shortages, a 
Long Term Equipments Plan (LTEP) 2014-15 to 2018-19 has been approved 
with an outlay of Rs 4116.70 crores and 1636 vehicles/equipments/plants 
were bought under plan. The Committee would like the BRO to inform them of 
whether the entire amount allocated under the plan has been spent. 
 
 
24. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
 
  Earlier, the approval for procurement of equipments was based on the 
approved five year Long Term equipment Plan which was not realistic with 
reference to the allocation of budget to BRO therefore, the entire plan could not 
materialise. Accordingly, Policy guidelines for preparation of Annual works plan 
(AWP) and Annual procurement plan (APP) with reference to fund allocation to 
S/No Name of State Proposed Notified 
i Arunachal Pradesh 128  
 
60 

12 
 
BRO has been issued vide this office letter dated 19th June 2017 so that the 
planning of works and the requirement of resources i.e. the size of APP is more 
realistic.  
  
25. From the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that 
inadequate information regarding the utilization of funds by the Ministry under 
Long Term Equipments Plan (LTEP) 2014-15 to 2018-19 has been furnished to 
them. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should clearly state 
whether the entire amount allocated under the Long Term Equipment Plan has 
been utilized or status of amount allocated as more than a year has passed after 
its completion. The Committee also want to be apprised about the projects 
completed with its help.  They would also like to be intimated as to what efforts 
were taken by the Ministry to address the issues of allocation of budget in order to 
safeguard the interests of not only BRO in particular but defence needs in general. 
 
 
 
H.  AIR LIFT FACILITY 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 30) 
 
26. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
  The Committee note that in order to induct the construction equipment and 
material to the air maintained detachments of BRO, each year the air effort is 
provided by Indian Air Force (IAF) by both Rotary Wing and Fixed Wing aircraft. 
During the year 2014-15, the demand by BRO was 1323 MT but it was allotted 
only 960 MT; In the year 2015-16, the demand was 2568 MT but allocation was 
971 MT. The same deficiency existed in the year 2016-17 where against the 
demand of 1028 MT only 820 MT could be allocated. Although Indian Air Force 
has not denied any air efforts assistance to BRO and position was improved in 
later years, but demand has not been fully met particularly in case of Rotary Wing 
aircraft. 
  The Committee find that inadequate air logistic support is stated to be one 
of the reasons for time overruns and consequent cost escalation in completing the 
ICBR projects by BRO. Considering the above facts, the Committee desire if 
private operators, who have experience and specialization in airlifting the material 
required by BRO are not available, then IAF should be requested to provided 
dedicated service to BRO as IAF has the expertise in carrying out such 
operations. 
 
27. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
   
  Earlier, Request for Proposal (RFP) for hiring of Helicopter for 
transporting heavy construction equipments for construction of strategically 
important roads was uploaded on CPP Portal in Jan, 2018 by BRO, however, 
no response was received from any private firm.  

13 
 
Further, the air effort provided by IAF for these roads during FY 2018-
19, is given below:- 
 
 
Sl. 
No Sector 
Status of Air Effort 2018-19       
(as on  31 March 2019) 
Rotary Wing  (In MT)  Fixed Wing (In MT) 
Allotment % Materialization Allotment % 
Materialization 
i Western/Northern 65 95 1150 90 
ii Eastern 370 99 10 0 
iii Central 225 90 0 0 
Total 660 96 1160 90 
 
 
28. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry regarding 
uploading the Request for Proposal. Taking into account the fact that no response 
had been received and since more than two years have been passed, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry may once again consider to advertise/upload 
its request and this time should consider advertising through print as well as 
electronic media too. 
 
I.  LACK OF AVAILABILITY OF EQUIPMENT 
 
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 31) 
 
29. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee note that a mechanism was put in place for coordinating 
between the Ministry/BRO and State Governments to resolve the issues such 
as land acquisition, forest/ wild life clearances, lack of quarries, law & order 
problems, etc., which are impacting adversely the construction schedules of 
BRO leading to delays in the completing border roads. Such mechanism 
includes constitution of Empowered Committees in various state Governments 
under the chairmanship of respective secretaries of the Departments 
concerned. So far five states viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, 
Sikkim and Tripura have constituted such committees. 
 The Committee note that of all the five states, Empowered Committee of 
Sikkim met five times since 2015 to discuss and resolve various issues 
affecting adversely the completion of border roads. The Empowered 
Committees of Arunachal Pradesh and J&K where number of land acquisition 
cases are pending i.e 117 & 308 respectively have not met since 15 June and 
07 May 2015 respectively. In respect of Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh 
where 32 and 4 respectively of land acquisition cases are pending, these 
Empowered Committees seems to have not met for a long time. 
 The Committee appreciate that empowered Committee of Sikkim met five 
times since 2015 to discuss various border roads related issues. However, in 
many states where large number of land acquisition case are pending (J&K 

14 
 
and Arunachal Pradesh) have met only once since 2015. The MoD has not 
furnished any information on the meetings of these Empowered Committees 
in Himachal Pradesh where 4 cases of land acquisition are pending. The 
Committee therefore are of the view that the Empowered Committee 
mechanism is not working effectively as it should be and accordingly 
recommend that specific steps should be taken to rejuvenate this body to 
enable to play more active role in resolving various issues concerning border 
roads. 
 
30. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
 
The meetings held under the Chairmanship of Additional Chief 
Secretary, Government of Himachal Pradesh, are given below:- 
 
(i) 04 Sept 2018 
 
(ii) 05 Dec 2018 
 
(iii) 05 Jan 2019 
 
(iv) 27 Feb 2019 
 
 
Out of the 36 cases pending in Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh, 7 
cases have been settled. The details of pending cases are as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
31. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had desired that as the 
Empowered Committees mechanism was not working effectively, specific steps 
should be taken to rejuvenate this body to enable to play more active role in 
resolving various issues concerning border roads.  This recommendation was 
given in context of all the Empowered Committees constituted in the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, HP, J&K, Sikkim and Tripura. The Committee are informed 
only about the details of the meetings conducted by the Empowered Committee of 
Himachal Pradesh.  The Committee find the lack of information regarding other 
States and reiterate their earlier recommendation to rejuvenate all the Empowered 
Committees specially in Arunachal Pradesh and J&K where the number of 
unresolved cases are very high.  They would specifically like to be apprised of the 
reasons of the high pendency of cases in Uttarakhand (case-wise) and those of 
Himachal Pradesh too. 
  
S/No State No of cases 
I Himachal Pradesh 02 
ii Uttarakhand 27 
Total 29 

15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
(A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1: 
 
TARGET AND ACHIEVEMENT IN CREATING PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
ALONG THE BORDER 
 The Committee note from the data supplied by MoD that since 2007-08, the 
targets set for formation, surfacing, permanent works and bridges could not be achieved. 
Despite the failure to achieve the set targets in respect of the aforementioned works in 
previous years, higher targets were set in the subsequent years again only to 
underperform. The failure to adhere to targets was attributed to various problems being 
faced by BRO such as difficult terrain, limited working period, lack of availability of 
construction raw material, lack of delegation of powers to the field level officers, etc. It 
may be worth noting that even in the year 2017-18, when the many administrative and 
financial powers have been delegated to the field level officers, the set targets could not 
be achieved in respect of these works. The Committee also note that based on the 
requirement of Army, five year Long Term Roll on Works Plan (LTRoWP) has been 
approved consisting of 530 roads of length 22,803 km for improvement/construction in 
the border areas. As per the year-wise completion plan of these 530 roads, BRO has to 
complete 55 roads of length 1729 km up to 2016, 72 roads of length 2081 km during 
2017, 99 roads of length 3047 km during 2018, 78 roads of length 3786 km during 2019, 
97 roads of length 4184 km during 2020 and 129 roads of length 7616 km beyond 2020. 
The Committee hope that the delegation of administrative and financial powers to the 
field level officers affected since August, 2017 will go a long way in enabling the BRO to 
quicken the completion of the projects on time and achieve the targets.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For BRO to be able to focus on the strategic roads and to ensure that BRO’s 
resources are not spread over a large number of roads, the earlier, five year LTRoWP 
consisting of 530 roads of length 22,803 km has been reviewed and a revised LTRoWP 
for 272 roads of length 14545 km has been approved vide this office letter dt 9 August 
2018, which has lesser number of roads and is more realistic vis –a vis budget 
allocation. Further, to bridge the gap between the strategic requirements of the Army and 
BRO’s own capacity constraints of departmental execution, guidelines have been issued 
by the Ministry vide this office letter dated 29 August 2017 to adopt EPC mode of 
execution for all projects costing more than Rs 100 crore.  
The delegation of administrative and financial power since August 2017 have 
enabled the CE(P) to speed up the works by enabling executives at various levels to 
sanction estimates, sanction of Revised estimates, acceptance of contracts and closure 
of jobs. The impact of these delegations of powers upto March 2019 is summarized 
below:- 
S/No Item Nos of cases Cost (crore) 
(i) Sanction of Estimate/DPR 787 4760.25 
(ii) Sanction of RAE/RDPR 243 5009.43 

16 
 
(iii) Acceptance of Contract 300 3294.66 
(iv) Closure of Jobs 1216 2606.86 
 
Further, the following ICBRs have been completed during FY 2018-19:- 
(i) Road Nacho-Tama-Chung-Chung of length 53.55 km 
(ii) Road Tr Jn-Bheem- Base –Dokala of length 19.72 km 
(iii) Road Naga-Sonam of length 11.20 km 
(iv) Road Musapani-Ghastoli of length 7.40 km 
(v) Road Joshimath –Malari of length 62.67 km 
 
The achievement against the AWP 2018-19 is as under:- 
 
Items of Work Unit Target FY 
2018-19 
Achievement FY 
2018-19 
Formation Km 937 990 
Surfacing Km 1930 1965 
Resurfacing Km 1797 1777 
Permanent Works 
including tunnel Rs Cr 1635 1854 
Major Bridges Metre 3039 2817 
 
 
Recommendation (Para  No. 4) 
 
 C&AG in their report (No. 5 of 2016) commented that numerous instances of 
defective construction of roads were noticed which resulted in delay in completion of 
strategic roads and also in fructuous expenditure of Rs.63.20 crore on account of 
corrective action/realignment of roads. This non completion/faulty specifications of works 
have a serious bearing on the operational capability of armed forces in strategically 
sensitive areas. Road works executed by the BRO did not adequately meet the users 
requirement. Even six roads which had been completed at a cost of Rs.164 crore, were 
not fit for running of specialized vehicles/equipment due to limitations in execution of 
works. 
  The Committee note from the reply submitted by the Ministry that due to 
extremely hostile and challenging terrains, where these ICBRs were being constructed, 
the first priority was to provide end to end connectivity and at times and at some 
locations the work was partially completed in order to achieve end to end connectivity. In 
the reply, the Ministry has not clarified as to whether the roads constructed by BRO are 
fit for running of specialized vehicles/equipment as pointed by C&AG. The Committee 
feels that border roads are essential for the movement of defence forces besides 
providing end to end connectivity and if they cannot withstand the movement of our 
fighting forces, in all weather conditions, it may not serve the purpose. The Committee, 
therefore desire that there should not be any compromise in the quality of the roads lest 
it may have adverse impact on the movement of troops. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

17 
 
To provide movement of defence forces and specialized vehicles/ equipments in 
all weather conditions inspections of works on roads are carried out regularly by 
executives at Project and Task Force level and the damaged roads are repaired 
regularly. In addition to the regular checks by the ground executives to ensure the quality 
of the roads is achieved, a Director level Officer at each Project headquarters has been 
appointed to check the quality of works.  
Further, efforts are made through multilevel training courses for the supervisory 
staff to enhance their skills so that the quality is not compromised.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
  
  The Committee note that road link to the last Indian post of Lipulekh pass which is 
located at an altitude of 17,000 feet in Chaudans valley or Darchula sub district in 
Pithoragarh in Uttarakhand on the Chinese border has not yet been constructed. The 
Ministry apprised the Committee that Ghatiabagarh-Lipulekh road of length of 75.54 Km 
is a strategic road under construction in Pithoragarh district of Uttarakhand. The road is 
to be developed to Class 9 specifications. Ghatiabagarh is connected by road from 
Dharchula of length 36 Km. Connectivity on Ghatiabagarh-Lipulekh road has been 
established upto 3.60 Km from Ghatiabagarh. Presently all effort are being made with 
five different attack points locations between Km 3.60 to Km 10.00 (3.70 Km connectivity 
yet to be achieved) and three attack points between Km 10.00 to Km 20.00 (9.50 Km 
connectivity yet to be achieved). The connectivity from Km 20.00 to Km 71.00 has been 
established and widening works are under progress through air maintained Dett Gunji. 
  The Committee also note that due to Annual Kailash Mansarovar Yatra, the same 
alignment form Km 0.00 to Km 20.00, the works got hampered nearly on daily basis from 
June to September every year. Yatries are being air lifted from Pithoragarh to Gunji in 
order to facilitate work on this alignment. State Government and District Administration 
have been approached by BRO for monitoring the movements of locals and traders in 
such a way that the working window is available with BRO for undertaking blasting and 
cutting operations daily at specified time intervals. Proposed date of completion of this 
road is 2022. 
  It is in view of the afore mentioned problems, the Committee, elsewhere in the 
report recommended that Empowered Committees be constituted which can discuss 
these kinds of problems and resolve them at the earliest ensuring completion of projects 
on time. The committee, therefore suggest, Uttarakhand Government may be requested 
to constitute empowered Committee without any delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
                                                                         
  In order to resolve the issue, a meeting was held with various stakeholders to 
provide airlift of Kailash Mansovar Yatris on 05 March 2018. 
Further, the stretch Lakanpur-Najang of Ghatiabagarh-Lipulekh road has been 
connected due to which now the Kailash Mansarovar Yatris may go by road up to 
Najang. Beyond Najang up to Budhi (9 km), the road alignment is on the eastern side 
and the PWD mule track is on the western side as such there will be no hindrance to the 
Yatris moving on this mule track. Therefore, Kailash Mansarovar Yatra 2019 is possible 
by road and mule track. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
  The Committee note from the data supplied by the Ministry that since 2011-12 
BRO could not get the amount of funds requested for. However, it could not spent entire 
amount of resources allocated at RE stage for 5 years from 2011-12 to 2015-16. For 

18 
 
instance, against final allocation of Rs. 4472, 4319, 4178, 4039 and 4360 Crore for the 
years 2011-12, 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 respectively, actual amount spent 
amounted to Rs. 4093, 4087, 4102, 4030, 4311 respectively. Hence, it may be seen 
against allocation of Rs. 21368 Crore for the last five years, actual expenditure 
amounted to Rs. 20,623 Crore leading to surrendering of funds to the tune of Rs. 745 
Crore by BRO during the said period. 
  The Committee were informed that due to lesser delegation of powers at the field 
level resulted in all cases were coming to the Ministry for clearances. For instance, 
during the deliberations, the Committee was informed that earlier BRO had powers to 
approve procurement of equipment worth of Rs.7.5 crore for a particular case of 
indigenous equipment and for imported equipment, the powers were Rs.3.75 crore. 
Similarly, earlier the Chief Engineer at the field level had absolutely no powers for 
execution of contracts. The only powers he/she had was up to Rs. 10 crore, that too, 
only for Departmental execution. BRO in a way attributed the surrendering of the funds 
due to delay in obtaining approvals for procurement proposals. The Committee hope that 
the delegation of administrative and financial powers and outsourcing of certain works 
and execution of projects through EPC mode which are discussed in subsequent paras 
may obviate the need for such surrendering of the funds in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 After the transfer of BRO from MoRT&H to MoD and with the delegation of 
financial and administrative powers to BRO executives, there has been no surrender of 
funds as given below:-  
S/No Year Allocation       
(Rs in Crs) 
Expenditure 
incurred                        
(Rs in Crs) 
i    2016-17 3791 3881 
ii 2017-18 4181 4240 
iii 2018-19 4861 5361 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
  During deliberation, the Committee was informed that earlier BRO was not in a 
position to perform in the field because there was lesser delegation of power and all 
cases were keep coming to the Ministry which led to delays. Earlier the Chief Engineer at 
the field level had absolutely no powers for execution of contracts. The only powers he 
had was up to Rs. 10 crore, that too, only for Departmental execution. Now there is 
enormous administrative and financial delegation of power. As per the new dispensation, 
Chief Engineer’s powers have been enhanced from Rs. 10 crore to Rs. 50 crore for both 
Departmental as well as for EPC mode of execution. For two ADGs – one in the East 
and one in the North, have been increased from Rs. 50 crore to Rs 100 crore. Beyond 
Rs. 100 crore, the DG has been given powers. All acceptance of tenders takes place at 
Chief Engineer level itself. So not only from the Ministry to BRO, even within BRO, the 
powers have been delegated from DGBR up to ADGBR and Chief Engineer level and 
even up to task force Commander level so that lesser time is wasted in unnecessary 
communication. The Committee also note that in the short period, since the delegation of 
enhanced powers, 90 estimates amounting to Rs 258 crore have been sanctioned and 
103 vintage vehicle/equipment/plants have been downgraded and 25 premature failure 
cases have been disposed off, which will facilitate BRO to induct new construction 
equipment. While appreciating the much needed move for putting in place the delegation 

19 
 
of financial powers, the Committee hope and trust that management of BRO uses the 
powers judiciously and ensure that projects do not suffer for want of approvals and 
sanctions of time. The Committee hopes that these powers may be utilized to complete 
the projects under Long Term Roll on Works Plan (LTRoWP). The Committee also want 
the MoD to furnish impact of such delegation of powers on the pace of execution of other 
projects. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The delegation of administrative and financial power since Aug 2017 have 
enabled the projects to speed up the works by enabling executives at various levels to 
sanction Estimates/DPR, sanction of RAE/RDPR, acceptance of contracts and closure of 
jobs. The impact of these delegations of powers upto 31 March 2019 is summarized 
below:- 
S/No Item Nos of cases Cost (Crore) 
(i) Sanction of Estimate/DPR 787 4760.25 
(ii) Sanction of RAE/RDPR 243 5009.43 
(iii) Acceptance of Contract 300 3294.66 
(iv) Closure of Jobs 1216 2606.86 
 
The Ministry has accorded the Administrative Approval & expenditure Sanction for 
the following works:- 
 
(i) Design and construction/Improvement of Road Balipara-Charduar-Tawang 
(BCT) from Km 70.00 to Km 88.00 (New Location from Km 69.90 to Km 
87.54) from existing Cl-9 specifications to NH Double Lane Specifications 
through EPC mode under Project Vartak in Arunachal Pradesh amounting 
to Rs 220.30 Crore. 
(ii)  Design and construction of two tunnels of length 0.475 km and 1.79 km at 
Sela pass along with approach road of length 9.775 km to NHDL 
specification on Balipara–Chardwar-Tawang (BCT) road under Project 
Vartak in Arunachal Pradesh through EPC mode amounting to Rs 687.11 
Crore.  
Further, award of contract approval accorded for the construction of Sela tunnel 
at an estimated cost of Rs 647 Crore. Work on the above two projects under EPC mode 
is in progress. 
After the delegation of financial powers, there has been an increase in 
achievement of targets as mentioned below:- 
 
Items of Work Unit Achievement 
FY 2017-18 
Achievement 
FY 2018-19 
Formation Km 883 990 
Surfacing Km 1930 1965 
Resurfacing Km 1675 1777 
Permanent Works 
including tunnel 
Rs 
Crore 1486 1854 
Major Bridges Metre 2547 2817 
 

20 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
  
  The Committee note that Ministry of Finance (MoF) imposes ceiling on the 
allocation of budget at the stage of Revised Estimate (RE) and Budget Estimate (BE), 
based on the actual expenditure incurred during the last financial year and current 
financial year. The Ministry of Finance is stated to have been requested to exempt BRO 
from its guidelines mandating the pace of expenditure and not to curtail the allocation at 
RE stage based on the percentage of expenditure at half yearly stage as BRO is unable 
to adhere to the half yearly expenditure limits stipulated by MoF due to difficult working 
conditions. Due to the restricted allocation of budget to BRO, the Committee were 
informed that road laying works, resurfacing, maintenance, snow clearance of road got 
affected badly. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Defence should take 
up this matter at the highest level, especially in view of the limited working period due to 
adverse climatic conditions in which BRO does the work, with the Ministry of Finance. 
The Committee hope to hear positive response from the Ministry of Finance in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
After the transfer of BRO from MoRT&H to MoD in January 2015 and due to 
various policy initiatives taken by the Ministry, there has been no reduction of funds by 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) to BRO. The details of funds allocated vs expenditure incurred 
are mentioned below:- 
 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE Allotment Final Allotment Expenditure 
2014-15 3223 2819 2897 
2015-16 3481 3316 3277 
2016-17 3526 3791 3881 
2017-18 4168 4181 4240 
2018-19 4426 4861 5361 
2019-20 5234 - 697               
(upto May 19) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
  It could be seen that out of allocated amount of Rs. 374 Crore for Rohtang tunnel 
project, Rs 265 crore only was spent during the year 2017-18. Hence, Rs 109 Crore was 
surrendered. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for such 
surrendering of the funds and also the impact, if any, on its completion schedules. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Earlier, the expenditure of Rs 265 crore for Rohtang tunnel was upto December 
2017 however, the final expenditure of Rs 375.98 crore during for FY 2017-18 was 
incurred by BRO against the allocation of Rs 376 crore for Rohtang Tunnel. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
  It could be seen that in none of the years since 2012-13, the achievement of the 
targets vis-à-vis planning in respect of formation, surfacing, resurfacing of roads, 

21 
 
completion of permanent works and bridges is nowhere near the targets. In fact, in some 
cases the achievement is less than 40% of the targets. The Committee are aware of the 
problems specific to the border areas especially rugged mountains, adverse climatic 
conditions, transportation problems, etc. and the consequent difficulties in implementing 
infrastructure projects and accordingly feel that the low achievement of the targets vs 
planning is due to non consideration of the ground realities. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the planning of the projects may be done in such a way taking into 
consideration the ground realities especially, the approvals required from statutory 
agencies.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Earlier, the approval for procurement of equipments was based on the approved 
five year Long Term equipment Plan which was not realistic with reference to the 
allocation of budget to BRO. Accordingly, Policy guidelines for preparation of Annual 
works plan (AWP) and Annual procurement plan (APP) with reference to fund allocation 
to BRO has been issued vide this office letter dated 19th June 2017 so that the planning 
of works and the requirement of resources i.e. the size of APP is more realistic.    
   
Further, this would ensure the limited budgetary allocation to BRO to be utilised to 
the optimum as per the requirement of the Army. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
  The Committee note that the average time taken for obtaining wild life clearance 
from proposal stage to final clearance is 3-7 years. This is despite the fast track process 
for forest and wild life clearances put in place by Ministry of Environment, Forests & 
Climate Change (MoEF&CC). The Committee are of the view that said that 3-7 years 
period is on the higher side especially in strategic areas and the possibility of reducing 
that time period may be explored with MoEF&CC and the Committee may be informed of 
the outcome in this regard at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Consequent to the order dated 05th October 2015 by Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India, the time taken for disposal of wild life clearance cases has reduced, as the 
requirement of filing interlocutory application on case to case basis has been dispensed 
with and only permission from National Board of Wild Life (NBWL) is required to be 
obtained as per this order. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 
  The Committee are glad to note that at present there are no pending cases of 
forest clearances in respect of ICBRs. However, the Committee note that at present out 
of 51 forest clearance cases of Non ICBRs, 13 forest clearance cases are not required at 
present, as lower priority has been accorded for construction by the Army. In 9 cases, 
Approval/Approval in Principle has been received and remaining 29 cases are pending 
with various State Governments. The Committee further note various measures such as 
Single Window System (SWS) at District, State & MoEF&CC levels to fast track 
processing of forest clearance cases since 2010, simplified and unified proforma 
adopted for processing both forest and wild life clearance simultaneously, regular review 
of meetings with all the concerned. The Committee are concerned to note that despite 
the afore mentioned measures for fast tracking the forest clearances, 29 cases for forest 

22 
 
approvals are still pending with various state  Governments. They therefore, recommend 
that the respective Empowered Committees may be requested to expedite these cases 
at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to facilitate obtaining various statutory clearances, BRO has appointed a 
Nodal Officer for each Project. Further, issues pertaining to forest clearances are 
reviewed by the empowered committee constituted by the State Government. As a 
result, at present critical road projects are not affected due to forest clearance. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
  The Committee note that BRO is using medium and indigenous equipment as 
they are generally working in the far flung/remote locations in the border areas where 
deployment of very sophisticated equipments, is not feasible as the repair support, 
supply point of spare parts etc are at a considerable distance. The Committee are of the 
view that the cost of sophisticated equipment and their spares, though may be costing 
high, the output of these machines and the efficiency at which these work may outweigh 
their cost. Hence, possibility of deploying sophisticated construction equipment may be 
explored especially to ensure quicker completion of the projects in rugged terrains. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Construction equipments of latest technology available in Indian market are 
procured by BRO through Open Tender Enquiry. The technical specifications are framed 
considering the latest development in the industry. During the FY 2018-19 state of the art 
equipments such as excavator, snow cutter/blower, and heavy duty drilling machine 
have been procured by BRO.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
  MoD has stated that extreme remoteness of the areas in which ICBRs are being 
laid is resulting in non-availability of skilled and experienced labour. MoD, however, 
stated that to attract and retain skilled and experienced labour an incentive mechanism 
was devised which includes (i) Preference in recruitment in Group ‘C’ & ‘D’ posts (ii) 
Shelter for accommodation (iii) Warming facilities for CPLs working above 8000 feet 
height (iv) Free conveyance from place of residence to work site (v) Creches for children 
of CPLs & (vi) Issue of ration on Government rates. In addition to the above, other 
benefits such as Ex-gratia benefits, compensation under Employees Compensation Act 
1923, Financial Assistance from Border Roads Special Relief Fund and Non productivity 
Bonus are stated to have been offered. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
impact of such measures on the addressing the shortages of skilled and experienced 
labour. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  BRO has intimated that after providing the above incentives to CPLs, there has 
been improvement in availability of skilled labour.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
 MoD has furnished different replies in respect of constitution of empowered 
Committee in Himachal Pradesh. In their initial replies MoD stated that five states viz. 

23 
 
J&K, Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Tripura. However, in a 
subsequent reply MoD stated that Empowered Committee is yet to be constituted in 
Himachal Pradesh. The committee therefore request MoD to furnish a clarification in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of Himachal Pradesh has not constituted the Empowered Committee 
as a mechanism under Single window for expeditious clearance of ICBRs and Single 
window at the level of DFO/DCF/Director (wild life/ national park) are already constituted 
which has facilitated in obtaining various statutory clearance for BRO. 
Further, a mechanism/committee has been established under the Additional Chief 
Secretary Government of Himachal Pradesh for early resolution of all issues related to 
BRO works.  Recently, the Government of Himachal Pradesh has accorded the 
permission for the following:- 
(i) Extraction of construction materials from the roadside.   
(ii) Installation of Hot Mix/Wet Mix Plants along the roadside.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 
 Out of the 14 States which are required to constitute Empowered Committees as 
mentioned above 5 states viz. Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim and 
Tripura, where construction of ICBRs are in progress, were requested to constitute 
Empowered Committees. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for not 
requesting other 09 states having strategic/border roads and where large number of land 
acquisition cases are pending. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Earlier, the Ministry had taken up a case with Chief Secretaries of 9 States 
Government, for constitution of Empowered Committees during 2013. Accordingly, 5 
State Governments i.e. J&K, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and Nagaland had 
constituted the Empowered Committee, whereas in Himachal Pradesh the Empowered 
Committee was not constituted as a mechanism under Single window for expeditious 
clearance of ICBRs and Single window at the level of DFO/DCF/Director (wild 
life/national park) is already constituted which is sufficient to take care of expeditious 
processing of forest land diversion proposals of BRO. 
At present, since lot of roads are handed over to MoRT&H by BRO in the         
remaining 3 states i.e. Assam, Manipur, Uttarakhand, therefore, now there are less 
number of pending cases in these states. 
  

24 
 
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT AND COMMENTED UPON 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that Government has identified 73 roads of length 3812 Km, 
for development along the Indo-China Border. The initial target date for completion of 
these roads was 2012. Out of this, 61 roads of length 3417.50 km have been entrusted 
to BRO. Out of these, 28 roads of length of 981 km are completed and works on the 
balance roads are under progress and are in different stages of completion. Out of 35 
General Staff roads, work has been completed in respect of 14 roads. Out of rest of 21 
roads work has commenced but not yet completed. Out of 13 China Study Group roads, 
work relating to only 6 roads has been completed and rest of 7 roads are still under 
construction. The same is the case with Indo Tibet Border Police roads where out of 13 
roads, only 8 has been completed and rest are still under construction. The Committee 
note that delay as mentioned by Border Road Organisation such as obtaining 
forest/wildlife clearances, difficult terrain conditions, hard rock stretches, limited working 
period, paucity of construction material, challenges posed by natural disasters such as 
flash flood of Leh in 2010, Earthquake in Sikkim in 2011, Uttrakhand Floods in 2013 and 
J&K Floods in 2014 etc is understandable. The revised completion schedule of 83 ICBR 
is 2022. The Committee also note that out of 11 ICBRs scheduled to be completed by 
the end of FY 2018-19 only three Nelong-Naga, Naga-Sonam and Sumna-Rimkhim have 
been completed. Work on only one road Tr Jn-Bheem Base-Dokala is near completion 
and has been completed 96 percent. Construction of all other roads i.e. Tata-Manigong-
Tadagade, Joshimath-Malari, Musapani-Ghastoli, Nacho-TCC, LGG-Mukto-Teli, Leh-
Upsi-Sarchu and Tawaghat-Ghatiabagarh has not been completed yet leaving 16 to 36 
work to be finished in the current financial year which seems not possible considering the 
winter season and hard working conditions. 
 The Committee hope that with the delegation of administrative and financial 
powers effected in August 2017 empowering the field level officers to approve and 
sanction projects will hasten the completion of the projects in time. Apart from the above 
measures, outsourcing of certain activities, execution of works through Engineering, 
Procurement and Construction (EPC) mode, might also shorten the project execution 
time. In view of the above, the Committee recommend BRO to explore the possibility of 
completing all ICBRs by 2020 instead of the present target of 2022. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government has identified 73 roads for development along Indo–China border by 
2012. Out of the 73 ICBRs, earlier, 61 ICBRs of length 3417.50 km was entrusted to 
BRO. As per the revised approval the earlier length of 61 ICBRs has reduced to 3323.57 
km. Of these 61 ICBRs, 33 ICBRs of length 1120 km are completed and connectivity has 
been achieved in 3204.11 km of road length.  Further, out of the 11 ICBR’s mentioned 
above in the recommendation of the Committee, 6 ICBRs are completed and the 
progress of remaining is as under:- 
Srl 
no 
Name of road Length 
(km) 
Remarks 
i Nelong - Naga 8.10 Completed ii Naga- Sonam 11.20 

25 
 
iii Tri Jn-Bheem Base -Dokala 19.72 
iv Joshimath- Malari 62.67 
v Musapani- Ghastoli 7.40 
vi Nacho- TCC 53.55 
vii Sumna- Rimkhim 14.00 Formation completed. 
viii Tato- Manigong -Tadagade 85.98 93% completed and work 
in progress 
ix LGG- Mukto -Teli 53.00 88% completed and work 
in progress 
x Leh- Upsi -Sarchu 249.62 67% completed and work 
in progress 
xi Tawaghat- Ghatibagarh 19.51 64% completed and work 
in progress 
 
The revised planning for completion of 28 remaining ICBRs based on the 
requirement of the Army is as under:- 
 (i) FY 2019-20               - 11 roads 
 (ii) FY 2020-21              – 9 roads 
(iii) FY 2021-22              - 6 roads 
(iv)  FY 2022-23             - 2 roads 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
  The Committee note that BRO is constructing tunnels at Rohtang pass, Theng 
and Sela pass to ensure all weather accessibility to our strategic borders. The committee 
are glad to note that tunnel on Gangtok-Chunghang at Teng was dedicated to the nation 
on 7th June, 2018. The Committee note that Rohtang tunnel is expected to be completed 
by August, 2019 and the Sela pass by 2021. The Committee hope that these much 
needed tunnels will not miss their completion deadlines especially in view of liberalized 
delegation of powers, outsourcing of works, execution of projects through EPC mode, 
etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 
No further comments.  
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
  
 
  The Committee note from the reply furnished by the Ministry that out of 20 bridges 
on ICBRs, only one out of two bridges on Balipara-Charduar-Tawang road, five bridges 
out of seven on Orang-Kalaktang-Shergaon-Rupa-Tenga road and one out of two 
bridges on Joshimath-Malari road have been completed leaving thirteen bridges in the 

26 
 
non completed category. All the twenty bridges have Probable Date of Completion (PDC) 
between year 2010 to 2017. To the astonishment of the Committee, one of the bridges at 
Dhak on Joshimath-Malari road had PDC dated 31-03-2015, where, only 14.41 percent 
work has been completed. With such pace of work, one can easily guess the actual date 
of completion of the bridge. Besides this, one bridge Tawangchu-II on BJG-LGG road 
had PDC dated 31-03-2010 but only 19.75 percent of the work has been completed. The 
Committee find that besides the above all other bridges are still under construction, 
which would result in BRO missing PDC by a huge margin. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that as these bridges join the roads and are very crucial in movement of 
personnel, BRO should give preference for their early completion. Considering the fact 
that in Uttarakhand bridges were washed out every year due to natural calamities, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should contemplate a plan of action to address such 
eventualities and designing of the bridges and site chosen for construction should be firm 
and not prone to vagaries of natural causes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The design and execution of bridges involves complex processes and factors 
considered for design and execution of bridges during planning stage get enhanced 
many times by adversity of terrains and nature. Recurring floods, avalanches due to 
global warming greatly affect the progress of bridges. Besides these Local problems, 
land clearance, forest clearances etc during construction period affect the completion of 
bridges. However, efforts are made by BRO to complete the bridges in time by 
meticulously resolving the issues responsible for delay in completion of bridge.  
Out of the 20 bridges, 07 bridges are completed and the present Status of these 
bridges is given below:- 
Name of road Name of 
State 
Nos of 
bridges 
Nos of bridges 
completed 
Nos of bridges 
under progress 
Balipara-Charduar-Tawang Arunachal 
Pradesh 
2 1 1 
Orang-Kalaktang-Shergaon-
Rupa-Tenga 
7 5 2 
BJG-LGG 2 - 2 
Joshimath-Malari Uttarakhand  5 1 4 
Darbuk Shyok-Daulat Beg 
Oldie 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
4 - 4 
Total 20 7 13 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 
  The Committee note that all formalities under the provisions of Wild Life 
Protection Act 1972 are required to be completed before taking up any construction 
activity within protected areas and reserve forest areas. The hurdles being faced in 
according wild life clearance are – delay in submission and processing of the case by the 
State Government, delay on the part of State Wild Life Board as well as National Board 
of Wild Life and filing of interlocutory application with Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
and its disposal. MoD in its latest reply about the pendency of wild life clearances stated 
that the case for wild life clearance for road Khab-Nanagia-Chuppan was initiated in 
2010 by BRO which is still pending with the State Government. The road has been 
completed and additional detail as required by the Government of Himachal Pradesh 
such as digital map etc has been submitted by BRO. MoD, however, in response to 
another latest query stated that as on date no wild life clearance is pending for road 
projects in north eastern region. Hence, it is not clear as to whether the Khab-Nanagia-
Chuppan road in Himachal Pradesh was laid without obtaining statutory wild life 
clearances. The Committee would like to have a clarification in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The case for forest clearance in respect of road Khab-Namgia-Chuppan was 
initiated on 04 Feb, 2010. However, the work on this road commenced immediately by 
BRO without wild life clearance, as it was an Indo-China Border Road.  
Himachal Pradesh State Forest Department has initiated a violation case and 
MoEF has sought directions from Hon’ble High Court of Shimla to deal with such cases. 
The Hon’ble High Court of Shimla has issued directions to constitute a committee 
comprising of members from Forest Dept, Revenue Dept and other stake holders on the 
matter. Details/documents required from BRO have already been provided to the State 
Government. There is no further, progress on the subject and case is still pending with 
State Government of Himachal Pradesh. 
 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 BRO and BRDB were set up, the Committee note, to ensure coordination and 
expeditious execution of road projects in the North and North Eastern States to enhance 
the defense preparedness and economic development of the region. There is a need for 
BRO to concentrate on strategic works, along the border and hand over certain roads to 
other agencies. The Committee also note that with a large number of roads included in 
BRDB programme over the years, BRO spread its resources for the development of 
roads in the lower regions (other than higher/hilly regions) and as a result the 
development of road infrastructure in the forward areas suffered. 
 Based on the operational requirements of the Army and consequent upon the 
decision taken in the National Security Council meeting, it was decided that BRO may 
focus on core strategic functions on the borders and MoD along with MoRT&H will work 
out the modalities of separating BRO’s strategic road building functions from 
infrastructure development in left Wing Extremism-affected areas and other internal 
roads. Accordingly, certain roads in the hinterland, which were earlier constructed by 
BRO and are now further required to be improved, are identified to be handed over to 
other agencies so that BRO is able to utilize its resources optimally for construction of 
roads, which are of strategic importance in the border areas and will meet the 
operational requirements of the Army. The Committee are in agreement with the decision 
especially in view of the fact that many border roads especially Indo-China Border Roads 
(ICBRs), which are important from the strategic perspective, are running much behind 
their completion schedules. 
Reply of the Government 
 
No further comments 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
   The Committee note that there are many issues relating to acquisition of 
land which resulted in considerable delay in construction of roads, bridges and tunnels in 
the border areas. These issues include delay in joint survey for land acquisition, non 
disbursement of land acquisition payment, non transfer of land in the name of BRO for 
which land acquisition already paid, dual payment to forest department and civil 
administration for land acquisition, demand for additional compensation for which joint 
survey completed and land acquisition amount paid, non-demolition of structures for 
which price for land acquisition already paid etc. The Committee find that there is an 
abnormal delay of more than one and half years to carry out the joint survey for land 
acquisition by the civil administration. As a result, construction of roads from Daporijo-
Taliha and Taliha-Nacho got delayed. In other case after making the payment for land 
acquisition in respect of Dirang Bye pass on road Balipara-Charduar-Tawang, the 
amount has not been disbursed to the land owners, due to which the people are not 
allowing BRO to construct the Bye pass. In yet another instance, there are 96 cases for 
which land acquisition amount has already been paid to the land owners by the civil 

29 
 
administration but the transfer of land/mutation of the land is still pending with the civil 
administration. 
  In a case specific to Arunachal Pradesh due to the non-availability of land records, 
dual payment is required to be paid for land acquisition to both the forest department as 
well the revenue authorities for which a notification needs to be issued by the State 
Government of Arunachal Pradesh for Kimin-Potin, Daporijo-Taliha, Taliha-Nacho and 
Taliha-Tato roads making construction of these roads delayed. 
  The Committee also note that despite completion of joint survey of land for 6 
cases in various States, recurring demand for fresh joint survey/demand for additional 
compensation is being received by BRO and more so over demolition of the structures 
within Right of Way (RoW) for which the compensation amount has already paid, is yet 
to be done. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The majority of the settlement of LA cases is based on court orders. In case of 
North Eastern states, a large number of LA cases are filed by the land owner’s on 
account of Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 for enhanced compensation. Further, earlier 
a large number of roads in remote areas were constructed on community land, which 
was provided to BRO by the village heads and concerned locals by issuing NOC. Now a 
large number of LA cases pertaining to such roads are also arising due to subsequent 
generation not honoring /accepting the NOC. 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
  The Committee further note that there is an acute shortage of quarry extracted 
construction materials in the state of Arunachal Pradesh. Out of 71 quarries proposed by 
BRO, only 39 quarries have been notified by the State Government. Despite repeated 
request by BRO, rates for extracted quarry materials have not been fixed by the State 
Government since Sep 2015. The Committee find it surprising that despite having 
Empowered Committees and BRDB, the Ministry is not able to resolve such issues. It is 
obvious that if quarries are not available, the construction work cannot progress. The 
Committee therefore, desire that the Ministry should take the issue at the highest level so 
that these bottlenecks can be cleared in a shorter span of time and roads are built as per 
the schedule. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The present status of allotment of quarries to BRO in Arunachal Pradesh is as under:- 
S/No Name of State Proposed Notified 
i Arunachal Pradesh 128  
 
60 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 
  

30 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
  The Committee note that the availability of construction equipment is far lesser 
than that of authorized numbers with respect to the work load of BRO in 2016-17. The 
availability vis-à-vis authorized numbers in respect of stone crushers of all types, a basic 
equipment in construction industry, is less than 40% in 2016-17, Similarly, in case of 
tippers the available percentage is less than 50%. In respect of others such as dozers, 
road rollers, Hot mix plants, wet mix plants, etc., the availability is less than the 
authorized. However, in 2017-18, the Committee find some improvement in terms of 
equipment availability, though there is shortages in terms of availability of snow 
clearance equipment, in which case the authorized vs. held is 154:41. 
  The Committee are of the view that BRO is deprived of certain basic construction 
equipment and snow clearance equipment in required numbers which may be affecting 
their efficiency adversely and also resulting in project delays. The Committee, however, 
appreciate that to address the shortages, a Long Term Equipments Plan (LTEP) 2014-15 
to 2018-19 has been approved with an outlay of Rs 4116.70 Crores and 1636 
vehicles/equipments/plants were bought under plan. The Committee would like the BRO 
to inform them of whether the entire amount allocated under the plan has been spent. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Earlier, the approval for procurement of equipments was based on the approved 
five year Long Term equipment Plan which was not realistic with reference to the 
allocation of budget to BRO therefore, the entire plan could not materialise. Accordingly, 
Policy guidelines for preparation of Annual works plan (AWP) and Annual procurement 
plan (APP) with reference to fund allocation to BRO has been issued vide this office 
letter dated 19th June 2017 so that the planning of works and the requirement of 
resources i.e. the size of APP is more realistic.  
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
  The Committee note that in order to induct the construction equipment and 
material to the air maintained detachments of BRO, each year the air effort is provided 
by Indian Air Force (IAF) by both Rotary Wing and Fixed Wing aircraft. During the year 
2014-15, the demand by BRO was 1323 MT but it was allotted only 960 MT; In the year 
2015-16, the demand was 2568 MT but allocation was 971 MT. The same deficiency 
existed in the year 2016-17 where against the demand of 1028 MT only 820 MT could be 
allocated. Although Indian Air Force has not denied any air efforts assistance to BRO 
and position was improved in later years, but demand has not been fully met particularly 
in case of Rotary Wing aircraft. 
  The Committee find that inadequate air logistic support is stated to be one of the 
reasons for time overruns and consequent cost escalation in completing the ICBR 
projects by BRO. Considering the above facts, the Committee desire if private operators, 
who have experience and specialization in airlifting the material required by BRO are not 
available, then IAF should be requested to provided dedicated service to BRO as IAF 
has the expertise in carrying out such operations. 
  

31 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Earlier, Request for Proposal (RFP) for hiring of Helicopter for transporting heavy 
construction equipments for construction of strategically important roads was uploaded 
on CPP Portal in Jan, 2018 by BRO, however, no response was received from any 
private firm.  
 
 
 
Further, the air effort provided by IAF for these roads during FY 2018-19, is given 
below:- 
Srl. 
No Sector 
 Status of Air Effort 2018-19       
(as on  31 March 2019) 
Rotary Wing  (In MT)  Fixed Wing (In MT) 
Allotment % Materialization Allotment % 
Materialization 
i Western/Northern 65 95 1150 90 
ii Eastern 370 99 10 0 
iii Central 225 90 0 0 
Total 660 96 1160 90 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
 
 The Committee note that a mechanism was put in place for coordinating between 
the Ministry/BRO and State Governments to resolve the issues such as land acquisition, 
forest/ wild life clearances, lack of quarries, law & order problems, etc., which are 
impacting adversely the construction schedules of BRO leading to delays in the 
completing border roads. Such mechanism includes constitution of Empowered 
Committees in various state Governments under the chairmanship of respective 
secretaries of the Departments concerned. So far five states viz. Arunachal Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Sikkim and Tripura have constituted such committees. 
 The Committee note that of all the five states, Empowered Committee of Sikkim 
met five times since 2015 to discuss and resolve various issues affecting adversely the 
completion of border roads. The Empowered Committees of Arunachal Pradesh and J&K 
where number of land acquisition cases are pending i.e 117 & 308 respectively have not 
met since 15 June and 07 May 2015 respectively. In respect of Uttarakhand and 
Himachal Pradesh where 32 and 4 respectively of land acquisition cases are pending, 
these Empowered Committees seems to have not met for a long time. 
 The Committee appreciate that empowered Committee of Sikkim met five times 
since 2015 to discuss various border roads related issues. However, in many states 
where large number of land acquisition case are pending (J&K and Arunachal Pradesh) 
have met only once since 2015. The MoD has not furnished any information on the 
meetings of these Empowered Committees in Himachal Pradesh where 4 cases of land 
acquisition are pending. The Committee therefore are of the view that the Empowered 
Committee mechanism is not working effectively as it should be and accordingly 
recommend that specific steps should be taken to rejuvenate this body to enable to play 
more active role in resolving various issues concerning border roads. 

32 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The meetings held under the Chairmanship of Additional Chief Secretary, 
Government of Himachal Pradesh, are given below:- 
(i) 04 Sept 2018 
 
(ii) 05 Dec 2018 
 
(iii) 05 Jan 2019 
 
(iv) 27 Feb 2019 
 
 
Out of the 36 cases pending in Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh, 7 cases have 
been settled. The details of pending cases are as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 31 of Chapter I) 
 
  
S/No State No of cases 
i Himachal Pradesh 02 
ii Uttarakhand 27 
Total 29 

33 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
  The Standing Committee on Defence in their Report (Report No. 19 DFG of 2016-
17) stated that connectivity between Himachal Pradesh and the Ladakh region is “very 
crucial” for the expeditious movement of troops and equipment, and recommended the 
construction of the Nyemo-Padum-Darcha Road to connect the two. The Committee are 
glad to note that progress has been noticed in the construction of the said road. The 
Ministry apprised the Committee that the road Nimmu-Padam-Darcha is 297 Km long 
road which takes off at Km 400 on Srinagar-Kargil-Leh road (34 Km short of Leh in J&K 
state) and terminates at Darcha (Km 145 on Manali-Leh road in H.P). The connectivity 
for 220.60 Km length has already been achieved. Out of 11 stretches of work, 
connectivity has been achieved in 6 stretches. The preparation of DPR for stretch of road 
between Km 45 to 124 and Km 176.70 to Km 259 measuring length 162 km is in 
progress. The Committee desire that the completion schedule of the project may be 
apprised on priority. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Out of 297 Kms, Connectivity has been achieved in a length of 257 Km in various 
portions. The present status of the road is given below:- 
 (i) Connected Portions 
  (a) Km 0 to Km 47.00 
  (b) Km 77.50 to Km 79.50 
(c) Km 89.00 to Km 297.00  
 
(ii) Unconnected Portions  
(a) Km 47.00 to Km 77.50  
(b) Km 79.50 to Km 89.00 
 
The Completion schedule of the road is given below:- 
Total 
Scope of 
work 
(Crore) 
Bal Scope of 
Work as on 
01 Apr 2019 
(Crore) 
Year Wise planning for completion (Crs) 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 Total 
2276.13 1797.91 140 200 360 370 370 357.91 1797.91 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
  
  The Committee note from the reply submitted by the Ministry that to bridge the 
gap between the strategic requirements of the Army and BRO’s own capacity constraints 
of departmental execution, BRO has also started outsourcing of projects. Guidelines 
have been issued by the Ministry to adopt Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
(EPC) mode of execution for all projects for which the value as per the DPR is above Rs 
100 Crore so that these projects can further be offered for outsourcing to big construction 
companies’ as viable projects through competitive bidding and improve the pace of 
execution of infrastructure projects in the border areas. Accordingly, at present BRO has 
identified 27 roads of length 2144.17 Km including one Sela Tunnel for construction 
through outsourcing. Request for proposal (RFP) has been uploaded for tendering of 
Detailed Project (DPR) preparation of 22 roads of length 1877.383 Km and for Sela 
Tunnel of length 2.265 Km. Bids had been received and were opened for 19 road 
projects & Sela Tunnel. Contract for DPR preparation has been awarded in 10 cases. 
DPR has been submitted for 1 road and Sela Tunnel which are under examination. The 
Committee welcomes the steps and hope that these steps will facilitate to minimize the 
gaps between targets and achievements with regard to construction of border roads and 
other infrastructure works in border areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No further comments 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
  The Committee while going through the observation made by C&AG in its report 
(No. 5 of 2017 on Union Government Defence Performance Audit), on non-completion of 
Indo China Border Roads (ICBRs) who commented inter-alia that out of 61 Indo China 
Border Roads (ICBRs) planned to be completed by 2012, only 15 roads had been 
completed by 2012. Out of the balance 46 roads, only 07 roads were completed by 
March, 2016 extending the probable Date of Completion (PDC) of balance roads up to 
the year 2021. Thus 22 roads (36%) had only been completed up to March 2016, despite 
incurring an expenditure of Rs. 4536 Crore (98 percent) against the estimated cost of Rs. 
4644 Crore for 61 ICBRs. Further out of 24 selected for audit, four roads were completed 
by March, 2012 and two were completed by March, 2016. Thus only 6 roads (25 per 
cent) costing Rs.164 crore were completed upto March, 2016 despite incurring an 
expenditure of Rs. 2,713.76 Crore for 24 selected ICBRs. 
 
  Further, C&AG has also pointed out certain serious malpractices for instance, an 
amount of Rs. 6.93 (Sl No. 6 above) crore was booked on four roads without any 
achievement in physical targets viz., formation, surfacing and permanent works. 
Similarly, an amount of Rs. 1.89 Crore (sl No. 8&9) was booked against BJG-LGG road 
during the year 2012-13 and 2013-14 against execution of works worth Rs. 0.55 Crore. 
The C&AG has also pointed out that there are cases of booking expenditure without any 
execution of any work in some cases. The Committee hope that suitable steps will be 
taken to ensure non repetition of such acts of omission and commission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The main reasons for cost and time overrun were delay in forest/Wild Life 
Clearance, restricted working season, inadequate air logistic support, terrain and 
technical constraints, limited attack points, extreme remoteness of the area resulting in 

35 
 
non-availability of skilled and experienced labour, inadequate availability of construction 
material. Further, due to physical inaccessibility of site, and available survey technology 
with department at the time of planning of these ICBRs (i.e. 1997-1999), the 
accuracy/efficiency of Recee Survey Trace Cut (RSTC) conducted and the estimates 
prepared were on approximation due to which revised estimates were required to be 
prepared based on modern day technique available for accurate estimation. 
 
Further, the Ministry has taken the following measures to ensure that latest 
technology is utilized by BRO at the time of Detailed Project Report (DPR) preparation:- 
 
(i) Policy guidelines have been issued for preparation of DPR for all works 
costing more than Rs 10 crore. 
(ii) Further, Outsourcing for preparation of DPR has also been accorded. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
   
  The Committee observe that surrendering of the allocated funds by BRO for the 
purpose is a norm rather than an exception since 2009-10. Against allocation of Rs 
4463.82 Crore form 2009-10 to 2016-17, utilization was only Rs 1534.29 Crore. Hence, 
an amount of Rs 2929.53 Crore was surrendered during the period, which is less than 
50% of the allocation. Another feature of the expenditure pattern is despite surrendering 
of the funds since 2009-10, higher allocations were made in subsequent years only to be 
under spent. For instance out of Rs 250.76 Crore, Rs. 205.70 Crore was spent during 
2009-10. However, in 2010-11 amount allocated was Rs 380.80 out of which Rs 186.66 
Crore was surrendered. The scene is no way different in the rest of years since 2011-12. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific reasons for surrendering 
considerable amounts allocated for the purpose. The Committee would also want the 
MoD to furnish the justification for such allocation of resources. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Earlier, the approval for procurement of equipments was based on the approved 
five year Long Term equipment Plan which was not realistic with reference to the 
allocation of budget to BRO. Accordingly, Policy guidelines for preparation of Annual 
works plan (AWP) and Annual procurement plan (APP) with reference to fund allocation 
to BRO has been issued vide this office letter dt 19 June 2017 so that the planning of 
works and the requirement of resources i.e. the size of APP is more realistic.   
 
Further, this would ensure the limited budgetary allocation to BRO to be utilised to 
the optimum as per the requirement of the Army. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
  The Committee observed that there are 593 cases of land acquisition are pending 
in different courts, out of which 288 are pending at lower courts. The Committee also 
note from the information submitted by the Ministry that land acquisition cases have 
been expedited after constitution of Empowered Committees in Arunachal Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Sikkim and Tripura which may be seen in the decline of 
pending land acquisition cases from 593 to 501. Though the Committee appreciate that 
the initiatives taken by the Empowered Committees resulting in decline of land 
acquisition cases to 501, they would like to be clarified as to whether the reduction in 
land cases is due to out of court settlement by the State Governments concerned or by 

36 
 
settlement of these cases by the Courts concerned. The Committee also desire that as 
many strategic roads in Arunachal Pradesh are stuck up for want of land clearances, 
special attention of the Empowered Committee of Arunachal Pradesh may be drawn to 
resolve the issue at earliest. They wish that after the meeting held under the 
Chairmanship of Raksha Rajya Mantri (RRM), wherein RRM directed the State 
Governments to expedite the cases and meeting with the representatives of State 
Government during Civil Military Liaison Conference (CMLC), pending cases would go 
down. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Out of the 501 cases pending for land acquisition, 170 cases are settled. The 
state wise pending cases are given below:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
  The Committee observe that out of 501 nos of land acquisition cases pending in 
J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Nagaland Manipur 
and Mizoram, two states viz. J&K and Arunachal Pradesh only account for 425 cases. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific reasons for large number of 
pending cases in J&K and Arunachal Pradesh vis-à-vis other states. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The majority of the settlement of LA cases is based on court orders. In case of 
North Eastern states, a large number of LA cases are filed by the land owner’s on 
account of Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 for enhanced compensation. Further, earlier 
a large number of roads in remote areas were constructed on community land, which 
was provided to BRO by the village heads and concerned locals by issuing NOC. Now a 
large number of LA cases pertaining to such roads are also arising due to subsequent 
generation not honoring / accepting the NOC. 
 
   Out of the pending 425 cases in the State of J&K and Arunachal Pradesh, 163 
cases have been settled. The LA cases pending in J&K and Arunachal Pradesh are as 
under:- 
S/No State Nos of cases pending 
i Jammu and Kashmir 131 
ii Himachal Pradesh 2 
iii Uttarakhand 27 
iv Arunachal Pradesh 131 
v Sikkim 6 
vi Nagaland/Manipur 18 
vii Mizoram 16 
Total 331 
S/No State Nos of cases pending 
i Jammu and Kashmir 131 
ii Arunachal Pradesh 131 

37 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
  The Committee note that at present there are 593 land compensation cases 
pending at Supreme Court, various High Courts and District Courts, where the affected 
party has approached in the context of acquisition of land for BRO roads and providing 
rehabilitation thereof. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should look for out of 
court settlement of the cases for early resolution. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Various correspondences are made by BRO with the concerned officials of the 
State Government of Arunachal Pradesh. Further, the matter for settlement of pending 
LA cases was also discussed by DGBR with Hon’ble CM of Arunachal Pradesh on 21 
Nov 2018.  
 
 As a result, LA cases have been reduced to 331 from 593. At present, there is no 
provision for out of court settlement of the cases. However, Policy guidelines for 
acquisition of private land through negotiation by Directorate General Defence Estate 
(DGDE) of Ministry of Defence are under consideration. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
  The Committee note that it has been suggested that in view of the in ordinate 
delays in land acquisition for border roads, it has been suggested to exclude 100 Kms 
along the northern borders and 50 Kms along the western borders from the extant land 
acquisition Act. MoD was requested to furnish its views on the issue. However, MoD 
merely stated that views of the relevant Ministry will have to be taken. The Committee 
desire that the views of the relevant ministries may be obtained and they be informed of 
the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Land acquisition is a state Government subject for which views from the various 
state Government authorities is being obtained so that concerned Ministry can be 
approached.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
  The Committee note that there is huge difference between authorized and held 
strength of Group A as well as Group B & C personnel. In respect of civil Engineers 
including Army and General Engineering Reserve Force (GREF), there are 155 
vacancies, in mechanical engineering discipline 65, 63 vacancies in administrative cadre, 
50 vacancies in medical cadre and 34 vacancies in miscellaneous category. In total there 
are 3381 vacancies in technical cadre and 1739 vacancies in non-technical cadre in 
group B & C. 
  The Committee have been apprised that demand for existing vacancies is being 
forwarded every year to Ministry for further processing the same to UPSC for recruitment 
in Group ‘A’ Officers cadre. However on the scrutiny of data furnished by the Ministry 
Total 262 

38 
 
since 2013 the Committee find that despite offer of appointment issued by Ministry of 
Defence for 30,60, 44 and 41 posts for AEE (Civil) in the years 2013, 2014, 2016 and 
2017, only 17,19,18 & 23 respectively accepted the offers and joined. Hence, the 
percentage of acceptance is less than 50% and in some years it is less than 30%. 
Similarly, in respect of AEE (E&M), against offers of 7,8,16 & 7 in the years 2013, 2014, 
2016 & 2017, only 2,4,6 & 2 candidates respectively only accepted the offers. Similarly, 
for medical officers (MOs) which recruitment was made in 2013 only one candidate 
against 8 offers made joined BRO. Similarly, in group ‘B’ and ’C’ post also thousands of 
posts (in excess of six thousand posts) hundreds are lying vacant and are in the process 
of being filled up through the agencies concerned such as SSC/Departments concerned. 
  The Committee are of the view that due to inhospitable terrain, inclement weather, 
lack of proper facilities for the families of the employees such as schools, colleges, etc, 
many who were offered may be opting out. The Committee are of the view to attract and 
retain the best engineering talent, an incentive package specific to BRO postings in 
border areas may be devised. The possibility of relaxing some conditions may also be 
explored to recruit and retain the talent. Further, candidates from high altitude areas 
such as J&K and northeastern states may be encouraged to apply for the positions and if 
possible, preference in the recruitment for the candidates from these states may be 
explored. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken/proposed to be taken in 
this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                         Jual Oram 
                                               Chairperson, 
09 February, 2021                                                    Standing Committee on Defence. 
20 Magha, 1942 (Saka)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21)  
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th February, 2021 from 1530 hrs. to 1600 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe (EPHA), 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Additional Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
5. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
7. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick 
8. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
9. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
10 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
11. Shri Prathap Simha 
12. Shri Brijendra Singh  
13. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
15. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
16. Shri Sanjay Raut 
17. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
19. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

40 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
i. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-third Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence on the subject 'Proxy and Postal Voting by 
Defence Services Personnel in General Elections an Evaluation'; 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fiftieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence on the subject ‘Provision of all weather road 
connectivity under Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and other agencies 
up to International Borders as well as the strategic areas including 
approach roads-an appraisal’; 
iii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘General Defence Budget, 
Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer 
Services, Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik 
Schools (Demand Nos. 18 and 21)’; 
iv. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force 
and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)'; 
v. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘Ordnance Factories, 
Defence Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of 
Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand No. 19 and 20)’; 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘General Defence Budget, 
Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer 
Services, Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik 
Schools (Demand Nos. 18, 19, 20 and 21)’; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force and 
Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’; and  
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, 

41 
 
Defence Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of 
Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
5. ******Does not pertain to the Reports****** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
  

42 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTIETH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘PROVISION OF ALL WEATHER ROAD 
CONNECTIVITY UNDER BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION (BRO) AND OTHER 
AGENCIES UP TO INTERNATIONAL BORDERS AS WELL AS THE STRATEGIC 
AREAS INCLUDING APPROACH ROADS-AN APPRAISAL' 
 
1.      Total number of recommendations                                                                      33 
 
2(A). Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(please see Chapter II (A)): 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 1,4,8,10,11,12,14,16,24,25,26, 29,32 and 33 
 
Total :      14 
Percentage:   42.42%  
 
2 (B). Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(please see Chapter II (B)): 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3,5 and 6. 
Total :      03 
Percentage:   09.09%  
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view        of the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
 
    Recommendation No. 23 
Total : 01 
Percentage:   3.03% 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have          
not been accepted by the Committee, which require reiteration and commented upon.    
(please see Chapter IV): 
 
Recommendation Nos.  2,17,22,27,30,31. 
Total :      6 
Percentage: 18.18 % 
 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies/replies awaited   (please see Chapter V): 
 
Para No.  7,9,13,15,18,19,20,21,28.  
 
      Total :    9 
Percentage:27.27% 