 
33 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2022-23 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence 
Planning and Married Accommodation Project
 
March, 2023 / Phalguna 1944 (Saka)
 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-eighth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
23 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence 
Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 21)’]
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2023 / Phalguna 1944 (Saka) 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations eighth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 23 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence (Demand No. 21)’] 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2022-23 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence 
Planning and Married Accommodation Project
 
 
Presented
 
March, 2023 / Phalguna 1944 (Saka)
 
2 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
Twenty-eighth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
23 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence 
Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 21)’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  21.03.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023 / Phalguna 1944 (Saka) 
  
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations eighth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 23 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence and No. 21)’] 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) ……………………....….  4  
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... 6 
 
CHAPTER  I Report…………………………………………………………….. 7 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  16  
 by the Government 
   
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 29  
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the  
 Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 31  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final   32  
  replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence   33  
 (2022-23) held on 20.12.2022 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/  36 
 Recommendations contained in the Twenty-eighth Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2022-23 on Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning 
and Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 21)’ 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23)  
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
@ Nominated w.e.f 08.12.2022. 
 Nominated w.e.f 16.11.2022. 
 
___________________ 
Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar and Shri Kotagiri Sridhar, MPs, Lok Sabha ceased to be Members of 
the Standing Committee on Defence w.e.f 16.11.2022  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
3. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
4. Shri Devaragunda Venkappa Sadananda Gowda 
5. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8. Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
9. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria   
10.@ Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
11. Kunwar Danish Ali 
12. Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
13. Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
14. Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy 
15. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy   
16. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
17. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
18. Shri Prathap Simha  
19. Shri Brijendra Singh  
20. Shri Mahabali Singh  
21. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
24. Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
25. Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi 
26. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
27. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
28. Smt. P.T. Usha 
29. Shri G.K. Vasan 
30. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 

5 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora  - Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
  

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2022-23), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Thirty-Third Report of the Committee on 
‘Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2022-23 on Capital Outlay 
on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and MAP (Demand No. 
21)’. 
 
2.  The Twenty-Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 March 2022. The Report contained 48 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in July 2022. 
 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 20 December 2022. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
17  March, 2023 Chairperson 
26  Phalguna, 1944 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
  

7 
 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2022-23 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, 
Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and MAP (Demand No. 21)’, which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 March, 2022.  
 
2. The Twenty-eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 46 
observations/ recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No. Subject 
Capital Outlay on Defence Services 
1-3 Budgetary provision 
4 Projections and Allocations in respect of three services  
5 Additional Allocation 
6 Modernization of Defence Forces 
7 Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
8 Non Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund – Defence Renewal Fund 
Procurement Policy 
9 Defence Procurement Policy 
10 Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
11-12 Increasing Dependence on Foreign Suppliers for Military Hardware 
13 Self Reliance and Make in India 
14 Extreme Cold Weather Clothing System  
15-17 Offset Clause 
18 Foreign Direct Investment 
Defence Planning 
19-21 Five Year Defence Plans 
22-23 Married Accommodation Project 
  
  
  

8 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 23 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been 
examined and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government (Chapter II): 
  
                        Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,13,15,16,17,19,20,21,23 
  
              (Total -18) 
  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
(Chapter III): 
  
Para Nos. 14,22 
(Total -2) 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
  
Para No. 10 
(Total -1) 
  
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited (V): 
  
                        Para Nos. 12,18 
                                                       (Total -2) 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and as any case 
not later than six months of the presentation of the reports.  
 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendation/observations made in the Twenty-eighth Report in the 
succeeding Paragraphs. 
 
  

9 
 
A. Projections and Allocations in respect of three services  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
  
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee observe that since 2016-17, none of the three Services 
have been allocated the amount that has been projected by the Ministry at BE 
or RE Stage. The gap between the RE figures for Army in 2016-17 was to the 
tune of Rs. 10,472.04 crore which has increased to Rs. 12,967.81 crore in 
2021-22.  For Navy the difference was Rs. 2933.76 crore in 2016-17 at RE 
stage which has become Rs. 3,989.84 crore in 2021-22.  For Air Force the gap 
was Rs. 8,273.09 crore in 2014-15 which increased to Rs. 17,961.62 crore in  
2020-21 RE stage.  The Committee further note that at BE stage in 2022-23 
the gap between the projected and allocated budget for Army, Navy and Air 
Force is Rs. 14,729.11 crore, Rs. 20,031.97 crore and Rs. 28,471.05 crore 
respectively which are remarkably high. The Committee are of the view that in 
the present scenario of heightened tensions with our neighbouring countries 
especially at borders of our country, such situation is not conducive for 
defence preparedness of the country to bring it at par with them or making it 
even better than theirs by possessing capital intensive modern machines 
which are imperative to tilt the result of war in our favour and also increase 
deterrence capabilities of our country. Taking into account the trend of sharp 
decline in the allocation of funds vis-à-vis projections under Army, Air Force 
and Navy, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should not make any 
reductions while allocating budget for Capital Head for any of the Services in 
the Demands for the coming years. The Committee also recommend the 
Ministry to take steps to enhance allocation at Revised Estimate Stage in 
2022-23 and also at the time of Supplementary Grants keeping in view the 
operational preparedness of the three forces.” 
 
7. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “This Ministry submits the requirements projected by the Services under 
Capital Head to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration. In the pre-
budget meeting discussions with M/o Finance, broad reasons for requirements 
projected by the Services are justified/ elaborated. While allocating funds, 
Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption capacity of the Services, pace of 
expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall resource envelope available 
and pressing demands from other quarters etc. Based on the overall ceilings 
conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates funds among the 
Services and Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-Services 
priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc. 
  
 However, the Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to 
obtain additional funds projected by the Services at Supplementary/ RE stage 
under Capital Head. Further, the allocated funds will be optimally utilized 
towards functional requirements/ activities. If required, the schemes will be 
reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without 
any compromise to operational preparedness.” 

10 
 
 
8. The Committee had observed in their original report that wide gap existed 
between the projected and allocated budget for Army, Navy and Air Force at BE 
stage in 2022-23. The Committee had also highlighted the paramount importance 
of capital intensive lethal modern weaponry for our Defence Forces and had 
therefore recommended for acquisition of the same. In the opinion of the 
Committee, it is imperative that modern weaponry has proven advantage of not 
only tilting the balance in our favour in a war like scenario but also to act as a 
deterrent capability at all times. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the 
Ministry should not make any reductions while allocating budget for Capital Head 
for any of the Services in the Demands. The Committee have the full trust in the 
assurance given by the Ministry in this regard and they would like to see it being 
implemented in letter and spirit in the coming Budgets including thereof in the 
Revised Estimate and Supplementary Grants Stage in respect of Army, Navy and 
Air Force. 
 
 
B. Non Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund – Defence Renewal Fund 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
  
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee in their previous reports have recommended making Capital 
Budget ‘Non-lapsable’ and ‘Roll-on’ in nature. The Committee were apprised 
during the oral evidence that a draft Cabinet note for Non-Lapsable Defence 
Modernisation Fund is under consideration. The Committee observe that out 
of the total budgetary allocation of Rs. 3,43,822.00 in 2020-21 only Rs. 
2,33,176.70 have been utilized by the Ministry upto December 2020. As there 
is  around Rs. 110,645.3 crore left unutilized which is to be spent in the three 
months of this F.Y. 2020-21, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
expedite the constitution of a Non-Lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund – 
Defence Renewal Fund, which may be meant exclusively for the procurement 
of critical defence assets at critical times. As the draft Cabinet note for 
constituting a Non-Lapsable Modernisation Fund is under consideration, the 
Committee urge upon the Ministry that approval may be accorded 
expeditiously so as to fructify its creation at the earliest so that procurement 
can be done unhampered without pursuing for funds to receive at 
Supplementary or Additional Grants stages.” 
 
 
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “A proposal for creation of Non-Lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund is 
under consideration with the Government. A suitable mechanism for 
operationalising the Fund is being worked out in consultation with the Ministry 
of Finance.” 
  

11 
 
 
11.  The Committee are happy to note that a proposal for the creation of the 
Non-Lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund is under consideration with the 
Government, and the mechanism for operationalising the Fund is being worked 
out in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee hope that before 
the next financial year Non-Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund (NLDM) will 
become a reality and the funds/allocations would not lapse due to long 
procurement cycles in defence deals. The Committee would like to see the light at 
the end of the tunnel as they had been repeatedly recommending for taking a final 
decision on non lapsable fund for the past several years. 
 
 Here, the Committee would like to bring it to the knowledge of the Ministry, 
though inadvertently, they have reproduced recommendation No. 6 of the original 
report in place of recommendation No. 8.  However, such an oversight has no 
bearing on the recommendation of the Committee now and therefore, they would 
not like to pursue this matter further.  Nevertheless they would like the Ministry to 
be more careful while following the set pattern which is invariably intimated to 
the Ministry through the OM when the original Reports are forwarded to it.  
 
 
C.  Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
  “The Committee note that for ensuring accountability and transparency in 
Defence Procurement cases, measures for promoting probity, public 
accountability and transparency in Defence capital procurements are put in 
place by the Ministry which include execution of Pre Contract Integrity Pact 
(PCIP) for all cases above Rs. 20 crore to ensure corruption free procurement 
process; time bound disposal of complaints which are aligned to CVC/ DOP&T 
guidelines; instructions issued for ascertaining vigilance status of L1 vendor 
before seeking approval of the Competent Financial Authority (CFA); 
guidelines for penalties in 60 business dealings with suspect entities and 
capacity assessment guidelines for shipbuilding entities. While taking 
cognisance of the fact that accountability and transparency are extremely 
imperative in the Defence Sector dealing with Procurement Procedures, the 
Committee appreciate the initiatives of the Ministry and recommend that the 
above measures be strictly followed and a vigorous monitoring mechanism be 
set up for ensuring corruption-free, fair and timely procurement of weapon 
systems. The Committee desire to be apprised of the number of cases, if any, 
when persons were found guilty after implementation of above guidelines.” 
 
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “All measures instituted by the Government of India (GoI)/Ministry of 
Defence (MoD) to promote probity, public accountability and transparency in 
Defence Capital procurements towards ensuring accountability and 
transparency are being adhered to diligently. Details of firms debarred/ put on 

12 
 
hold/suspended etc. from doing business with MoD are placed on the MoD 
website.” 
 
14.  The Committee note from the action taken reply submitted by the Ministry 
that the Government of India (GoI) / Ministry of Defence (MoD) is undertaking all 
measures in place to promote probity, public accountability and transparency in 
Defence Capital procurements in order to enable accountability and transparency 
in its procurements. However, in the original report, the Committee had explicitly 
recommended to be apprised of the number of cases, if any, when persons were 
found guilty after the implementation of the guidelines. The reply of the Ministry 
stating that the details of firms debarred/ put on hold/ suspended etc., from doing 
business with MoD are placed on the MoD website is not acceptable to the 
Committee. In the normal course and it is also well established practice that a 
straight forward, concise and pinpointed replies should be forwarded to the 
Committee for their perusal. At this stage the Committee have no option but to 
recommend that their earlier recommendation should atleast now be taken in the 
right earnest and a consolidated, easy to go through and exhaustive information 
in regard to the debarred firms be supplied to them within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. It goes without saying that the information as sought 
should be updated. 
 
D.  Extreme Weather Clothing System  
  
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
  
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “ The Committee observe that  Extreme Cold Weather Clothing System 
(ECWCS) which is a three layer clothing being procured for soldiers 
deployed  in super High Altitude Areas like  Siachen. The Committee note that 
its procurement is based on effectiveness of the item determined through user 
trials carried out under actual operational conditions. It is also ensured that 
procurement is done only from user approved sources and DGQA make 
certain that there is zero deviation between bulk supply  and user approved 
sample  determined. In addition, user satisfaction on quality during usage is 
monitored through suitable structured feedback process and in case of any 
quality issue during usage, the user can raise a defect report as per Army 
Order 323/166, based on which detailed technical   investigation is then 
carried out by DGQA to verify the claims of the user and ascertain reasons 
for defect. The Committee would like to recall that in their 7th and 21st Reports, 
they have recommended for indigenous production of ECWCS in the country. 
The Committee are glad to find that Indian Private Industry is now capable of 
manufacturing ECWCS in India and its procurement has already 
been commenced from indigenous supplier. The Committee appreciate the 
efforts of the Ministry and hope that the list of indigenously manufactured and 
procured items would further increase by the determined efforts of the 
Ministry.”  
  
  

13 
 
 
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “ECWCS is being procured by MGS (SCME) Branch under the aegis of 
Empowered Committee. Earlier, this item was procured ex import. In year 
2020, one Indian Vendor had been approved by the end user and one supply 
order of ECWCS has been successfully executed.” Further, following long term 
(05 years)  contracts are under process at various stages in which Indian 
Vendors have participated :-  
 
Sl. 
No.  
Items  Participated Vendors  Present Status  
(a) Sleeping Bag 
(Qty -75000 Sets)  
Contract period -05 years)  
14 Indian Vendors 
participated 
Sample forwarded for 
user trial. 
(b)  JD TD  
(Qty -25000 Sets) 
Contract period -05 years 
01 Indian Vendors 
participated 
Sample forwarded for 
user trial. 
(c ) ECWCS 
(Qty -75000 Sets) 
Contract Period -05 years  
14 Indian Vendors 
participated 
Sample forwarded for 
user trial. 
(d)  Socks WnSpl (Two Layer)  
(Qty -525000 Sets) 
Contract period -05 years  
12 Indian Vendors 
participated 
Sample forwarded for 
user trial. 
(e)  Gloves Outer & Gloves Inner 
(Qty -75000Sets) 
Contract period -05 years  
05 Indian Vendors 
participated 
Sample forwarded for 
user trial. 
(f)  Boot Crampons  
(Qty -64998 Nos)  
Contract period -03 years  
RFP published  
(g)  Avalanche Air Bag  
(Qty -25000 Nos.) 
Contract period -05 years  
RFP published 
  
 
17.  The Committee note from the action taken replies that Extreme Cold 
Weather Clothing System (ECWCS) has been procured through an Indian Vendor 
approved by the end user in the year 2020. Further, long-term contracts of five 
years in respect of Sleeping Bag, ECWCS, Socks Winter Spl (Two Layer), Gloves 
Outer & Gloves Inner have been attempted by Indian Vendors, and samples have 
been forwarded for user trial. The Committee also note that Request for 
Proposals (RFPs) have been issued concerning Boot Crampons and Avalanche 
Air Bag, which the Committee feel is a welcome step in the right direction. In this 
regard nevertheless, the Committee would like to highlight that no timelines have 
been given to users for the completion of trials. As it may be, there could be 
timelines given but the Committee are unaware of the same. They, therefore, 
would like to be intimated of the specific dates as to when the samples were 
forwarded for user trials, what were the time limits given to them for submitting 
their feedback and the latest status including inter alia whether any extension 

14 
 
have been sought for submitting the feed back and if so, on what grounds. The 
Committee would also like to be informed whether there is a perspective plan 
drawn out by the Ministry for the commencement of actual production 
consequent to the user trial and as such the probable dates in this regard. 
 
E. Married Accommodation Project 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
18.  The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee note that Directorate General of Married Accommodation 
Project (DGMAP) was raised by Government of India under the aegis of 
Engineer-in-Chief to construct married accommodation for the personnel of 
three Services, with the aim of eradicating the shortage of married 
accommodation for service personnel. The MAP was setup to fullfill the 
promise made to the Armed Forces by the Government of India. Two lakh 
dwelling units had been planned for construction under the scheme in four 
phases. At present, balance of 9,903 dwelling units have to be completed 
under Phase-II and 71,102 dwelling units are planned under Phase-III which 
are assigned to Annual Major Works Programme (AMWP) for their completion. 
The committee note that in 2020-21, Rs. 209.6507 crore were utilized vis-à-vis 
Allocation of Rs. 232.50 Crore till (31st December, 2021) for the MAP. The 
Committee are concerned to find that despite the pendency in construction of 
dwelling units under Phase-II and Phase-III of MAP, the utilisation of funds is 
very low in 2021-22 which amounts to nearly one- third of the total funds. 
According to the revised rules of expenditure of the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, in the last quarter of the Financial Year, the 
limits of Expenditure has been revised to 25 percent and 10 per cent in the last 
month of financial year. The committee, therefore, fail to understand as to how 
the Ministry would be in a position to utilise the rest of the allocated funds in 
2021-22. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
devise an expenditure mechanism with strict time lines so as to utilise the 
allocated funds in totality in a given financial year so that the funds are not 
surrendered at the end.” 
 
 19. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “Against the total requirement of 1,98,881 Dwelling Units, 1,18,675 
Dwelling Units (DUs) have already been completed under Phase-I and   
Phase-II of MAP. As of now, 9,785Dwelling Units of MAP Phase-II are in 
various stages of execution. As per the reply submitted in Feb 2022 towards 
the supplementary list of points on Demand of Grants 2022-23, it was 
envisaged that Rs. 195 crore would be spent by Mar 2022, however, as on 
31st Mar 2022 only Rs.128 crore could be spent. The delay in expenditure is 
primarily due to disruption caused by COVID pandemic. Also, the processing 
of Risk & Cost contracts is a complex process and outcome is unpredictable 
due to structural defects, involvement of Arbitration/ legal cases, poor 
response from contractors during tendering etc. The proactive action has been 
taken to expedite the work progress and the expenditure.” The fund will be 

15 
 
demanded for next FY after more realistic assessment to avoid fund surrender 
at last stage.”  
  
20. In their original report, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry 
should devise an expenditure mechanism with strict time lines to utilise the 
allocated funds in totality for construction of Married Accommodation at various 
stations in a given financial year so that the funds are not surrendered at the end. 
The Committee are not oblivious to the fact that the surrender of funds do not 
depict a healthy trend in financial probity in regard to spendings. However, in the 
action taken reply, the Ministry stated that as of 31st Mar 2022 only Rs.128 crore 
could be spent out of the estimated Rs.195 crore. The delay as stated by them in 
the expenditure is primarily due to disruption caused by the COVID pandemic. 
The Ministry has also mentioned other reasons like the processing of Risk & Cost 
contracts, involvement of Arbitration/ legal cases, poor response from 
contractors during tendering etc. In this regard, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation that money is a scarce commodity and it should be used wisely. 
They therefore recommend that the Ministry should make more realistic 
assessment to avoid fund surrender at last stage. They would also like to be 
apprised, though succinctly as to why there sponse of the contractors was poor 
during tendering process.  Based on the response, they may like to review the 
tendering processes in totality sometimes at a consequent stage. 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
A. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 The Committee note from the information submitted by the Ministry that Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services provides allocation for Land & Construction Works of the 
three Services and other Departments. In other words, it caters for the expenditure 
incurred on durable assets of Defence Services, i.e., Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, 
Defence Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation 
(DRDO), Director General Quality Assurance(DGQA), National Cadet Corps (NCC), 
Married Accommodation Project, National Defence Academy, Rashtryia Rifles etc. The 
Committee note that during the year 2021-22, the allocation made including Revenue 
and capital to the Ministry of Defence was Rs. 3,68,418.13 as crore as against the 
projections of Rs. 3,47,088.29 crore and the actual utilization was only Rs. 2,66,558.69 
crore up to December, 2021. The Committee taking into account the trend of actual 
utilization of funds by the Ministry of Defence, which has been exceeding the budgetary 
allocations in the previous few years, except 2020-21, expect that the Ministry would 
take appropriate measures to utilize the rest of unutilized funds which are to the tune of 
Rs. 101,860 crore, within the time-limit of current financial year i.e. 2021-22 to enhance 
the acquisition of latest state-of-the art weapon systems, aircraft, ships, tank and other 
capital intensive projects including land building and other infrastructure, and ensure 
that there are no funds surrendered at the end of the year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 In BE 2021-22, an amount of Rs. 3,47,088.28 Crore (including both Revenue 
(net) and Capital Heads) had been  allocated for Defence Services.  This amount was 
increased by Rs. 21, 324.90 Crore to Rs. 3,68,418.13 Crore in RE 2021-22.  Against 
the said allocation, an amount of Rs. 3,66,560.70 Crore (99.50%) has been expended 
as per March(Final) (as on 13.05.2022). 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that in 2022-23, Ministry of Defence has been allocated Rs. 
1,52,369.61 crore vis-à-vis total allocation of Rs. 1,38,850.90 crore in RE 2021-22 under 
Capital Budget. Out of this under the Head for Capital Acquisition, Ministry has been 
allocated Rs. 1,24,408.64 crore; for land and works of three Services (including Married 
Accommodation Project) Rs. 12,149.16 Crore and for DRDO, DGOF and other Defence 
Departments Rs. 15,811.81 Crore have been allocated.  The Committee are pleased to 
note that overall budget of the Ministry of Defence which was Rs. 4,78,196.62 crore in 
2021-22 has been increased to Rs. 5,25,166.16 crore.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This is factual information and Ministry has no comments to offer. 
 
 

17 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that demand of Rs. 2,15,995.43 crore was projected in  
2022-23 in Capital Head and the allocations were Rs. 1,52,369.61 crore. The Committee 
find that though the allocations have been enhanced from previous year, they were not 
as per projections made by the Ministry. The Committee recommend the Ministry to 
pursue with the Ministry of Finance not to curtail the projected amount of the Ministry of 
Defence as this results in reprioritization of schemes/activities which might end up in 
compromising with the operational preparedness of the Defence Services. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should seek additional grants at the supplementary 
Grants/RE Stage if the schemes/projects get affected by this curtailment of funds at BE 
Stage as capital budget is utilized for developing and acquiring the most modern state-
of-the-art fighting platforms which can be useful in the current security threats at our 
Northern and Western frontiers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This Ministry submits the requirements projected by the Services to Ministry of 
Finance for favourable consideration. In the pre-budget meeting discussions with M/o 
Finance, broad reasons for requirements projected by the Services are justified/ 
elaborated. While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption 
capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall 
resource envelope available and pressing demands from other quarters etc. Based on 
the overall ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates funds 
among the Services and Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-Services 
priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.   
 
2. However, the Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain 
additional funds projected by the Services at Supplementary/RE stage. Efforts will be 
made to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise 
to operational preparedness of the Defence Services. Further, the allocated funds will be 
optimally utilized towards functional requirements/activities. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
Projections and Allocations in respect of three services   
 
The Committee observe that since 2016-17, none of the three Services have 
been allocated the amount that has been projected by the Ministry at BE or RE Stage. 
The gap between the RE figures for Army in 2016-17 was to the tune of Rs. 10,472.04 
crore which has increased to Rs. 12,967.81 crore in 2021-22.  For Navy the difference 
was Rs. 2933.76 crore in 2016-17 at RE stage which has become Rs. 3,989.84 crore in 
2021-221.  For Air Force the gap was Rs. 8,273.09 crore in 2014-15 which increased to 
Rs. 17,961.62 crore in 2020-21 RE stage.  The Committee further note that at BE stage 
in 2022-23 the gap between the projected and allocated budget for Army, Navy and Air 
Force is Rs. 14,729.11 crore, Rs. 20,031.97 crore and Rs. 28,471.05 crore respectively 
which are remarkably high. The Committee are of the view that in the present scenario 
of heightened tensions with our neighbouring countries especially at borders of our 
country, such situation is not conducive for defence preparedness of the country to bring 
it at par with them or making it even better than theirs by possessing capital intensive 

18 
 
modern machines which are imperative to tilt the result of war in our favour and also 
increase deterrence capabilities of our country. Taking into account the trend of sharp 
decline in the allocation of funds vis-à-vis projections under Army, Air Force and Navy, 
the Committee recommend that the Ministry should not make any reductions while 
allocating budget for Capital Head for any of the Services in the Demands for the coming 
years. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to take steps to enhance allocation 
at Revised Estimate Stage in 2022-23 and also at the time of Supplementary Grants 
keeping in view the operational preparedness of the three forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  This Ministry submits the requirements projected by the Services under Capital 
Head to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration. In the pre-budget meeting 
discussions with M/o Finance, broad reasons for requirements projected by the Services 
are justified/ elaborated. While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance analyses past 
absorption capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, 
overall resource envelope available and pressing demands from other quarters etc. 
Based on the overall ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates 
funds among the Services and Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-
Services priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.  
 
2. However, the Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain 
additional funds projected by the Services at Supplementary/ RE stage under Capital 
Head. Further, the allocated funds will be optimally utilized towards functional 
requirements/ activities. If required, the schemes will be reprioritized to ensure that 
urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational 
preparedness. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
Additional Allocation  
 
 The Committee note that additional allocation sought by the three Services in 
Capital Head separately in 2021-22 was Rs. 1,813.00 crore for Army, Rs. 16,757.83 
crore for Navy and Rs. 17,961.62 crore for Air Force, after which total allocation Stands 
at Rs. 25,377.09 crore for Army, Rs. 46,021.54 crore for Navy and Rs. 53,214.77 crore 
for Air Force at RE Stage. The Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry should 
ensure that these additional allocation of funds at the first place should be granted to the 
three services, as first and foremost priority should be given to the preparedness of 
Defence Forces and should be utilized for critical projects and operational activities of 
the three Services. The Committee also desire the Ministry to take steps for timely 
expenditure of the allocated funds in the first two quarters itself so that requirement of 
additional funds is assessed timely and get approved from the Ministry of Finance at 
Supplementary Grants stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The figures indicated above are RE 2021-22 allocations under Capital Head. 
Details of RE/ MA allocations and expenditure as per March (Pre), 2022 for the FY 
2021-22 are as under:- 
   

19 
 
 (Rs. in Crore) 
Service RE MA Expenditure 
Army 25,377.09 25,177.09 25,130.63 
Navy 46,021.54 45,767.87 45,040.21 
Air Force 53,214.77 53,214.77 53,216.74 
 
  It may be seen from the table that Services have been able to utilise the allocated 
funds. 
 
2. In current financial year also progress of expenditure will be reviewed at 
appropriate levels to ensure full utilisation of available resources. Also, efforts will be 
made to obtain additional funds projected by the Services at Supplementary/ RE stage. 
Further, the Committee may be assured that critical projects and urgent activities are 
concluded without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence 
Services. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
Modernization of Defence Forces 
  
 The Committee observe that the Modernization of Defence Forces involves the 
acquisition of new state-of-the-art platforms, technologies and weapon systems to 
upgrade and augment Defence capabilities and is a continuous process based on threat 
perception, operational necessities and technological changes to keep the Armed 
Forces in a state of readiness to meet the entire spectrum of security challenges. As per 
the assertion made by the Ministry, Government attaches highest priority to ensure that 
the Armed Forces are sufficiently equipped to meet any operational requirement, which 
is achieved through induction of new equipment and technological upgradation of 
capabilities. The equipment requirements of the Armed Forces are planned and 
progressed through a detailed process which includes 15 Year Long Term Integrated 
Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a five year Service-wise Capability Acquisition Plan, a two 
year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and deliberations by the Defence Acquisition 
Council chaired by the Raksha Mantri.  The Committee note that an overview of the BE, 
RE and AE on Modernization for capital acquisition since  2017-18 shows that Actual 
Expenditure incurred has been by and large more than the allocated funds even after 
RE Stage.  Although the Ministry has utilized Rs. 75,194.31 crore out of BE of Rs. 
1,13,717.59 crore in 2021-22 by December, 2021,  the Committee expect that the target 
of full utilization of funds will be achieved by the Ministry under this head by the end of 
F.Y. 2021-22.  The Committee note that modernization of Armed Forces through 
procurement of new equipment and upgrading of existing equipments and systems is a 
continuous process which are progressed as per the approved Capital Acquisition plans, 
therefore, the Committee recommend that enhanced and adequate budgetary allocation 
should be made under Capital Head for modernization purpose so that the procurement 
and upgrading procedures should be carried out without any hurdle of shortage of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In FY 2021-22, booking to the tune of Rs. 1,13,780.99Crore [As per March(Pre), 
2022]has been made against RE 2021-22 allocation of Rs. 1,13,717.59 Crore under 
Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) Segment of the Defence Services Estimates. In BE 

20 
 
2022-23, an amount of Rs. 1,24,408.64 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 12,945.43 Crore 
over BE 2021-22) has been allocated under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) 
Segment. However, the Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain 
additional funds projected by the Services at Supplementary/RE stage under Capital 
Head for Modernisation purpose so that the procurement and upgrading procedures 
should be carried out as planned. Further, the allocated funds will be optimally utilized 
towards functional requirements/activities. If required, the schemes will be reprioritized 
to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to 
operational preparedness. 
 
 Necessary measures have been taken in the Ministry to fully utilize the budget 
allocated for the Capital Acquisition. Information regarding expenditure details on 
Domestic and Foreign items incurred upto March, 2022 is as under: 
 
                     RE 2021-22 RE utilized % of RE utilized 
Total Domestic Foreign Domestic Foreign Domestic  Foreign 
1,13717.58 72881.59 40835.99 74112.04 39651.02 101.69 97.10 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes  
 
 The Committee were informed that Committed Liability refers to payments 
anticipated during a financial year in respect of contracts concluded in previous years. 
Under the Defence Services Estimates, Committed Liabilities constitute a significant 
element in respect of the capital acquisition segment, since one project may span 
several financial years.  As such, it is important to track the element of Committed 
Liabilities which holds first charge on the budget allocation and  inadequate allocation for 
committed liabilities would definitely lead to ‘default situation’ on contractual obligations. 
New Schemes include new projects/ proposals which are at various stages of approval 
and are likely to be implemented in near future.  The Committee learn that at present, 
there is no separate allocation of funds for Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
under Defence Services Estimates and the funds for it are allocated under Capital 
Acquisition (Modernisation) Head. The Committee observe that in BE the allocation in 
the 2022-23 for Committed Liabilities and New Schemes is Rs. 1,24,408.64 crore vis-à-
vis BE Projection of Rs. 1,77,958.63 crore.  In 2021-22 RE allocation for Army is Rs. 
19,485.09 crore against Rs. 30,636.90 crore, for Navy it is Rs. 43,736.02 crore vis-à-vis 
Rs. 47,414.33 crore, for joint staff it is Rs. 405.71 crore as per projection of Rs. 405.71 
crore.  For Air Force RE allocation stands at Rs/ 50,090.77 crore against RE projection 
of Rs. 67,169.42 crore.  In addition it is ensured by the Ministry that urgent and critical 
capabilities are acquired without any compromise to the operational preparedness of the 
Defence Services. The Committee find it contradictory in comparison to amount of funds 
actually allocated under RE-2021-22 for the three services especially Army being a 
capital intensive force. Considering this grim situation towards allocation in Capital 
Acquisition Fund, the Committee in their 7th and 21st Report had recommended the 
Ministry of Defence to create a dedicated fund for Committed Liabilities and New 
Schemes.  As no progress has been observed by the Committee in this regard, the 
Committee again urge upon the Ministry to create a separate dedicated Head for 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes from the next Budget onwards, so that there 

21 
 
are no difficulties faced in matching the deadlines in the payment towards already 
committed purchases and latest weaponry could be procured under New Schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Under the Defence Services Estimates, Committed Liability (CL) refers to 
payments anticipated during a financial year in respect of fulfilment of milestones for 
contracts already concluded. New Schemes (NS) include new projects/proposals which 
are at various stages of approval and are likely to be implemented in near future. New 
Schemes once implemented forms part of committed liabilities and expenditure towards 
the same is met under the Capital Acquisition Head. The recommendation of the 
Committee for creation of a separate Code Head for Committed Liabilities and New 
Schemes was taken up with the Services. Broadly, views of the Services are as follows:- 
 
(i) Assignment of funds specifically for a separate Head for New Schemes/ 
Committed Liabilities would result in limiting the flexibility of usage of funds, 
thereby hampering the progress of expenditure and timely utilisation of 
resources. 
 
(ii) The projections made for New Schemes for a particular year are estimates 
which may or may not fructify during the year owing to various stages 
involved in Contract finalisation. Similarly, amounts planned against the CL 
are based on projections depending on milestones likely to be achieved as 
per the contract. These milestones may encounter slippages resulting in the 
requirement to carry forward the CL to next/ succeeding year.   
 
(iii) Every existing Committed Liability had earlier been a New Scheme and every 
New Scheme would transform into a Committed Liability. Hence, introduction 
of separate Heads for Committed Liabilities and New Schemes would require 
amendment of the sanctioned Code Head when a New Scheme become 
Committed Liability on a later date. The frequent changes between Code 
Heads may lead to accounting complexities and planning problems. 
 
2.  In view of the above, the Committee may consider continuing with the existing 
system of earmarking between Committed Liabilities and New Schemes under Capital 
Acquisition, as is being carried out by Service Hqrs presently. 
 
“Non Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund – Defence Renewal Fund 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 The Committee in their previous reports have recommended making capital 
Budget ‘Non-lapsable’ and ‘Roll-on’ in nature.  The Committee were apprised during the 
oral evidence that a draft Cabinet note for Non-Lapsable Defece Modernisation fund is 
under consideration.  The Committee observe that out of the total budgetary allocation 
of Rs. 3,43,822.00 in 202-21 only Rs. 2,33,176.70 have been utilized by the Ministry 
upto December 2020. As there is around Rs. 75,194.31 crore out of BE of Rs. 
1,13,717.59 crore in 2021-22 by December, 2021, the Committee expect that the target 
of full utilization of funds will be achieved by the Ministry under this head by the end of 
F.Y. 2021-22.” 

22 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A proposal for creation of Non-Lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund is under 
consideration with the Government. A suitable mechanism for operationalising the Fund 
is being worked out in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Defence Procurement Policy  
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
The Committee note that the policy for procurement of Defence equipment for 
the Armed Forces aims to ensure timely procurement of military equipment, systems 
and platforms as required by the Armed Forces in terms of performance capabilities and 
quality standards, through optimum utilisation of allocated budgetary resources. The 
policy also seeks to ensure that the highest degree of probity, public accountability, 
transparency, fair competition and level-playing field in the process of procurement, 
besides, self-reliance in Defence equipment production and acquisition as a key aim of 
the policy which is pursued through Make in India. The policy is implemented through 
the mechanism of Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). The Committee also find 
that the Defence Procurement Procedure 2016 has been revised as Defence 
Acquisition Procedure 2020 which is driven by the tenets of Defence Reforms 
announced as part of Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan. In order to promote indigenous 
design and 59 development of defence equipment ‘Buy {Indian-IDDM (Indigenously 
Designed, Developed and Manufactured)}’ category which was introduced in 2016 and 
was accorded top most priority for procurement of capital equipment, has been retained 
in DAP 2020. The Committee were also informed that Ministry of Defence has notified a 
second positive Indigenization List comprising 108 items for which there would be an 
interim embargo on the import. The Committee were informed by the Ministry that the 
last Defence Procurement Manual (DPM) came out in 2016 and is presently under 
revision to incorporate the latest orders and other developments. The Committee 
express the hope that the revised Manual on Defence Acquisition Procedure will not 
only make the procedure fast track for procuring the arms, ammunition and defence 
equipment in a time bound manner and also promote self-reliance. While reposing faith 
in the good intentions of the Ministry of Defence, nevertheless the Committee 
recommend that concerted efforts of all stakeholders in the process of procurement 
such as the Ministry, DPSUs the Armed Forces and private sector are crucial for 
realization of the goal of self reliance in Defence Sector for which all out efforts should 
be made by the Ministry to bring out the maximum gains from each of them. 
Reply of the Government 
This is a comment. Ministry of Defence as a whole is committed to Atma 
Nirbharta in Defence. 
 
 

23 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 The Committee express their concern over the ever increasing import of arms 
and equipments in the country. Though India is the largest importer of the arms and 
equipment in the World, the Committee find that no authoritative and official information 
of India being the largest importer of Defence equipment is available as no country 
officially reveals information on import of Defence equipment. However, in the report 
published by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), India has 
been shown as the second largest importer of Defence equipment for the year 2014-19. 
The Committee in their Twenty-first Report on ‘examination of Demand for Grants 2021-
22’ have pointed out that India was reported to be the largest importer of Defence 
equipment during the period 2012-16. The Committee appreciate the efforts of the 
Ministry in this direction by bringing down the imports of defence equipment which is a 
step towards the goal of Self Reliance and Make in India which is evident from the 
SIPRI Report. Taking note of the fact that capital procurement of Defence equipment is 
undertaken from various domestic as well as foreign vendors in accordance with the 
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP), based on threat perception, operational 
challenges and technological changes so as to keep the Armed Forces in a state of 
readiness to meet the entire spectrum of security challenges, the Committee expect 
that with the increasing focus on self reliance and promotion of indigenous industries, 
the import of defence equipment will further fall down. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The GoI/ MoD, while adhering to the clarion call on Atmanirbhar Bharat given by 
our Hon’ble PM, has been giving impetus to procurement from indigenous sources. 
During the last five Financial Years, 267 AoNs worth approxRs 3,54,756 Crore were 
accorded. Out of these, 207 AoNs (78%) worth Rs 2,75,540 Crore have Indian Industry 
oriented categorisation. In terms of cost also, in the last 5 FYs, 78% of AoN cost 
pertained to AoNs favouring Indian Industry Participation. For the same period i.e. last 5 
financial years, approx 65% of contracts since FY 2017-18 to 2021-22 have been 
signed with Indian Industry.  
 
 Furthermore, to promote domestic Capital procurement, MoD earmarked funds 
amounting to Rs. 71,438 Cr (64.09% of the total capital budget) for domestic Capital 
procurement in 2021-22, which has been increased to Rs. 84,597 Cr (68% of the total 
Capital Acquisition Budget) for domestic Capital procurement in 2022-23. 
 
Self Reliance and Make in India  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
  The Committee note that the proposals of capital acquisition in Defence 
Procurement Procedure are categorized as ‘Buy Indian – IDDM)’, Buy (Indian), Buy and 
make (Indian) & ‘Buy and Make’ with preference over ‘Buy (Global)’ category, to make 
the country self reliant in defence production. For this, Ministry of Defence has 
earmarked about 64 per cent of its modernization funds 62 amounting to Rs. 71,400 
crore under capital acquisition budget for 2021-22 for procurement from domestic 
industries. The Committee further note that the value of indigenized production which 
was Rs 84,643 crore in 2020-21 has come down to Rs. 34,384 crore (up to 25 Jan, 

24 
 
2022) and the reasons being attributed to Covid-19 pandemic. As a big chunk of capital 
acquisition budget has been earmarked to procurement from domestic industries, the 
Committee recommend that Ministry should explore more efficacious ways to utilize the 
full allocated funds in the current financial year 2021-22. The Committee wish to be 
apprised of the total utilization of funds out of Rs. 71,400 crore earmarked for domestic 
industries in 2021-22 and also the amount of funds allocated in 2022-23 for this 
purpose. The Committee further desire that the Ministry should make concerted efforts 
to set up proper co-ordination between, Armed Forces, DPSUs and private sector so as 
to increase the production under Make in India categories. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Capital Acquisition schemes are planned and prioritized to optimally utilize 
the allocated budget.  Necessary measures are taken in the Ministry to fully utilize 
budget allocated for the Capital Acquisition.  To promote domestic Capital procurement, 
MoD earmarked funds amounting to Rs. 71, 438 Crore (64.09% of the total capital 
budget) for domestic Capital procurement in 2021-22, which has been increased to 
Rs.84,597 Crore (68% of the total Capital Acquisition Budget) for domestic and Foreign 
items incurred upto March, 2022 is as under: 
 
Cumulative Expenditure upto March-22 
Services Domestic 
Private PSU/OFB Total 
Army 3874.89 13367.72 17242.61 
Navy 3193.12 23707.73 26900.85 
Air Force 2725.97 27242.61 29968.58 
Total 9793.98 64318.06 74112.04 
 
Offset Clause 
 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
 
 The Committee noted that Offsets under Defence Capital Acquisition were 
introduced in the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) in 2005 based on the 
recommendation of Kelkar Committee and the Offset guidelines framed under DPP 
have since been amended 6 times. As per Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP 2020) 
offset provisions are applicable only on “Buy Global” categories of capital acquisitions. 
They apply in capital acquisitions contracts which are more than Rs. 2000 crore. 
However, the offsets are not applicable to procurements under” Fast Track Procedure” 
and in “Option Clause” cases if the same was not envisaged in the original contract. 
Further no offsets will be applicable in all ab-initio single vendor cases including 
procurements based on Inter Governmental Agreements/Foreign Military Sales 
(IGA/FMS) and the offset applicability on Indian companies under ‘Buy Global’ cases do 
not arise in case the indigenization component is 30% or more. The committee also 
note that offset contracts are co-terminus with the main procurement contract and 
signed along with the main procurement contract after approval of Competent Financial 
Authority (CFA) and the period of offset discharge can be extended on exceptional 
ground by a maximum period of two years. Further the DAP stipulates eligible 
products/services for discharge of offset obligations which covers defence products and 

25 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Operations (MRO) related to helicopter and aircraft. Though 
the responsibility for fulfilment of offsets obligations lies with the main vendor, however 
the vendor is permitted to discharge his obligations through Tier 1 vendor sub vendors 
based on their work share. In case of investment and/or transfer of technology the offset 
discharge can be permitted by entities other than vendor/Tier-I sub vendor on case to 
case basis and the vendors are free to select their Indian Offset Partners (IOP) from 
DPSU/OFB/DRDO/Private Industry. The offset policy further allows vendors to submit 
offset details at later stage after signing of the contract i.e. either at the time of seeking 
offset credits or one year prior to discharge of offset obligations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Noted. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The committee have been apprised that as on date, a total of 57 Defence offset 
contracts have been signed in Ministry of Defence. The total offset obligations are 
estimated at approx US$ 13.52 billion to be discharged over a period from 2008-2033. 
Out of the total contracted obligations US$ 4.59 billion has been discharged by the 
vendors, of which US$ 2.9 billion has been accepted in audit and the balance claims are 
under clarification/examination. The committee, while appreciating the efforts of the 
Ministry in bringing down the total offset obligations express the hope that the Ministry 
of Defence would take appropriate measures in right earnest for clearing balance claims 
at the earliest that are under clarification/examination, which would result in further 
strengthening of Defence Industrial Base. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Noted. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 While expressing satisfaction that the Defence Offset Monitoring Wing is 
effectively discharging its duties, the committee recommend the Ministry to be more 
cautious and transparent as the scope of Offset has been increased from Rs. 300 crore 
to Rs. 2000 crore or more. The committee desire that the Ministry should try to establish 
some import substitute products industry while discharging the 30 percent obligation.   
 
  

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Towards establishing the import substitute products industry base set up through 
Defence offsets, following initiatives have been incorporated in DAP 2020: -  
 
(i) The thrust of Guidelines is to have enabling provisions to attract 
investment and technology. 
(ii) It is expected to enhance capability in the domestic defence 
manufacturing sector and promote ‘Make in India’ initiative. 
(iii) Investment in defence manufacturing including in Defence Industrial 
Corridor could be through FDI. 
(iv) The eligible defence products have been streamlined to ensure high 
technology based investments through offsets. 
(v) To incentivize transfer of technology to Indian industry/ DRDO/ OFB/ 
DPSUs and to attract direct investment, higher multipliers have been 
provided. 
(vi) Higher preference has been given for purchase of defence products as 
compared to components. 
(vii) Investments have been incentivized through higher multipliers. 
(viii) Discharge of offset obligations through entities other than vendor/Tier-1 
sub-vendor has been envisaged for investments/Transfer of Technology 
on case to case basis. 
(ix) Flexibility to provide details of products and Indian Offset Partners (IOPs) 
at later stage even after signing of contract. 
(x) End-to-end online submission and verification of offset claims through the 
offset portal to ensure greater transparency, accountability and efficiency. 
(xi) The process of IOP addition submission, evaluation and approval has 
been streamlined through end to end electronic means. This has made the 
offset discharge process more transparent, accountable and efficient. 
 
Defence Planning 
Five Year Defence Plans 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
The Committee note that the Defence Five Year Plans are formulated to elaborate the 
necessary steps to maintain and augment Defence capabilities in line with the Raksha 
Mantri’s Operational Directive, the Long Term Perspective Planning and the current threat 
perception. These plans help to estimate the outlay required to achieve the planned 
objectives. The Committee further note that under these Five Year Plans operational activities 
are carried out within the available budget allocations.  For optimal and full utilization of 
allocated funds the schemes are reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are 
acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This is a factual statement and Ministry has no comments to offer. 
 
  

27 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
The Committee note that Defence Five Year Plans serve as a guide for formulating 
annual budgetary protection submitted to the Ministry of Finance (MoF). The Committee also 
note that Government has set up a Defence Planning Committee under the Thirteenth 
Defence Plan (2017-22), to facilitate comprehensive and integrated planning for defence 
matters, which analyses and evaluate all relevant inputs relating to defence planning, inter-
alia, national defence and security priorities, foreign policy imperatives, operational directives 
and security related doctrines, defence acquisition and infrastructure development plans 
including 15 year Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), defence technology, etc.  
The Committee are surprised to note that the 12th Plan was approved by the Raksha Mantri 
but the same was not approved by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee, however, find 
that non-approval of the Defence Plan did not act as a hindrance in implementation of 
Defence projects.  The Committee in their earlier Reports have been recommending to adopt 
measures for foolproof budgetary planning and implementation for Ministry of Defence.  The 
Committee, at this stage express the hope that the Ministry’s focused efforts would ensure 
proper and effective implementation of the various activities planned which are likely to 
proceed according to the annual budgetary allocations and the 13th Defence Plan serves as a 
guide for formulating yearly budgetary projections even without the formal approval by the 
Ministry of Finance.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee is assured that planned activities will proceed according to annual 
budgetary allocations. For optimal and full utilization of allocated funds the schemes are 
reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any 
compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence Forces. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 After gleaning through the figures of the BE, RE and Actual Expenditure under the 
year-wise allocation in the Thirteenth Defence Plan from 2017-18 to 2022-23, the Committee 
find that from 2017-18 to 2019-20 the expenditure incurred by the Ministry was more than 
what was allocated to them at RE Stage.  In 2020-21, the expenditure was slightly less than 
the budgetary allocations i.e. Rs. 3,40,093.51 crore were utilized vis-à-vis total allocation of 
Rs. 3,43,822.00 crore.  The Committee understand that the less utilization might have been 
due to less expenditure incurred by various Services/Organizations due to Covid-19 situation 
prevailing in the country. The Committee further find that in 2021-22, Rs. 3,47,088.28 crore 
were projected against which, the Ministry received Rs. 3,68,418.13 crore and the figures of 
utililzation were shown as Rs. 2,66,558.69 crore upto December, 2021.  The Committee 
expect that with concerted and coordinated efforts of the Ministry of Defence, the balance 
funds will be utilized by all service wings in full and within the time frame of F.Y. 2021-22 as 
Covid-19 pandemic is behind us and now there are ample opportunities with the Ministry to 
focus on the areas which were badly affected hitherto during the pandemic. The Committee 
express the hope that the enhanced demands for grant put forth by the Ministry in its annual 
plan in 2022-23 would not be curtailed by the Ministry of Finance, especially when the 
Ministry of Defence is able to absorb the entire allocated funds.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the figures of the amount allocated to the Ministry against their projections in 
2022-23.  
 

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 3,85,370.15 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 38,281.87 
Crore over BE 2021-22) has been allocated to M/o Defence under Defence Services 
Estimates against projection of Rs. 4,87,739.98 Crore. 
 
2.    However, the Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional 
funds projected by the Services at Supplementary/RE stage under Defence Services 
Estimates. Further, the allocated funds will be optimally utilized towards functional 
requirements/activities. If required, the schemes will be reprioritized to ensure that urgent and 
critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness. 
 
 
MARRIED ACCOMMODATION PROJECT( MAP) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 The Committee find that out of 69,904 dwelling units(DUs) approved to be 
constructed under Phase-II of MAP 9,903 DUs are yet to be completed. Further, 
71,102 DUs were approved in Phase-III under MAP, which has been foreclosed and 
routed through Annual Major Works Programme (AMWP) under Military Engineer 
Service. Taking into count the already existing delays in Phase- II and Phase-III, the 
Committee recommend that as the proposal for construction of MAP Phase-III by 
AMWP has already been approved, the Ministry should pursue vigorously and leave no 
stone unturned to expedite the commencement of construction of the remaining 
dwelling units and get them completed within the specified time frame. The Committee 
note that the Ministry has set the time-line to complete the Phase-II by the end of 2023 
and hope that the Ministry would make all out efforts to get them completed within the 
time-line fixed and hand them over to the eligible personnel.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Against the total requirement of 1,98,881 Dwelling Units 1,18,675 Dwelling 
Units,(DUs) have already been completed under Phase-I and Phase-II of MAP. As of 
now 9,785Dwelling Units of MAP Phase-II are in various stages of planning and 
execution and are likely to be completed by Dec 2023. 4401 DUs of MAP Phase-II are 
planned to be completed by Dec 2022 and the balance 5384 DUs are planned to be 
completed by Dec 2023.  
  

29 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
B.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
Extreme Weather Clothing System  
 
 The Committee observe that  Extreme Cold Weather Clothing System (ECWCS) 
which is a three layer clothing being procured for soldiers deployed  in super High 
Altitude Areas like  Siachen. The Committee note that its procurement is based on 
effectiveness of the item determined through user trials carried out under actual 
operational conditions. It is also ensured that procurement is done only from user 
approved sources and DGQA make certain that there is zero deviation between bulk 
supply and user approved sample determined. In addition, user satisfaction on quality 
during usage is monitored through suitable structured feedback process and in case of 
any quality issue during usage, the user can raise a defect report as per Army Order 
323/166, based on which detailed technical   investigation is then carried out by DGQA 
to verify the claims of the user and ascertain reasons for defect. The Committee would 
like to recall that in their 7th and 21st Reports, they have recommended for indigenous 
production of ECWCS in the country. The Committee are glad to find that Indian Private 
Industry is now capable  of manufacturing ECWCS in India and its procurement has  
already been  commenced from indigenous supplier The Committee appreciate the 
efforts of  the Ministry and hope  that the list of indigenously manufactured  and 
procured  items would further increase by the determined efforts of the Ministry.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 ECWCS is being procured by MGS (SCME) Branch under the aegis of 
Empowered Committee. Earlier, this item was procured ex import. In year 2020, one 
Indian Vendor had been approved by the end user and one supply order of ECWCS has 
been successfully executed. Further, following long term (05 years)  contracts are under 
process at various stages in which Indian Vendors have participated :-  
  
Sl. No. Items  Participated Vendors  Present Status  
(a) Sleeping Bag 
(Qty -75000 Sets)  
Contract period -05 years)  
14 Indian Vendors 
participated  
Sample forwarded for 
user trial.  
(b)  JD TD  
(Qty -25000 Sets) 
Contract period -05 years  
01 Indian Vendors 
participated  
Sample forwarded for 
user trial.  
(c ) ECWCS 
(Qty -75000 Sets) 
Contract Period -05 years  
14 Indian Vendors 
participated 
Sample forwarded for 
user trial.  
(d)  Socks WnSpl (Two Layer)  
(Qty -525000 Sets) 
Contract period -05 years  
12 Indian Vendors 
participated 
Sample forwarded for 
user trial. 

30 
 
(e)  Gloves Outer & Gloves 
Inner  
(Qty -75000Sets) 
Contract period -05 years  
05 Indian Vendors 
participated 
Sample forwarded for 
user trial. 
(f)  Boot Crampons  
(Qty -64998 Nos)  
Contract period -03 years  
RFP published  
(g)  Avalanche Air Bag  
(Qty -25000 Nos.) 
Contract period -05 years  
RFP published 
 
MARRIED ACCOMMODATION PROJECT(MAP) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
 The Committee note that Directorate General of Married Accommodation Project 
(DGMAP) was raised by Government of India under the aegis of Engineer-in-Chief to 
construct married accommodation for the personnel of three Services, with the aim of 
eradicating the shortage of married accommodation for service personnel. The MAP 
was setup to fullfill the promise made to the Armed Forces by the Government of India. 
Two lakh dwelling units had been planned for construction under the scheme in four 
phases. At present, balance of 9,903 dwelling units have to be completed under Phase-
II and 71,102 dwelling units are planned under Phase-III which are assigned to Annual 
Major Works Programme( AMWP) for their completion. The committee note that in 
2020-21, Rs. 209.6507 crore were utilized vis-à-vis Allocation of Rs. 232.50 Crore till 
(31st December, 2021) for the MAP. The Committee are concerned to find that despite 
the pendency in construction of dwelling units under Phase-II and Phase-III of MAP, the 
utilisation of funds is very low in 2021-22 which amounts to nearly one- third of the total 
funds. According to the revised rules of expenditure of the Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance, in the last quarter of the Financial Year, the limits of Expenditure 
has been revised to 25 percent and 10 per cent in the last month of financial year. The 
committee, therefore, fail to understand as to how the Ministry would be in a position to 
utilise the rest of the allocated funds in 2021-22. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should devise an expenditure mechanism with strict time lines so as to 
utilise the allocated funds in totality in a given financial year so that the funds are not 
surrendered at the end. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Against the total requirement of 1,98,881 Dwelling Units, 1,18,675 Dwelling Units 
(DUs) have already been completed under Phase-I and Phase-II of MAP. As of now, 
9,785Dwelling Units of MAP Phase-II are in various stages of execution. As per the 
reply submitted in Feb 2022 towards the supplementary list of points on Demand of 
Grants 2022-23, it was envisaged that Rs195 crore would be spent by Mar 2022, 
however, as on 31st Mar 2022 only Rs128 crore could be spent. The delay in 
expenditure is primarily due to disruption caused by COVID pandemic. Also, the 
processing of Risk & Cost contracts is a complex process and outcome is unpredictable 
due to structural defects, involvement of Arbitration/ legal cases, poor response from 
contractors during tendering etc. The proactive action has been taken to expedite the 
work progress and the expenditure. The fund will be demanded for next FY after more 
realistic assessment to avoid fund surrender at last stage.   

31 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
C. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that for ensuring accountability and transparency in 
Defence Procurement cases, measures for promoting probity, public 
accountability and transparency in Defence capital procurements are put in place 
by the Ministry which include execution of Pre Contract Integrity Pact (PCIP) for 
all cases above Rs. 20 crore to ensure corruption free procurement process; 
time bound disposal of complaints which are aligned to CVC/ DOP&T guidelines; 
instructions issued for ascertaining vigilance status of L1 vendor before seeking 
approval of the Competent Financial Authority (CFA); guidelines for penalties in 
60 business dealings with suspect entities and capacity assessment guidelines 
for shipbuilding entities. While taking cognisance of the fact that accountability 
and transparency are extremely imperative in the Defence Sector dealing with 
Procurement Procedures, the Committee appreciate the initiatives of the Ministry 
and recommend that the above measures be strictly followed and a vigorous 
monitoring mechanism be set up for ensuring corruption-free, fair and timely 
procurement of weapon systems. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
number of cases, if any, when persons were found guilty after implementation of 
above guidelines. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All measures instituted by the GoI/Ministry of Defence (MoD) to promote probity, 
public accountability and transparency in Defence Capital procurements towards 
ensuring accountability and transparency are being adhered to diligently. Details of 
firms debarred/ put on hold/ suspended etc. from doing business with MoD are placed 
on the MoD website. 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
D. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
 
The Committee note that during the last four financial years (2017-18 to 2020-
21), out of total 239 contracts, 87 contracts worth about Rs.1,18,111.98 crore have 
been signed with foreign vendors including USA, Russia, Israel, France, etc. for 
procurement of Defence equipment for Armed forces. The Defence equipment imported 
during this period includes helicopters, aircrafts, missiles, rifles, artillery guns, simulators 
and ammunition. The Committee further note that although the procurement from 
foreign vendors is far less than their Indian counterparts, still the value of imports has 
been constantly increasing since 2016-17. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
ways and means should be devised so that Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and 
Services) – New DPSUs, DPSUs, DRDO and Private Industries work in tandem to 
produce not only import substitute products but also expand their export potential so 
that the country become an exporter of defence equipment. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
Foreign Direct Investment  
 
The Committee note that the Government of India has enhanced FDI in Defence 
Sector up to 74% through the Automatic Route and beyond 74% through Government 
Route wherever it is likely to result in access to modern technology or for other reasons. 
The Committee note that this FDI limit was increased from 49% to 74% to ensure that it 
will come alongwith the technology also and the FDI limit has also been made attractive 
enough as it facilitate upto 100% through Government Route. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the Ministry should ensure that despite raising the limits of FDI to 
as high as 74%, the purpose of self reliance should not be defeated. The Committee 
recommend that in addition to the measures taken for making FDI more attractive, 
focused efforts may be undertaken by the Ministry to strengthen R&D base of the 
country and increase coordination between the public and private sector within the 
country, so that the indigenous defence sector is encouraged to develop and 
manufacture technologies/systems/accessories which are intended to be made 
available in the country through the FDI route. 
 
 
 
 
  

33 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2022-23) 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20th December, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI JUAL ORAM    -   CHAIRPERSON 
    MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
2. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
3. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
4. Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
5. Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
6. Kunwar Danish Ali 
7. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick 
8. Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
9. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy 
10. Shir Jugal Kishore Sharma 
11. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
12. Shri Prathap Simha 
13. Shri  Brijendra Singh  
14. Shri  Durga Das Uikey   
 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
15. Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
16. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
17. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
18. Smt. P.T. Usha  
19. Shri G. K. Vasan 
20. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D.P. Vats (Retd.) 
1. Smt. Suman Arora  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  

34 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by the representative of Ministry of Defence on 
the subject ‘A review of functioning of Zila Sainik Boards in the country’ and adoption of 
two draft Action Taken Reports. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence and drew their attention to Directions 55(1) 
and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the 
proceedings of the Committee.  
3. ****Does note pertain to the report**** 
4. The Committee then took up the draft Reports on the following subjects for 
consideration: 
 (i)  Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-seventh Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2022-23 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, 
Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme and Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; and  
 (ii)  Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-seventh Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2022-23 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence 
Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and Married 
Accommodation Project (Demand No. 21)’. 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Reports without any 
changes/modifications. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
6. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

35 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-EIGHTH 
REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (17TH LOK SABHA) ON 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR        
2022-23 ON CAPITAL OUTLAY ON DEFENCE SERVICES, PROCUREMENT 
POLICY, DEFENCE PLANNING AND MAP (DEMAND NO. 21)’ 
 
 
1. Total number of recommendations                        23 
 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
   
 Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,13,15,16,17,19,20,21,23 
Total : 18 
Percentage:  78%    
 
3.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
  
Para Nos. 14,22  
(Total - 2) 
Percentage:  9%    
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. 10  
(Total - 01) 
Percentage: 4% 
 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
 
Para Nos.  12,18 
(Total - 2) 
Percentage: 9%    
 
 
 
 
 