 
45 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-seventh Report of
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023
on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and D
December
i 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023
on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)
 
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023-24 on ‘Capital Outlay efence Planning (Demand No. 21)’] 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-seventh Report of
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023
on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and D
 
 
 
Presented
 
December
ii 
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023
on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)
Presented to Lok Sabha on  20.12.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2023 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023-24 on ‘Capital Outlay efence Planning (Demand No. 21)’] 
 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24)……………………………………………… 
 
iv 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………………... 
 
vi 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II  Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
9 
Chapter III Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
28 
Chapter IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration and to be commented upon 
 
29 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
awaited 
 
30 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2023-24) HELD ON 18.12.2023. 
  
31 
II ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (17TH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF 
THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2023-24 ON 
‘CAPITAL OUTLAY ON DEFENCE SERVICES, PROCUREMENT 
POLICY AND DEFENCE PLANNING (DEMAND NO. 21)’. 
34 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2023-24)  
SHRI JUAL ORAM  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy ceased to be member of the Standing Committee on Defence w.e.f. 8th December, 2023 vide Lok 
Sabha Secretariat notification no 21/1(3)/2023/T(B) dated 8th December, 2023. 
 
@ Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy ceased to be member of the Standing Committee on Defence w.e.f. 13th December, 
2023 vide Lok Sabha Secretariat notification no 21/1(5)/2023/T(B) dated 13th December, 2023. 
 
2 Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
3 Kunwar Danish Ali 
4 Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
5 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
6 Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
7 Shri Devaragunda Venkappa Sadananda Gowda 
8 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
9 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
10 Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
11 Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
12 Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
13 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
14 Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
15 Shri Prathap Simha  
16 Dr. Amar Singh 
17 Shri Brijendra Singh  
18 Shri Mahabali Singh  
19 Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 Vacant* 
 Vacant@ 
Rajya Sabha 
20 Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
21 Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
22 Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
23 Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi 
24 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
25 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
26 Smt. P.T. Usha 
27 Shri G.K. Vasan 
28 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
29 Shri K.C. Venugopal 

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2023-24), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Forty-fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty-seventh Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023-24 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, 
Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’.  
2.  The Thirty-seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 21 March, 2023. The Report contained 23 Observations/ Recommendations. 
The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in August, 2023. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 18th December, 2023. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence 
is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
18  December, 2023 Chairperson 
27 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023-24 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, 
Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’, which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2023. 
2.        The Thirty-Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 23 
observations/ recommendations on the following aspects:- 
 Rec. No./ 
Para No. 
Subject 
  
1-3 Ministry of Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2023-24: 
An Overview 
4 Additional Allocation 
5 Ratio for Capital and Revenue Outlay 
6-7 Modernization of Defence Forces 
8 Inflation 
9-10 Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
11-12 Defence Procurement Policy 
13-14 Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
15-17 Increasing Dependence on Foreign Suppliers for Military 
Hardware 
18 Self Reliance and Make in India 
19 Offset Clause 
20 Foreign Direct Investment 
  
21 
22-23 
DEFENCE PLANNING 
 Approval from Ministry of Finance 
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 
  
3.        Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 23 observations/recommendations contained in the  Thirty-Seventh Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2023-24 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’. The replies have been examined and 
categorized as follows:- 
  

2 
 
(i)        Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
Para Nos.     1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18, 19,20,21,22,23 
              (Total - 23) 
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
Para Nos. –Nil- 
                                                                                                                          (Total -Nil) 
 (iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 Para Nos.    –Nil- 
(Total - Nil) 
(iv)      Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V) 
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
                                                      (Total - Nil) 
4.        The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes in respect of 
comments contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and 
in any case, not later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
  
5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the observations/recommendations made in the Thirty-Seventh Report of the 
Committee in the succeeding Paragraphs.  
 
 A. Ministry of Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2023-24: An Overview 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
6.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note that Defence Service estimates distributed over revenue 
and capital outlay reflected an increase of 12.29 per cent, i.e. Rs. 47,350 Crore 
from Rs. 3,85,000 Crore to Rs. 4.33 lakh Crore in the current year in comparison 
to the BE of 2022-23. The capital outlay budget of defence services is bifurcated 
into capital acquisition and other than capital acquisition with outlays of 
Rs.1,32,301 crore and Rs. 30,298 Crore respectively. The Committee note with 
satisfaction that the capital budget of defence services has registered an 
increase of 6.71 per cent from Rs.1.50 lakh Crore to Rs.1.62 lakh Crore. The 

3 
 
capital acquisition expenditure which is also known as the modernisation budget 
of the defence services – Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff – reflects an 
increase of 6.34 per cent. In the last five years from 2018-19, the capital 
acquisition budget has registered an increase of about 78.5 per cent. In absolute 
terms, it stands at about Rs.58,185 Crore. Other than capital acquisition segment 
which consists of the land and works expenditure of the armed forces and the 
capital budget of DRDO, DGQA and Directorate of Ordnance represents an 
increase of 8.36 per cent. This also includes an amount of Rs.1310 Crore for the 
modernisation of plants of the newly created seven defence PSUs. The 
Committee appreciate the persistent efforts made by the Ministry of Defence with 
the Ministry of Finance at various levels for obtaining this enhanced budgetary 
allocation and in this regard recommend that the Ministry of Defence would utilize 
this budget efficiently for developing and acquiring the latest state of the art 
fighting platforms, which can match prowess of volatile neighbours in the light of 
current security threats on the frontiers of the country. The Committee further 
note that the Ministry could utilize only Rs. 2,67,523.08 Crore (upto Dec. 2022) 
out of RE of Rs. 4,09,500.48 Crore in 2022-23 at the time of furnishing the replies 
to the Committee. The Committee, at this stage would like to be apprised of the 
reasons as to why only about 65 percent of the grants could be utilized till the 
completion of the third quarter of the Financial Year. While they are informed of 
the reasons by the Ministry, they would like also to be apprised within one month 
of the presentation of this Report as to what are the 
plans/schemes/channels/trajectory in place for utilizing the remaining 35 percent 
until the time this Financial Year draws to a close. The Committee are of the firm 
view that the complete utilization of the allocated funds would help the armed 
forces by creating a fleet of officers equipped with advance training and by 
acquiring latest weaponry, air craft, ships, tanks and other platforms along with 
optimum capital intensive projects including logistical infrastructure’. 
  
7.        The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“The Committee may be apprised that about 65 percent of the grants could be 
utilized till the completion of the third quarter of the Financial Year broadly due to 
the following reasons:- 
i. Delays in conclusion of New Schemes in preceding quarters. 
ii. Non-release of payment to Russian vendor due to ongoing Russia-Ukraine 
conflict. 
iii. Milestone payments linked to various stages of procurement. 
 2.      Further, it may be added that an expenditure of Rs. 3,99,091.60 Crore (i.e. 
 97.46% of RE 2022-23 allocations) has been incurred in FY 2022-23 under 
 Defence Services Estimates as per March(Final), 2023.” 
        

4 
 
   
8.    The Committee note that about 65 percent of the grants could be utilized till 
the completion of the third quarter of the Financial Year due to either  delays in 
conclusion of New Schemes in preceding quarters or non-release of payment to 
Russian vendor(s) due to ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict and Milestone 
payments linked to various stages of procurement as pointed out by the Ministry. 
The Committee at this stage would like to reiterate their considered view that the 
complete utilization of the allocated funds would help the armed forces in 
the creation of a fleet of officers equipped with advance training and by acquiring 
latest weaponry, air craft, ships, tanks and other platforms along with optimum 
capital intensive projects. They, therefore, would like to urge upon the Ministry to 
undertake consistent due diligence in a timely manner in order to complete the 
spending within the given timeframe  as per the extant guidelines for the next 
financial year.  Here, it goes without saying that such exercise should invariably 
be followed for the subsequent financial years also.   
  
 B.  Modernization of Defence Forces 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
  
9.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
‘The Committee were apprised that Union Budget 2023 gave impetus to 
modernisation and infrastructure development for armed forces as a result of 
which capital allocation of the services has been increased to Rs.1,62,600 Crore, 
i.e. a jump of Rs.10,230 Crore, which is 6.7 per cent over the financial year 2022-
23 and since 2018-19 this has increased Rs.68,618 Crore which is 73 per cent 
rise in last five years. This is a reflection of Government’s commitment towards 
sustainable augmentation of modernisation and infrastructure development. The 
equipment requirements of the Armed Forces are planned and progressed 
through a detailed process which includes 15 Year Long Term Integrated 
Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a five year Service-wise Capability Acquisition Plan, a 
two year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and deliberations by the Defence 
Acquisition Council. The Committee note that an overview of the BE, RE and AE 
on Modernization for capital acquisition since 2018-19 shows that Actual 
Expenditure incurred has been by and large more than the allocated funds even 
after RE Stage. Although the Ministry has utilized Rs 67,020.99 Crore out of BE 
of Rs. 1,24,408.64 Crore in 2022-23 by December, 2022, the Committee 
recommend that the target of full utilization of funds must be achieved by the 
Ministry under this head by the end of current financial year 2022-23.’ 
  
  

5 
 
10.        The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“An expenditure of Rs. 1,17,184.27 Crore (i.e. 95.51% of the RE 2022-23 
allocation of Rs. 1,22,690.98 Crore) has been incurred as per March(Final), 
2023, under Capital Acquisition (Modernization) Head.” 
  
 
11.    Considering the fact that only Rs. 67,020.99 crore out of Rs. 1,24,408.64 
crore were spent by December, 2022, the Committee in their original report 
recommended that the target of full utilization of  funds must be achieved by the 
Ministry under this head by the end of current financial year 2022-23. However, 
from the Action Taken Reply, the Committee note that an expenditure of Rs. 
1,17,184.27 Crore (i.e. 95.51% of the RE 2022-23 allocation of Rs. 1,22,690.98 
Crore) has been incurred as per March(Final), 2023, under Capital Acquisition 
(Modernization) Head, leaving thereby an unspent amount of   Rs. 5,506.71 crore. 
As the financial year 2022-23 has already ended, therefore, at this stage, the 
Committee could only urge upon  the Ministry to be more careful about under-
spending of defence budget in future as they are of the firm view that spending 
of the defence budget is critical from the viewpoint of country's defence 
preparedness and mitigating threat perceptions.   
 
C.  Inflation 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
  
12.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 ‘The Committee were apprise that the total budget allocation for Ministry of 
Defence for the financial year 2023-24 is Rs. 5,93,537.64 Crore which is an 
increase of 13.03 per cent and in absolute terms amounts to Rs. 68,371.49 
Crore. Subsequently, there has been an increase of 12.29 per cent in the 
Defence Service estimate. In particular the capital budget has been raised from 
Rs 1.50 lakh Crore to Rs 1.62 lakh Crore which is about 6.71 per cent increase 
over the previous financial year. On closer examination of the allocations, the 
Committee find that on comparing the RE for the year 2022-23 which is Rs. 
4,09,500.48 Crore to the BE of the financial year 2023- 24, the Committee 
discern that the actual rise was less than 5 per cent. Keeping in mind of inflation 
of about 6 per cent (for calendar year 2022), this rise as projected by the 
Ministry of Defence tends to decline further. Most of our defence purchases are 
transacted in dollars, depreciation of rupees against dollar has also to be 
factored in calculating the actual rise in the financial sanction vis-à-vis previous 
financial year. The Committee acknowledge the notional jump in the capital 
outlay meant for modernization of armed forces, nevertheless they would like to 
recommend that the funds provided must be utilized in such a manner as to 
give actual boost in modernizing our forces. Therefore, the Committee are of 
the considered view that the Ministry of Defence while submitting its demands 

6 
 
for grants to the Ministry of Finance needs to have more holistic approach by 
considering tangibles as well as non-tangible factors so that avant-garde 
equipment and infrastructure is available to all the wings of armed forces and 
threat perception at the borders of our nation is completely neutralized’. 
  
13.        The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“In BE 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 1,62,600.00 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 
12,600 Crore over RE 2022-23) has been allocated under Capital Head. The 
Committee may be assured that the allocated funds will be optimally utilized 
towards meeting modernization and infrastructure development work needs of 
the Defence Services.  It may also be relevant to mention that Services, while 
projecting fund requirements, take into account various factors such as inflation, 
exchange rate variations, pending committed liabilities, new schemes likely to be 
fructified etc. The funds projected by Services are examined and forwarded for 
favorable consideration of Ministry of Finance. All efforts are made to obtain 
additional funds projected by the Services at Supplementary/RE stage.” 
 
 
 
14.     The Committee note that in BE 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 1,62,600.00 Crore 
(i.e. an increase of Rs. 12,600 Crore over RE 2022-23) has been allocated under 
Capital Head. The ministry have assured the Committee  that the allocated funds 
will be optimally utilized towards meeting modernization and infrastructure 
development needs of the Defence Services. Hoping that the allocated funds will 
be utilised as per the mandated expenses,  the Committee desire that the funds 
projected by Services are properly examined by the Ministry and forwarded for 
favorable consideration of Ministry of Finance at  supplementary/RE stage.  
   
D.  Defence Procurement Policy 
Recommendation ( Para No.12) 
 
15.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note from the information furnished by the Ministry that 
procurement of defence equipment is a long drawn and exhaustive process. As 
per the Ministry of Defence the final purchase of equipment comes about in 74-
106 Weeks/19-26 Months, which according to the Committee is a much stretched 
period of time in terms of strategic risks involved. The Committee are of the view 
that with high level of dynamism in the field of technology such a long timeline 
can result in technology becoming obsolete and redundant hence directly having 
adverse impact on the security of the country. Furthermore, the dynamism of 
international geopolitics relations can also threaten the acquisition through 
traditional channels and allies which is evident in the recent Russo-Ukraine War. 
Therefore, in the wake of dynamism exhibited in terms of technological 
development and global relations, the Committee recommend that Ministry 
should try to identify ways in which the defence equipment acquisition can be 

7 
 
accelerated without compromising on the transparency and accountability of the 
process. This would not only help in empowering our forces but will also act as 
deterrent for hostile countries. The Committee may be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard’. 
  
16.        The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“Measures taken to accelerate defence equipment acquisition without 
 compromising on the transparency and accountability of the process are as 
 following: 
i. Sharing of Draft SQR/RFP.  It was noted that due to existing SQR/RFP 
formulation process, a number of cases had shelved/retracted on account of 
discrepancies/shortcomings in the  Industry’s capabilities that were observed at 
later stages of procurement.  Hence, draft SQR/RFPs are now being shared 
before their finalization/issue. 
ii. Preparation of Trial Methodology/Directives in consultation with 
Industry.  To expedite the process of trials, Vendor Interaction before finalizing 
the trials methodology as well as directive is being followed by the SHQ. 
iii. Documentation in D&D Cases.  DRDO is pursuing concurrent preparation of 
technical documentation of the equipment being developed by them, to obviate 
undue delay in technical evaluations. 
iv. Acceptance of Spares with Matching Form, Fit and Functionality.  It was 
observed that Industry is able to provide replacements for OEM manufactured 
parts in terms of Form, Fit and Functionality.  However, they were unable to 
provide part numbers and design drawings.  To address the issue, DGQA has 
recently evolved guidelines/SOP to be followed for evaluation and acceptance of 
‘Form, Fit and Functionality’ of equipment/spares and their certification.” 
  
17.      The Committee note that the Ministry  have taken measures  to accelerate 
defence equipment acquisition without compromising on the transparency and 
accountability of the process i.e. sharing of draft SQR/RFP, preparation of trial 
methodology/directives in consultation with industry, documentation in D&D 
cases and acceptance of spares with matching form, fit and functionality etc. The 
Committee, while appreciating the measures taken by the Ministry  to accelerate 
defence equipment acquisition, desire that the best practices being followed 
in  developed nations may also be studied and applied, wherever applicable to 
further expedite the procurement process so that our country  can  keep pace 
with changing  technologies to be at par  with adversaries on all fronts.  
  

8 
 
E.  DEFENCE PLANNING - Approval from Ministry of Finance 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
18.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note that Defence Five Year Plans serve as a medium to bridge 
the gap between the exigencies of the armed forces within the limits of annual 
budgetary allocation as sanctioned by the Ministry of Finance (MoF). The 
Committee also discern that Government has set up a Defence Planning 
Committee under the Thirteenth Defence Plan (2017-22), to synergies not just 
the long term plan for amelioration of defence forces but to also evaluate security 
priorities, foreign policy imperatives, changing dynamics of balance of power at 
the global level. The Committee note the fact that in spite of being a document of 
significance the Ministry is yet to get approval by the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee note that the Defence Plan for a considerable duration has been 
awaiting approval of Ministry of Finance. Although non-approval of the Defence 
Plan did not impede the implementation of Defence projects at this juncture the 
Committee would like to reiterate that obtaining the consent of the Ministry of 
Finance must be the Ministry of Defence’s utmost prerogative. Hence, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence should, as a matter of 
priority seek the necessary approval in a time bound manner. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in this regard’. 
  
 19.        The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
“In accordance with DAP-20, the Defence Five Year Plans are being renamed as 
Defence Capital Acquisition Plans (DCAP) and will flow out of the ten year 
Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP).  DCAP is a planning document 
and will give the likely expenditure envisaged in the five year period.  The DCAP 
is still under formulation and will be taken up for approval of Competent authority 
once ready.  Approval of the Ministry of Finance will assist in better planning and 
management of the Capital Acquisition Budget and will be considered.” 
  
20.      The Committee note  that in accordance with DAP-20, the Defence Five 
Year Plans are being renamed as Defence Capital Acquisition Plans (DCAP) and 
will flow out of the ten year Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP). They 
understand that DCAP is a planning document and will give the likely expenditure 
envisaged in the five year period. The Committee have been informed that DCAP 
is still under formulation stage and will be taken up for approval of Competent 
authority once it is ready.   The Committee understand that five or ten year plans 
are needed for long term refinement of existing procurement and capability 
development plans. They, therefore, would like to re-iterate their earlier 
recommendation that the approval of DCAP and ICAP should be taken up for 
finalization in a time-bound manner  so that the procurement process moves on 
the right trajectory.   

9 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Ministry of Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2023-24: An Overview 
 
Recommendation 1-3: 
 
 The Committee learn that the allocation for the Ministry of Defence is distributed 
into four grants, which are Demands for Grants viz., Demand No. 19 – Ministry of 
Defence (Civil), Demand No. 20– Defence Services (Revenue), Demand No. 21 – 
Capital Outlay on Defence Service and Demand No. 22 – Defence (Pension). They 
also learn that Demand Nos. 19 and 22 come under Civil/Pension Estimates and 
Demand Nos. 20 and 21 fall under Defence Services Estimates. The Grant no. 19 is 
MoD Civil grant which caters to the revenue and capital budget of the following seven 
organisations:- (i) Border Roads Organisation, (ii) Coast Guard, (iii) Defence Estate, 
(iv) CSD, (v) Defence Accounts Department, (vi) JKLI, and (vii) AFT. They found that 
Grant nos. 20 and 21 constitute the Defence Service Estimates comprising the revenue 
and capital allocation of Army, Navy, Joint Staff including Integrated Defence Staff, Air 
Force, DRDO and Directorate of Ordnance. The revenue segment of these 
organisations is catered through grant no. 20 and capital expenditure of these 
organisations is allocated through grant no. 21. The fourth grant is the Defence 
Pension grant which is grant no. 22 and it provides for the pension budget of the 
Defence Services. The Committee note that the total allocated budget for the Ministry 
of Defence for Financial Year 2022-23 is ₹ Rs. 5,93,537 Crore. The Committee also 
take note of the fact that in the total Defence Budget as compared to 2022-23, the 
budgetary estimate for the next financial year registers an increase of 13.02 per cent, 
which in the opinion of the Committee is a positive step in the right direction. They are 
happy to note that in absolute terms, the amount of increase is Rs. 68,371.49 Crore. 
The Defence Service estimate has also registered an increase of 12.29 per cent from 
Rs. 3,85,370 Crore to Rs. 4,32,720 Crore. The Defence Services estimates at Rs. 
4,32,720 Crore constitute about 73 per cent of the total Defence Budget.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 This is factual information and Ministry has no comments to offer. 
 
Recommendation No. 2: 
 
 
 The Committee note that Defence Service estimates distributed over revenue and 
capital outlay reflected an increase of 12.29 per cent, i.e. Rs. 47,350 Crore from Rs. 
3,85,000 Crore to Rs. 4.33 lakh Crore in the current year in comparison to the BE of 
2022-23. The capital outlay budget of defence services is bifurcated into capital 
acquisition and other than capital acquisition with outlays of Rs.1,32,301 crore and Rs. 
30,298 Crore respectively. The Committee note with satisfaction that the capital budget 
of defence services has registered an increase of 6.71 per cent from Rs.1.50 lakh 

10 
 
Crore to Rs.1.62 lakh Crore. The capital acquisition expenditure which is also known 
as the modernisation budget of the defence services – Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint 
Staff – reflects an increase of 6.34 per cent. In the last five years from 2018-19, the 
capital acquisition budget has registered an increase of about 78.5 per cent. In 
absolute terms, it stands at about Rs.58,185 Crore. Other than capital acquisition 
segment which consists of the land and works expenditure of the armed forces and the 
capital budget of DRDO, DGQA and Directorate of Ordnance represents an increase of 
8.36 per cent. This also includes an amount of Rs.1310 Crore for the modernisation of 
plants of the newly created seven defence PSUs. The Committee appreciate the 
persistent efforts made by the Ministry of Defence with the Ministry of Finance at 
various levels for obtaining this enhanced budgetary allocation and in this regard 
recommend that the Ministry of Defence would utilize this budget efficiently for 
developing and acquiring the latest state of the art fighting platforms, which can match 
prowess of volatile neighbours in the light of current security threats on the frontiers of 
the country. The Committee further note that the Ministry could utilize only Rs. 
2,67,523.08 Crore (upto Dec. 2022) out of RE of Rs. 4,09,500.48 Crore in 2022-23 at 
the time of furnishing the replies to the Committee. The Committee, at this stage would 
like to be apprised of the reasons as to why only about 65 percent of the grants could 
be utilized till the completion of the third quarter of the Financial Year. While they are 
informed of the reasons by the Ministry, they would like also to be apprised within one 
month of the presentation of this Report as to what are the 
plans/schemes/channels/trajectory in place for utilizing the remaining 35 percent until 
the time this Financial Year draws to a close. The Committee are of the firm view that 
the complete utilization of the allocated funds would help the armed forces by creating 
a fleet of officers equipped with advance training and by acquiring latest weaponry, air 
craft, ships, tanks and other platforms along with optimum capital intensive projects 
including logistical infrastructure. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee may be apprised that about 65 percent of the grants could be 
utilized till the completion of the third quarter of the Financial Year broadly due to the 
following reasons:- 
(i) Delays in conclusion of New Schemes in preceding quarters. 
(ii) Non-release of payment to Russian vendor due to ongoing Russia-Ukraine 
conflict. 
(iii) Milestone payments linked to various stages of procurement. 
 
2. Further, it may be added that an expenditure of Rs. 3,99,091.60 Crore (i.e. 97.46% of 
RE 2022-23 allocations) has been incurred in FY 2022-23 under Defence Services 
Estimates as per March(Final), 2023. 
 
Recommendation No. 3: 
 
 The Committee are trifle disconcerted to note the figures of allocation made for 
the financial year 2023-24. The Ministry of Defence, though feel contended with the 

11 
 
sanctioned BE allocation which almost matches the projected allocation submitted to 
the Ministry of Finance. From the information furnished on actual expenditure by the 
Ministry, the Committee note that in every financial year with an exception for the year 
2020-21 the actual expenditure is far greater than the allocation made at RE stage.  
In this context, the Committee would like to state that at no cost the compromises 
should be made in regard to the allocations sought to meet the current threat 
perception of the country. Therefore, they recommend that at RE stage Ministry should 
be consistently pragmatic to seek further allocations to meet all its requirements 
keeping in mind the realistic assessment of the sought allocations. The Committee, 
here also recommend that in the backdrop of the security threats from across the 
borders, Ministry of Defence must ensure best of security equipment and logistical 
support for the armed forces by optimum utilization of the funds as sanctioned at any 
stage whether it be the Budget Estimate or Revised Estimate.  
 
Reply of the Government 
[[ The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Committee may be 
assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional funds at Supplementary/ RE 
stage. Further, the allocated funds will be optimally utilized towards operational 
activities. If required, the schemes will be reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical 
capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the 
Defence Services. 
  
Additional Allocation 
Recommendation No. 4: 
 
 
 The Committee are satisfied to note that the allocation made to the Ministry of 
Defence for the financial year 2023-24 has put forth the Demand of Rs. 37,341.54 
Crore, Rs. 52,804.75 Crore and Rs. 58,808.48 Crore for Army, Navy and Air Force 
respectively under Capital Head and was granted the same by the Ministry of Finance 
without any deductions. In the light of this fact, the Committee would like to reiterate 
that Ministry of Defence is expected to make prudent use of the funds allocated by 
prioritising operational preparedness of Defence Forces and the Ministry should ensure 
optimum utilization of the these funds for developing critical projects and operational 
activities of the three services. The Committee, therefore, recommend that it is 
incumbent upon the Ministry to take insightful analysis of the expenditure of the 
allocated funds during the first two quarters of the ongoing financial year so that in 
case of need of supplementary grant, timely approval can be obtained from the Ministry 
of Finance at Revised Estimate stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee may be apprised that the progress of expenditure is reviewed 
from time to time to ensure that the budgetary allocations are utilized. All efforts are 
made to ensure that the allocated funds are optimally utilized towards operational 
activities. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it is ensured that urgent and critical 

12 
 
capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the 
Defence Services. Further, it may be stated that based on expenditure during the year, 
pending committed liabilities and critical/operational requirements, threat perception 
etc., additional funds will be sought at Supplementary/RE stage. 
 
Ratio for Capital and Revenue Outlay 
 
Recommendation No. 5: 
 
 The Committee note from the information furnished by the Ministry that capital 
component of the budget has declined due to which the ratio for Capital and Revenue 
outlay for the financial year 2022-23 is 62:38, (Revenue: Capital) which clearly reflects 
the tilt towards Revenue expenditure as is evident from the shift from the earlier 60:40 
ratio. The Ministry attributed this tilt to enhancement provided in terms of the 
operational and sustenance expenditure, i.e. defence stores including ordnance stores, 
transportation, operational works etc. Both Revenue and Capital expenditure play 
significant roles in operational preparedness of our forces. However, the Committee 
note with concern that with each passing year, the ratio of Revenue to Capital outlay is 
tilting towards Revenue component of the Budget which is not withstanding of their 
recommendations in their earlier Reports. The Committee comprehend that 
implementation of One Rank One Pension and Seventh Pay Commission would also 
impacting favour of higher Revenue expenditure but a twisted ratio has a tendency to 
adversely affect the modernization of forces. In the light of this observation, the 
Committee, therefore unanimously recommend that the Ministry of Defence along with 
the armed forces should collaborate to take measures to strike a healthy balance 
between the Capital and Revenue in respect of all three armed forces without 
compromising on the operational expenditure of the forces.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
Modernization of Defence Forces 
 
Recommendation No. 6-7: 
 
 The Committee were apprised that Union Budget 2023 gave impetus to 
modernisation and infrastructure development for armed forces as a result of which 
capital allocation of the services has been increased to Rs.1,62,600 Crore, i.e. a jump 
of Rs.10,230 Crore, which is 6.7 per cent over the financial year 2022-23 and since 
2018-19 this has increased Rs.68,618 Crore which is 73 per cent rise in last five years. 
This is a reflection of Government’s commitment towards sustainable augmentation of 
modernisation and infrastructure development. The equipment requirements of the 
Armed Forces are planned and progressed through a detailed process which includes 
15 Year Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a five year Service-wise 
Capability Acquisition Plan, a two year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and 
deliberations by the Defence Acquisition Council. The Committee note that an overview 

13 
 
of the BE, RE and AE on Modernization for capital acquisition since 2018-19 shows 
that Actual Expenditure incurred has been by and large more than the allocated funds 
even after RE Stage. Although the Ministry has utilized Rs 67,020.99 Crore out of BE 
of Rs. 1,24,408.64 Crore in 2022-23 by December, 2022, the Committee recommend 
that the target of full utilization of funds must be achieved by the Ministry under this 
head by the end of current financial year 2022-23. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
An expenditure of Rs. 1,17,184.27 Crore (i.e. 95.51% of the RE 2022-23 allocation of 
Rs. 1,22,690.98 Crore) has been incurred as per March(Final), 2023, under Capital 
Acquisition (Modernisation) Head. 
 
Modernization of Defence Forces 
 
Recommendation No. 7: 
 
 The Committee note that modernization of Armed Forces through procurement of 
new equipment and upgrading of existing equipments and systems is a continuous 
process which are progressed as per the approved Capital Acquisition plans, therefore, 
in this regard, the Committee recommend that enhanced and adequate budgetary 
allocation should be made under Capital Head for modernization purpose as and when 
demanded so that the procurement and upgrading procedures be carried out without 
any restraint of funds.  
 
Reply of the Government 
In BE 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 1,32,301.27 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 9,610.29 
Crore over RE 2022-23) has been allocated under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) 
Head. Further, the Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain 
additional funds projected at Supplementary/RE stage. Further, the allocated funds will 
be optimally utilized towards operational activities. If required, the schemes will be 
reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any 
compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence Services. 
 
Inflation 
 
Recommendation No. 8: 
 
 The Committee were apprise that the total budget allocation for Ministry of 
Defence for the financial year 2023-24 is Rs. 5,93,537.64 Crore which is an increase of 
13.03 per cent and in absolute terms amounts to Rs. 68,371.49 Crore. Subsequently, 
there has been an increase of 12.29 per cent in the Defence Service estimate. In 
particular the capital budget has been raised from Rs 1.50 lakh Crore to Rs 1.62 lakh 
Crore which is about 6.71 per cent increase over the previous financial year. On closer 
examination of the allocations, the Committee find that on comparing the RE for the 
year 2022-23 which is Rs. 4,09,500.48 Crore to the BE of the financial year 2023- 24, 
the Committee discern that the actual rise was less than 5 per cent. Keeping in mind of 

14 
 
inflation of about 6 per cent (for calendar year 2022), this rise as projected by the 
Ministry of Defence tends to decline further. Most of our defence purchases are 
transacted in dollars, depreciation of rupees against dollar has also to be factored in 
calculating the actual rise in the financial sanction vis-à-vis previous financial year. The 
Committee acknowledge the notional jump in the capital outlay meant for 
modernization of armed forces, nevertheless they would like to recommend that the 
funds provided must be utilized in such a manner as to give actual boost in 
modernizing our forces. Therefore, the Committee are of the considered view that the 
Ministry of Defence while submitting its demands for grants to the Ministry of Finance 
needs to have more holistic approach by considering tangibles as well as non-tangible 
factors so that avant-garde equipment and infrastructure is available to all the wings of 
armed forces and threat perception at the borders of our nation is completely 
neutralized.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In BE 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 1,62,600.00 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 
12,600 Crore over RE 2022-23) has been allocated under Capital Head. The Committee 
may be assured that the allocated funds will be optimally utilized towards meeting 
modernization and infrastructure development work needs of the Defence Services.  It 
may also be relevant to mention that Services, while projecting fund requirements, take 
into account various factors such as inflation, exchange rate variations, pending 
committed liabilities, new schemes likely to be fructified etc. The funds projected by 
Services are examined and forwarded for favorable consideration of Ministry of Finance. 
All efforts are made to obtain additional funds projected by the Services at 
Supplementary/RE stage. 
 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
Recommendation No. 9-10: 
 
 
 Committed Liability refers to payments anticipated during a financial year in 
respect of contracts concluded in previous years. Under the Defence Services 
Estimates, Committed Liabilities constitute a significant element in respect of the 
Capital acquisition segment, since one project may span over several financial years. 
As such, it is important to track the element of Committed Liabilities that hold first 
charge on the budget allocation. New Schemes include new projects/proposals, which 
are at various stages of approval and are likely to be implemented in near future. The 
Committee learnt that in the Defence Services Estimates, there is no separate 
allocation and these are catered through Capital Acquisition (Modernization) budget. 
During the deliberations with the representatives of the Ministry of Defence, the 
Committee were also informed that though the allocations received are not as per 
projections made, however, based on expenditure during the year and pending 
committed liabilities, if required, additional funds will be sought at Supplementary/RE 
stage. In this regard, the Committee in unequivocal terms recommend that if required, 
through reprioritization, it must be ensured that urgent and critical capabilities are 
acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence 

15 
 
Services. The Committee also recommend that if the need is felt the allocations may 
be revised in regard to Committed Liabilities and New Schemes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
Recommendation No. 10: 
 
 The Committee infer from the information furnished by the Ministry that actual 
expenditure incurred since last five years exceeded the financial allocation granted. In 2018-
19, the RE allocation was Rs. 73,882.95 crore whereas actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 
75,892.85 crore. Similarly in 2020-21, the allocation amounted to Rs. 1,14,320.30 crore and 
expenditure incurred for that financial year was Rs. 1,18,966.44 crore. Further, the reduced 
allocation in committed payments may lead to possibility of additional interest and unwanted 
litigation thereby hampering the process of modernization of forces as funds for Committed 
Liabilities, as informed by the Ministry is catered through Capital Acquisition (Modernization) 
budget. Therefore, the Committee recommend that adequate allocations should be made 
for Committed Liabilities and New Schemes in order to ensure that the modernization 
process of the Defence Forces is not interrupted for shortage of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 1,32,301.27 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 9,610.29 
Crore over RE 2022-23) has been allocated under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) 
Head. Further, the Committee may be assured that all efforts will made to obtain additional 
funds projected at Supplementary/RE/MA stage so that the modernisation process of the 
Defence Forces is not interrupted for shortage of funds. If required, the schemes will be 
reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any 
compromise to the operational preparedness of the Defence Services. 
 
Defence Procurement Policy 
 
Recommendation No.11-12: 
 
 The Committee were informed by the Ministry that the last Defence Procurement 
Manual (DPM) came out in 2016 and is presently under revision to incorporate the latest 
orders and other developments. The Ministry in its submission has stated that it has 
been revised nine times during last 11 years and due to diversity of our geographical 
terrain the procurement manual has to cater for all eventualities. Though the Committee 
take cognizance of the fact that the requirements of each of the armed forces are very 
complex yet the Committee expect that the Ministry to accelerate the revision of Manual 
on Defence Acquisition Procedure as this will not only put the procedure for procuring 
fast track the arms, ammunition and defence equipment in fast lane and but also propel 
the country towards self-reliance. Hence, the Committee recommend that time bound 
and determined efforts must be made by all the stakeholders involved in the process of 

16 
 
procurement such as the Ministry, DPSUs the Armed Forces and private sector as this 
is vital for realization of the goal of self-reliance in Defence Sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Defence Procurement Manual (DPM) is used for revenue procurement of 
defence items, which was last revised in 2009 (with a supplement issued in 2010).  
Further, the procedure for Capital Acquisitions other than Works and Land undertaken 
by the Ministry of Defence (MoD) and Service Headquarters (SHQs) is contained in 
Defence Acquisition Procedure 2020, which is effective since 01st October, 2020.  This 
Ministry reviews the existing Defence procurement manual/procedure on a regular basis 
to make it simplified and more domestic industry friendly with focus on boost to 
indigenous defence capability and reduction of reliance on imports under “Make in 
India” initiative.  Ministry of Defence as a whole is committed to AtmaNirbharta in 
Defence. 
 
Recommendation No.12: 
 
 The Committee note from the information furnished by the Ministry that 
procurement of defence equipment is a long drawn and exhaustive process. As per the 
Ministry of Defence the final purchase of equipment comes about in 74-106 Weeks/19-
26 Months, which according to the Committee is a much stretched period of time in 
terms of strategic risks involved. The Committee are of the view that with high level of 
dynamism in the field of technology such a long timeline can result in technology 
becoming obsolete and redundant hence directly having adverse impact on the security 
of the country. Furthermore, the dynamism of international geopolitics relations can also 
threaten the acquisition through traditional channels and allies which is evident in the 
recent Russo-Ukraine War. Therefore, in the wake of dynamism exhibited in terms of 
technological development and global relations, the Committee recommend that 
Ministry should try to identify ways in which the defence equipment acquisition can be 
accelerated without compromising on the transparency and accountability of the 
process. This would not only help in empowering our forces but will also act as deterrent 
for hostile countries. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Measures taken to accelerate defence equipment acquisition without 
compromising on the transparency and accountability of the process are as following: 
(i) Sharing of Draft SQR/RFP.  It was noted that due to existing SQR/RFP 
formulation process, a number of cases had shelved/retracted on account of 
discrepancies/shortcomings in the  Industry’s capabilities that were observed 
at later stages of procurement.  Hence, draft SQR/RFPs are now being 
shared before their finalization/issue. 
(ii) Preparation of Trial Methodology/Directives in consultation with 
Industry.  To expedite the process of trials, Vendor Interaction before 
finalizing the trials methodology as well as directive is being followed by the 
SHQ. 

17 
 
(iii) Documentation in D&D Cases.  DRDO is pursuing concurrent preparation of 
technical documentation of the equipment being developed by them, to 
obviate undue delay in technical evaluations. 
(iv) Acceptance of Spares with Matching Form, Fit and Functionality.  It was 
observed that Industry is able to provide replacements for OEM manufactured 
parts in terms of Form, Fit and Functionality.  However, they were unable to 
provide part numbers and design drawings.  To address the issue, DGQA has 
recently evolved guidelines/SOP to be followed for evaluation and acceptance 
of ‘Form, Fit and Functionality’ of equipment/spares and their certification. 
 
Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
 
Recommendation No.13-14: 
 
 The Committee note that for ensuring accountability and transparency in Defence 
Procurement cases, the Ministry has taken various measures like interactive policy 
reviews with Indian defence industry, use of certification, simulation, visibility of 
Capability Development Plan to Indian Defence Ecosystem, hosting of policy changes, 
AoNs, RFI, etc on MoD website, etc. The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the 
Ministry for ensuring accountability and transparency in the Defence Sector but would 
also recommend the need to warrant that all the measures/steps taken are implemented 
stringently at all levels and a robust monitoring mechanism must be formulated for 
ensuring fair and timely procurement of weapon systems. At the later stage the 
Committee may also be apprised of the number of cases, if any, when persons were 
found guilty after implementation of guidelines. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All measures instituted by the GoI/Ministry of Defence (MoD) to promote probity, 
public accountability and transparency in Defence Capital procurements towards 
ensuring accountability and transparency are being adhered to diligently in letter and 
spirit.  Any discrepancies/violations, if noticed, are handled as per existing provisions for 
the same. 
Recommendation No.14: 
 
 The Committee note that to ensure level-playing field for private defence industry 
vis-a-vis the DPSUs, various measures like enhanced opportunities through DND 
categories which have been given to the private industry since the Ordinance Factory 
Board (OFB) has been corporatized, there are seven DPSUs which have been added, 
and there has been a parity in securities and payment terms between the DPSUs and 
bank guarantees which were earlier five to ten per cent were reduced to three per cent 
and they remain at three per cent as on today. The Committee applaud the initiatives 
taken to attract the private enterprisers in the defence sector but there is still a lot more 
to be done in this direction. Amongst the private players in defence sector, the 
Committee prescribe that the Ministry should try to encourage indigenous private 
enterprises instead of foreign conglomerates. Considering long and arduous gestation 

18 
 
period in defence manufacturing sector, the Committee would recommend the Ministry 
to enhance capital buoyancy and bolster design and research assistance for indigenous 
players in order to create vibrant indigenous privatise defence manufacturing hub which 
is also the essence of the Atma Nirbhar Bharat program. The Committee would also like 
to point that existence of flourishing private defence sector would necessitate the need 
for articulated design and patent laws synchronised with the unique needs of defence 
manufacturing sector. The Committee therefore, would recommend that the Ministry 
must proactively formulate stringent design and patent laws to curtail any breach of 
security of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Ministry has launched various schemes to encourage indigenous private 
enterprises instead of foreign conglomerates like the launch of Innovations for Defence 
Excellence (iDEX), Make Schemes (Make I, Make II & Make III) & Technology 
Development Fund (TDF). 
 
2. The Ministry encourages participation in R&D by Indian Industries. Further, to 
prioritise the Indian Companies for capital acquisition of Defence Equipment, as per 
DAP-2020, Buy (Indian-IDDM) has been given the highest priority. 
 
3. Patents obtained by DRDO are available on DRDO website for use by industries, 
which are available free of cost to the industry. Ownership of IPR generated in iDEX 
and Make cases is also provided to the Industry. Ministry monitors the IPRs filed and 
granted in case of Indian designs developed by DPSUs and Industry under “Mission 
Raksha Gyan Shakti”. A dedicated IP Cell has been created in the MoD. 
 
 
Increasing Dependence on Foreign Suppliers for Military Hardware 
 
Recommendation No.15-17: 
 
 The Capital procurement of Defence equipment from Indian and foreign vendors 
is carried out as per provisions of the Defence Procurement Procedure. Defence 
equipment are being imported from various countries as per the operational 
requirements of Armed Forces. The Committee have been informed that during the 
current Financial year 2022-23 (upto December, 2022), total 264 capital acquisition 
contracts have been signed for capital procurement of defence equipment for Armed 
Forces, out of which 88 contracts worth about 36.26% of total contracts value, have 
been signed with vendors from foreign countries including Russia, USA, Israel, France 
etc for capital procurement of defence equipment. The Committee also note that value 
of imports from 2017-18 to 2021-22 in r/o DPSUs and erstwhile OFs is Rs 68,871.4 
Crores approximately. The Committee note that import content for equipment 
manufactured by DPSUs is substantially high. Since our Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings (DPSUs) and Ordnance Factories Board (OFB) are the backbone of 
indigenous Defence production and are also flag bearers of indigenisation programme 
in defence production. However, they are still very far from becoming self-sufficient in 

19 
 
defence production, which is evident by considerable value of imports in manufacturing 
various equipment and systems being developed by them. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that it is imperative now that DPSUs and OFB took urgent and concerted 
steps to make India self-reliant in Defence production. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. DPSUs are encouraged to take necessary steps for reducing import dependence 
& indigenise the items being regularly imported. Towards the same objective, a total of 
8 Positive Indigenisation Lists (PIL), 4 PIL of DPSUs (4666 items) and 4 PIL (411 items) 
of Services have been promulgated comprising of a total of 5077 items which will only 
be procured from domestic industry. Out of the total 4666 items of DPSUs PIL which 
includes OF Units, 2849 items have already been indigenised so far and no import with 
regards to the same will be carried out, hence reducing the import content of DPSUs. 
 
2. Pursuant to ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ announcement, the Department of Defence 
Production (DDP) under Ministry of Defence has developed a portal named ‘SRIJAN’ 
(srijandefence.gov.in), as “Opportunities for Make in India in Defence” in Aug 2020. 
SRIJAN portal is a Common Indigenization Portal for all Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings (DPSUs) including OF Units and the Armed Forces (SHQs). It gives 
access to the Indian Manufacturing Industry of the items which have been imported in 
the past or are likely to be imported in the future by DPSUs/SHQs. The portal is a non-
transactional online market place platform. As on 19.07.2023 more than 30,000 items 
are available for Public View on SRIJAN portal and out of which more than 9,100 items 
have already been indigenised. 
 
 
Recommendation No.16: 
 
 Committee further note that although the procurement from foreign vendors is far 
less than their Indian counterparts, still the value of imports has been constantly 
increasing consistently since 2017-18 for all the three wings of the Armed Forces for 
example like in case of Air Force, the expenditure incurred on purchase of defence 
equipment from foreign sources has risen from 24,570.18 Cr in 2020-21 to Rs. 
25,424.98 crore in 2021-22. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry to 
devise ways and means for Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services)- New 
DPSUs, DPSUs, DRDO and Private Industries to work in congruence to manufacture 
equipment/devices will not only enhance import substitution potential of indigenous 
products but also to bolster their export potential so that the country can transform from 
being largest importer to a distinguishable exporter of defence equipment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Government has taken several policy initiatives in the past few years and 
brought in reforms to encourage indigenous design, development and manufacture of 
defence equipment, thereby promoting self-reliance in defence manufacturing & 
technology in the country. These initiatives, inter-alia include, Buy (Indian- IDDM) has 
been accorded top priority for procurement of capital equipment (AON accorded for 50 

20 
 
IDDM proposals worth Rs 1,06,710 Crs. since 2020); Notification of  four ‘Positive 
Indigenization Lists’ of total 411items of Services and  four ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ 
of total 4666 items (out of which 2849 items have been indigenised so far)of Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings(DPSUs), for which there would be an embargo on the 
import beyond the timelines indicated against them; Simplification of Industrial licensing 
process with longer validity period; Liberalization of Foreign Direct Investment(FDI) 
policy allowing 74% FDI under automatic route; Simplification of Make Procedure; 
Launch of Mission DefSpace; Launch of Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) 
scheme involving startups & Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs); 
Implementation of  Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order 2017; 
Launch of an indigenization portal namely SRIJAN to facilitate indigenisation by Indian 
Industry including MSMEs; Reforms in Offset policy with thrust on attracting investment 
and Transfer of Technology for Defence manufacturing by assigning higher multipliers; 
Establishment of two Defence Industrial Corridors, one each in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil 
Nadu; Opening up of Defence Research & Development (R&D) for industry, startups 
and academia; and Progressive increase in allocation of Defence Budget of military 
modernization for procurement from domestic sources, etc. 
 
2. All the DPSUs are making consistent efforts for indigenisation & further enhance 
export potential. Certain efforts to highlight the same are as under:- 
  
 (a) AVNL has identified 31 Line Replaceable Units (LRUs) for 
 indigenisation, out of which 12 have been indigenised since 01/10/2021. 
 
 (b) BDL is designing and developing products through in-house R&D & is 
 co-developmentpartner in projects/products designed by DRDO. 
  
 (c) To reduce import content BEML has initiated Product Indigenisation 
 through License Agreement, Joint Venture & Transfer of Technology with 
 foreign OEMs. 
  
(d) HAL is aggressively & proactively participating in the Global Tenders 
offering HAL platforms to Friendly Foreign Countries (FFCs). The leads 
generated are being actively pursued.  
 
 (e) HSL has uploaded 83 items on SRIJAN Portal and has indigenised 27 
 items so far. HSL  has tied up with ‘M/s AG Flex technologies’, Mysuru, a 
 Start-up Company through iDEX  (Innovations for Defence Excellence) for 
 development of “EMI/EMC Shielding for Bridge  windows”. 
 
 (f) AWEIL, IOL & GRSE have obtained 94%, 91.5% & 85% indigenous 
 content respectively in their value of production. 
 
 (g) GIL, TCL & YIL are a 100 % indigenised DPSUs exploring potential of 
 export toforeign friendly countries. 
 

21 
 
Recommendation No.17: 
 
 The Committee note that as reported by several reports that 84.3 per cent of the 
major conventional arms procured by India in 2016-20 were of foreign origin, of which 
licensed production accounted for 57.8 per cent which evidently reflects high 
dependency of armed forces on foreign sources. The Committee believe that this 
dependency needs to be curtailed by incentivizing indigenisation more vigorously and 
imploring them to become global exporters. Thus, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry of Defence encourage domestic industry-friendly environment by means of 
relaxation/concessions at various levels with an aim to facilitate growth of local 
companies thereby leading to holistic development of not only our country but also 
simultaneously catering to the security needs of the friendly countries which is in 
alignment with our vision of ‘Make in India, Make for the World. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government has taken several policy initiatives in the past few years and 
brought in reforms to encourage indigenous design, development and manufacture of 
defence equipment, thereby promoting self-reliance in defence manufacturing & 
technology in the country. These initiatives, inter-alia include, according priority to 
procurement of capital items from domestic sources under Defence Acquisition 
Procedure (DAP)-2020; Notification of  four ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ of total 411 
items of Services and  four ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ of total 4666 items of Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings(DPSUs), for which there would be an embargo on the 
import beyond the timelines indicated against them; Launch of an indigenization portal 
namely SRIJAN to facilitate indigenisation by Indian Industry including MSMEs; 
Simplification of Industrial licensing process with longer validity period; Liberalization of 
Foreign Direct Investment(FDI) policy allowing 74% FDI under automatic route; Launch 
of Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) scheme; Implementation of  Public 
Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order 2017; Establishment of two Defence 
Industrial Corridors, one each in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu; Opening up of Defence 
Research & Development (R&D) for industry, startups and academia; and Progressive 
increase in allocation of Defence Budget of military modernization for procurement from 
domestic sources, etc. Due to concerted efforts of MoD, all 36 contracts signed 
towards Capital Procurement /Platform of defence equipment during FY 2022-23 have 
been signed with Indian entities. Further, out of 4666 Defence items listed in 4 Positive 
Indigenization Lists of DPSUs, 2849 items have already been indigenized. 
 
 
Self Reliance and Make in India 
 
Recommendation No.18: 
 
 
 The Committee note that the ‘Make in India’ initiative of the Government is 
devised to transform India into a global design and manufacturing hub. ‘Make in India’ in 
defence sector is primarily driven by providing preference to procurement from Indian 
vendors under the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP), promoting indigenous 
design, development and manufacture of defence equipment, and other policy 

22 
 
measures such as simplification of Make procedure, introduction of simplified procedure 
for Make-II sub category, liberalization of the licensing regime and FDI policy by raising 
the cap on FDI in the defence sector, simplification of export procedure, streamlining of 
defence offset guidelines, creation of level playing field between public and private 
sector, formulation of outsourcing and vendor development guidelines, setting up of 
‘Technology Development Fund’ to public and private sector industry especially 
Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSME) etc. The budget allocation is made for 
the total acquisition of defence equipment requirements of the Services. The proposals 
for capital acquisition in Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) are categorized as 
‘Buy (Indian-IDDM)’, Buy (Indian)’,‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ & ‘Buy and Make’ with 
preference over ‘Buy (Global)’ category, to make the country self-reliant in defence 
production after deliberations in various Committees such as SPB/ DPB/ DAC. For this, 
Ministry of Defence has earmarked about 68% per cent of its modernization funds 
amounting to Rs. 84,597.89 crore under capital acquisition budget for 2022-23 for 
procurement from domestic industries. In financial year 2023-24, at the BE stage, 75 
per cent allocation of the Defence Budget has been kept for domestic procurement 
alongwith, Rs 1231.62 crore has been allocated for prototype development under MAKE 
projects wherein the industry will be taking part. The Committee acknowledge that 
although a sizable allocation of budget has been earmarked for procurement from 
domestic industries yet the Ministry of Defence does not have clear strategy in place 
about utilizing the funds reserved for indigenization as DPSUs and erstwhile OFs are 
still importing defence equipment worth Rs. 6,8871.4 crores approximately. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that Ministry should explore more effective ways to 
utilize the full allocated funds in the current financial year 2023-24. The Committee 
further recommend that the Ministry should make exhaustive efforts to set up proper co-
ordination between, Armed Forces, DPSUs and all other stakeholders so as to escalate 
production under Make in India categories. Subsequently, at the Action Taken stage the 
Committee may be apprised of the details of utilization of funds out of Rs.84,597.89 
Crore earmarked for domestic industries in 2022-23. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. In FY 2023-24, an amount of Rs.1,32,301.27 Crore has been allocated under 
Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) Segment, out of which Rs.99,223.03 Crore (75%) 
has been earmarked for procurement through Domestic Sources and balanced Rs 
33,078.24 Crore through foreign sources. Against the funds earmarked for Domestic 
Capital Procurement in FY 2022-23 i.e Rs 84,597.89 Crore, an expenditure of 
Rs.79,057.30 Crore was done till March (Supplementary). 
 
2. In the FY 2022-23, 36 Contracts worth Rs 64,775.14 Crore have been signed 
with Indian vendors for capital procurement of defence equipment for Armed Forces. 
 
Offset Clause 
Recommendation No. 19: 
 
 The Committee are given to understand that the vendors have been expressing 
difficulties in providing the details of Indian offset partners, products and work share 

23 
 
along with supporting documents in the technical offset proposal as per offset guidelines 
at Technical Offset Evaluation Committee (TOEC) stage, sighting that these activities 
would be undertaken number of years later which would then cause seeking changes to 
the contract. Another major challenge towards post contract management had been 
timely and meaningful disposal of contract amendment requests received from the 
vendors for change of IOP/Product etc. The resolution of these issues have been 
catered for by introducing an amendment to the offset guidelines with the approval of 
Defence Acquisition Council, whereby vendors have been given an option to provide 
details of IOPs and products even after signing of contracts, thereby making it more 
realistic. The Committee is worried that several incidents on non-fulfillment offset 
agreement by Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) could be hamper the growth 
of defence research and development sector of our country. The reply given by the 
Ministry in this regard is inconclusive. Although the Committee appreciate the fact that 
the process for contract amendment has been made flexible by allowing change of 
Indian Offset Partners (IOPs) and offset components, for the signed contracts yet there 
is scope for the Ministry to strive further towards effective implementation of offset 
guidelines based on the feedback received from the vendors at the grass-root level. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that Ministry of Defence play more proactive role 
in selection of offset partners since the inception of such agreement in order to avert 
any kind of breach of offset agreement at any level. Furthermore, the Committee are in 
total concurrence that the success of indigenization of defence sector is adhered to 
fulfillment of offset agreement in-toto. Additionally, therefore the Committee recommend 
that Ministry should work out a mechanism to ensure that all the offset agreements are 
implemented thoroughly at all level to give momentum to indigenization programmes. 
The violators of offset agreement may be penalized appropriately keeping the security 
perception in mind. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. As per the Defence Offset Guidelines under extant DPP/DAP, the Vendor/Tier – 
1 sub vendor will be free to select the Indian Offset Partner (IOP) for implementing the 
offset obligation. The function of Defence Offsets Management Wing (DOMW) in the 
Ministry includes assisting vendors in interfacing with Indian industry. Ministry is 
organizing Conclaves/Webinars/Seminars/Interactive Sessions primarily through 
Industry Associations to facilitate interface of vendors with Indian defence companies.  
 
2. Ministry has streamlined the process of management of offset contracts through 
digitisation of the offset claims submission, audit, verification and calculation of 
shortfalls. This has enhanced transparency, accountability and efficiency in offset 
management. 
 
3. For unfulfilled offset obligations, the vendors are penalised as per the terms and 
conditions of the offset contracts governed by the applicable Defence Procurement 
Procedure. 
 
 

24 
 
Foreign Direct Investment 
 
Recommendation No. 20: 
 
 The committee note the Government has reviewed the Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) policy in Defence sector in September 2020 thereby allowing FDI under Automatic 
Route up to 74% and beyond 74% through Government Route wherever it is likely to 
result in access to Modern technology or for other reasons to be recorded. The 
Committee note that this FDI limit was increased from 49% to 74% to ensure that it will 
come along with the technology also and the FDI limit has also been made attractive 
enough as it facilitate up to 100% through Government Route. So far, till October, 2022 
FDI inflows of over Rs 4814 crores have been reported in the defence and aerospace 
sector. Further, FDI inflows of over Rs 3432 crores have been reported in defence and 
aerospace sector since 2014 till October' 2022.  Further, till date, 45 JVs/companies 
have been given foreign investment approvals in Defence sector. The Committee are of 
the considered view that the Ministry should ensure that despite raising the limits of FDI 
to as high as 74%, The purpose of self reliance should not be hampered. Furthermore, 
the Committee note that current FDI policy facilitate up to 100 per cent by Government 
route wherever, it is likely to result in access to modern technology or for other reasons 
to be recorded. The Ministry also submitted that consequently increasing FDI through 
automatic route to 100 per cent will nullify the ownership of domestic partner. The 
committee, therefore, recommend that in addition to the measures taken for making FDI 
more attractive, focused efforts may be undertaken by the Ministry to strengthen 
indigenous R&D base of the country and increase coordination between the public and 
private sector within the country, so that the indigenous defence sectoris encouraged to 
develop and manufacture technologies/systems/accessories independently which are 
presently being acquired through the FDI route. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to boost Research & Development infrastructure in the country, Ministry 
of Defence has taken various measures so that the indigenous defence sector is 
encouraged to develop & manufacture technologies/systems/accessories. The 
initiatives inter-alia include Buy(Indian-IDDM) has been accorded top priority for 
procurement of capital equipment; Simplification of Make Procedure; Launch of 
Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) scheme involving startups & Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs); Reforms in Offset policy with thrust on attracting 
investment and Transfer of Technology for Defence manufacturing by assigning higher 
multipliers; Opening up of Defence Research & Development (R&D) for industry, 
startups and academia with 25 percent of defence R&D budget; implementation of New 
Transfer of Technology Policy; Launch of Dare to Dream Innovation: Contest to Support 
Start Ups & Innovators; Exclusive Technologies/Systems for industry to develop: 108 
System identified, DRDO to provide scientific/technologic & testing support; Provisional 
access to own industry to world class test facilities of DRDO; Free access to Indian 
Industry to DRDO Patents, MoU with Defence Industrial Corridor to impact skill training, 
hand holding & guidance; To augment the knowledge potential, Introduction of Defence 
Courses, Collaborative Ph. D Programmes/Certified Courses on AI & Cyber 

25 
 
Technologies. Further DRDO is providing Apprenticeship scheme & Internship training 
to students. 
 
 
DEFENCE PLANNING: Approval from Ministry of Finance 
 
 
Recommendation No. 21-23: 
 
 The Committee note that Defence Five Year Plans serve as a medium to bridge 
the gap between the exigencies of the armed forces within the limits of annual 
budgetary allocation as sanctioned by the Ministry of Finance (MoF). The Committee 
also discern that Government has set up a Defence Planning Committee under the 
Thirteenth Defence Plan (2017-22), to synergies not just the long term plan for 
amelioration of defence forces but to also evaluate security priorities, foreign policy 
imperatives, changing dynamics of balance of power at the global level. The Committee 
note the fact that in spite of being a document of significance the Ministry is yet to get 
approval by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee note that the Defence Plan for a 
considerable duration has been awaiting approval of Ministry of Finance. Although non-
approval of the Defence Plan did not impede the implementation of Defence projects at 
this juncture the Committee would like to reiterate that obtaining the consent of the 
Ministry of Finance must be the Ministry of Defence’s utmost prerogative. Hence, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence should, as a matter of priority seek 
the necessary approval in a time bound manner. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 In accordance with DAP-20, the Defence Five Year Plans are being renamed as 
Defence Capital Acquisition Plans (DCAP) and will flow out of the ten year Integrated 
Capability Development Plan (ICDP).  DCAP is a planning document and will give the 
likely expenditure envisaged in the five year period.  The DCAP is still under formulation 
and will be taken up for approval of Competent authority once ready.  Approval of the 
Ministry of Finance will assist in better planning and management of the Capital 
Acquisition Budget and will be considered. 
 
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 
 
Recommendation No.22: 
 
 The Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff (HQIDS), is a single point of contact 
to ensure joint planning for all the wings of armed forces catering to diverse needs of all 
the three forces. As apprised by the Ministry, Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan 
(LTIPP) presently, is in LTIPP 2012-2027 and has been approved by the Defence 
Acquisition Council. All the proposals for acquisition of Capital Assets flow out from the 
defence procurement planning process which covers the 15 year LTIPP, 5 year 
Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). As per 
the Ministry, the procurement cases included in the AAP are progressed as per DPP till 

26 
 
finalization by signing of contracts/placement of indent. The Committee have been 
apprised that so far Rs. 1,00,915 (95.30%) and Rs. 16154 (4.70%) capital procurement 
in terms of contracts have been signed in last three years at the local and global level 
respectively. The vast majority of the capital acquisitions of the Armed Forces have 
been as per LTIPP, which as informed by the Ministry, forms a broad framework for the 
acquisition of capabilities/ platforms, over a defined period of time. The Committee note 
that certain procurements that have been carried out to cater for certain operational 
emergencies [which are not part of the Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP)], again, after 
taking due approval of the Defence Acquisition Council and subsequently, included in 
the modified AAP. However, the Committee understand the strategic risk and urgency in 
acquiring modern weaponry but is also of the considered view that practice of seeking 
ex post facto approval should be limited to exceptional cases and should not become a 
norm when it comes to arms or equipment acquisition. In the wake of above 
observations, the Committee would urge the Ministry of Defence to encourage all the 
wings of armed forces to make the future procurements as per revised ICADS model, 
by seeking prior approval. Hence, the Committee recommend that defence planning 
needs to be more prescient in chalking out its acquisition strategy and must avoid any 
procedural delay at all the levels. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted.  It is highlighted that 
the ICADS model is likely to enhance even greater integration and jointness amongst 
the Services, besides enlarging the share of indigenisation in the Capability Planning 
and Acquisition.  The ICADS process will entail formulation of ten year prioritized 
Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP), comprising two Defence Capital 
Acquisition Plans (DCAPs), of five years period each and two-year roll on Annual 
Acquisition Plans.  As mandated in DAP 2020, HQIDS in conjunction with SHQs is 
currently progressing formulation of ICDP in accordance with ICADS process and will 
be taken up for the approval of DAC once finalized.  The ICDP will replace current 
LTIPP. 
Recommendation No. 23: 
 
 The Committee after scrutinizing through the data furnished by the Ministry 
regarding the BE, RE and Actual Expenditure under the year-wise allocation in the 
Thirteenth Defence Plan from 2018-19 to 2022-23 note that funds allocated in 2020- 21 
and 2021-22 at the RE stage was not fully utilized by the Ministry. In 2020-21, the 
expenditure incurred was Rs. 3,40,093.51 Crore which was evidently less than the 
budgetary allocations of Rs. 3,43,822.00 Crore. The Committee understand that the 
less utilization might have been due to less expenditure incurred by various 
Services/Organizations due to Covid-19 situation prevailing in the country. The 
Committee further find that in 2021-22 the Ministry received Rs. 3,68,418.13 Crore and 
utilized Rs. 3,66,545.90 Crore. For the current financial year of 2022-23, out of the 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 4,09,500.48 Crore the Ministry had been able to utilize only 
Rs 2,67,523.08 Crore in first two quarters of the financial year 2022-23. The Committee 
believe the idea underlying the concept of planning is to disseminate the expenses of 
the armed forces in the most efficient manner in order to avoid any inadvertent delay or 

27 
 
haste in decision making process. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry of Defence make concerted and coordinated efforts with each of the armed 
forces to ensure that funds are fully utilized in a balanced manner by all service wings 
and within the time frame of financial year 2022-23. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the figures of the amount allocated to the Ministry against their projections 
in 2023-24. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee may be apprised that the progress of expenditure is reviewed 
from time to time to ensure that the budgetary allocations are utilized. All efforts are 
made to ensure that the allocated funds are optimally utilized towards operational 
activities. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it is ensured that urgent and critical 
capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the 
Defence Services. In BE 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 5,93,537.64 Crore (i.e. an increase 
of Rs. 68,371.49 Crore over BE 2022-23) has been allocated to M/o Defence (all 4 
Grants) against projection of Rs. 6,37,113.51 Crore. 
 
 
 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
-Nil- 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
 
-Nil- 
  

30 
 
 CHAPTER- V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
18  December, 2023 Chairperson 
27 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Defence 

31 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2023-24)  
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2023-24) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th December, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
    1.     Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary  
     2.     Shri Tirthankar Das - Director 
 
2 Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
3 Kunwar Danish Ali 
4 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
5 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
6 Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7 Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
8 Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
9 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
10 Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
11 Shri Prathap Simha  
12 Shri Brijendra Singh  
Rajya Sabha 
13 Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
14 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
15 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
16 Smt. P.T. Usha 
17 Shri G.K. Vasan 
18 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

32 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Reports:- 
i) Draft Report on the subject ‘A review of working of Defence 
Research and Development Organisation(DRDO)’; 
 
ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence 
for the year 2023-24 on General Defence Budget, Border Roads 
Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’; 
 
iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2023-24 on Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, 
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik Schools 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’;   
 
iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh 
Report on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2023-24 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’; and  
 
v) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-eighth 
Report on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2023-24 on Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and 
Services)–New DPSUs, Defence Research and Development 
Organisation and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.  
 

33 
 
4. *****Does not pertain to the Report****** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

34 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SEVENTH 
REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON 
DEMAND FOR GRANTS(2023-24)’ ON ‘CAPITAL OUTLAY ON DEFENCE 
SERVICES, PROCUREMENT POLICY AND DEFENCE PLANNING’ 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             23 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II):   
 Recommendation Para Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,
          21, 22,23  
 
   Total  : 23 
 
Percentage:100% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
            
  Recommendation Para Nos.        -Nil- 
  
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
           
  Recommendation Para Nos.        -Nil- 
   
 Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
             
  Recommendation Para Nos.        -Nil-                                               Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 