 
 
24 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2021-22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex
Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik Schools
TWENT
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
1 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex
Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik Schools’ (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)  
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)]   

 
TWENT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2021-22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex
Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik Schools
 
Presented
Laid
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)
 
2 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2021-22) 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex
me and Sainik Schools’ (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)
Presented to Lok Sabha on   8.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    8.12.2021 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen (Demand Nos. 19 and 20) ]  
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
            
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) ……………………....….........           4 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….….............             5 
 
CHAPTER  I Report………………………………………………………………….....       6 
       
 
CHAPTER II A) Observations/ Recommendations which have been  
  accepted by the Government …………………………………….     19 
 
 B) Observations/ Recommendations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon............         74 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
 do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
 Government …………………………………                                            79 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon …………………...        80 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
 awaited………………………..........................................................        82 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  
 (2021-22) held on 17.11.2021.………......................................................           83 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
 Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of Standing  
 Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
 the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, 
 Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
 Health Scheme and Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’..............          85 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2021-22) 
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Kunwar Danish Ali   
3 Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
4 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
5 Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
6 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
7 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser  
8 Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
9 Dr. Ram Shankar Katheria 
10 Shri Sridhar Kotagiri  
11 Smt. Rajashree Mallick 
12 Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
13 Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar 
14 Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy 
15 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
16 Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
17 Shri Prathap Simha 
18 Shri Brijendra Singh 
19 Shri Mahabali Singh  
20 Shri Durga Das (D.D.) Uikey 
21 Vacant  
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22 Dr. Ashok Bajpai  
23 Shri N. R. Elango 
24 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
25 Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi  
26 Shri Sharad Pawar 
27 Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao  
28 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
29 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
30 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D.P. Vats (Retd.) 
31 Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Director 
2.  Shri Rahul Singh                       - Deputy Secretary 
3.         Smt. Rekha Sinha                         - Assistant Executive Officer 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2021-22), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee 
on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twentieth Report on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Military Engineer 
Services, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik Schools’ (Demand 
Nos. 19 and 20)’.  
2.  The Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 16.03.2021. The Report contained 79 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in November, 2021 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 17.11.2021. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
 01 December, 2021 Chairperson 
 10 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Twentieth Report 
of Standing Committee on Defence (17thLok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Military 
Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik School 
(Demand Nos. 19 & 20)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 16.03.2021.  
2. The Committee's Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) contained 79 Observations/ 
Recommendations on the following aspects:- 
Para No./Nos. Subject 
 
                                 Army 
1-4 Budget Outlay 2021-22 
5 Budget Review 2020-21 
6 Percentage Share of Army Budget 
7 Budget for Modernization  
8-9 Planning and Procurement 
10 Indigenization 
11-12 Bullet Proof Jackets(BPJs) 
13-15 Manpower 
16 Tooth to Tail Ratio 
                                Air Force 
17-20 Budget Outlay 2021-22 
21 Budget Review 2020-21  
22 Percentage Share of Air Force Budget  
23 Budget for Modernization 
24-25 Indigenization 
26 Planning  
27-29 Force Level  
30-32 Trainer Aircraft  
33 Transport Planes and Helicopters 
34 Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI) Project 
Phase-II (MAFI-II) 
35 Accidents 
36 Manpower  
                              Navy 

7 
 
37-40 Budget 
41 Budget Review 2020-21 
42 Percentage Share of Navy Budget 
43 Budget for Modernization 
44 Planning and Procurement 
45 Indigenisation 
46-48 Force Level 
49 Naval Exercises 
50 Safety Measures 
51 Manpower 
                             Joint Staff 
52-55 Joint Staff (budget) 
56 Air Defence Command and Maritime Theatre Command 
                              MES 
57 Military Engineer Services (MES) 
                              ECHS 
58-59 Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
60 Expansion of ECHS 
                              Sainik Schools 
61-63 Opening of Sainik Schools 
64-68 Budgetary Provisions 
69 Inadequate Infrastructure 
70-72 Deficiency of Quality Staff 
73-74 Curriculum 
75-77 Implementation of reservation for Economically Weaker 
Section (EWS) 
78-79 Intake of Girl Cadets 
  
3.    Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report. However, 11 number of replies 
stated as “classified” have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairpersons office in sealed 
cover which include para Nos. 5, 9, 11, 16, 21, 26, 27, 32, 33, 35 & 36. These replies 
have been placed under ‘accepted’ category. However, categorization of these paras 
may be done again after receipt of the replies/direction from Hon'ble Chairperson. The 
remaining replies have been examined and categorised as follows:- 
 
  

8 
 
(i)  (a)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (please see Chapter II A) : 
 
Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26, 
 27, 28,29, 31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,45,48,49,50,51, 
 52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,69,70,71,72,75,76, 
 77, 78,79 
        (71 Recommendations)  
 
 
(b) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
 Government  and commented upon (please see Chapter II B): 
 Para Nos. 15,30, 46,47,74 
                    (05 Recommendations) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
 in view of the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
 Para No. 73                  (01 Recommendation) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
 have not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and 
 commented upon (please see Chapter IV): 
 Para Nos. 44,68 
         (02  Recommendations) 
                           
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have furnished 
 interim replies (please see Chapter V): 
   
 Para No.  Nil                 
                                        (00 Recommendation) 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments made 
in Chapter I of this Report to be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case 
not later than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
  

9 
 
ARMY 
A. Manpower 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 15 
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘The Committee are aware of the ordeal of the war widows involved in the 
situation when they clear the exams as tough as Combined Defence Service 
Examination (CDSE) and Staff Selection Board (SSB) and still they are denied 
commission on the basis of lack of vacancies.  Taking note of the fact that there 
are scores of vacancies existing in Armed Forces at the level of Officers, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to explore the possibility of absorbing those war 
widows who have qualified SSB and are rejected commissioning in the vacancies 
available with Army and other Services.  The Committee take a serious view of 
the same and recommend that as the war widows have already gone through  an 
ordeal after the supreme sacrifice of their spouses for the nation and definitely do 
not deserve this behavior of dejection and injustice and desire that if there are no 
vacancies, there should be no selection at the first place and if the war widows 
get qualified in the exams they should definitely be offered commissioning at the 
earliest, under any Services/ Organizations of Defence Forces.’ 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-  
 
 ‘The present policy for release of vacancies for Short Service Commission 
 Women (Widow Category)(SSCW) is that the widow of Defence personnel 
 (including those with children) who have died in harness is eligible to apply for 
 the Short Service Commission.  A total of 5% vacancies are earmarked for 
 widows, both the SSCW (Technical) and SSCW (Non-technical) (i.e. 2.5% each).  
 In case of non-availability of officers in any category, the vacancies can be filled 
 vice-versa.  They are eligible only case in they have not re-married.  The unfilled 
 vacancies will revert to the category other than that of widows.  At the current 
 rate of vacancies release, the above reservation translates to one vacancy for 
 SSCW (NT) and SSCW(T) for courses starting in April & October each year.   
 War Widows are exempted from appearing in Combined Defence Services 
 examination and are directly detailed to undergo Services Selection Board(SSB).  
 Adjutant Generals Branch invites applications against the vacancies released in 
 the Widow Category  and take age waiver, if required and puts all eligible 
 candidates through the SSB.  Post SSB, Recruiting Directorate draws a Merit List 
 of candidates against the number  of vacancies released. Joining letter is  then  
 issued to the candidates, first in Order of Merit on the Merit List of each course 
 (subject to clearing medicals).  In the eventuality of the first candidate not 
 reporting for training within the stipulated time or resignation, the candidate next 
 in order of merit is issued a Joining Letter.  Shortlisting maximum candidates in 

10 
 
 excess of vacancies released is undertaken so as to ensure full utilization of 
 vacancies released.  However, sheer shortlisting on a Merit List does not amount 
 to assurance to a vacancy, as Joining Letters are issued in a  progressive 
 manner such that vacancies released are filled.   However, with women officers 
 now being considered for grant of Permanent Commission, this policy may 
 necessitate review, in view of need to ensure gender parity.’ 
 
Comments of the Committee 
7. The Committee take note of the factual position intimated by the Ministry of 
Defence that shortlisting maximum candidates in excess of vacancies released is 
undertaken so as to ensure full utilization of vacancies released. Nevertheless, 
the Committee feel that at the time of declaration of vacancies the vacant 
positions must be brought out in regard to the extant vacancies. This will be 
useful in decision- making by war widows before appearing for the Service 
Selection Board (SSB). Also, consequent to the declaration of the results, a rank-
wise list need to be provided to the candidates so that they are aware of their 
ranking in the waiting list. The Committee view that such a measure would indeed 
be helpful in ameliorating ordeal of war widows to some extent. As regards grant 
of Permanent Commission, the Committee concur with the view that policy for 
intake of war widows necessitate review, in order to ensure gender parity. 
Requisite efforts to be undertaken in this direction may be initiated and brought 
to the knowledge of the Committee.  
AIR FORCE 
B. Trainer Aircraft 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 30 
8. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 
‘With regard to trainer aircraft, the Committee wanted to know the existing 
strength of trainer aircraft with Air Force which is 260 as against the sanctioned 
strength of 388. Trainer aircraft held by IAF in its inventory include 75 PC-7 Mk-II 
Basic trainer Aircraft (BTA), 86 Kiran Mk-I/IA Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT), 99 
Hawk Mk-132 Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) and 42 Kiran Mk-II (which are 
presently not being utilised for training).  The Committee also learn that 

11 
 
simulators have been acquired for the PC-7 Basic Trainer Aircraft and Hawk-132 
Advance Jet Trainer aircraft.  A case for procurement of two Twin Dome 
Simulator for Hawk Mk-132 aircraft has been processed.  Presently Technical 
Evaluation is under progress.  Also, a case for procurement of additional 29 
Hawk aircraft (AJT) has been initiated.  Presently, the case is with Contract 
Negotiation Committee (CNC).  The Committee recommend that the said 
procurements are made in time by undertaking all out efforts and details thereof 
shall be intimated to the Committee as well.’ 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
‘Presently a total of 99 Hawk Mk-132 Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) aircraft are in 
service. 
A case for procurement of two Twin Dome Simulator for Hawk Mk-132 aircraft is 
currently in TEC stage. 
The case for procurement of 20 additional Hawk aircraft is stalled because of the 
high cost& engine lifing issues.’ 
Comments of the Committee 
10.    During the examination of Demands for Grants (2021-22), the Committee 
were informed that a case of procurement of additional 29 Hawk Aircraft (AJT) 
was pending with Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC).  However, from the 
perusal of the Action Taken Reply submitted to the Committee, it came to the 
notice of the Committee that the case for procurement of 20 additional Hawk 
Aircrafts is stalled because of the high cost & engine lifing issues. The 
Committee are not oblivious of the fact that a vendor is invited for price 
negotiation only after carrying out: 
a. Technical, staff and commercial evaluations to ensure that the intended 
offer complies with all the relevant terms stipulated in the Request for 
Proposal (RfP); 
b. Field evaluation Trials (FET) to ensure that the proffered equipment meets 
the stipulated performance parameters; and 
c. Cost comparison with other bidders who too qualify to ensure that the 
price quoted by the vendor being invited for negotiation is the lowest. 
 

12 
 
After gleaning through the above the Committee infer that  scope does exists 
to find out that why the vendor was invited for price negotiations if the requisite 
compliance was not met.  Obviously, they are desirous to be informed about the 
procedure followed in the extant case before arriving at the stage of CNC. They 
would also like to be apprised of the precise reasons and compulsions behind the 
reduction in number of Hawk AJT aircraft from 29 to 20 which were initially 
planned to be procured.  Meanwhile the Committee would also like to recommend 
for procurement of additional simulators so that the number of pilots intake in Air 
Force is not hampered due to unavailability of training facilities. 
NAVY 
C.     Planning and Procurement 
 Observation/Recommendation Para No. 44 
11. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 ‘Upon scrutiny of the documents furnished to them the Committee learn that 
 Long Term Intergrated Perspective Plan 2021-27 (LTIPP 12-27) for three 
 Services including Navy was formulated by Head Quarter Integrated Defence 
 Staff (HQIDS), and approved by the Defence Acquisition Council in April, 2012. 
 The purpose of this plan is to bridge the void and build force levels to achieve the 
 desired combat potential vis-à-vis our adversaries, and consolidate our defence 
 potential. During the last two plan periods, various shortfalls and voids of the 
 Indian Navy have been progressively mitigated/addressed. As larger time period 
 of LTIPP has now passed, the Committee recommend that a report on targets 
 and achievement for LTIPP shall be prepared and brought to the knowledge of 
 the Committee.’ 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘The modernization of Indian Navy (IN) is an ongoing process and is being 
progressed in accordance with LTIPP 2012-27 and is on track to achieve the 
requisite force levels. The need for modernisation and combat preparedness of 
our Armed Forces is known and adequate measures are being taken up  by all 
stakeholders. Further, IN is constantly reviewing, rationalization and prioritising 
requirements to remain a combat  ready force and achieve optimum utilisation of 
the available resources. The Navy remains committed to progress its 

13 
 
modernisation as planned and is progressing various acquisition (ships, 
submarines and aircraft) and infrastructure cases as mentioned below:- 
(a) Ships and Submarines.  41 ships and submarines are under construction at 
various shipyards.  
(b) Aircarft. IN has concluded contract with HAL to deliver 36 aircraft 
comprising 12 Dorniers, 16 ALH and 08 Chetaks and delivery of these aircraft  
are being progressed as per contractual timelines. In addition, 24 MRH and 
four additional P8I are also scheduled for delivery in near future. Further, AoN 
exists for procurement of additional six P8I, six Kamov 31 and 111 Naval Utility 
Helicopters (under SP model).’ 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. In their original report, the Committee had recommended for preparation of 
a report on targets and achievements envisaged in Long Term Integrated 
Perspective Plan in respect to Navy.  The Committee are happy to note that 41 
ships and submarines are under construction at various shipyards and IN has 
concluded contract with HAL to deliver 36 aircraft comprising 12 Dorniers, 16 
Advanced Light Helicopters (ALH) and 08 Chetaks. Further 24 Multi Role 
Helicopters (MRH) and four additional P8I are also scheduled for delivery in near 
future.  However, the reply of Ministry is silent on preparation of any report on 
targets envisaged under Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) and 
actual comparison, if any, on the achievements.  While agreeing to the fact that  
Indian Navy is constantly reviewing, rationalization and prioritising requirements 
to remain a combat ready force and achieve optimum utilisation of the available 
resources, the Committee reiterate that a comprehensive report in this matter will 
be beneficial in making critical analysis on  lapses. Since the halfway of LTIPP 
has already been covered, a report at this stage will further assist streamlining of 
planning and procurements.  Therefore, bringing out such a report and sharing 
the contents of the same with the Committee may be taken up for consideration 
by Ministry of Defence.  
 
 

14 
 
D.  Force Level 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 46 
14. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘The Committee were confided by Ministry of Defence that, Navy is constantly 
reviewing, rationalization and prioritizing their requirements so as to remain a 
combat ready force and achieve optimum utilization of the available resources. At 
the time of proceedings, a detailed discussion was held on aircraft carriers. At the 
time of proceedings, a detailed discussion was held on aircraft carriers. The 
representative of Ministry of Defence, in this regards, stated that Indian Navy has 
got Vikramaditya which is a operational aricarft carrier.  The second aircraft 
which is under construction in Cochin was expected to be delivered in March, 
2021 but owning to lockdown period is now being expected for induction by the 
end of this year.  The Committee are wishful for timely induction of second 
aircraft carrier which is an indigenous production and hope that no further 
extension would be needed.’ 
 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
 ‘Progress of Construction. Progress of construction of IAC during last one 
year has been adversely affected due to COVID-19 related restrictions and other 
imponderables. The progress  of work has been reviewed  by multiple high level 
committees, including , review by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri in May’ 20, Defence 
Secretary at Kochi in Nov 20, Steering Committee under the  Chairmanship of 
DG (Acq) on 16 Feb 21, Expert Committee under the  Chairmanship of VCNS on  
17 Feb 21 and CPRMs under tha Chairmanship of CWP&A in Jul 20, Nov 20, 
Jan 21 and Mar 21. 
 2. Ship’s Basin Trials. Inspite of nationwide lockdown and other 
 COVID related restriction, readiness of Ship’s  propulsion and Power Generation 
 equipment/systems in harbor was tested as part of Basin Trials on 30 Nov 20. 
 This was one of the major milestone activity successfully completed towards ship 
 readiness for Sea Trials. 
 3. Impact of COVID Recurrence. COVID recurrence with third wave in 
 Kerala has adversely impacted work progress on IAC. More than 250 personnel 
 associated with IAC project have either tested COVID positive or were primary 
 contacts. The top management of M/s CSL and OEM reps have also been 
 detected COVID positive. Absence of top management of M/s CSL directly 

15 
 
 involved in planning construction/ trials of IAC, has impacted progress of work. 
 Associated uncertainties are posing challenges in achieving firm up schedule  of 
 construction. 
 4. Delivery Schedule.  The delivery of IAC is likely to evolve post 
 successful completion of Ship’s Sea Trials by Sep/Oct 21.’ 
 
Comments of the Committee 
16. The Ministry of Defence in its reply has mentioned covid pandemic to be 
cause of delay in completion of Indian Aircraft Carrier project. In view of the 
Committee, the current delay due to covid is understandable, however, at the 
same time, the fact cannot be denied that there had been repeated delays in 
achievement of various milestones in the project leading to huge time and money 
overruns in construction  of IAC.  The Ministry in the reply has furnished that the 
delivery of IAC is likely to evolve post successful completion of Ship’s Sea Trials 
by Sep/Oct 21. The Committee desire to be updated on latest position with regard 
to outcome of the said sea trials and desire that atleast now, all out efforts be 
done to achieve the new targets set for induction of the IAC.  
 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 47 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘In so far as requirement of aircraft carriers are concerned, the Committee  were 
given to understand that it is desirable to have three aircraft carriers in Indian 
Navy. Two of them are operating in maritime zone on each of the side of Indian 
Coastline viz. eastern and western coasts. The third one can be used as a 
substitute when either of the first two undergoes maintenance as Aircraft Carriers 
are known to have lengthy maintenance schedules. In this perspective, the 
Committee recommend that  case for development of a third aircraft carrier be 
taken up for serious consideration by the Ministry of Defence. The Committee 
would like to be kept abreast with the development in this regard.’   
 

16 
 
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘The requirement of third Aircraft Carrier will be worked out on the IN 
 committed liabilities and future acquisition projects.’ 
 
Comments of the Committee 
19. Gleaning  through the reply of the Ministry, the Committee reiterate their 
view that having three Aircraft Carriers will considerably enhance combat 
capabilities of the Navy. Taking into account the long coastline and hostile 
adversities on both sides of Indian peninsula, an aircraft carrier on both sides of 
coast is quintessential to uphold operational requirements. However, repair work 
of huge vessel such as an  aircraft carrier takes considerably long time, therefore 
to abridge operational deficiencies thus arising, three aircraft carrier is an 
unavoidable  requirement to meet any eventualities. Based on this analogy a 
standard scenario is the deployment of two Aircraft Carriers at all times while one 
would undergo repairs and maintenance.  The Committee desire that while 
chalking out future acquisition projects, Navy shall take into consideration the 
observation made here by the Committee and the outcome of the same be 
brought to the knowledge of the Committee. 
SAINIK SCHOOLS 
E. Budgetary Provisions  
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 68 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘Contemplating upon the facts stated in para No. 7 above, the 
 Committee feel that issuance of some payment heads from Central 
 Government while some from State Governments are complicating 
 financial matters. Therefore, it would be in the fitness of things to create a 
 corpus fund at level of each Sainik School so that financial commitments 
 are cleared in timely manner and issue is taken to its logical conclusion’ 
  

17 
 
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘It is to be submitted that DGFP had allocated a total of Rs. 329.36 crore to 
Sainik Schools in the FY 2020-21, which adequately facilitate the functioning and 
clearance of backlog of bills/claims of Sainik Schools. During the current year, 
DGFP has allocated Rs. 300 crore under BE 2021-22 against our projection of 
Rs. 137.68 crore to clear all dues of Sainik Schools. Sufficient funds have been 
allocated during the current Financial Year which will cater payment of all current 
year liabilities. Thus, there is no need to create a corpus fund at level of each 
Sainik School.’ 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. In the reply, the Ministry has stated that there is no need to create a corpus 
fund at the level of each Sainik school. However, the Ministry has not stated any 
reason for the same. In this regard, the Committee would like to know from the 
Ministry of Defence, the reasons and the benefits which would accrue in not 
constituting a corpus fund at the school level.  At this stage the Committee can 
only reiterate their assertions made in the original report that having a 
transparent corpus fund at the level of schools would help in timely clearance of 
financial obligations in more opportune manner which would further assist in 
smooth running of the institutions.  The decision made consequent to this 
observation of the Committee and the developments taking in this regard may be 
brought to the knowledge of the Committee. 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 74 
23. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘The Committee, find that the fee structure of Sainik Schools is more than  lakh 
rupees annually which is beyond reach of weaker sections of the society. There 
are indeed some schemes for provisioning of scholarships to students in Sainik 
Schools, however, those schemes of Central and State Governments are not 
universal in nature. The Central Government scholarship programmes cover 
wards of Defence Personnel. Although there are some State Government 
schemes for students of weaker sections, yet large number of students is not 
able to reap the benefit due to limited number of scholarships leaving many 
talented and aspiring students on the fringe. Therefore, the viability of exploring 
CSR corporate social responsibility may also be taken into consideration in 
different schools.’ 

18 
 
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
 ‘The Central Government is providing financial assistance to all Sainik 
 Schools for infrastructure development, IT & training, additionality in pay & 
 pension of Sainik School employees. Further, State Government grants annual 
 scholarships to all the cadets belonging to the economically weaker sections of 
 society. Notwithstanding, Central Government is also providing following 
 scholarship to the cadets: 
 (a) Defence Scholarship:  Scholarship to the wards of Defence Personnel 
 including Ex-serviceman. 
 (b) Central Assistance: Provides a part of Scholarship as Central Assistance 
 to those students who are awarded State Government Scholarships. 
 (c) NDA Incentive: Incentive to those cadets who are selected for National 
 Defence Academy/Naval Academy.  
 (d) Sharing the Burden of enhanced fees: Scholarship for reducing the 
 burden of tuition fee and dietary charges of the cadets studying in Sainik 
 Schools.’ 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
25. The Committee note that in the reply of the Ministry of Defence there is no 
mention to the recommendation of the Committee contained in their original 
report on exploring viabilities of raising funds for Sainik Schools through 
corporate social responsibility. The Committee are also aware of the fact that 
Sainik School Society is receiving assistance from Central and State 
Governments to meet their expenses.  However, they emphasize their view that 
CSR funds would further augment multiple resourcing which would be in the 
eventual benefits for the Sainik Schools. The Committee categorically opine that 
CSR funds can be useful in infrastructure development of Sainik Schools.  This in 
turn will ameliorate some portion of burden of fees on students thereby ultimately 
benefitting deserving and needy students. Therefore, the Ministry of Defence may 
take into consideration the reiterations made here by the Committee and they be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard while furnishing the Action Taken 
Statements.  

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
(A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
ARMY 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1-2 
 
 At the outset, the Committee would unanimously like to place on record that the 
valour and courage shown by our soldiers in the incidence of Galwan Valley in June, 
2020 is beyond words of appreciation. The Committee overwhelmingly express their 
gratitude towards each and every soldier and officer, martyred or injured, and also to 
their families. In addition, the Committee are also appreciative of the efforts made by 
Army at the time of ‘COVID Crisis’ during past one year. Indian Army is undoubtedly 
dedicated to preserve national interests, safeguard sovereignty, territorial integrity and 
unity of the Nation. In present testing times on both sides of the border, Army has 
shown great valour in facing and thwarting the challenges. Other than this, the ongoing 
task at the hands of Army include fighting proxy wars, defeating internal threats, 
assisting Government and the people of India during natural calamities; albeit  a few to 
mention. The Committee opine that a sustained and adequate budgetary support is 
quintessential for meeting requirements of Army. The Demands for Grants of Army for 
the year 2021-22 are contained in Demand Nos.19 and 20. A detailed scrutiny of the 
demands, allocation and earlier expenditure of Army is discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs of the Report. 
 
Budget Outlay 2021-22 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
 For examination of the Demands for Grants of Army for the year 2021-22, the 
Committee had sought from the Ministry of Defence relevant budgetary data on 
proposed and earmarked outlay during current and previous years. In Budget Estimates 
of 2021-22, total proposed outlay of Army including both Revenue and Capital Heads 
was Rs. 2,22,197.38 crore, whereas the allocation to be made was found to be Rs. 
1,84,176.03 crore which is nearly 83 per cent of the demand. The allocation viz-a-viz 
demand gap stands to the tune of Rs. 38,021.35 crore which is approximately 17 per 
cent of the demand.  As regards huge gaps in projection and allocation, the Committee 
were apprised that the projections are normally made about 15 per cent to 20 per cent 
higher as a strategic planning process. More funds are sought by anticipating that the 
procurement will happen as per the plan but it does not go as per that planning because 
of the various procurement cycles. The Committee here, thus, recommend that 
adequate measures for streamlining of procurement and budgetary procedures shall be 
undertaken in order to mitigate projection vs. allocation gap. This will help in optimizing 
resource utilization and boost transparency in processes of budgeting and spending. 
 
 
  

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.  It may be 
added that Army had made projections for BE 2021-22 in September/October, 2020, 
based on following: 
 
i. Planned outgo towards committed liabilities of all ongoing contracts, Indents 
and Supply Order placed with suppliers, including allocation to DGOF (based 
on mutually fixed targets by the Army and Ordnance Factories). 
 
ii. Anticipated Committed Liability payments for additional New Schemes which 
were to get contracted in the last two quarter of FY 2020-21.  These includes 
schemes which were at advanced stages of approval [Competent Financial 
Authority (CFA) and Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC)] in September, 
2020. 
iii.  Advance payments for New Schemes expected to be signed during FY 2021-
22 based on operational requirements. 
 
2. Funds are broadly allocated based on past absorption capacity of the Service, 
pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc. In addition to this, based on the 
overall ceilings received, Ministry of Defence allocates funds among the Services and 
Organizations under MoD taking into account Inter-Services priorities and requirements 
for critical projects. 
 
3. The allocated funds are optimally utilized towards operational activities. The schemes 
are reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any 
compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence Services. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Revenue budget comprises of two main components, salary and non-salary. 
Major portion of the budget head primarily goes for salary expenses which is a fixed and 
recurring expenditure. The non-salary expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, 
ration, transportation, fuel, etc. which are essential for regular training, upkeep and 
optimizing all time operational preparedness of Army. In Budget Estimates (BE) for FY 
2021-22, against Revenue Head, projection of Army was that of Rs. 1,70,705.28 crore 
against which allocation to be made is Rs. 1,47,644.13 crore, hence amounted shortfall 
stood at  Rs. 23,061.15 crore. In percentage terms, the allocation is short of demand by 
13 percent. Further gleaning through the documents furnished by the Ministry of 
Defence, the Committee infer that in 2020-21, BE allocation was Rs. 1,45,785.88 crore. 
The proportionate annual increase is 1.27 per cent which is marginal. The Committee 
believe that since salary obligations and service benefits are fixed expenses, the 
implication of budget constraint would affect training, infrastructure and stores. These 
expenditure are viewed as vital for battle readiness of Army, therefore, the Committee in 
no uncertain words recommend that in subsequent stages of the FY 2021-22, adequate 
funds shall be provisioned to Army under Revenue Head bridging the gap in demand 
and allocation.  
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Funds are allocated to the Services, including Army, taking into consideration pace 
of expenditure, committed liabilities, approval stage of various projects/schemes etc. 
Though the allocations received are less than projections made, however, based on 
expenditure pattern during the year and pending committed liabilities, additional funds 
will be sought at Supplementary/RE stages. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it 
will be ensured that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise 
to operational preparedness of the Army. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Capital budget cardinally provides for expenditure on modernisation, 
enhancement of force level, infrastructure development, etc. Under Capital Head, in BE 
for FY 2021-22, Army’s projection was Rs. 51,492.10 crore and allocation to be made is 
Rs. 36,531.90 crore. There is evident deduction of Rs. 14,960.20 crore in allocation vis-
a-vis demand.  The Committee view that a gap to the tune of 30 percent is huge and 
merit attention.  On this account, the Committee were enlightened that initially at the 
time of Acceptance of Necessity, cost is projected broadly, later on negotiations take 
place and the final procurement is invariably lesser than anticipated amount. The 
Committee opine that most of the procurement details are available in open market as 
well as on internet, therefore inaccuracy in cost estimation to such a large extent should 
be avoided. They reiterate that further streamlining and systematizing budgeting 
procedures of Army need serious consideration and priority. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The wide gap between projections and allocations under Capital Acquisition 
(Modernization) is mainly due to the fact that the projections for each financial year are 
estimated in September/October of the previous financial year.  The projections are 
made based on pending committed liabilities and likely fructification of Capital 
Acquisition New Schemes which are at advanced stages. However, if these schemes at 
advanced stages do not fructify or not likely to be materialized during the course of next 
financial year, some reduction is made from the projected requirements while allocating 
funds.  In case some of the Schemes at advanced stage fructifies during the course of 
the year, which were not budgeted earlier, additional funds are sought/provided at 
Supplementary/RE stage. 
 
 
Budget Review 2020-21  
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 
In case of Revised Estimates (RE) for FY 2020-21, under Revenue head, Army’s 
projection was Rs.1,53,436.68 crore and allocation made was Rs. 1,44,545.67 crore. 
The allocation is short of demand by Rs. 8,891.01 crore, however, the expenditure 
incurred till December 2020 was Rs. 1,06,690.05 crore. In case of Capital Head, in RE 

22 
 
2020-21, the projection of Army was Rs. 39,019.17 crore against which an allocation of 
Rs. 33,283.28 crore was made, hence, an amount of Rs. 5,835.89 crore was short of 
demand. However, the expenditure in three quarters of FY 2020-21 i.e. upto December 
2020 was only Rs. 15,354.93 crore which is less than half of allocation. The Committee 
expressed concern over noticeably less utilization of funds during FY 2020-21. They 
were given to understand that due to less production during lockdown period of three 
months from April to June, 2020 there was lesser payment utilization of Capital Budget. 
The Committee find that the production has improved during the past six months and 
they hope that Army would be able to finish off its liabilities once the items contracted 
are supplied by the factories. The Committee desire that the process shall be hastened 
up and funds be prudently utilized so that the trajectory of development of Army is not 
hampered.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 
Percentage Share of Army Budget 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
After glancing at the papers furnished to the Committee, they evidently find an 
increase in percentage share of revenue budget of Army out of Defence Services 
Estimates from 41.87 per cent in 2015-16 to 45.13 per cent in 2020-21. At the same 
time there is decrease in capital budget share from 11.08 percent in 2015-16 to 10.05 
per cent in 2020-21. However, in value terms, increase is witnessed under both revenue 
and capital heads during the same time period. The Revenue Budget saw a jump from 
Rs.1,03,315.91  crore in 2015-16 to Rs. 1,47,644.13 crore in 2021-22. At the same time 
the capital budget witnessed increase from Rs.  27,342.42 crore to Rs. 36,531.90 crore 
during the same period. The relative growth in Capital outlay is significantly less in 
comparison to relative increase in Revenue outlay. From the figures mentioned here 
above, the Committee note a steady inclination over past few years towards Revenue 
overhead.  The Committee recommend maintaining financial prudence in such a 
manner as to maintain healthy balance between Revenue and Capital share as sturdy 
progress of Army can be accomplished only with unvarying augmentation of 
infrastructure and forcing level.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The higher growth in the revenue expenditure is mainly attributable to the fact that 
Army is manpower intensive with a large portion of its expenditure devoted to Salaries. 
This skews the revenue-capital ratio in favour of revenue expenditure in overall sense 
and for Army in particular.  Maintaining ideal revenue/capital ratio for Army will broadly 
depend on reduction of manpower, which is a major decision and needs to be taken at 
the highest level considering internal/external threats to the security of nation.  
However, efforts are regularly being made to improve the revenue/capital ratio from 

23 
 
ongoing pattern by minimizing revenue expenditure and optimum utilization of available 
sources. 
 
2.  It may also be added that ceilings are received separately for Revenue (Salary 
and Non-Salary) and Capital, based on which funds are allocated to services. The 
procedure followed for allocation involves trend of expenditure, projections made by the 
services, Committed Liabilities to be fulfilled, absorption capacity etc. Therefore, it may 
not be possible to maintain a particular ratio in favour of Capital or Revenue for any 
Service/ Organization. However, every effort is made to ensure that no project/proposal 
is shelved for want of funds. As and when required, additional funds are sought and 
requirements are reprioritized to ensure optimum utilization of available resources. 
 
Budget for Modernization 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
During course of examination of DFG 2021-22, the Committee were apprised 
that in the Defence Services Estimates, there is no separate allocation of funds for 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes. In the FY 2020-21, an amount of Rs. 
26,068.61 crore was allocated to Army at BE stage. Further, earmarking between 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes is carried out by Service Head Quarters based 
on prioritization among the projects/schemes and the progress of contractual 
milestones. Against these allocations, an expenditure of Rs. 13,129.81 crore (upto 
December, 2020) has been incurred in FY 2020-21. In FY 2020-21, Army had sought 
additional allocation of Rs. 7,300 crore in first supplementary to cater for shortfall 
towards Committed Liabilities, emergency powers2020 and requirement for construction 
of offices in connection with Central Vista Project. Keeping in view the pace of 
expenditure additional funds were not allocated to Army in RE 2020-21 under 
Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head (which includes Committed Liabilities and New 
Schemes). The Committee observe that developmental programmes for one complete 
year cannot be left in lurch as national security is certainly paramount aspect of 
Governance. It is understandable that the expenditure had been low due to COVID 
pandemic during first quarter of FY 2020-21, albeit with normalization of state of affairs, 
the expenditure has now picked pace and Army shall be able to realize its annual 
modernization goals and any gaps hence created shall be ameliorated. Final 
appropriation of Army relating to Modernization for the FY 2020-21 shall be brought to 
the knowledge of Committee at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Army has been allocated an amount of Rs. 22,452.75 crore in MA(Modified 
Appropriation) in FY 2020-21 under Modernization (Capital Acquisition) Head and the 
expenditure incurred against these allocations is Rs. 22,580.70 crore upto March (Final-
as on 19th May, 2021). It may be seen that Army has been able to utilize the funds 
allocated for its modernization.  
 
  

24 
 
Planning and Procurement 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Committee were intimated that Capital Acquisition is planned, based on Schemes 
included in the Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). Cases included in the AAP are 
progressed as per Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) / Defence Acquisition 
Procedure (DAP) till finalisation of contracts. Discussions on Demands for Grants 2021-
22 brought out that there is a need for shortening of procurement process which include 
planning, negotiations, trials etc. so that the budget utilization by Army happens in 
timely manner. The Committee were enlightened that Defence Acquisition Procedure 
2020 has been formulated to revise shortcomings. The Committee hope that with 
revision in DAP, the procurement process will be efficiently reorganized to engender 
proficiency and prudence in acquisition processes and also help in ameliorating 
breaches in projection and allocation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 These are observations of the Committee based on the information provided by 
MoD. Therefore, no further action is envisioned. 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
  With regard to planning, the Committee were further given to understand that 
acquisition of Weapon Systems and equipment for Army flows from the Long Term 
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP). The current LTIPP spells out the capability desired 
to be achieved by the Armed Forces over the 15 years duration from 2012 to 2027. The 
LTIPP is translated into specific assets to be acquired, in the form of Services Capital 
63 Acquisition Plan, covering a five year period. From the Services Capital Acquisition 
Plan (SCAP), a list of equipment and weapon systems required to be procured 
immediately is listed in the form of the Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). The AAP is a 2 
year roll on plan. The Committee recommend that since more than half the timeline of 
LTIPP 2012-27 has elapsed, a valuation of goals and projects planned initially for Army 
and accomplished hitherto shall be done to assess the progress. The study report of the 
same may be brought to the knowledge of the Committee. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 
Indigenization 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee desired to know the efforts made by Army towards realization of 
indigenisation and self-reliance. In this connection, it was informed by Ministry of 
Defence that during the year 2019-20 and current year 2020-21 (upto 30.11.2020), out 
of the total 21 contracts signed, 14 contracts were signed with the Indian vendors for 

25 
 
capital procurement of defence equipment such as Tanks, Mine ploughs for Tanks, 
Pinaka Regiments, Secure communication systems, Multimode Hand Grenade (MMHG) 
for Indian Army. The expenditure under capital acquisitions budget for Army during 
2019-20 and 2020-21 (till date), on indigenous contracts was Rs. 20,896.14 crore and 
Rs. 13,580.55 crore respectively. While appreciating the efforts being made by Army 
towards achieving goals of self reliance, the Committee recommend that a major chunk 
of amount from modernisation outlay shall be designated for indigenous procurement in 
the FY 2021-22. While doing so, necessities of Army shall be given due consideration 
and its right for having latest State-of-the-Art global capabilities not compromised by any 
extent. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2020 clearly accords higher priority to 
indigenous products. In exceptional circumstances, when a particular weapon/ 
equipment operationally required is not available from indigenous industry, “Buy Global” 
category is resorted to.  
 Further, In line with Government of India’s initiative of Atmanirbhar Bharat, this 
Ministry has issued order with the approval of Hon’ble RM that funds will be earmarked 
in the ratio of 64:36 between Domestic and Foreign Procurement in the Capital 
Acquisition Budget for the year 2021-22 (Grant No. 20: Capital outlay on Services). For 
the Army, total of Rs 30636.90 crore has been allotted for Domestic and Foreign 
Procurement in the Capital Acquisition Budget for the year 2021-22 wherein Rs 
22,120.90 crore (72.2%) have been allotted for domestic procurement. 
 
Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs)  
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
The Committee were updated on the status of procurement of Bullet Proof 
Jackets (BPJs) for our soldiers. They were happy to find that Government is issuing 
licenses to private companies for manufacture of Bullet Proof Jackets/Body 
Armour/Body Protector to have indigenous capabilities of said defence stores. The 
Committee believe that involvement of private sector will definitely speed up design and 
production of BPJs and moreover, Army will have greater options to select the best 
available jackets. However, the Committee at the same time recommend for imbibing all 
indispensable precautions so that confidentialities do not get divulged. The safeguards 
being taken by Army in respect thereto shall be brought to the knowledge of the 
Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 
  

26 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
 Further, the Committee were educated that in Government sector, Ordnance 
Factories Board (OFB) in association with Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) has 
developed Bullet Resistance Jackets branded as ‘BHABHA KAVACH’. This has been 
successfully evaluated to meet the specifications/requirements. by the Para Military and 
Police Forces. This was launched at the International Police Expo 2019 held on 19-20 
July 2019 at New Delhi. Bullet Resistance Jacket developed by OFB is conforming to all 
technical specifications/requirements of Bullet Proof Jacket of Indian Army. The 
Committee applaud the developments and recommend that consistent and continued 
efforts for improving indigenous protective gear shall be done by the Ministry of Defence 
so that our Forces get the best supplies which they truly deserves. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFB has established manufacturing facility for Bullet Resistant Jacket in two 
factories; Ordnance Clothing Factory, Avadi (OCFAV) and Ordnance Equipment 
Factory, Kanpur (OEFC) as per User’s requirement.  
 
Besides, MIDHANI (Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited)is setting up New Armouring Unit at 
IMT, Rohtak for Bulk Production of BRJs with indigenous process and technology to 
meet requirements of Defence and Security forces. 
 
Development at Ordnance Equipment Factory, Kanpur (OEFC) 
 
The Bullet Resistant Jacket (BHABHA KAVACH) of OEFC is designed and 
developed by OFB in association with MIDHANI (Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited) with 
Transfer of Technology (ToT) of Carbon Nano Tube (CNT) technology from Bhabha 
Atomic Research Institute (BARC). By weight it is the lightest in the category.  
 
 
Development at Ordnance Clothing Factory, Avadi (OCFAv) 
 
Ordnance Clothing Factory, Avadi, Chennai (OCFAV)/OFB is manufacturing 
Bullet Resistant Jacket with 360°protection under the name of ‘KAVACH VASTRA 
V.01’with its In-House capabilities. The prototype was evaluated at a third party 
laboratory i.e. National Forensic Science University (NFSU), Gandhinagar, Gujarat 
 
Specifications of both the products i.e. 'BhabhaKavach’ and ‘KavachVastra V.0T 
and comparison chart for both the products 
 
 BhabhaKavach (OEFC) is being developed as per requirement of Bullet 
Resistant jackets for threat level-5 as per BIS standard IS 17051:2018,and NIJ 
level III & of MHA guidelines requirement 

27 
 
 KavachVastra V.01 (OCFAv) conforms to MHA specification for threat level III+ 
and BIS level 5 and proven in accordance with the trial directives of 
International Standard NIJ 0101.06. 
 
Comparison chart for both the products 
Sr. 
No. 
Particulars BhabhaKavach KavachVastra 
1 Nodal Factory OEFC OCFAv 
2 Mode of 
Development 
Developed through 
Transfer of Technology 
(ToT) from BARC 
Mumbai to Midhani. 
 
 Developed through In-house R&D. 
 Entire design and production 
activities from of the entire 
components (SAP, HAP & Outer 
Carrier) is performed In-house 
under one roof. 
3 Specification BIS Standards 
IS 17051:2018 & NIJ 
BIS Standard IS 17051:2018&MHA 
GSQR 
4. Protection Level Threat level of: 
BIS Standards level V 
 
MHA qualitative 
requirement level  III+  
 
with 3600protection 
BIS Standards level 1,4 &5 
 
MHA qualitative requirement level  
IIIA, III+&III 
 
with 3600protection 
5. Production 
Capacity* 
24000 nos per annum 5000 nos per annum 
6. Weight 9 to 9.3 kg (for standard 
medium size) 
As given in following table 
 
The capacity can be augmented further if large term orders are received. 
 
Threat level Sizes/Weight (Kgs) 
XS S M L XL 
1 2.43 2.71 3.00 3.19 3.48 
2 5.41 5.84 6.28 6.63 7.09 
3 5.61 6.05 6.50 6.86 7.34 
4 7.00 7.51 8.03 8.47 9.02 
5 7.79 8.34 8.91 9.39 9.99 
 
 
Targets received /Supplies made on the product till date; 
 
OEFC:- 
Orders in Hand: Order to supply 164 nos BRJ received from Assam Police Hqrs 
  

28 
 
 
OCFAv:- 
Orders in Hand:  A.  Tamilnadu Police: BRJ(Level-III) 122nos 
 B.  IFD*-BRJ(Level-III) 1225nos 
                           C. CQA(T&C)-BRJ 16Nos 
 
Order Completed: Tamilnadu Police (Level-III) 92 Nos. 
[* Inter factory Demand] 
 
Recommendation No.13 
 
At the time of presentation by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on 
the Demands for Grants 2021-22, the Committee were informed that a proposal for 
reduction in non-essential manpower is under consideration.  The representative further 
added that relevance of certain divisions such as infantry division, mountain division and 
armed division etc., have eroded with time.  The new concept will have Integrated Battle 
Groups while logistics support will mostly be outsourced as modern day infrastructure 
development and outsourcing facilities have expanded upto border and forward areas.  
Manpower requirements will see a transition from conventional to new age technological 
warfare requirements which include space, cyber and Artificial Intelligence 
specializations.  The Committee ratified the perception of manpower optimization and 
imbibing technological advancements.  Simultaneously, they observe that the secrecy of 
Army’s mission and strategic operations shall not be jeopardized by outsourcing 
activities in border or forward areas.  Therefore, developing a foolproof internal system 
is the need of the hour.  In this perspective, the Committee recommend that the 
agencies/workshops approved for outsourcing activities shall designate specific 
officials/personnel at least on annual basis for executing tasks of Army as everybody’s 
responsibility sometimes becomes nobody’s responsibility. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Studies for rightsizing and reorganization of Indian Army have been carried out 
with a view to have leaner and efficient organizations/establishments. Integrated Battle 
Groups Concept is also being evaluated for implementation. Outsourcing of non-core 
tasks/services is also being suitably implemented. 
 
Outsourcing of services will enable non-core tasks of the services being 
outsourced to specialist civilian organisations, while ensuring no loss of operational 
efficiency.  The policy framework to outsource non-core requirements of the Indian 
Army was put in place in March, 2018.  Presently, the outsourcing of services is in its 
infancy stage and certain amendments to the policy are in the process of being finalized 
to further streamline outsourcing.  The Government is seized of the importance of 
maintaining security while outsourcing non-core services.  The aspect of holding the 
service provider accountable for all services provided will also be ensured.  
 

29 
 
Recommendation No.14 
 
The Committee finds that another aspect of manpower optimization included 
using technologies for surveillance needs, for instance in hilly terrains.  The Committee 
approve and recommend use of technologies for surveillance and reconnaissance 
purpose as latest surveillance tools and software indeed prove to be decisive in gather 
intelligence against enemies.  Nevertheless, boots on ground is inherently important 
from point of view of taking quick and responsive measure from time to time as the need 
be.  Technologies shall be imbibed to assist human resource in carrying out 
responsibilities to the best. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All future procurements are aligned to induction of new generation and new 
technology equipment to enhance the combat potential through exploitation of niche 
technologies thereby facilitating a shift from manpower intensive to technologically 
driven operations.  Innovations are being encouraged such that service personnel 
involved on frontline duties, identify their requirements and develop equipment and 
systems for employment.  These are then processed for further manufacture by Small 
and Medium Scale Enterprises (MMSEs).  Idex 4 Fauji is one such initiative launched by 
the Ministry.   A host of technology solutions are being employed in the field of 
surveillance.  They are in the form of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), Battle 
Surveillance Radars (BFSR), Electro Optical Devices, etc. Various procurement cases 
for the above mentioned technology solutions are currently underway with the user 
directorates.   Sustained efforts are being made to infuse technology in Intelligence and 
Surveillance. 
 
 
Tooth to Tail Ratio   
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
The Committee are aware of the rapid technological advancements and changes 
taking place globally in the warfare technology and feel that after the appointment of 
Chief of Defence Staff there is an imperative need to examine the current system and 
suggest that necessary reforms should be undertaken in the future. Since a long time, 
the Army is trying to reduce its force size especially the Tooth to Tail ratio but nothing 
concrete has come out till date. The Committee feel that after integration of the 
available resources of three Forces, the tail part of Army can be substantially reduced. 
As stated by the CDS, State-of-the-Art equipment and surveillance system may give the 
concept of smart soldier, a certainty. The Committee recommend that trimming the force 
should be a time bound exercise to enable our soldiers to be of international standards 
and imbibing State-of-the-Art technologies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All future procurements are aligned to induction of new generation and new 
technology equipment to enhance the combat potential through exploitation of niche 

30 
 
technologies thereby facilitating a shift from manpower intensive to technologically 
driven operations.  Innovations are being encouraged such that service personnel 
involved on frontline duties, identify their requirements and develop equipment and 
systems for employment.  These are then processed for further manufacture by Small 
and Medium Scale Enterprises (MMSEs).  Idex 4 Fauji is one such initiative launched by 
the Ministry.   A host of technology solutions are being employed in the field of 
surveillance.  They are in the form of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), Battle 
Surveillance Radars (BFSR), Electro Optical Devices, etc. Various procurement cases 
for the above mentioned technology solutions are currently underway with the user 
directorates.   Sustained efforts are being made to infuse technology in Intelligence and 
Surveillance. 
 
AIR FORCE 
 
Budget Outlay 2021-22 
Recommendation Nos. 17-19 
 
Recommendation No.17 
 
 The Committee are aware of the fact that the Air Force leverages airpower of the 
Armed Forces. Humanitarian assistance during disaster Relief is another vital and 
momentous role of Indian Air Force (IAF) as was witnessed during Covid pandemic. For 
effective command and control, the IAF has various commands, under which there are 
different stations and units located at various places throughout the country. For running 
their operations and modernizing force level, Air Force needs adequate budgetary 
provisions. The Committee had sought from the Ministry of Defence a statement 
indicating the proposed and earmarked outlay at Budget Estimates (BE), Revised 
Estimates (RE) and actual expenditure for Air Force.  
 
Recommendation No. 18 
 
 The Committee scrutinized the papers furnished to them and inferred that the 
budgetary projection of Air Force for the FY 2021-22 was Rs. 1,22,133.46 crore 
including both Revenue and Capital budget. The approved allocation is Rs. 83,927.30 
crore. There is a deficit of Rs. 38,206.16 crore in allocation against projections which is 
a substantial amount. At the time of deliberations, the representatives of Air Force 
submitted before the Committee that in the coming future Air Force will have to 
essentially increase their aircraft fleet and improve ground based systems. 
Simultaneously improvisation of security infrastructure is equally important. For 
achieving all these, they will require additional budget in consequent years. 
Notwithstanding the fact, the Committee find that in BE 2021-22, the grant to Air Force 
is only 70 per cent of its projection. The Committee desire that modernization and 
enhancement of capabilities of Air Force shall not be compromised for want of 
resources. The budget has two main components-Revenue and Capital. An analysis of 
both the budget overheads is brought out in paras below. 
 
  

31 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
 Glancing at the documents, the Committee in summation find that in case of 
Revenue Budget, in FY 2021-22, the projection of Air Force was Rs. 44,992.90 crore 
and allocation to be made is Rs. 30,652.53 crore. The allocation is lessened by Rs. 
14,340.37 crore which is almost one-third of the demand. The Revenue budget 
comprises of two main components, salary and non-salary. Major portion of the budget 
head primarily goes for salary expenses which is a fixed expenditure. The non-salary 
expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, transportation, fuel, etc. which are 
essential for regular training and operational preparedness of Air Force. During course 
of deliberations on Demands for Grants, the Committee were given to understand that 
the projection is made on the basis of schemes at planning stage which may or may not 
fructify during the particular Financial Year and therefore, the projections are higher 
than the allocations. However, in case of schemes rolling out, the requisite budget will 
be provided at RE stage. The Committee observe that the Revenue expenditure is an 
integrated cost of maintenance and training and most of the expenses are routine and 
essential commodities. Therefore, the Committee recommend that adequate budgetary 
provision should be made to Air Force at subsequent stages during the FY 2021-22 so 
that basic maintenance cost is met. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Funds are allocated to the Services, including Air Force, taking into consideration 
pace of expenditure, committed liabilities, approval stage of various projects/schemes 
etc. Though the allocations received are less than projections made, however, based on 
expenditure pattern during the year and pending committed liabilities, additional funds 
will be sought at Supplementary/RE stages. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it 
will be ensured that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise 
to operational preparedness of the Air Force. 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
In case of the Capital Outlay for BE 2021-22, Air Force’s projection is Rs. 
77,140.56 crore and allocation to be made is Rs. 53,214.77 crore. The Capital budget 
outgo necessarily meet expenditure on infrastructure development and procurements of 
aircraft, helicopters etc. These expenses are dedicated towards modernization and 
capability enhancements. The Committee realize that Air Force is a capital intensive 
Force and any shortfalls in budget outlay would be creating gaps in existing and desired 
strength. Therefore, they recommend that adequate budget shall be given to Air Force 
at later stages of budgeting during the FY 2021-22 so that path of development of Air 
Force is not affected. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is a fact that Air Force is a Capital intensive Force as its Capital to Revenue ratio 
is 62:38 in BE 2021-22. Air Force share under Capital Head is Rs 53214.77 crores 
(39.40%), which is largest among any other Service/Organization of MoD. Though the 
allocations received are not as per the projections made, however, based on 

32 
 
expenditure pattern during the year and pending committed liabilities, additional funds 
will be sought at Supplementary/RE stages. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it 
will be ensured that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise 
to operational preparedness of the Air Force. 
 
 Budget Review 2020-21  
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
In case of Revised Estimates (RE) for FY 2020-21, under Revenue head, Air 
Force’s projection was Rs. 44,605.21 crore and allocation made was Rs. 31,742.07 
crore. The allocation is short of demand by Rs. 12,863.14 crore, however, the 
expenditure incurred till December 2020 was Rs. 22,640.01 crore. As far as capital 
outlay is concerned, in RE 2020-21, the projection of Air Force was Rs. 72,955.18 crore 
against which an allocation of Rs. 55,083.91 crore was made, hence, Rs. 17,871.21 
crore were short of demand. However, the expenditure in three quarters of FY 2020-21 
i.e. upto December 2020 was only Rs. 34,098.00 crore. As regards lesser expenditure 
incurred by Air Force during the FY 2020-21, the Committee 71 were apprised that in 
the current year there was lesser expenditure due to COVID, therefore, Government 
has not imposed any limit on last quarter spending which normally is 30 per cent. The 
Committee are hopeful that the targets missed owing to COVID breakdown would be 
accomplished henceforth and accordingly recommend that Air Force makes a strategy 
so as to enable them to cautiously utilize their budget by the end of March 2021. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 
Percentage Share of Air Force Budget 
 
Recommendation No. 22 
 
While examining Demands for Grants 2021-22, the Committee analyzed Air 
Force budget, both in Revenue and Capital segments, out of total Defence Budget 
during the last five years. In 2014-15, the Revenue allocation was Rs.  20,506.84 crore 
which grew to Rs. 30,652.53 crore in 2021-22. Meanwhile the capital allocation 
increased to Rs. 53,214.77 crore in 2021-22 from Rs. 33,710.68 crore in 2014-15. There 
is an evident increase in percentage share of revenue budget of Air Force, out of 
Defence Services Estimates from 8.95 per cent in 2014-15 to 9.27 per cent in 2020-21. 
At the same time there is decrease in capital budget share from 14.72 percent in 2014-
15 to 13.40 per cent in 2020-21. However, there is an increase in absolute terms under 
both Revenue and Capital Heads during the same time period. The Committee take 
note of steady decline in case of Capital allocations which is pertinent in view of Air 
Force being capital intensive branch of Armed Forces. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that a fair share of allocation in the Capital Head should be given to Air 
Force. 

33 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Air Force & Navy are Capital Intensive forces and Army is a manpower intensive 
force and the same is being reflected in the distribution of funds in the Revenue and 
Capital Segment of the respective Services. In BE 2021-22, Air Force’s share under 
Capital Head is Rs 53214.77 crores (39.40%), which is largest among any other 
Service/ Organization of MoD. 
 
The BE allocations and percentage share of the three Services and other 
Organizations under Capital Head for the last three years is tabulated below: 
 
 (Rs in crore) 
Year Army Navy Air Force Other 
Organization 
Total 
2019-20 29486.61 22227.53 39347.19 12332.98 103394.31 
28.52 % 21.50 % 38.06 % 11.93 % 100.00 % 
2020-21 32435.28 25666.49 43281.91 12350.32 113734.00 
28.52 % 22.57 % 38.06 % 10.86 % 100.00 % 
2021-22 36516.90 32050.02 53214.77 13279.03 135060.72 
27.04 % 23.73 % 39.40 % 9.83 % 100.00 % 
 
It can be seen from the above table that Air Force has the largest share among 
Services/Organizations under Capital Head and its allocations are also consistently 
increasing.  
 
Budget for Modernization 
 
Recommendation No. 23 
 
The Committee were apprised that in the Defence Services Estimates (DSE), 
there is no separate allocation of funds for Committed Liabilities (CL) and New Schemes 
(NS). In the FY 2020-21, an amount of Rs. 39,030.91 crore was allocated at BE stage 
and an additional amount of Rs. 13,188.00 crore was allocated to Air Force in RE 20-21 
under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head (which includes Committed Liabilities 
and New Schemes). Further, earmarking between Committed Liabilities and New 
Schemes is carried out by Service Head Quarters based on prioritization among the 
projects/schemes and the progress of contractual milestones. Against these allocations, 
an expenditure of Rs. 32,872.12 crore (upto December, 2020) has been incurred in FY 
2020-21. In the same year no additional allocation was received in First Supplementary. 
In Second Supplementary, an additional amount of Rs. 11,152.00 Crore has been 
sought to cater for Committed Liabilities, new schemes, and future operational 
capabilities of IAF, etc. Second and Final supplementary is yet to be approved by the 
Parliament. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the additional allocation shall 
be approved so that requisite outgo for modernization activities are concluded. 

34 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Air Force has been allocated an amount of Rs. 55,938.12 Crore in MA (Modified 
Appropriation) in FY 2020-21 under Modernization (Capital Acquisition) Head. This 
figure in final grant is Rs 16,907.21 Crore more than BE allocation of Rs 39,030.91 
Crore and the expenditure incurred against these allocations is Rs. 56,071.91 Crore 
upto March (Final-as on 19th May, 2021). It may be seen that Air Force has been able to 
utilize the funds allocated for its modernization.  
 
Indigenization 
 
Recommendation No. 24 
 
 At the time of power point presentation, the Committee were briefed that Air 
Force is vigorously pursuing indigenisation. Expenditure is being done as per committed 
liabilities and internal earmarking of budget for domestic capital acquisition.  The 
Ministry further revealed that during FY 2019-20 the contract worth Rs. 5,846.13 crore 
was signed from indigenous sources.  In three quarters of 2020-21, i.e. upto 31 
December, total contracted value from domestic market is Rs. 2,835.19 crore.  The 
Committee understand that due to covid crisis, lesser amount was contracted during the 
current first three quarters of current FY.  Nevertheless, with industrial and economic 
activities opening up in full vigour, the Committee hope and desire that acquisition 
processes will pick pace and occurred backlogs will be cleared. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The contracted value of Domestic Procurement during FY 2020-21 has increased 
from Rs 2,835.19 Cr (upto 31 Dec 20) toRs 50,525.34Cr (upto 31 Mar 21). The 
breakdown of the amount is as follows:- 
 
Vendor Contracted Value 
(Rs in Cr) 
HAL 46,898.29  
BEL 1,698.84  
Other Private Vendors 1,928.21  
Total 50,525.34 
 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
 At the time of evidence on the Demands for Grants, the Committee take note of 
the fact that there is a dependency on foreign vendors for repair and upkeep of aircraft 
and other equipment’s of Air Force. The representatives of Air Force stated that there is 
a certain amount of dependence because when they approach PSUs like HAL etc., the 
latter have got backend contracts with foreign Original Equipment Manufacturer. The 

35 
 
Committee express their concern over the prevailing situation and observe that unless 
and until domestic companies are able to indigenize manufacturing processes, self-
reliance could not be realized. The Committee recommend that in terms of self-reliance, 
our companies shall look at sustainability in all maintenance activities. The milestone in 
this regard is not easy to be achieved, nevertheless, with renewed emphasis on R&D 
and, even though in staggered manner, it can be achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
HAL: Aerospace industry is characterized by technology intensive, high investment, low 
volumes, high gestation period and technology restrictive.  In the past eight decades, 
HAL has built up competencies in the areas of Design, Development, Manufacture 
Upgrade and Overhaul of fighters, trainers, transport aircraft and helicopters, along with 
associated aero engines, aircraft systems, and avionics. HAL has taken up the 
responsibility of supporting the Indian Defence Services and channelized its capabilities 
in such a way that total product life cycle management is ingrained. As this industry is 
highly technology intensive and country is yet to achieve self-reliance in critical 
technologies, which includes Engines, raw materials, etc., the dependency on foreign 
OEMs still exists in some areas. However, lot of efforts have been made to transform 
from repair overhaul organisation into an organisation with capabilities in various 
segments namely: 
 
 Fixed wing Aircraft 
 Rotary Wing Aircraft 
 Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
 Aircraft equipment 
 Ground Handling Equipment(GHE) / Ground Support Equipment(GSE) 
 Spares 
 
However, with rapid growth in technology development, a continuous efforts in R & D is 
essential to bridge the gap. Towards this, HAL has enhanced its thrust on R & D and 
following initiatives have been taken. 
 
 R & D Corpus has been created with contribution of 10% of operating profit after 
tax every year and is being utilized both for in-house development and also to 
encourage R & D by private sector.   
 
 Collaboration with OEMs for acquisition of technology through ToT to assure 
complete support for our products. 
 
 Collaborations with Chairs in academic institutions for development of technology. 
HAL has established chairs with various institutions such as IIT Kanpur, 
Kharagpur, Bombay, Roorkee, Madras and IISc Bengaluru. 
 
 To maintain operational relevance and fleet serviceability of aircraft/helicopters for 
around 20-30 years of exploitation, HAL has undertaken upgrade of several 
platforms like Dornier Do 228, Jaguar and Hawk-i etc. without involvement of 
OEMs and project like Mirage 2000 upgrade jointly with OEM. 

36 
 
 
 In addition to Design and Development of aircraft / helicopters, various other 
technology development projects have been launched to increase self-reliance in 
critical areas like engines, Aircraft Display System, Mission Computers, Automatic 
Flight Control Systems for helicopters, Soft Net Radio etc. 
 
To support Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services for all projects 
throughout their service life HAL has initiated various initiatives. HAL continuously 
undertakes indigenisation of various items of foreign origin fitted on HAL platforms to 
reduce dependence on imports. Every year HAL indigenizes sizeable no. of imported 
items and total no of items indigenised during the last three years is given below: 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 954 638 487 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
HAL has taken significant progress in the past couple of years in respect of 
Indigenisation/ Make in India in line with Government initiatives as given below to 
encourage private participation for promoting domestic manufacturing capabilities of 
defence equipment in the country. These initiatives will help in reduction in import 
content and encourage/ create local aerospace ecosystems in the country. 
 
 Indigenisation through Make-II’ Procedure: A framework for implementation of 
‘Make-II’ Procedure at DPSUs/ OFB has been issued by MoD in Feb, 2019. In line 
with Make-II framework of MoD, HAL Make - II procedure was made and 
implemented at HAL in Dec 2019. HAL has also identified items to be indigenized 
through Make-II procedure and the same is hosted in HAL’s website. EOIs of these 
items are being issued in phased manner to take up for indigenisation under Make-
II and till date HAL has issued EoIs for more than 700 items till date for 
indigenisation under Make-II. 
 
 Hosting of Government Test Facilities for utilization by Private Vendors: HAL 
has hosted more than 85 types of test facilities available at HAL for utilization by 
Industries on payment basis. These facilities are being extensively utilised by both 
government organizations and Indian private companies. More than 500 no. of 
enquiries on utilization of test facilities received and completed. More than 55 
vendors (Indian Private Vendors and Govt. Organisations) have utilized the test 
facilities till now. 
 
 Uploading of imported items in Srijan Defence Portal: MoD has developed and 
launched Srijan Defence Portal (an indigenization portal) to support Indian 
Industries with opportunities for Make In India in Defence.  It acts as an interface or 
link between DPSUs and Indian private vendors for indigenization of imported 
components including alloys and special materials. Further, details of number of 
imported items uploaded on Srijan Defence Portal, are as under: 
 
 

37 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos. 5743 2352 1762 
Data as per Srijandefence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
 Participation in Defence Industrial Production Corridors: Government has 
announced to develop two defence industrial production corridors in Uttar Pradesh 
& Tamil Nadu to promote domestic production of defence equipment by public 
sector, private sector, and MSMEs [Micro, Small, and Medium-sized Enterprises]. 
HAL has planned capital investment of Rs 1200 Crs for the growth of UP Corridor 
and  approx. Rs. 706 Crs has been spent till now 
 
 Hosting of items in HAL Website: Apart from items identified under Make-II, HAL 
has hosted imported systems and sub systems of mechanical, electrical, avionics, 
instrumentation categories in HAL’s website under ‘Make in India’ to  enable private 
industries to take up for indigenization through HAL’s extant indigenisation 
procedure. Contact details of division wise nodal officer for each item are also 
provided in the website www.hal-india.co.in under Make In India. 
 
 Special Focus on MSME: MSMEs have also been granted relaxation in the 
registration and profitability criteria for consideration as eligible “Indian Vendor” for 
participation in the ‘Make in India’ initiative by GoI. MSME associations are being 
involved for carrying out feasibility studies for indigenisation projects. HAL Make-II 
procedure has earmarked projects with estimated cost (Design & development 
phase and Procurement phase) not exceeding Rs 250 Lakhs, for MSMEs/Startups. 
 
 Implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order: 
HAL has implemented the Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India), Order 
2017 issued by DIPP vide letter dt.15th Jun 2017 and its subsequent amendments.  
 
 Organizing/participation in exhibitions/ seminars: HAL is organising, 
participating and supporting various exhibitions/ seminars/ webinar organised with 
MOD’s initiatives to promote Indigenization and vendor development.  
 
 Support to Vendors: HAL also provides requisite technical support to private 
vendors during Indigenous development, prototype development and testing. HAL 
regularly organises Vendor Meet for capacity building of domestic players. Majors 
structures for LCA like wing, front fuselage, rear fuselage and structures for Su-30 
MKI like Vertical Fin, Stabilizer, Slat, canard are realised through private vendors by 
extended all technical support. 
 
BEL: BEL has been taking various initiatives towards sustainability in all maintenance 
activities. Major ones are listed below: 
 
 To provide professional Support Services to Army & IAF, BEL has already 
established Regional Product Support Centres inside IAF Campuses at 8 locations 
across India and also being established at 2 more locations. 

38 
 
 For Navy also, BEL has already established Water Front Support Centres at 5 
locations inside Navy Complex and another one is under establishment. 
 These Support Centres have been established with test & repair facilities for 
providing First Level of Repair/Logistic Support. 
 To augment further, BEL has planned to Establish Zonal MRO Centres PAN-India 
which will be equipped for carrying out  Repair, Maintenance and Overhaul 
Activities (Facilities once established will be at PAR with Army Workshops/IAF - 
Base Repair Depots). 
 These MRO Centres will also be capable of handling major repair facility 
requirements of Foreign OEM’s Equipment.  
 
 As regards achieving self-reliance in indigenous manufacturing, BEL has been 
continuously modernizing its infrastructure to be in tune with the changing needs of the 
technology/products. It is also essential for successful indigenization. Specific groups in 
all the Units scan the technology changes that are taking place and identify new 
processes in the world market for acquisition. This enables BEL to maintain its 
infrastructure on par with international standards. BEL’s recent major investments to 
build the manufacturing and testing capabilities are Product Development & Innovation 
Centre (PD&IC) inaugurated by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri (BEL Bengaluru Unit), New 
State-of-the-art manufacturing facility for Composite Material, Environmental Testing & 
Finishing inaugurated by Hon’ble Raksha Rajya Mantri (BEL Navi Mumbai Unit), New 
Production Building (BEL Hyderabad Unit), Secure Triple Play Services (BEL, 
Bengaluru Unit), 2100 Litre Climatic Chamber with 60 TR Chillers (BEL Kotdwara Unit) 
etc. 
 
 Modernization and up-gradation of infrastructure in the recent past has enabled 
BEL to indigenously manufacture critical equipment/systems there-by, minimizing the 
dependency on foreign OEMs. Some of the major systems like Central Acquisition 
Radar (Rohini), Akash Missile Warning System, 3D Tactical Control Radar, Low Level 
Light Weight Radar (Bharani), Hull Mounted Sonar etc., are indigenously designed and 
manufactured. It is pertinent to mention here that around 87% of company’s turnover is 
generated from indigenous technology by making use of in-house 
infrastructure/facilities, skilled manpower etc., which is paving way towards self-reliance. 
 
 BEL recognizes the need for continuous modernization & up-gradation of its 
facilities in order to have state-of-the-art set ups for promoting exports and for being 
able to offer the best in class products/systems to the Defence Services. To reach the 
next level i.e., having of world class technology and capabilities to address global 
market needs, it will go a long way, if Ministry extends the budgetary support. 
 
Further, Details of number of imported items uploaded on Srijan Defence Portal, are as 
under: 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 194 371 8 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 

39 
 
Every year BEL indigenizes no. of imported items and total no of items indigenised 
during the last three years is given below: 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 78 14 4 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
BEML Ltd: BEML has given major thrust to Self-Reliance and already achieved 
indigenization levels of over 90% in the mainline Mining & Construction products, over 
80% in Rail coaches & EMU's, and High Mobility Vehicles (HMV) and over 65% in Metro 
cars. The overall import content depends on product mix manufactured each year.  
 
R&D is central to BEML’s operations wherein over 65 % of the turnover comes from 
R&D developed products. The R&D expenditure is around 2 ~ 3% of its turnover. 
The Company launched “Make in India” Products 150T & 190T Dump Trucks, 180T 
Electrical / Hydraulic Excavators and 850HP Bulldozer successfully. These biggest 
electric drive dump trucks, excavator and bulldozer were designed and manufactured 
for the first time in India and are major import substitution products for the Mining sector. 
After successful trials, orders have been received for supply of 5 numbers of 180T 
Electrical Excavators, 7 numbers of for 150T and 8 numbers of 190T high end dumpers. 
Out of these, orders for 190T dumpers are under execution. Additionally, Trial-cum sale 
order was received from M/s. CIL for 2 nos. of 850HP bulldozers and 1 no. of 180T 
Hydraulic excavator. 
 
Indigenously Designed & Developed Arjun Armoured Repair & Recovery Vehicle in 
association with M/s. CVRDE, has undergone trials and orders are expected which will 
result in substantial FE savings for the Country.  
 
Design & Development of Metro car for Kolkata Metro Rail Corporation Limited was 
successfully completed and all 14 train sets were delivered to the customer. Catenary 
Maintenance Vehicle (CMV) was successfully designed & developed and supplied to 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation. 
 
To further enhance indigenization, BEML invited ‘Expression of Interest’ for 
manufacturing and technology partnerships with reputed global OEMs looking to 
establish and / or expand their supply chains / manufacturing base in India for the 
manufacture of various goods and/or service business in the areas of Defence & 
Aerospace, Rail & Metro, Mining & Construction, Engines and aggregates with the 
overarching objective of “Atma Nirbhar Bharat”. Positive Responses have been received 
and is under compilation. 
 
Towards protecting the Intellectual property of the Company, the Innovation Cell has 
succeeded in filing 210 IPRs since setting up, including 55 IPR during 2020-21 covering 
innovations in product design, manufacturing and operations. Eight patents have been 
awarded so far. BEML Limited have also instituted Awards to identify and encourage 
R&D engineers. 
 

40 
 
The Company is also engaging with premier academic institutions, R&D establishments 
like DRDO and ARAI and Industry Partners to leverage technology for the benefit of 
customers such as introducing AI features in machines. 
 
Steps taken by Company to bring down Import level 
 
 Indigenisation Committee has been formed at each manufacturing division having 
members from R&D, Planning, Purchase and Production. The indigenization 
activity is monitored at Corporate level on regular basis. 
 The Company is working towards 'ZERO IMPORT' policy and published EoIs for 
indigenous development of 850 items being imported. Development orders have 
already been placed for 659 items & sample accepted for 245 items. Further, 
efforts are on for indigenous development of balance items. 
 BEML has entered into ToT for indigenous manufacture of High Mobility Vehicle 
cabins. Further, plans are afoot for local manufacture of defence spares and 
propulsions for Metro Cars / EMUs through JVs. 
 
Further, Details of number of imported items uploaded on Srijan Defence Portal, are as 
under: 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 771 470 137 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
Every year BEML indigenizes no. of imported items and total no of items indigenised 
during the last three years is given below 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 36 53 13 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
BDL: Bharat Dynamics Limited is a manufacturer of Missiles and Under Water 
Weapons.Currently almost all the products manufactured by BDL are with DRDO 
Design and fully indigenised except for few items which are being imported.In case 
where foreign collaboration is involved ATGMs with Russian/French collaboration 70 to 
90% indigenisation has already been achieved.Balance % of items remain as all-time 
imports due to contract terms.In these items also BDL has been able to indigenise to a 
large extent and reduce defence on the foreign OEM to the minimum for all product 
support activities.BDL is also progressing on the obsolescence management where 
required to support the customer for the product life cycle management. In all the future 
programs with foreign OEMs BDL is ensuring this aspect is taken care of while finalising 
the agreements and phased wise ToT is achieved. 
 
Further, Details of number of imported items uploaded on Srijan Defence Portal, are as 
under: 
 
 

41 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 226 191 61 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
Every year BDL indigenizes no. of imported items and total no of items indigenised 
during the last three years is given below: 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 42 42 10 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
GSL: As part of Govt’s efforts to achieve self reliance in Defence Production, GSL have 
taken steps to support the Govt’s initiative and have indigenously developed several 
designs of following ships / platforms included in list of 101 items for import embargo: 
 
(i) Offshore Patrol Vessels 
(ii) Waterjet Fast Attack Crafts 
(iii) Survey Vessel  
(iv) 50 T Bollard Pull Tugs 
(v) Pollution Control Vessel 
(vi) Next Generation Missile Vessel  
(vii) Multi Purpose Vessels 
(viii) Anti Submarine Warfare Shallow Water Crafts 
 
(a) From the above indigenously developed designs, GSL has constructed and 
delivered Offshore Supply Vessels, Waterjet Fast Attack Crafts and Survey 
Vessels to Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard and exported to Navies of Friendly 
Foreign Nations. The indigenously developed designs have saved the country’s 
considerable amount of foreign exchange by avoiding import of ships / designs. 
The delivery of ships had contribution from private industries thereby creating 
opportunity for local industry in developing and manufacturing indigenous products 
and achieving Government of India’s goal of self-reliance. 
 
(b) Further, GSL is presently executing in-house designed 05 CGOPV Project, which 
will be completed by end 2021. Out of which, 03 Vessels have already been 
delivered to Indian Coast Guard as per project schedule. The ongoing 05 CGOPV 
Project in GSL has been indigenized under ‘Make in India’ initiative of GoI and 
indigenous content has increased to 70% compared to 60% for the previously built 
similar Project. Gear Boxes, Steering Gear System, Fin Stabilizer System, Steel 
Plates, Doors & Hatches, Gemini Boats, Heli Grid etc. have been indigenized 
successfully in coordination with local industries. 
 
(c) Govt of India has signed contract with GSL for indigenous construction of 02 nos 
state-of-the-art missile frigates of P1135.6 Class at GSL under ToT from the 
Russian Side. GSL has set target for indigenisation of equipment/systems as part 
of GoI “Make in India” initiative. Towards this, certain major equipment such 
Auxiliary Control System, Steering Gear System, Fin Stabiliser, Electronic Warfare 

42 
 
System Shakti, Combat Management System have been identified for 
indigenisation for P1135.6 Project. The execution of this Project will result in 
developing indigenous capability in construction of high-tech Naval ships, which 
are hitherto being acquired from foreign countries.  
 
Further, Details of number of imported items uploaded on Srijan Defence Portal, are as 
under: 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 43 7 0 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
 
 
Every year GSL indigenizes no. of imported items and total no of items indigenised 
during the last three years is given below: 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 3 2 0 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
GRSE: Almost all the warships and auxiliary vessels of the Indian Navy and 
Indian Coast Guard have been built by the DPSU shipyards. GRSE itself has delivered 
105 warships to these forces. As the integrators of these platforms, the shipbuilders 
have the technical knowhow, captive network of equipment suppliers and the 
infrastructure & facilities to provide seamless life cycle support to the ships built by 
them. 
 
Further, as part of the initiatives towards self-reliance in defence sector, the customers 
themselves (Indian Navy & Coast Guard) are focusing on indigenous equipment in the 
customer nominated  category and for the other items (mostly yard material and 
auxiliary equipment) GRSE has made adequate headway.  The result is that the 
shipyard has achieved over 90% indigenisation for Landing Craft Utility Ships, over 85% 
indigenisation for Anti-Submarine Warfare Corvettes and over 70% indigenisation for 
Fast Patrol Vessels. 
 
Also, in line with the Government of India policy, GRSE has adopted different 
Indigenisation programs like Make II Policy and Atma Nirbhar Bharat plan for 
indigenization The list of items susceptible for indigenisation are already uploaded in 
Srijan Portal.  GRSE also has a comprehensive ‘5 YEAR INDIGENISATION PLAN’           
(FY 2019-20 to FY 2023-24) for developing equipment worth approximately Rs. 400 
crores towards ensuring that indigenization targets for ongoing projects are met. 
 
Further, Details of number of imported items uploaded on Srijan Defence Portal, are as 
under: 
 
 

43 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 15 8 0 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
Every year GRSE indigenizes no. of imported items and total no of items indigenised 
during the last three years is given below: 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 3 1 0 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
MDL:  The Indian Navy has drawn up a comprehensive 15 years Indigenisation plan 
(2008-2022) under four major heads which also includes equipment/systems for 
submarines. MDL, as a shipyard has aligned itself to the indigenisation plan of the 
Indian Navy by formulating an indigenisation plan co-terminus with Navy’s 
Indigenisation Plan. Focus is on the development of competent vendor base, for import 
substitution. MDL has been successfully increasing the indigenisation content in 
shipbuilding projects.  From 42% indigenous content in earlier project MDL is now 
aiming for 75% in the ongoing project.  The % indigenisation in the projects 
successively executed by MDL is as follows: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project % Indigenisation Status 
1. P15 42 Delivered 
2. P17 52 Delivered 
3. P15A 59 Delivered 
4. P15B 72 Under Construction 
5. P17A 75 Under Construction 
 
HSL:  The core business of Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, a defence PSU, is building and 
repairs of ships and submarines. HSL has been consistently making efforts to boost 
indigenization in its ship construction projects under Make in India policy. 
 
Srijan Portal (www.srijandefence.gov.in)has been developed by MoD to identify 
potential vendors for indigenization of imported items identified by DPSUs / OFB. 
 
HSL has indigenised 5 items during the FY 2020-21 details of which are tabulated 
below:- 
Sl Name Savings 
(in Rs Lakhs) Remarks 
1 HP Air valves upto 200 Bar 101 Category : Other than Make II 
Status: Supply Order placed 
The value indicated is difference 
between basic cost of  import 
versus indigenous firm 
2 RO Plant 30 
3 Sewage treatment plant 20 
4 5.2 MW Alternator 100 
5 Gear Box, 5.2MW  728 
 Total 979  

44 
 
 
HSL has made following progress on indigenizing technology in order to achieve self-
reliance:- 
 
Sl Technology Progress at Yard 
1 Indigenous design of 
Diving support vessels  
Yard has designed first of kind of Diving 
support ships for Indian Navy in collaboration 
with Indigenous designer. 
2 40 % Indigenous content 
on Diving system 
The Diving system has been ordered on M/s 
Unique hydra of South Africa. The 40% of 
Diving system components is manufactured in 
India (worth Rs 150 Crore)  
3 2MW & 3MW Alternators 
are indigenous  
The 2MW & 3MW Alternators on DSV project 
is being manufactured by Indigenous vendor 
M/s TDPS, Bangaluru. 
4 ToT for Integrated 
Design of FSS 
Yard has signed a contract with M/s Anadolu 
Shipyard, Turkey for technical assistance in 
Integrated Ship design of FSS. 
 
HSL has identified following critical imported defence equipment / components that are 
consistently facing technical problems. Detailed proposals on such issues are being 
taken up with DRDO for indigenous development. 
 
Sl Equipment Technical problems 
1 Ring laser 
Gyro  
The Ring laser Gyro use to fail several times on OSS 
project however Bharat electronics Limited is 
manufacturing this item in collaboration with DRDO 
2 Helo deck 
lighting 
Frequent failure of Helo deck lighting. This issue will be 
forwarded to DRDO for indigenous development. 
 
 
In addition, following initiatives have been taken by HSL to promote indigenization:- 
 
(a) Provisions contained in ‘Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India), order 
2017’, issued by Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, have been incorporated in Purchase Manual for 
implementation. 
(b) Appointed Chief Indigenization Officer (CIO). Indigenisation Committee has also 
been constituted to select the items to be indigenized 
(c) The MAKE-II Procedure has been incorporated in the Purchase Manual in order to 
indigenize imported items through development of prototype. Four items have 
been selected for indigenisation under Make II. 
(d) Assurance of orders for future requirement in 5 years on the same Indian firm 
which executed Import substitute order successfully. 
(e) Relaxation of norms (prior experience and prior turnover) for MSMEs and start-ups 
in all public procurements, subject to meeting quality and technical specifications. 

45 
 
(f) Deemed registration of vendors (Vendors registered in other Defence PSUs are to 
be considered as deemed Registered) 
(g) Efforts are being made to identify Tier-I & Tier-II Vendors so as to facilitate 
development of import substitutes. 
(h) ‘Make in India’ Portal has been created in the HSL Website to attract vendors. The 
contact details of Nodal Officer have been provided in the portal. The list of items 
which are hitherto being imported are displayed on the website with an intent to 
Indigenise. 
(i) A direct link to the Make in India Page of GoI (http://www.makeinindia.com) has 
also been provided in the portal 
 
Further, Details of number of imported items uploaded on Srijan Defence Portal, are as 
under: 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 49 38 2 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
Every year HSL indigenizes no. of imported items and total no of items indigenised 
during the last three years is given below 
 
Year 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Nos 5 5 0 
Data as per Srijan Defence Portal as on 07.06.2021 
 
 
Planning  
 
Recommendation No. 26 
 
The Committee were apprised that the current Long Term Integrated Perspective 
Plan (LTIPP) in vogue is LTIPP 2012-27. LTIPP lays down broad guidelines for the 
Acquisition Plans over a period of 15 years. It does not include schemes in particular. 
Further, the plans are converted into schemes in three Five Year Plans (SCAPs) and in 
AAPs. A total of 75 schemes are expected to fructify during the remaining period of 
LTIPP 2012-27. Total funds envisaged for such schemes are Rs. 67,658.36 crore. 
Since more than half the period of LTIPP has completed, therefore, the Committee 
recommend that an analytical study shall be carried for assessment of ambition versus 
accomplishment report. The Committee opine that such an analysis will assist in guiding 
future course of action of Air Force. The details of outcome shall also be furnished to 
the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 

46 
 
 
Force Level  
 
Recommendation No. 27 
 
 
At the time of examination of Demands for Grants, the Committee were apprised 
about the status of availability of fighter squadrons with Air Force. In this respect, the 
Committee found that the total strength of Fighter Squadrons varies, depending upon 
phasing out of aircraft due to obsolescence as well as new inductions. The Committee 
find that the induction of new generation aircraft is underway in a planned manner. The 
development of advanced unmanned systems with better technology, long range Air 
Defence Missiles also contribute to Air Power. Hence, requirement of aircraft for Air 
Force varies with the threat 75 perception and induction of other combat systems that 
supplement Air Power. As far as the build-up in the strength of fighter squadrons is 
concerned, two pronged approach has been adopted by midlife upgradation of legacy 
aircraft to retain their operational relevance and induction of new aircraft. The 
Committee learn that MiG-29, Jaguar and Mirage-2000 aircraft are being upgraded in a 
phased manner as a part of obsolescence management so that they remain relevant 
and contemporary. The Committee observe that utilizing existing capabilities to its 
fullest by managing obsolescence issues is plausible. They desire that since aircraft are 
operated by human resource, due care should be taken while carrying out upgradation 
and maintenance.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 28 
 
 With regard to induction of new aircraft, the Committee were apprised that 
procurement of 36 Rafale aircraft has commenced and will significantly enhance 
operational capabilities of Air Force.  Meanwhile, induction of the balance Su-30 MKI 
aircraft from HAL is under process.  The induction of indigenous LCA is also ongoing, of 
which some LCA Mk 1 have been delivered.  Additionally, contract for procurement of 
83 x LCA Mk 1A from HAL has been signed recently.  The first batch of the aircraft are 
planned to be inducted within 03 years of signing of contract (FY 2023-24) and all 
deliveries would be completed within 08 years after commencement of deliveries.  
Induction of these aircraft would augment the present overall fighter squadron strength 
of IAF by four over a period of next eight years.  The Committee recommend that the 
timelines for deliveries of the above stated aircraft shall be stringently followed so that 
desirable strength of combat capabilities are achieved by Air Force. 
 
  

47 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
1. 23 Rafale aircraft have been accepted by the IAF team. 20 aircraft have been 
ferried to India and the remaining three aircraft are in process of being ferried to India in 
May 2021. The delivery of aircraft is as per contractual schedule till date. 
 
2. Under the two contracts with HAL for supply of 20 LCA MK1 aircraft each in IOC 
and FOC configuration, sixteen LCA IOC have been delivered. Delivery of FOC aircraft 
has also commenced wherein two aircraft have been delivered and another four have 
been signaled out. Further, HAL has planned to deliver 8 twin seater aircraft (04IOC + 
04 FOC) with AAR capability in 2022-23. Contract for 83 LCA Mk 1A has been signed 
with HAL on 25 Jan 21. Delivery envisaged in the contract is T0 + 36 months to T0 + 96 
months (Where T0 is the date of contract signing). Out of contracted 272 Su-30 MKI 
aircraft, total 271 aircraft have been delivered by HAL. 
 
Recommendation No. 29 
 
 The Committee find that induction of indigenously developed LCA Mk-IA would 
partially offset drawdown of number of fighter squadrons to cater for phasing out of MiG 
21 and MiG-27 squadrons. The Committee cautiously state that further advancements 
in indigenous development of fighter aircraft shall be undertaken so that in near future 
Air Force does not depend solely on LCA Mk-I which is a light combat aircraft.  On this 
account, the Committee were reassured that a case for additional fighter aircraft is 
under process with enhanced indigenous content and technology transfer.  Also, the 
IAF is fully supporting DRDO in the Design & Development of indigenous Advanced 
Medium Combat Aircraft (AMCA). The Committee recommend that Ministry of Defence 
shall regularly review that status of progress of AMCA so that it rolls out within a 
stipulated timeframe and if the progress is not satisfactory, alternate aircraft may be 
procured so that squadron strength does not deplete further. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. MRFA. An RFI for procurement of 114 fighter aircraft was hosted on MoD and 
SHQ website on 06 Apr 2018. The procurement would be through the Make in India 
provisions of the DAP 2020. Responses have been received for eight aircraft types and 
the ASQRs for the procurement are being finalised. 
 
2. AMCA. IAF is providing active support to DRDO towards meeting the 
developmental timelines of the aircraft. Preliminary Design Review for AMCA was 
carried out in Nov 2020 and the Critical Design Review is tentatively planned in Dec. 
2021. 
 
  

48 
 
Trainer Aircraft 
 
Recommendation No. 31 
 
 A representative of Air Force intimated the Committee that albeit current Air 
Force is managing with the existing strength, more trainer aircraft would be desirable to 
undertake training responsibilities.  The Committee further found that in order to cater 
for the shortage of trainer aircraft, IAF is in the process of acquiring 106 indigenous 
HTT-40 Basic Trainer aircraft from Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL).  While taking 
note of the fact that process of certification of HTT-40 has been pending for some time, 
the Committee recommend that immediate steps must be taken to acquire/ procure of 
HTT-40 in time so that training curriculum of Air Force pilots is not disrupted. 
Developments on the same shall be intimated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Development of HTT-40 aircraft. The aircraft has recently undergone spin trials. 
Developmental activities towards certification are being progressed. PSQR (Preliminary 
Service Qualitative Requirements) validation trials are being undertaken by the Testing 
Agency of the IAF. 
 
2. Procurement Process. AoN for procurement of 106 BTA and change of 
category to Buy ‘Indian-IDDM’ was revalidated by DAC on 11 Aug 2020. Initially, 70 
HTT-40 BTA will be procured from HAL along with associated equipment. Balance 36 
BTA will be procured on successful operationalisation of HTT-40 aircraft in the IAF. RFP 
has been issued to HAL on 04 Feb 21. Technical bid has been opened on 15 Apr 21 
and TEC is under process. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 32 
 
The Ministry of Defence furnished a note stating that Kiran (Intermediate Jet 
Trainer) aircraft have started phasing out on reaching the life span since 2016. 
However, a scheme for Total Technical Life extension from present 8,000 hr to 8,500 hr 
by HAL has been accepted. With this, the Kiran MK-I/IA fleet is likely to be exploited till 
2025-26. The Committee recommend that adequate precautionary measures shall be 
adopted while using the IJT for training purposes lest precious life of our pilots will fall in 
danger.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 
 
  

49 
 
Transport Planes and Helicopters  
 
Recommendation No. 33 
 
The Committee desired to know about the availability of transport planes and 
helicopters with Air Force. In respect thereto, they were assured that Adequate 
transport aircraft and helicopters are available to meet operational and administrative 
requirements. Phase out of Transport Aircraft and Helicopters is based on Calendar Life 
/ Flying Hours as designated by the Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM). IAF 
undertakes Life Extension of these aircraft from time to time depending upon the actual 
condition of these platforms. The Committee desire that adequacy in transport planes 
and helicopters should be maintained by Air Force as they are backbone of our fighting 
strength at far flung areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 
Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI) Project Phase-II (MAFI_II) 
 
Recommendation No. 34 
 
 The Committee wished to be apprised about the status of night landing facilities 
at Air Force bases.  In this regard, the Ministry of Defence submitted that night landing 
facilities are provisioned as per the operational commitments of a base.  Installation of 
night landing facilities is planned when requirement for night operations is envisaged.  
Installation of night landing facilities is planned at 18 IAF airfields as part of 
Modernization of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) Project Phase-II.  The Committee 
recommend that the projects under MAFI-II shall be completed with stipulated 
timeframe. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Indian Air Force has 53 Air Force bases, out of which 42 have permanent night 
landing facilities.  The MAFI Phase-II Project is scheduled to be executed within 
stipulated timelines (i.e. May 2024). 
 
 
Accidents  
 
Recommendation No. 35 
 
The Committee were concerned to learn about the accidents of aircraft. The 
Ministry of Defence replied that the aircrafts’ accidents have reduced by over 60 per 
cent between the 11th plan period to 13th plan. In the current financial year, only two 

50 
 
accidents have occurred and the accident rate is the lowest in last 50 years. The 
Committee applaud the measures being taken to curb accidents, nevertheless, 
recommend that a foolproof strategy be chalked out so that Air Force operations 
become safer with time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 
Manpower  
 
Recommendation No. 36 
 
During examination of Demands for Grants, the Committee found that the 
shortage in officers’ strength is approximately 4 percent and is a variable figure which 
keeps fluctuating depending on commissioning cycle, premature separation of officers 
etc and is considered negligible for such calculations. The inductions are planned so as 
to gradually bring the strength at par with the sanctioned establishment. With regard to 
strength of airmen, the shortage is approximately 5% and is a variable figure. Presently 
12,330 trainees are 80 undergoing training at various training institutes. The Committee 
recommend that a thorough review of measures undertaken for reduction of deficiency 
of manpower and improvements in training infrastructure shall be carried out and they 
may be apprised of the progress while furnishing Action Taken Replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action Taken Replies have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairman in sealed cover 
being ‘Classified’. 
 
NAVY 
 
Recommendation Nos. 37-39 
 
Recommendation No. 37 
 
 The Committee find that Navy is prime manifestation of India’s maritime power 
which shapes maritime domain and safeguards national maritime interests. To 
safeguard our national maritime interests, continuous Mission Based Deployments are 
being undertaken by Indian Navy. Indian Ocean Region (IOR) has multiple security 
challenges as it contains major shippings lines and nearly 1,20,000 ships transit through 
various choke points. Almost 13000 ships are in IOR at any given point of time. The 
region is centre of gravity of piracy & transnational crimes and also locus of 70% of 
world’s natural disasters. Providing Humanitarian assistance during disaster is another 
vital role played by Navy. The Committee are also aware and they applaud that large 
scale evacuations was also carried by Indian Navy during COVID-19 crisis. In the 
considered opinion of the Committee, in order to run their operations efficiently, Navy 
unquestionably need consistent and adequate inflow of funds.   

51 
 
 
Recommendation No. 38 
 
 For examination of the Demands for Grants of Navy for the year 2021-22, the 
Committee had sought from the Ministry of Defence a statement indicating the proposed 
and earmarked outlay at Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and actual 
expenditure for Navy during the last five years and the current year.  After gleaning 
through the documents furnished to them, the Committee find that total demand of Navy 
including Revenue and Capital outlays, for the year 2021-22 is Rs. 1,05,177.61 crore 
while the allocation is Rs. 56,614.23 crore resulting into a deficit of Rs. 48.563.38 crore. 
The Committee take serious note of huge gap in projection and allocation. The 
Committee further looked into detailing of Revenue and Capital Overheads and their 
findings are contained in succeeding paragraphs of this recommendation portion.  
 
Recommendation No. 39 
 
 The Revenue budget has two constituents viz. salary and non-salary. Major 
portion of the budget head primarily goes for salary expenses which is a fixed 
expenditure. The non-salary expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, ration, 
transportation, fuel, etc. which are essential for regular training and operational 
preparedness of Navy. In Budget Estimates (BE) for FY 2021-22, against Revenue 
Head, projection of Navy was Rs. 34,256.83 crore and allocation to be made is Rs. 
23,360.68 crore, so there is a reduction of Rs. 10,896.25 crore. From the examination of 
Demands for Grants, the Committee record that the average increase in revenue 
budget allocation over the last five years has been 8.05 percent. However, the 
requirements projected continue to be significantly higher than the allocations.  As 
brought out in earlier paras of this Report, a healthy Revenue budget is significant for 
regular upkeep, training and operational preparedness of the Force. Therefore, the 
Committee aver that adequate funding shall invariably be provided to Navy for meeting 
their operational cost.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This Ministry receives ceilings separately for Revenue (Salary and Non-Salary) 
and Capital, based on which funds are allocated to services. Since Ceilings received 
are not as per projections made, it may not be possible to provide allocations to Navy or 
any other service/organization as per their projected requirement.  Keeping a certain 
percentage for Revenue or Capital also depends on ceilings received. Therefore, it may 
also not be possible to maintain a particular ratio in favor of Capital or Revenue. 
However, every effort is made to ensure that no project/ proposal is shelved for want of 
funds. As and when required, additional funds are sought. In absence of receipt of 
additional funds, requirements are reprioritized for optimum utilization of available 
resources. 
 
  

52 
 
Recommendation No. 40 
 
Capital budget cardinally provides for expenditure on modernisation, 
enhancement of force level, infrastructure development, etc. Under Capital Head, in BE 
for FY 2021-22, Navy’s projection was Rs. 70,920.78 crore and allocation to be made is 
Rs. 33,253.55 crore. There is a deduction of Rs. 36,677.23 crore in allocation vis-a-vis 
demand. It is apparent for the Committee to see that Naval Capital budget has not seen 
substantial increase over past years. Most of the provisions are utilized for paying off 
committed liabilities, hence leaving minimal scope for new schemes. The Committee 
are very clear in their exhortation that due to dearth of funds for new schemes, 
capability enhancement of Navy cannot progress at desired pace. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Defence shall review the aspects related to 
Capital allocation to Navy and funds be allocated in accordance to advancements of 
their capital acquisition schemes. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Funds are allocated to the Services, including Navy, taking into consideration 
pace of expenditure, committed liabilities, approval stage of various projects/schemes 
etc. Though the allocations received are not as per the projections made, however, 
based on expenditure pattern during the year, additional funds will be sought at 
Supplementary/RE stages. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it is ensured that 
capital acquisition schemes of Navy do not suffer due to want of funds. 
 
The BE allocations of Navy under Capital Head for the last three years is tabulated 
below:  
 
 (Rs in crore) 
Year BE allocations 
2019-20 22227.53 
2020-21 25666.49 
2021-22 32050.02 
 
It can be seen from the above table that Navy’s BE allocations under Capital Head 
are consistently increasing.  
 
Recommendation No. 41 
 
 In case of Revised Estimated (RE) for FY 2020-21, under Revenue head, Navy’s 
projection was Rs. 28,379.84 crore and allocation made was Rs. 23,347.69 crore. The 
allocation is short of demand by Rs. 5,032.15 crore. However, the expenditure incurred 
till December 2020 was merely Rs. 15,135.30 crore. Under Capital head, in RE 2020-
21, the projection of Navy was Rs. 51,769.28 crore against which an allocation of Rs. 
37,542.88 crore was made, hence Rs. 14,226.40 crore short of demand. However, the 
expenditure in three quarters of FY 2020-21 i.e. upto December 2020 was only Rs. 

53 
 
25,384.81 crore. With regard to the capital budget, the Committee were apprised by the 
representatives of Ministry of Defence who stated that in capital budget at RE stage 
Navy got an additional amount of Rs. 11,000 crore which catered for budget shortfall in 
the capital allocation as well as the emergency procurement. Further, it was added that 
majority of Naval Capital expenditure goes for ship construction. The ship construction 
timelines are unpredictable, some of the payments were to slip to next year due to 
COVID-19. The Committee construe that as estimation of ship construction timelines 
should be pursued with the shipyards at commencement of contract and constant 
reviews be held at regular intervals, Further, the Committee desire that those 
obligations which had been deferred due to covid, shall now be accelerated so that 
yearly procurement plans are mostly concluded by the end of the FY 2020-21 i.e. March 
2021. The efforts initiated and outcome of the same be intimated to the Committee 
simultaneously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
COVID-19 has severely affected work related to shipbuilding in all the shipyards. 
Most of the foreign as well as domestic OEMs could not depute their reps for works 
related with major shipbuilding projects. The shipyards also faced shortage of casual 
labourers due to their exodus from major cities due to the pandemic. Notwithstanding, 
measures were instituted to ensure continuation of work related to shipbuilding by 
undertaking online consultations from OEMs or their reps and by following SOPs 
regulated by the State Governments with adherence to COVID-19 guidelines. It is 
pertinent to highlight that IN was able to fully expend the allocations at RE stage. 
 
Percentage Share of Navy Budget 
 
Recommendation No. 42 
 
The Committee desired to know the percentage share of Navy budget, both in 
Revenue and Capital segments, out of the total Defence Budget during the past years. 
The data furnished by the Ministry of Defence revealed an evident increase in 
percentage share of Revenue budget of Navy out of Defence Services Estimates from 
6.10 per cent in 2014-15 to 7.10 per cent in 2020-21. At the same time there is 
decrease in capital budget share from 10.41 percent in 2014-15 to 8.26 per cent in 
2020-21. Albeit, in absolute terms, increase is visible under both revenue and capital 
heads during the same time period. In case of Revenue head, in 2014-15, the allocation 
was Rs. 13,975.79 crore which increased to Rs. 23,360.68 crore in 2021-22.  As far as 
Capital part is concerned, the allocation of Rs. 23,832.67 crore in 2014-15 grew to Rs. 
33,253.55 crore in FY 2021-22. The Committee observe that only a healthy balance 
between Revenue and Capital overheads of Naval budget would determine both, all 
time operational preparedness and modernization drive of Navy. Based on the above 
analogy, the Committee recommend that funds shall be demanded and allocated to 
Navy in light of the above observation. 
  

54 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. Based on 
progress of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc., additional funds will be 
sought at Supplementary/RE stage. 
 
 
Budget for Modernization 
Recommendation No. 43 
 
The Committee were apprised that in the FY 2020-21, an amount of Rs. 
24,948.28 crore was allocated at BE stage and an additional amount of Rs. 11,084.50 
crore has been allocated to Navy in RE 2020-21 over BE 2020-21 under Modernisation 
(Capital Acquisition) Head (which includes Committed Liabilities and New Schemes). 
Further, earmarking between Committed Liabilities and New Schemes is carried out by 
Service Head Quarters based on prioritization among the projects/schemes and the 
progress of contractual milestones. Against these allocations, an expenditure of Rs. 
24,568.88 crore (upto December, 2020) has been incurred in FY 2020-21. The 
Committee also find that in FY 2020-21, Navy had sought additional allocation of Rs. 
29,672.68 crore in first supplementary to cater for anticipated Carry Forward Liabilities 
of Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs)/ Foreign/ Private Vendor and 
Shipbuilding Projects, P8I, Multi Role Helicopter (MRH), progress of other aviation 
schemes, Annual Major Works Programme (AMWP), Married Accommodation Project 
(MAP), Varsha, Seabird, marine projects including Strategic Infrastructure Projects, etc. 
No additional allocation is received in First Supplementary. In 2nd Supplementary, an 
additional amount of Rs. 11,645.59 crore had been sought to cater for anticipated Carry 
Forward Liabilities of DPSUs/ Foreign/ Private Vendor and Shipbuilding Projects, P8I, 
MRH, progress of other aviation schemes, Annual Major Works Programme, MAP, 
Varsha, Seabird, marine projects including Strategic Infrastructure Projects, 
procurement of weapon equipments/ systems, missiles and torpedoes; emergency 
procurements and custom duty payments, etc.  Second and Final supplementary is yet 
to be approved by the Parliament. In the first instance, the Committee see that 
anticipated committed liabilities to the tune of Rs. 29,672.68 crore denied in first 
supplementary would generate backlogs ahead. This will certainly lead to rippling effect 
on future modernization programme. Secondly, the Committee wish to recommend that 
the demands sought in second supplementary are judiciously provisioned to Navy so 
that anticipated expenditure are paid off. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Navy has been allocated an amount of Rs. 39,972.82 Crore in MA (Modified 
Appropriation) in FY 2020-21 under Modernization (Capital Acquisition) Head. This 
figure in final grant is Rs 15,374.82 Crore more than BE allocation of Rs 24,598.00 
Crore and the expenditure incurred against these allocations is Rs. 40,084.65 Crore 
upto March (Final-as on 19th May, 2021). It may be seen that Navy has been able to 
utilize the funds allocated for its modernization.  
 

55 
 
Indigenisation 
 
Recommendation No. 45 
 
 As regards indigenization, the Committee were apprised during deliberations that 
Indian Navy has been at the forefront of indigenization and has aligned itself fully with 
the Make in India initiative of the government. The Navy has nurtured indigenous 
shipbuilding programme since 1960, and over 130 indigenously build ships have been 
commissioned, till date. Presently, 48 ships and submarines are being constructed 
indigenously in Indian shipyards. In addition, Navy has contracted for 12 Dornier 
aircraft, 16 Advanced Light Limited Helicopter and eight Chetak helicopter with 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited last years. IN would maintain domestic and foreign 
outlay 70:30 in next 5-7 years. It was further informed by Ministry of Defence that in 
2019-20, Rs. 17401.48 crore was incurred on indigenous procurements. Comparatively 
in 2020-21, upto January 2021, Rs. 14574.44 crore worth procurements were made 
from domestic market by Navy. Taking into account, the lockdown periods due to covid 
pandemic and subsequent slowdown of economic activites, the Committee view  that 
indigenized purchases of Navy had progressed well during the year. The committee 
commend the initiatives undertaken by Navy in realizing self-reliance in country-s 
Defence and desire that the right trajectory of indigenization continue  to be constantly 
pursued. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
IN concur with remarks of the Committee and would progress the indigenization 
efforts at the right earnest. 
 
Recommendation No. 48 
 
 The Committee explored that island territories are viable of developing into an 
optional aircraft carrier. Country is enriched with island territories having runways which 
can be operationalized. In fact, some of these islands are strategically and favourably 
located on both sides of the coast suited for blocking and dominating the ingress routes 
provided runways there are made operational. The Committee infer that above proposal 
is worthwhile and priortising investment for development of various island territories as 
provisional aircraft carrier shall be contemplated by Ministry and decisions on the same 
shall be furnished to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is true that Country has island territories located strategically, both on the East 
and the Wes Coast and overall infrastructure development in these territories is being 
progressed in tandem with the threat perception and long term strategic vision. As 
suggested by the Committee, investment is being prioritized to develop OTR Ports 
and extension of existing runways in Andaman and Nicobar islands to support forward 
development of ships and aircraft. Further, Armed Forces are also supporting the NITI 
Aayog initiative of developing a Joint User Airfield in Minicoy, as well as the MoCA/AAI 
Project for development of the Agatti airfield. Once completed these assets can be 

56 
 
effectively leveraged to dominate the ingress routes, especially from the Malacca Strait 
and the eight degree off the Lakshadweep. 
 
 
Naval Exercises 
 
Recommendation No. 49 
 
 The Committee were apprised on role and purpose of Quadrilateral Security 
Dialogue (QUAD) which is a Naval exercise collaborated with other Navies to ensure 
that there is freedom of navigation in the Indo-Pacific. The Committee endorse such 
operational cooperation and they recommend Government can explore possibilities of 
extension of Naval  exercises  among QUAD nations in domain of defence as well. The 
Committee look forward to advancement in this regard and shall be informed by Ministry 
of Defence. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
IN has been participating in bilateral and multilateral maritime exercises with the 
QUAD members. The objective of these exercise is to establish interoperability between 
the participating Navies, improve skill-sets, exchange ‘best-practices’ including lessons 
learnt, and also strengthen the bridges of friendship amongst the participants. In 
addition, passage exercises are conducted with the navies of friendly foreign countries 
at every available opportunity.  
 
The details of the bilateral and multilateral exercises conducted with QUAD 
countries are as follows:- 
 
Ser Exercises Countries Remarks 
Multilateral Engagements (involving QUAD countries) 
(a) MALABAR 
 
Australia, India, 
Japan and USA 
 Conducted annually 
 Area of conduct alternately between IOR 
and Western Pacific 
(b) RIMPAC Lead - USA  Conducted biennially 
(c) IMX Lead - USA  Conducted annually 
(d) CUTLASS 
EXPRESS 
Lead - USA  Conducted annually 
(e) KAKADU Lead - Australia  Conducted biennially 
(f) LA PEROUSE Australia, 
France, India, 
Japan and USA 
 French led exercise. 
 Maiden participation by India in Apr 21 
 Conducted in Eastern IOR 
Bilateral Engagements With QUAD Countries 
(g) AUSINDEX Australia  Conducted biennially 
 Alternately hosted by India and Australia 
(h) JIMEX Japan  Conducted biennially 

57 
 
 
Recommendation No. 50 
 
 The Committee were concerned about the implementation of safety measures in 
Navy so as to curb accident rate. In this issue, the Ministry of Defence brought to the 
notice of the Committee various measures taken to enhance safety awareness and 
mitigate accidents. It was submitted through a written reply that aspects have always 
been accorded utmost importance by the Indian Navy. Adherence to safe working 
practices is a pre-requisite for operational effectiveness for the Indian Navy, wherein 
personnel operate in an equipment intensive and potentially hazardous environment. To 
ensure safe conduct of all operations within their respective domains, Class Authorities, 
namely Flag Officer Sea Training (for surface), Flag Officer Naval Aviation (for aviation) 
and flag Officer Submarines (for sub-surface) have been existing for a long time. The 
implementation of Safety Consciousness is a process in continuation. The measures 
facilitate improvement in the working environment from the safety point of view, without 
curbing the traditional naval ethos of initiative and boldness. The Committee desire that 
Indian Navy continues to keep ‘safety’ at work at all times as well as in operations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Stringent adherence to safety have been implemented as a part of Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) for all naval evolutions, and concentrated efforts to imbibe 
‘Safety Culture’ as a way of life amongst naval personnel are being progressed. Accordingly, 
several initiatives have been introduced based on emerging requirements to inculcate a 
‘think safety’ attitude. Further, training towards a safety oriented approach to various 
evolutions has been included from the ab-initio stage itself and is suitably reinforced at 
subsequent stages. IN concurs with the remarks of the Committee and continues to keep 
‘safety’ at work and operations in prime focus with constant endeavour to minimise 
accidents/ incidents through the established process of sensitisation of personnel, proper 
briefings/ debriefings, and adherence to Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). 
 
Recommendation No. 51 
 
 After going through the data on the existing and sanctioned strength of the 
manpower in the Navy, the committee found that as on 31 December 2020, the 
shortage in case of officers (excluding medical and dental officers) was 11.4 percent. 
The committee are happy to take note of the improvement on comparison from the 
position in 2011 when the shortage was 21.5 percent. The shortage of sailors has been 
reduced from 22.65 percent in 2011 to 18.49 percent in 2020 (on 31 December 2020). 
The committee are confident that current endeavours shall result into ameliorating 
manpower shortages in Navy, therefore, they recommend for continuation of the same 
trend in future and for achieving the optimum number of its force level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The steps undertaken by the IN to mitigate shortages would be continued to 
overcome the manpower shortfalls. 
 

58 
 
 
JOINT STAFF 
 
Recommendation No. 52 
 
 The Committee learn from the detailed discussion on Demands for Grants that 
Ministry of Defence is introducing process of jointness and integration of the three 
services. The prioritization of procurements are being done to regulate imbrications in 
purchases by the three Services namely Army, Navy and Air Force. The Committee 
infer that integration of logistics would surely help in checking redundancy and saving 
upon the budget, however, they are cautious to perceive if this would lead to 
compromising upon individual insufficiencies for any of the Services at any point of time. 
Therefore, while welcoming logistical integration of processes at central level of the 
three services, the Committee recommend that independent needs of all the services 
shall not be overlapped so that there be no need of adjustments in regular activities of 
training and maintenance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issue is being deliberated in detail as part of the Study for providing support 
to Theatre Commands wherein commonality of equipment/ inventory between the three 
services is being established. The endeavour would be to establish common supply 
chain wherever feasible. 
 
Recommendation No. 53 
 
An overview of budget of Joint Staff was taken up by the Committee. They find 
that  allocation in BE 2021-22 is Rs. 4,543.04 crore made against a projection of Rs. 
6,251.11 crore, a deficit of Rs. 1708.07 crore. Further study of outlays, revealed that 
that there is hardly any increase in BE 2021-22 from the last year when BE was Rs 
4,461.44 crore. The Committee were apprised by the representatives of Ministry of 
Defence that on the basis of expenditure further money will be sought subsequent 
budgetary stages of the year.  The Committee feel that in view of the enhancement in 
jointness of procurement etc. by the three services, there will be augmentation in 
responsibilities of Joint Staff. Therefore, the Committee recommend for enhanced 
allocation to Joint Staff at consequent stages during the year, otherwise substantial 
progress in expanding horizons of defence will be delayed. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. Based on 
progress of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc., additional funds will be 
sought at Supplementary/RE stage. 
 
  

59 
 
 
Recommendation No. 54 
 
In course of examining DFG 2021-22, the Committee discovered that the land for 
construction of few establishments has not yet been finalized. The Committee construe 
that wars in modern times are no more limited to conventional battlefield conflicts but 
cyber and space attacks are becoming new normal. Therefore, they in no uncertain 
words recommend that the process of acquiring land which is evidently a very crucial 
stage of progressing further and construction of building infrastructure shall be 
expedited and at no cost shall be deferred due to want of requisite money. 
Developments in regard thereto shall be furnished to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No issue of land for the construction of establishments is currently pending due 
budgeting constraints on our records. Further, projects are progressed for sanction only 
after accord of budget approvals. 
 
Recommendation No. 55 
 
Glancing at the figures submitted to them, the Committee notice that lesser 
expenditure had been incurred during FY 2020-21, whereby only Rs. 2,266.70 crore 
was spent till the end of December 2020. The amount is nearly half the allocated 
amount for that year.  The Committee were given to understand that there was less 
expenditure in FY 2020-21 due to Covid as most of the training programmes were run 
online. The Committee are aware of the fact that the demands of Joint Staff are not 
limited solely to training activities. Therefore, it goes without saying that the money 
saved under training head shall be prudently utilized against other overheads for holistic 
development.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 In MA (Final Grant) 2020-21, an amount of Rs. 3,602.20 crore had been 
allocated to Jt. Staff (including Revenue and Capital Heads). Against these allocations, 
an expenditure of Rs.3,565.98 crore (98.99% of final grant) has been done till 
March(Final-as on 19th May, 2021). The expenditure percentage is indicative of 
optimum utilization of the allocations to Joint Staff in FY 2020-21. 
 
Recommendation No. 56 
 
 In course of examination of DFG 2021-22, the Committee found that An Air 
Defence Command (ADC) and a Maritime Theatre Commander (MTC) are in advanced 
stages of finalization. It was further apprised by the Ministry of Defence that ADC will be 
responsible for the air space of the entire nation both during peace and war while MTC 
would look after the maritime domain. These would provide the operational flexibility, 
resource optimization, unity of command and unity of effort. The Committee view that 
this integration has the potential to unlock critical core strength within the three services 
to bridge limitations and complement each other’s competencies in battle to optimize 
combat power. On the obverse, the Committee find that a very positive development 

60 
 
intertwined with the modernisation and advancement of four Forces, and such 
recommend that no stone should be unturned to take this development to finality. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the details in this regard with the Action Taken 
Replies furnished by the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The objective of setting up ADCs MTC would be to integrate and synergise 
relevant elements of the Indian Armed Forces for the joint application of force in the 
maritime domain. Study Report for establishing the Maritime Theatre Command is at an 
advanced stage, with large degree of consensus having been achieved through 
extensive deliberations with all stakeholders. 
 
 
MILITARY ENGINEER SERVICES (MES) 
 
Recommendation No. 57 
 
The Committee learn that Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch of Military Engineer 
Services (MES) is responsible for monitoring of budget allotted for Carry Over Capital 
and certain Heads of Revenue and Maintenance Services for Army only. The 
allocations for the balance Code Heads of Army and all Code Heads of other Services 
is carried out to lower MES formations by Service Headquarters through staff channel. 
The Committee note that during the year 2020-21, under Capital Head only Rs.3,450.00 
crore could be utilized out of Rs. 7,343.17 crore and under Revenue Head only Rs. 
6329.70 crore could be utilized out of Rs. 10,713.04 crore which leaves a large amount 
of unutilized fund. The Committee understand that due to Covid-19 pandemic situation 
there were delays in reaching the targets of expenditure under Revenue and Capital 
Head but taking note of the fact that due to the crunch in Budgetary grants, AMWP 
ceilings were regulated, six works worth Rs. 484.41 crore were reprioritized under Army 
and 57 works worth Rs. 2263.71 crore were reprioritized under Air Force. While taking 
note of this dismal performance the Committee recommend that MES should improve 
their trend of utilization of budget in a well organized manner and adhere to the 
prescribed timelines so that the unutilized funds are not surrendered at the end of 
Financial Year and due to non-availability of funds, reprioritization of certain sanctioned 
works under the three services does not take place in coming years. Such a trend in 
fiscal parameters does not bode well with the prudent financial principles. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the figures of final expenditure in 2020-21 under 
Revenue as well as Capital Heads at the time sending action taken replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Observations of the Committee have been noted and all out efforts are being 
made to ensure complete utilization of allotted funds. In the   past  five years there has 
not been any major under-utilization of allotted funds. In fact, additional funds were 
sought to maintain the targets set by MES. As per reply to Point No  4 (i) to 
Examination  of Demand of Grants for the MoD for the year 2021-22, submitted in 
Feb 2021, the figures of MES expenditure under Capital and Revenue outlay were 

61 
 
updated as on 31 Dec 2020, hence there was a difference noted in the allocated 
and utilized fund. 
 
2. The FY 2020-21 has been an unprecedented year not only for MES but for also 
for entire Nation. Due to the lockdown, construction activities did not take place as 
planned and even after lifting of the lockdown, the labour shortage continued. Despite 
the challenges posed by pandemic, MES strived to ensure nearly 100% expenditure of  
allotted funds. The state of final expenditure for FY 2020-21 as on 31 Mar 2021 is as 
under: 
 
  Capital Head 
(Rs. in crore) 
Revenue Head 
Rs. in crore) 
(i) Funds allocated 5911.08 10713.04 
(ii) Funds utilized 5917.20 10499.60 
 
 
3. As per reply to Point No  4 (ii) to Examination  of Demand of Grants for the MoD 
for the year 2021-22, submitted in Feb 2021, it was mentioned that Re-prioritization of 
certain sanctioned works was done in Financial Years  2018-19 and  2019-20, 
during which the 06  works of Army and 57 works of Air Force had been  re-prioritized. It 
is submitted that, despite of all COVID related challenges faced during FY 2020-21, no 
re-prioritization of works was done by MES. 
 
EX-SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME 
 
Recommendation No. 58 
 
 The Committee note that during the year 2020-21, ECHS has been allocated Rs. 
3451.98 crore against the projection of Rs. 6892.00 crore out of which only Rs. 2913.34 
crore had been utilized. The Ministry has put forth the projection of Rs. 5643.62 crore in 
2021-22. The Committee further learn that the Ministry of Defence has provided 
additional financial sources for current pandemic management to ECHS which is to the 
tune of Rs. 150 crore. During the course of evidence while examining Demands for 
Grants 2021-22 the Committee note that there were bills pending as the Bills processing 
Agency at Mumbai is not clearing the bills in time and there are inordinate delays 
reported in clearing the bills of Ex-Servicemen pertaining to the treatment during 
COVID-19 pandemic situation in the empanelled hospitals. The Committee believe that 
this delay in timely payment of medical bills of the empanelled hospitals may have 
detrimental effects on the healthcare Services provided to the ECHS beneficiaries, and, 
therefore, recommend that if the present additional allocation is not adequate to settle 
the bills, more funds should definitely be provided to ECHS at supplementary Grants 
stage to do away with the pendency of Medical Treatment related expenses. The 
Ministry should also apprise the Committee regarding current pendency in this regard 
while furnishing Action Taken Notes. 
 
 
  

62 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. It is intimated that during last FY 2020-21, Total Rs. 5321.28 Crs (at MA stage) 
was allotted to ECHS which was sufficient for FY 2020-21. In current FY 2021-22, Rs. 
3332.51 Crs has been allotted to ECHS in BE 2021-22. As on 25.06.2021, the 
expenditure is Rs.892.58 Crs and a pendency of bill amounting to Rs 1122.59 Cr of the 
empanelled hospitals. The pendency of bills as on 31 Mar 2021 was Rs.1128.94 Crs. 
Thus it can be seen that payments made due to timely clearance of bills has reduced 
the pendency from Rs.1128.94 Crs to Rs. 1122.59 Crs. The total COVID-19 Pendency 
as on 25 Jun 2021 is Rs. 16.99 Crs only, which is included in total pendency of 
Hospitals. The balance available fund will now be utilised to clear the outstanding bills of 
Empanelled Health Care Facilities and other expenditure related to ECHS 
establishment. It has been proposed to allot an additional fund of Rs 1725.00 Crs vide 
CO ECHS letter No. B/49791/DG FP/AG/ECHS dated 17 Jun 2021 to DG FP before 
Nov of the current financial year by the time ECHS will utilise the currently allotted funds 
fully and ensure timely payment of medical bills of the empanelled hospitals. Last year 
there was an allotment of Rs. 900 Cr on 02 Mar 2021 which could not be utilised in full 
due to funds allotment at the fag end of the financial year with very little time left to 
process the bills for payments.  
 
 2. Hence, it is clarified that pendency varies on day to day basis due to daily 
submission of bills. The total No. of bills and amounts may increase or decrease. Few 
bills returned to NMI (Need More Information) basket at BPA, needs more documents 
and clarification from individual or BPA. As on date Pendency of NMI amount is Rs. 
334.31 Crs. Out of total pendency of Rs. 1122.59 Cr, Rs. 334.31 Crs is in NMI amount.  
 
3. The total amount pending at Regional Centres (RCs) in respect of individual 
claims by Ex-Servicemen as on 31 May 2021 was Rs. 3.58 crores. 
 
Recommendation No. 59 
 
 After examining the data of authorized and actual Manpower at ECHS against 
the sanctioned strength of 61, there are only 03 Radiologists in ECHS polyclinics. This 
issue of shortage came to the attention of the Committee during the examination of 
previous DFGs also. However in a written reply, the Committee were informed that 
there has been no shortfall in the existing authorized manpower and unutilized 
vacancies are due to non-availability of Specialists in small town and remote areas and 
low Daily Average Sick Report (DASR) in Polyclinics. In their earlier report (5th Report 
of 17th Lok Sabha), the Committee had recommended that new technology of providing 
radiology services through telemedicine may be explored as an option at ECHS 
polyclinics at the earliest for compensating lack of radiologists. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. Nevertheless, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to publicize the vacancies in the ECHS Polyclinics through print 
and electronic media as well as writing directly to the superspecialty medical institutions 
to solicit the interest of willing candidates. It is of paramount interest that serious 
consideration should be given to revise the pay structure of the concerned posts and 
make unwavering efforts to fulfill these vacancies at the earliest.  
 

63 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Though efforts are being made to explore various alternatives like providing 
radiological services through telemedicine, however, it is a considered medical opinion 
that radio diagnosis is essentially based on imaging technology for which no clear 
guidelines are available. Further, unless photo sent to a Radiologist on email/WhatsApp 
is of high resolution quality, there are chances of missing out conditions like hairline 
fractures etc. With regards to filling up the vacancies of Radiologists, all concerned 
Station Headquarters, which are responsible to carry out Board of Officers for 
contractual employment, will be impressed upon through respective  Command 
Headquarters to widely publicize vacancies for Radiologists and to also liaise with 
medical institutions. Present remuneration of Radiologist was revised on 06 Jun 2018 
vide MoD letter No. 22D(19)/2017/(WE)/D(Res-I) date 06 Jun 2018. Functional 
requirements occurring due to unavailability of Radiologists due to low remunerations at 
ECHS Polyclinics are being met through utilization of empanelled Health Care 
Organisations. Sanction for hourly part time hiring has also been accorded to attract 
Radiologists. 
 
 
Expansion of ECHS 
 
Recommendation No. 60 
 
 The Committee understand that Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) has been 
authorized at all ECHS beneficiaries who are residing in far flung areas where 
Polyclinics are not available. Further, 17 Mobile Polyclinics have been sanctioned in the 
States of Uttarakhand, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and West Bengal. Taking into account the 
difficulties experienced by the veterans and their dependents dwelling in remote and 
difficult areas of the country in accessing and utilizing health care services, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should expedite with the formalities relating to 
the opening up of 17 Polyclinics in the above mentioned States. The Committee also 
recommend that these sanctioned Polyclinics should become functional at the earliest 
and new possibilities of procurement of ambulances and Mobile Medical Units should 
also be accorded topmost priority by the Ministry of Defence. The action taken in this 
regard may be apprised to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Efforts are being made to make all the sanctioned Polyclinics operational at the 
earliest.  Supply order has been placed to M/S Ashok Leyland Ltd on 13 Jan 2021 by 
MGS Branch for 17 Mobile Medical Units (MMUs) for Type E ECHS Mobile Polyclinics 
in India and 03 Mobile Medical Units for Type E ECHS Mobile Polyclinics in Nepal. An 
amount of Rs. 300 Lakhs has also been allotted to MGS Branch vide Central Org ECHS 
letter No. B/49791/DGFP/AG/ECHS dated 06 Apr 2021 for this purpose. ECHS 
Polyclinics type ‘E’ are likely to be functional after the expected delivery of the above 
said Mobile Medical Units (MMUs). 
 

64 
 
 
SAINIK SCHOOLS 
 
Opening of Sainik Schools 
 
Recommendation No. 61 
 
The Committee note that the scheme of Sainik Schools was conceived as a 
collaborative effort between the Central and State Government so that all parts of the 
country have Sainik Schools to remove regional imbalance in training for joining 
Defence Forces. The Committee truly believe that Sainik Schools have played a unique 
role as a recruiting and training ground of future leaders of the armed forces. The Sainik 
Schools, true to its aim, have contributed more than one fourth of NDA intake during the 
last decade. At present, Sainik Schools Society is playing a significant role in imparting 
quality education to students across length and breadth of the nation with 33 Schools in 
23 States and 01 UT having about 16000 cadets. In the budget speech for 2021-22, 
pronouncement was made for consideration of proposal of setting up 100 more Sainik 
Schools in collaboration with NGOs and other stakeholders. During deliberations on 
Demands for Grants 2021-22, the Committee were enlightened that the said proposal is 
at formulation stage. The Committee desire that the scheme rolls out well within this 
Financial Year so that timely benefit could be availed by students. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A cabinet note on the proposal for setting up Sainik Schools in partnership with 
NGOs/ Private Schools/ States has been submitted to the cabinet Secretariat on 
02.02.2021. On receiving requisite approvals from the competent authority the same will 
be implemented at the earliest.  
 
Recommendation No. 62 
 
In course of examination of Demands for Grants for the Financial Year 2021-22, 
the Committee realized that 5 states namely Sikkim, Tripura, Telangana, Goa & 
Meghalaya do not have even one Sainik School. Meanwhile, some States have two or 
more Sainik Schools. The Committee recommend that at the time of opening up of new 
schools balanced and equal distribution amongst States shall also be seriously taken 
into consideration. However in this regard, simultaneous assessment of keenness and 
commitment of the State for sharing joint responsibility and allocating necessary 
financial resources shall also be merited.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Sainik Schools are established on receipt of a request from State Government 
agreeing to provide land along with funds for the creation and maintenance of basic 
infrastructure, purchase of equipment and other facilities besides scholarships for the 
cadets belonging to the State. Status of setting up of Sainik schools in Five States viz 
Meghalaya, Sikkim, Tripura, Goa and Telangana is as follows: 
 

65 
 
(a) Telangana: On the request of the Government of Telangana, Ministry of 
Defence has accorded “in-principle” approval and signed Memorandum of 
Agreement for opening of Sainik School at Warangal District in Telangana on 
02.03.2017. However, thereafter no proposal is received from the State 
Government. 
 
(b) Sikkim:  Response from State Government is still awaited. 
 
(c) Tripura: Response from State Government is still awaited. 
 
(d) Goa:  The State Government of Goa has expressed inability to provide land to 
the required extent.  
 
(e) Meghalaya: Response from the State Govt. of Meghalaya is yet to be 
received. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 63 
 
The Committee also express concern for preservation of existing values, ethos 
and quality of education by new Sainik Schools. The proposals for new schools are at 
formulation stage, the criteria for the same shall ensure retention of existing excellence. 
The committee wish to recommend that all the stakeholders for new schools shall be 
approved only when essential procedural parameters for infrastructure and professional 
competence of faculty are diligently followed. The approval Committee should be 
constituted of eminent people including ex-service personnel.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government is proposing to bring a new scheme for setting up Sainik Schools in 
the country in partnership with NGOs/Private Schools/States etc. It is aimed to have at 
least one school in each district of the country on the pattern of existing Sainik Schools 
in order to develop the ethos of national spirit, indomitable courage, unfailing 
commitment to values of respect for country and society, imbibe the importance of 
physical fitness and embody the national pride in students’ souls while providing “CBSE 
Plus” type of educational environment by involving the Government/ private schools to 
partner in establishing/ aligning their system with Sainik Schools’ eco-system. 
 
2. Detailed guidelines and requisite approval are at an advance stage. 
 
3. The observations of the committee are noted. 
 
 
  

66 
 
Budgetary Provisions 
 
Recommendation No. 64 
 
 The Committee scrutinized the details of budgetary allocation for Sainik Schools 
submitted to them by the Ministry of Defence. They noted that in BE 2020-21, the 
projection was Rs. 116.00 crore while the allocation/utilization was Rs. 79.36 crore till 
date. The Committee were apprised that despite lesser allocation from Central 
Government, the mandatory expenses were not affected as State Governments 
provided for necessary financial support. Furthermore in RE 2020-21, an allocation of 
Rs. 329 crore has been approved by the Government and therefore there will not be 
any financial implication on functioning of Sainik Schools. The Committee appreciate 
that in the current Financial Year, Government has made adequate allocation to Sainik 
Schools which will be helpful in realizing all outstanding financial obligations.  
 
Recommendation No. 65 
 
 In BE 2021-22, the projection of Sainik Schools is Rs. 137.68 crore. The 
allocation was to be finalized by Directorate General Financial Planning (DGFP). The 
Committee recommend that the allocation shall be made in light of the proposal for 
setting up of 100 more schools in ensuing year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 21-22, an amount of Rs. 300 crore has been allocated to Sainik Schools.  
 
Recommendation No. 66 
 
The Committee explored into the possibilities that Central and State 
Governments jointly share responsibilities and pool resources for smooth running of 
Sainik Schools. It also stands to reason that for practical purposes running a school on 
daily basis requires active and positive support of the local administration/ State 
Government. After sifting through the documents furnished to them, the Committee find 
that over the years the share of contribution of State Governments has increased from 
63.16 per cent in 2017-18 to 74.65 per cent in 2019-20. Meanwhile, the share of Central 
Government has plummeted from 36.84 percent in 2017-18 to 25.35 percent in 2019-
20. Not only in proportionate terms, even in absolute terms the contribution of Central 
Government has slided over the years. Gleaning the documents made available to 
them, the Committee explored that in 2017-18, Rs. 8000 lakh was sponsored by Central 
Government which came down to Rs. 4039.93 lakh in 2019-20. The Committee would 
like to comment that in order to bring in uniformity across the spectrum of Sainik 
Schools, role of Central Government is paramount and shall not erode under any 
circumstances.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In this regard, it is submitted that against a demand of Rs. 115 Cr. DGFP had 
allocated only Rs. 40.40 Cr. under BE/RE 2019-20. Due to less budget allocation by 
DGFP under BE 2019-20 to Sainik Schools there is a decrease in allocation in 2019-20. 

67 
 
 
2. With regard to less allocation of budget during 2019-20, DGFP has intimated that 
Sainik Schools are budgeted out of the Grants provided to the Army under the Revenue 
Head. The Revenue Head of the Army Budget caters for not only the maintenance and 
sustenance of the Army but also critical operational procurements such as Emergency 
Procurements and creation of infrastructure through operational works in difficult 
terrains. 
 
3. During the Financial Year 2020-21, DGFP had allocated Rs. 329.36 crore to 
Sainik Schools under RE 2020-21 against the demand of Rs. 217.44 crore, which 
adequately facilitate the functioning and clearance of backlog of bills/claims of Sainik 
Schools. 
 
Recommendation No. 67 
 
The Committee, while examining DFG 2021-22 found certain issues such as 
payment of teachers are pending with Sainik Schools. Further exploring the matter, it 
was found that Sainik Schools were self-sustaining till the implementation of Sixth and 
Seventh Central Pay Commission (CPC) pay scales came to being. Subsequent to that, 
Sainik Schools are faced with certain fund constraints especially related to payment of 
additionality. The representative of the Ministry of Defence while throwing light on the 
issue stated that in the extant system pension payments is the liability of State 
Government, however, the additonalities arising out of implementation of Sixth and 
Seventh CPCs will be paid by Central Government. Further, the Committee were 
assured that with suitable allocation within the existing budget lines, these limitations 
have been overcome to a substantial extent. The Committee desire that in current 
Financial Year, those outstanding financial issues shall be amicably resolved.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the year 2019-20, against the demand of Rs. 115.00 Cr. under BE 2019-
20, DGFP had allocated Rs. 40.40 Cr. only for Sainik Schools. Due to shortfall in 
allocation of funds during 2019-20, liabilities of 2019-20 were carried forward and all 
shortfalls were required to be met from the budget of FY 2020-21. Hence, the budget 
outlay for the year 2020-21 was increased accordingly. Further, it is to be pointed out 
that DGFP had allocated a total of Rs. 329.36 Cr. to Sainik Schools in the FY 2020-21. 
Grants were processed for release of funds to Sainik Schools to meet their expenditure. 
Accordingly, all pending grants and bills of past liabilities have been cleared. 
 
2. Also, during the current year 2021-22, DGFP has allocated Rs. 300 Cr. under BE 
2020-21 to cater payment of all current year’s dues to Sainik Schools.   
 
 
  

68 
 
Inadequate Infrastructure 
 
Recommendation No. 69 
 
The Committee note certain issues in respect to the maintenance and 
infrastructure. Not all Sainik Schools are well endowed in the matter of land, buildings 
and infrastructure. Many years since their commencement, Schools such as Sainik 
School Rewari, Sainik School Gopalganj, Sainik School East Siang and Sainik School 
SujanpurTira continue to have inadequate infrastructure. The maintenance of the 
infrastructure is largely the subject of the State Government, but the allocation of grants 
for this purpose also not meet the actual demand in some of the cases. Consistent 
follow up is being done with states in this regard. The Committee would like to 
recommend that Ministry of Defence shall consistently follow up such issues and 
endeavor to resolve them. The action taken in respect to the aforesaid schools shall be 
shared with the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Many Sainik Schools are of 50 years plus vintage and the financial support from 
the respective State Governments has not been consistent. The Central Government is 
providing financial assistance to all Sainik Schools for infrastructure development, IT 
training, additionality in pay & pension of Sainik School employees consequent to 
implementation of Sixth & Seventh Pay Commission, NDA incentive etc. 
 
2. Besides, out of funds Rs. 329.36 Cr. allocated under RE 2020-21, an amount of 
Rs. 109 Cr. has been earmarked onetime special infrastructure grant for enabling 
schools to create required facilities for girls cadets as a grant-in aid for the academic 
year 2021-22 in all Sainik Schools in the country.  
 
 
Deficiency of Quality Staff 
 
Recommendation No. 70 
 
The Committee came to know that the quality of staff is affected by the location 
of the school. For instance, far flung schools find it difficult to attract and retain the best 
talent. The problem is further aggravated after withdrawal of Residential Allowance to 
school teachers and Tough Area Allowance. The Committee desire that Ministry of 
Defence should strive to find solution to such problem and measures taken be informed 
to the committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issue of quality of staff and retention is being addressed through the 
implementation of policy on transfer of staff whereby equal opportunity will be given to 
all the staff members to serve in different locations. All the admissible allowance as per 
7th CPC are given to staff. The Residential allowance was given in the year 2010 as per 
6th CPC but since the staff members opted for 7th CPC, it was stopped.  

69 
 
 
Recommendation No. 71 
 
Sometimes, difficulty is faced in posting of Principal, Vice Principal, 
Administration Officer, Permanent Instructor (PI) Staff etc. The number of Sainik 
Schools has steadily grown because of their ever increasing demand. However, 
concomitant increase in Officers from Army Education Corps (AEC) who ternate the 
post of Principal, Vice Principal, Admin Officer has not happened. As a result, on some 
occasions, the three services face difficulty in sparing officers for filling up the post of 
Principal, Vice Principal and Administrative Officer. The Committee note that efforts are 
being made to get officers posted from other core Armed Forces having requisite flair 
and academic bent to meet the shortages. Further, they wish that more effective 
initiatives are taken to overcome the challenge.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The number of Sainik Schools have steadily grown because of their ever 
increasing demand. However, there has no concomitant increase in Officers from AEC 
who tenate the post of Principal, Vice Principal and Admin Officer. As a result on some 
occasions, the three services face difficulty in sparing officers for filling up these posts.  
In this regard, special efforts are being initiated by Sainik Schools Society, the three 
services have stressed to provide suitable officers with the requisite QRs for filling up 
the post of Principal, Vice Principal and Administrative Officer. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 72 
 
Another concern of the Committee was to be apprised about the efforts that have 
been made by the Sainik Schools to facilitate online/distance learning for the students in 
wake of current pandemic. In this regard, they were informed that a letter dated 
11.05.2020 was issued to all Sainik Schools to conduct mandatory online classes 
through video conferencing apps like Microsoft Teams, Google Suite etc. The video 
conference app is also used by Sainik Schools to carry out other activities like PT 
(including Yoga), NCC as well as co-curricular activities like group discussion, class 
talk, programmes related to Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat etc. The Committee 
appreciates the efforts and desire the same be continued.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In wake of the current pandemic, all Sainik Schools are conducting mandatory 
online classes through video conferencing applications. The video conference 
applications are also used by Sainik Schools to carry out other activities like PT 
(including Yoga), NCC as well as co-curricular activities like group discussion, class 
talk, programmes related to ‘Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat’ etc. 
 

70 
 
2. For the current year 2021-22, annual calendar of events under EBSB has been 
circulated to all Sainik Schools who have confirmed the implementation of monthly 
activities under EBSB and to update the same on EBSB portal on monthly basis.   
 
 
Implementation of reservation for Economically Weaker Section (EWS) 
 
Recommendation No. 75 
 
The Committee categorically wished to be intimated about the status of 
implementation of reservation for EWS in Sainik Schools. A representative of Sainik 
School candidly submitted that the proposal is still under consideration and has not yet 
been implemented for pendency of final decision. The Committee view that reservation 
for EWS has now been pronounced for quite some time and most of the institutions in 
the country have implemented it. Delaying of the same by Sainik Schools will not be in 
support of the scheme. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the policy shall be 
implemented in Sainik Schools without delay so that the purpose of the idea is achieved 
in letter and spirit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per Sainik School Society rules and regulations, there is no policy for 
reservation of Economically Weaker Section (EWS) in admission in Sainik Schools. 
Further, Office Memorandum No. 12-4/2019-U1 dated 17th January 2019 issued by the 
Ministry of Education provides 10% reservation for the Economically Weaker Sections 
(EWS) in terms of 103rd Constitutional amendment in Higher Educational Institutions 
within the general category; whereas Sainik Schools are not Higher Educational 
Institutions as such the said Office Memorandum is not applicable to the Sainik Schools. 
In this regard a clarification has also been sought from Ministry of Education. In 
response, Ministry of Education vide email dated 21.12.2020 stated that the EWS 
Notification issued by Department of Higher Education is in respect of providing 10% 
reservation to EWS who are not covered in any other form of reservation like 
SC/ST/OBC in admissions to Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). 
 
Recommendation No. 76 
 
The Committee during deliberations on the subject desired to be apprised about 
the percentage of Cadets of Sainik School in total selections in Service Selection 
Boards. The representatives of Sainik School assured that they will provide the requisite 
data.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The details of the average percentage of students from Sainik Schools per year, 
selected to serve NDA/ Naval Academy/ Military Academies in last 10 years are as 
follows: 
 

71 
 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Sainik 
Schools 
Average percentage of students from Sainik 
Schools per year, selected to serve NDA/ Naval 
Academy/ Military Academies in last 10 years. 
1 Amaravathi Nagar 15.2 
2 Ambikapur 13.6 
3 Balachadi 12.2 
4 Bhubaneswar 3.9 
5 Bijapur 15.3 
6 Chittorgarh 17.0 
7 Ghorakhal 33.4 
8 Goalpara 5.9 
9 Gopalganj 11.4 
10 Imphal 13.0 
11 Kapurthala 10.9 
12 Kazhakootam 12.8 
13 Kodagu 5.3 
14 Korukonda 24.3 
15 Kunjpura 13.8 
16 Nagrota 4.7 
17 Nalanda 17.7 
18 Punglwa 0.9 
19 Purulia 13.8 
20 Rewa 19.1 
21 Rewari 5.5 
22 Satara 18.5 
23 SujanpurTira 30.5 
24 Tilaiya 8.8 
 
Recommendation No. 77 
 
The specific enquiry regarding progress of the Sainik School at Matanhail in 
Jhajjar district was made before the representatives of Sainik Schools. It was assured 
by the Ministry of Defence that the specific report shall be made available in due course 
requisite data is furnished at the earliest. In this case also the Ministry should supply the 
details at their earliest easy convenience. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The site inspection to open Sainik School at Matanhail in Jhajjar district has been 
carried out on 21.06.2019 and site found suitable and hence recommended subject to 
the following:- 
 
(a) Completion of construction and handing over of permanent buildings of existing 
Sainik School Rewari by Haryana Government (which is running in a temporary 
location since 2008). 
 

72 
 
(b) Approval of Ministry of Environment and Forest to be obtained by Government of 
Haryana for use of the land for the purpose of school (non-forest activity). 
 
(c) Financial commitment for construction of Sainik School Matenhail. 
  
 Response from State Government is yet to be received.   
 
 
Recommendation No. 78 
 
The Committee sought details regarding existing and required infrastructure for 
girl students in the Sainik Schools in the country as well as the steps being taken to 
expedite admission of girl students in Sainik Schools in terms of necessary 
infrastructure and teaching staff. The committee found that consequent to the success 
of the pilot project for admission for girl children in Sainik School Chhingchhip 
(Mizoram), based on Government approval, five more Sainik Schools viz., Bijapur& 
Kodagu (Karnataka), Chandrapur (Maharashtra), Ghorakhal (Uttarakhand) and Kalikiri 
(Andhra Pradesh) commenced admission of girls from the academic session 2020-21. 
With effect from the academic session 2021-22, girls will be eligible for admission to 
Class VI in all 33 Sainik Schools. The process for induction of girl cadets in all Sainik 
Schools is underway. Here the Committee would recommend that  essential 
infrastructure for ensuring safety and well being of girl cadets include various measures 
such as separate hostel with ample CCTV cameras, adequate medical support, 
separate washrooms, etc. which shall be ensured for them.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Consequent to the success of the pilot project for admission for girl children in 
Sainik School Chhingchhip (Mizoram), based on Government approval, five more Sainik 
Schools viz., Bijapur& Kodagu (Karnataka), Chandrapur (Maharashtra), Ghorakhal 
(Uttarakhand) and Kalikiri (Andhra Pradesh) commenced admission of girls from the 
academic session 2020-21. With effect from the academic session 2021-22, girls will be 
eligible for admission to Class VI in all 33 Sainik Schools. The process for induction of 
girl cadets in all Sainik Schools is underway. 
 
2. Adequate steps being taken by the Sainik Schools for smooth induction of the girl 
cadets in to Class VI w.e.f. 2021-22 including putting in place physical infrastructure to 
ensure their safety and security. 
 
Recommendation No. 79 
 
In summation, the Committee would like to appreciate and place on record that 
commencement of intake of girl cadets in the Sainik Schools is a boon not only for the 
Forces but for the society as well. Notwithstanding the fact, there are certain issue 
based aspects which needs deeper consideration and Committee thought their prudent 
duty to bring those to the attention of the Ministry. Thus far, the entry for the girl cadets 
is not open in the National Defence Academy. It is not certain that after passing out from 
the Sainik Schools how many of these girl cadets would opt for entry into the forces 

73 
 
other than the NDA after completing their Graduation. Keeping this in mind, it is high 
time that planning should start for the intake of girl cadets in the NDA and also not the 
least important, modalities should be worked upon to raise the new battalion especially 
for female officers. The Committee would like to know the outcome of this observation 
with the Action Taken Replies to be furnished by the Ministry.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Girl cadets in the Sainik Schools will get same training as it is being given to boys 
in the schools to prepare them for joining Defence Forces. The observations of the 
Committee are duly noted.  
 
 
  

74 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT AND ARE COMMENTED UPON 
 
 
ARMY 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
The Committee are aware of the ordeal of the war widows involved in the 
situation when they clear the exams as tough as Combined Defence Service 
Examination (CDSE) and Staff Selection Board (SSB) and still they are denied 
commission on the basis of lack of vacancies.  Taking note of the fact that there are 
scores of vacancies existing in Armed Forces at the level of Officers, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to explore the possibility of absorbing those war widows who have 
qualified SSB and are rejected commissioning in the vacancies available with Army and 
other Services.  The Committee take a serious view of the same and recommend that 
as the war widows have already gone through  an ordeal after the supreme sacrifice of 
their spouses for the nation and definitely do not deserve this behaviour of dejection and 
injustice and desire that if there are no vacancies, there should be no selection at the 
first place and if the war widows get qualified in the exams they should definitely be 
offered commissioning at the earliest, under any Services/ Organizations of Defence 
Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The present policy for release of vacancies for Short Service Commission 
Women (Widow Category)(SSCW) is that the widow of Defence personnel (including 
those with children) who have died in harness is eligible to apply for the Short Service 
Commission.  A total of 5% vacancies are earmarked for widows, both the SSCW 
(Technical) and SSCW (Non-technical) (i.e. 2.5% each).  In case of non-availability of 
officers in any category, the vacancies can be filled vice-versa.  They are eligible only 
case in they have not re-married.  The unfilled vacancies will revert to the category 
other than that of widows.  At the current rate of vacancies release, the above 
reservation translates to one vacancy for SSCW (NT) and SSCW(T) for courses starting 
in April & October each year.   
 
War Widows are exempted from appearing in Combined Defence Services 
examination and are directly detailed to undergo Services Selection Board(SSB).  
Adjutant Generals Branch invites applications against the vacancies released in the 
Widow Category and take age waiver, if required and puts all eligible candidates 
through the SSB.  Post SSB, Recruiting Directorate draws a Merit List of candidates 

75 
 
against the number of vacancies released. Joining letter is then issued to the 
candidates, first in Order of Merit on the Merit List of each course (subject to clearing 
medicals).  In the eventuality of the first candidate not reporting for training within the 
stipulated time or resignation, the candidate next in order of merit is issued a Joining 
Letter.  Shortlisting maximum candidates in excess of vacancies released is untaken so 
as to ensure full utilization of vacancies released.  However, sheer shortlisting on a 
Merit List does not amount to assurance to a vacancy, as Joining Letters are issued in a  
progressive manner such that vacancies released are filled.  However, with women 
officers now being considered for grant of Permanent Commission, this policy may 
necessitate review, in view of need to ensure gender parity.  
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
 
AIR FORCE 
 
Trainer Aircraft 
 
Recommendation No. 30 
 
 With regard to trainer aircraft, the Committee wanted to know the existing 
strength of trainer aircraft with Air Force which is 260 as against the sanctioned strength 
of 388. Trainer aircraft held by IAF in its inventory include 75 PC-7 Mk-II Basic trainer 
Aircraft (BTA), 86 Kiran Mk-I/IA Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT), 99 Hawk Mk-132 
Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) and 42 Kiran Mk-II (which are presently not being utilised 
for training).  The Committee also learn that simulators have been acquired for the PC-7 
Basic Trainer Aircraft and Hawk-132 Advance Jet Trainer aircraft.  A case for 
procurement of two Twin Dome Simulator for Hawk Mk-132 aircraft has been 
processed.  Presently Technical Evaluation is under progress.  Also, a case for 
procurement of additional 29 Hawk aircraft (AJT) has been initiated.  Presently, the case 
is with Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC).  The Committee recommend that the 
said procurements are made in time by undertaking all out efforts and details thereof 
shall be intimated to the Committee as well. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
1. Presently a total of 99 Hawk Mk-132 Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) aircraft are in 
service. 
 
2. A case for procurement of two Twin Dome Simulator for Hawk Mk-132 aircraft is 
currently in TEC stage. 
 

76 
 
3. The case for procurement of 20 additional Hawk aircraft is stalled because of the 
high cost& engine lifing issues. 
 
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
 
NAVY 
 
Force Level 
 
Recommendation No. 46 
 
 The Committee were confided by Ministry of Defence that, Navy is constantly 
reviewing , rationalization and prioritizing their requirements so as to remain a combat 
ready force and achieve optimum utilization of the available resources. At the time of 
proceedings, a detailed discussion was held on aircraft carriers. At the time of 
proceedings, a detailed discussion was held on aircraft carriers. The representative of 
Ministry of Defence, in this regards, stated that Indian Navy has got Vikramaditya which 
is a operational aricarft carrier.  The second aircraft which is under construction in 
Cochin was expected to be delivered in March, 2021 but owning to lockdown period is 
now being expected for induction by the end of this year.  The Committee are wishful for 
timely induction of second aircraft carrier which is an indigenous production and hope 
that no further extension would be needed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Progress of Construction.  Progress of construction of IAC during last one 
year has been adversely affected due to COVID-19 related restrictions and other 
imponderables. The progress  of work has been reviewed  by multiple high level 
committees, including , review by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri in May’ 20, Defence Secretary 
at Kochi in Nov 20, Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of DG (Acq) on 16 Feb 
21, Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of VCNS on  17 Feb 21 and CPRMs 
under tha Chairmanship of CWP&A in Jul 20, Nov 20, Jan 21 and Mar 2021. 
 
2. Ship’s Basin Trials. Inspite of nationwide lockdown and other COVID 
related restriction, readiness of Ship’s propulsion and Power Generation equipment/ 
systems in harbor was tested as part of Basin Trials on 30 Nov 20. This was one of the 
major milestone activity successfully completed towards ship readiness for Sea Trials. 
 
3. Impact of COVID Recurrence. COVID recurrence with third wave in Kerala 
has adversely impacted work progress on IAC. More than 250 personnel associated 
with IAC project have either tested COVID positive or were primary contacts. The top 
management of M/s CSL and OEM reps have also been detected COVID positive. 
Absence of top management of M/s CSL directly involved in planning construction/ trials 

77 
 
of IAC, has impacted progress of work. Associated uncertainties are posing challenges 
in achieving firm up schedule of construction. 
 
4. Delivery Schedule.  The delivery of IAC is likely to evolve post successful 
completion of Ship’s Sea Trials by Sep/Oct 2021. 
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation No. 47 
 
 In so far as requirement of aircraft carriers are concerned, the Committee were 
given to understand that it is desirable to have three aircraft carriers in Indian Navy. Two 
of them are operating in maritime zone on each of the side of Indian Coastline viz. 
eastern and western coasts. The third one can be used as a substitute when either of 
the first two undergoes maintenance as Aircarft Carriers are known to have lengthy 
maintenance schedules. In this perspective, the Committee recommend that  case for 
development of a third aircraft carrier be taken up for serious consideration by the 
Ministry of Defence. The Committee would like to be kept abreast with the development 
in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The requirement of third Aircraft Carrier will be worked out on the IN committed 
liabilities and future acquisition projects. 
 
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
SAINIK SCHOOLS 
 
Recommendation No. 74 
 
The Committee, find that the fee structure of Sainik Schools is more than lakh 
rupees annually which is beyond reach of weaker sections of the society. There are 
indeed some schemes for provisioning of scholarships to students in Sainik Schools, 
however, those schemes of Central and State Governments are not universal in nature. 
The Central Government scholarship programmes cover wards of Defence Personnel. 
Although there are some State Government schemes for students of weaker sections, 
yet large number of students is not able to reap the benefit due to limited number of 
scholarships leaving many talented and aspiring students on the fringe. Therefore, the 
viability of exploring CSR corporate social responsibility may also be taken into 
consideration in different schools. 
 
  

78 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Central Government is providing financial assistance to all Sainik Schools for 
infrastructure development, IT & training, additionality in pay & pension of Sainik School 
employees. Further, State Government grants annual scholarships to all the cadets 
belonging to the economically weaker sections of society. Notwithstanding, Central 
Government is also providing following scholarship to the cadets: 
 
(a) Defence Scholarship:  Scholarship to the wards of Defence Personnel including 
Ex-serviceman. 
 
(b) Central Assistance: Provides a part of Scholarship as Central Assistance to 
those students who are awarded State Government Scholarships. 
 
(c) NDA Incentive: Incentive to those cadets who are selected for National Defence 
Academy/Naval Academy.  
 
(d) Sharing the Burden of enhanced fees: Scholarship for reducing the burden of 
tuition fee and dietary charges of the cadets studying in Sainik Schools. 
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report] 

79 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
SAINIK SCHOOLS 
 
Curriculum  
 
Recommendation No. 73 
 
The Committee were given to understand that as a measure of standardization 
CBSE Board curriculum is being followed by Sainik Schools. It was also found by the 
Committee that the existing pattern is satisfactorily fulfilling aspirations of the cadets and 
their parents. However, in progressive interest, the Committee opine that a comparative 
study may be conducted for assessment of performance of other Boards and a 
feasibility report for venturing out more options of affiliation shall be prepared. The 
outcome of such a study may be brought to the knowledge of the Committee.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Sainik Schools are residential schools run on public school lines. As per Sainik 
Schools Society Rules and Regulation, all Sainik Schools offer a common curriculum 
and are affiliated to the Central Board of Secondary Education to maintain uniformity. All 
the major nationalized competitive exams like JEE/ NEET are conducted following the 
curriculum recommended by the CBSE. In the interest of better management, uniformity 
across all the Sainik Schools and similar syllabus of various competitive examination 
like UPSC, CBSE is considered more suitable for Sainik Schools. 
 
 
 

80 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON: 
 
 
NAVY 
 
Planning and Procurement 
 
Recommendation No. 44 
 
Upon scrutiny of the documents furnished to them the Committee learn that Long 
Term Intergrated Perspective Plan 2021-27 (LTIPP 12-27) for three Services including 
Navy was formulated by Head Quarter Integrated Defence Staff (HQIDS), and approved 
by the Defence Acquisition Council in April, 2012. The purpose of this plan is to bridge 
the void and build force levels to achieve the desired combat potential vis-à-vis our 
adversaries, and consolidate our defence potential. During the last two plan periods, 
various shortfalls and voids of the Indian Navy have been progressively 
mitigated/addressed. As larger time period of LTIPP has now passed, the Committee 
recommend that a report on targets and achievement for LTIPP shall be prepared and 
brought to the knowledge of the Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The modernization of Indian Navy (IN) is an ongoing process and is being 
progressed in accordance with LTIPP 2012-27 and is on track to achieve the requisite 
force levels. The need for modernisation and combat preparedness of our Armed 
Forces is known and adequate measures are being taken up by all stakeholders. 
Further,  IN is constantly reviewing, rationalization and prioritising requirements to 
remain a combat ready force and achieve optimum utilisation of the available resources. 
The Navy remains committed to progress its modernisation as planned and is 
progressing various acquisition (ships, submarines and aircraft) and infrastructure cases 
as mentioned below:- 
 
(a) Ships and Submarines. 41 ships and submarines are under construction 
at various shipyards.  
 
(b) Aircraft. IN has concluded contract with HAL to deliver 36 aircraft 
comprising 12 Dorniers, 16 ALH and 08 Chetaks and delivery of these 
aircraft  are being progressed as per contractual timelines. In addition, 24 
MRH and four additional P8I are also scheduled for delivery in near future. 
Further, AoN exists for procurement of additional six P8I, six Kamov 31 
and 111 Naval Utility Helicopters (under SP model). 
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report] 

81 
 
 
SAINIK SCHOOLS 
 
Recommendation No. 68 
 
Contemplating upon the facts stated in para No. 7 above, the Committee feel that 
issuance of some payment heads from Central Government while some from State 
Governments are complicating financial matters. Therefore, it would be in the fitness of 
things to create a corpus fund at level of each Sainik School so that financial 
commitments are cleared in timely manner and issue is taken to its logical conclusion.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is to be submitted that DGFP had allocated a total of Rs. 329.36 Cr. to Sainik 
Schools in the FY 2020-21, which adequately facilitate the functioning and clearance of 
backlog of bills/claims of Sainik Schools. During the current year, DGFP has allocated 
Rs. 300 Cr. under BE 2021-22 against our projection of Rs. 137.68 Cr. to clear all dues 
of Sainik Schools. Sufficient funds have been allocated during the current Financial 
Year which will cater payment of all current year liabilities. Thus, there is no need to 
create a corpus fund at level of each Sainik School.  
 
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report] 
  

82 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/REPLIES AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                                    JUAL ORAM 
 17  November, 2021 Chairperson 
 26 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
  
 
 
 

83 
 
APPENDIX – I  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2021-22) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2021-22) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 
1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Kunwar Danish Ali   
3 Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
4 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
5 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser  
6 Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
7 Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
8 Shri Mahabali Singh  
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
9 Dr. Ashok Bajpai  
10 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
11 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D.P. Vats (Retd.) 
12 Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
2. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 

84 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
i. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘General 
Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence 
Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 
Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pensions (Demand 
Nos. 18 and 21)'; 
 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, 
Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme and Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)'; and 
 
iii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Capital Outlay on 
Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and Married 
Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports barring a few 
amendments in draft Report mentioned at Sl. No. (ii) above. 
 
4. ********* 
 
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. ******* 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** Does not pertain to the Report. 

85 
 
APPENDIX – II 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (17THLOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR 
THE YEAR 2021-22 ON ‘ARMY, NAVY, AIR FORCE, JOINT STAFF, MILITARY ENGINEER 
SERVICES, EX-SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME AND SAINIK SCHOOLS 
(DEMAND NOS. 19 & 20)’ 
1. Total number of recommendations                                                                                                         79 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government (please see 
Chapter II A): 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27, 
28,29,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,45,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,
63,64,65,66,67,69,70,71,72,75,76,77,78 and 79 
 
                             Total :      71 
Percentage:   90%    
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government and commented 
upon (please see Chapter II B): 
  
Recommendation Nos. 15, 30, 46, 47 and 74          
                                                                                                                                        Total :      5 
Percentage:     6% 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
 Recommendation No. 73 
Total :        1 
Percentage: 1% 
 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee, which require reiteration and commented upon (please see Chapter 
IV): 
Recommendation No. 44 and 68 
Total :       2 
Percentage:   3 % 
 
6. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished interim 
replies/replies awaited (please see Chapter V): 
 
 -Nil- 
 
Total :0 
   Percentage:   0% 