30 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty
(17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2021-22 on Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (DRDO), Directorate General of Quality Assur
National Cadet Corps (NCC) (Demand No. 20)'
 
August
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2021-22) 
 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
Twenty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
22 on Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (DRDO), Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) and 
National Cadet Corps (NCC) (Demand No. 20)'] 
 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka)   
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
22 on Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development 
ance (DGQA) and 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
 
(
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021
Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) and National Cadet Corps (NCC) 
(Demand No. 20)'] 
 
 
Presented
Laid
 
August
  
 
- 2 - 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2021-22) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021
Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) and National Cadet Corps (NCC) 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   04.08.2022 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   04.08.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on 
Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) and National Cadet Corps (NCC) 
 
 

 
- 3 - 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) ……………………....…. 04 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... 06 
 
CHAPTER  I Report…………………………………………………………….. 07 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  18 
 by the Government 
   
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 47 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 48 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final  49 
  replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  50 
 (2021-22) held on 22.07.2022 ..................................................... 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/  52 
 Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on Ordnance 
Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation 
(DRDO), Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) and 
National Cadet Corps (NCC) (Demand No. 20) 
 
  

 
- 4 - 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2021-22)  
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Kunwar Danish Ali   
3 Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
4 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
5 Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
6 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
7 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser  
8 Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
9 Dr. Ram Shankar Katheria 
10 Shri Sridhar Kotagiri  
11 Smt. Rajashree Mallick 
12 Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
13 Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar 
14 Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy 
15 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
16 Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
17 Shri Prathap Simha 
18 Shri Brijendra Singh 
19 Shri Mahabali Singh  
20 Shri Durga Das (D.D.) Uikey 
21 Vacant*  
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22 Dr. Ashok Bajpai  
23 Shri N. R. Elango 
24 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
25 Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi  
26 Shri Sharad Pawar 
27 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
28 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
29 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D.P. Vats (Retd.) 
30 Shri K.C. Venugopal 
31 Vacant** 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* 1 seat vacant in Lok Sabha. 
 ** Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao ceased to be Member, Rajya Sabha due to 
retirement on 21/06/2022. 
  

 
- 5 - 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan - Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Rajesh Kumar  - Executive Officer 
  

 
- 6 - 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2021-22), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Thirtieth Report of the Committee on 
'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on Ordnance 
Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation(DRDO), Directorate 
General of Quality Assurance(DGQA) and National Cadet Corps(NCC)                
(Demand No. 20)’. 
 
2.  The Twenty-Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 March 2021. The Report contained 46 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in October 2021. 
 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 22 July 2022. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
01 August, 2022 Chairperson 
10 Sravana, 1944 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
  

 
- 7 - 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on Ordnance Factories, Defence Research 
and Development Organisation (DRDO), Directorate General of Quality Assurance 
(DGQA) and National Cadet Corps (NCC) (Demand No. 20)', which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 March, 2021.  
 
2. The Twenty-Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 46 
observations/ recommendations on the following aspects:- 
 
Para No. Subject 
ORDNANCE FACTORIES 
1 Budgetary Provisions 
2 Order Book Position 
3 Budget for Modernisation 
4 Corporatization of the  Ordnance Factory Board 
5 Manpower 
6 Quality Control   
7 Delay in Product Delivery 
8 Export  and Import of Ordnance Factories Products 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION 
9-14 Budgetary Provisions  
15-17 Manpower 
18 Public Private Partnership 
19-20 Indigenisation of Research and Development Activities 
21-22 Nuclear, Biological and Chemical(NBC) Weapons Detection 
System 
25 Role of DRDO During Covid-19 Pandemic 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL QUALITY ASSURANCE 
26-27 Budget 
28-30 Manpower and Training 
31-32 Quality Check 
33-34 Use of DGQA facilities by Private Sector 
NATIONAL CADET CORPS 
35-36 Budget 
37-38 Training and Jobs in Armed Forces for NCC Cadets 
39-41 Expansion of NCC in Schools and Colleges 
42-43 Fully Self Finance Scheme (FSFS) 
44-46 Skill Development   
 

 
- 8 - 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 46 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been 
examined and categorized as follows:- 
 
 (i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government(Chapter II): 
   
  Para Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23, 
 24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42, 
 43,44,45 & 46  
 
 (Total - 45) 
 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
(Chapter III): 
  
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
(Total - Nil) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos.    10   
 
(Total - 01) 
 
(iv)   Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited(V): 
  
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
           (Total - Nil) 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest.  
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendation /observations made in the Twenty-second Report in the 
succeeding Paragraphs.  

 
- 9 - 
ORDNANCE FACTORIES 
 
A. Export and Import of Ordnance Factories products 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 8) 
 
6. The Committee had, in their Twenty-Second Report recommended: 
 
During deliberations on DFG 2021-22, the Committee were pleased to find that 
OFB is diversifying its product portfolio range and expanding its base in the international 
market as well as domestic civil sector. In domestic civil sector, new Sporting Arms are 
being continuously developed and introduced in the civil market periodically, in exports 
also, OFB is exploring new areas/regions/countries to export products to the friendly 
countries. It was further explored that as of now, OFB is only able to materialize 1% of 
their sales from export which even given to conservative estimates is a very meagre 
figure. The Committee feel that for sustained growth and achieving target of export of 
Rs.30,000 crores by 2026, OFB needs to increase its export base. The Committee 
recommend that OFB will have to explore methodologies and products for ingression 
into international markets. For this, appointing sales personnel in different global zones 
and vigorously following latest market needs are essential. OFs in the country are a 
large network of production base and unless and until the humungous world market is 
optimally protruded, the capacity of OFs cannot be fully utilized. Last but not the least, 
every expert success has a hidden story in terms of very strong Research and 
Development base. All achievements become subservient in the absence of any 
advance R & D base. Therefore, as a priority OFB should give more than due emphasis 
on continued R & D. 
 
7. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:- 
 
OFB has started engagements with channel partners in foreign countries for 
boosting its exports. Indian Defence Attache’ (DA) posted abroad and DAs of various 
countries posted in India are being contracted for assistance in boosting export. OFB 
has also started customization of products as per user requirements. OFB has also 
invited various delegations from OEM and Foreign Countries for technical discussions 
to explore export potential. 
 
OFB is giving more and more emphasis on R&D activities to develop futuristic 
defence equipment/Weapon-platform. To achieve the objective, following actions/ 
efforts have been initiated by OFB: 
 
 MOU with CSIR: OFB has entered into an agreement with Council of Scientific 
& Industrial Research (CSlR). 
 MoU with DPSUs: OFB has concluded MoU with BEL and BEML for 
cooperation on various projects to jointly address the requirements of Indian 
Defence & Export market. OFB has MoU with MIDHANI to jointly address the 

 
- 10 - 
requirements of critical and strategic material for Indian Defence Forces, 
Paramilitary Forces, Police organizations, civil and export market. 
 Interaction with Academia: OFB is taking project specific technical/ research 
assistance in design and prototype development from premier Govt. Academic 
Institutions such as IITs/IISc/NITs and Govt. owned Laboratories such as 
Central Institutes of Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET). 
 
8. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the various 
measures/steps taken by Ordnance Factories Board(OFB) for boosting its 
exports, which include amongst others exploring new markets through 
diplomatic channels.  Besides OFB is also stated to be giving more emphasis on 
R&D to develop futuristic defence equipment / weapon platforms by entering into 
agreement with other DPSUs, Government academic institution viz. IITs/ NITs and 
also CSIR.  The Committee express the hope that the efforts being made by OFB 
to explore new markets for boosting their exports including R&D efforts would 
fructify and enable OFB to achieve the export targets set by 2026. 
 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION  
 
 
B. Budget  
Recommendation (Para no. 9) 
 
9. The Committee find that during the Financial year 2021-22, the proposed BE 
allocation of DRDO was Rs. 23460.00 crore and the approved allocation is Rs. 
20457.44 crore. There is a shortfall of Rs. 3002.56 crore. DRDO has pointed out that 
the insufficient left over amount is for R&D activities after meeting the mandatory 
expenses for strategic schemes and pay & allowances. The Department, as Committee 
understand, however, manages within the existing allocations by prioritizing project 
activities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
10. Details of FBE, Budget Allocations for the Deptt. of Defence R&D at different 
Budgetary stages w.e.f FY 2017-18 is as under.  
(Rs. in cr) 
Year BE Proposed BE Approved  RE Approved MA Approved 
2017-18 19935.60 14818.74 15463.25 15399.25 
2018-19 22203.74 17861.19 17610.38 17121.99 
2019-20 22953.95 19021.02 17730.78 17730.78 
2020-21 23457.40 19327.35 16466.29 16145.74  
2021-22 23460.00 20457.44 - - 
 

 
- 11 - 
It may be noted that against the projection of Rs. 23460.00 crore at BE stage 
during the FY 2021-22 An amount of Rs 20457.44 crore was allocated. Department is 
managing within the allocations by re-prioritising the project activities. Further, additional 
funds would be required to support various projects to be undertaken in futuristic areas. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
11. The Committee in its original report had observed that there was a shortfall 
of Rs. 3002.56 crore in the approved allocation for Financial year 2021-22 for 
DRDO as against the proposed Budget Estimate(BE) allocation. The Ministry in its 
reply have stated that the department is managing within the allocated funds by 
re-prioritization of project activities.  However, it has been stated that additional 
funds would be required to support various projects to be undertaken in futuristic 
areas.  The Committee feel that since role of DRDO has assumed greater 
significance in the area of development of futuristic technologies that are 
required for defence preparedness, it should be ensured that the budgetary 
requirements of DRDO are fully met and, if required, even additional funds may 
be provided to DRDO for their ongoing and future projects.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
12. During the course of examination of Demands for Grants 2021-22, the 
Committee find that in 2020-21, the approved BE allocation for DRDO was Rs. 
19,327.35 crore while the approved RE allocation was Rs. 16,466.29 crore. The 
Committee note that the RE allocation is lesser than the BE allocation by Rs. 2,861.06 
crore. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
13. Yes, it is a fact that BE approved for DD R&D during the FY 2020-21 was Rs. 
19327.35 crore and the same was reduced to Rs 16466.29 crore at RE stage. Thus 
overall reduction of Rs 2861.06 crore has been made. This includes a reduction of Rs. 
2575.00 crore under Capital Head based on the expenditure trend during the Financial 
Year. 
 
  

 
- 12 - 
Comments of the Committee 
 
14. From the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that no 
plausible explanation has been given for the reduction of budget allocation at 
Revised Estimate(RE) stage for DRDO except the fact that the reduction under 
Capital Head was based on the expenditure trend during the Financial Year.  The 
Committee feel that such a huge  gap between the BE and RE allocation shows 
either an inaccurate estimation of actual requirements on the part of DRDO or 
less allocation on the part of the Government ignoring the actual demand of 
DRDO.  The Committee would like to emphasise that as far as possible correct 
and realistic estimation of the actual budgetary requirements of the organisation 
should be made so as to obviate the scope for reduction at RE Stage.  
Notwithstanding this the Committee desire that sufficient funds should be 
allocated to DRDO keeping in view the various projects undertaken by it in 
futuristic areas. 
 
D. Manpower  
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 15 and 16) 
 
15. The Committee were apprised that presently authorized strength of scientists in 
DRDO is 7773 while existing strength is 6959. It shows that there is 10% shortage in 
scientist in DRDO. The Committee note that the shortage of manpower can prove to be 
a hindrance towards fructification of committed R&D projects. In its written reply, the 
Ministry of Defence has stated that the Government of India has sanctioned creation of 
434 posts (420 Scientists and 14 works cadre posts) in phase-1 towards meeting 
immediate and unavoidable critical requirements of additional scientific and technical 
manpower against ongoing projects in DRDO out of the total manpower of 1316 which 
the Ministry of Finance had agreed for augmentation in three phases. The progress in 
this regard may be apprised to the Committee through the Action Taken Replies.  
 
 While appreciating the sanction of posts in phase-1 for augmentation of 
manpower in DRDO which the Committee feel can further bolster the capabilities of 
DRDO to meet its goals, the Committee recommend that all efforts be made to provide 
for the balance projected manpower requirement of 882 posts to DRDO on priority basis 
 
  

 
- 13 - 
Reply of the Government 
 
16. DRDO optimally utilizes manpower through dynamic manpower management. 
The vacant posts created on account of superannuation/resignations etc are released 
regularly on annual basis after considering the functional requirements of Labs/Estts of 
DRDO. Out of 814 existing vacant posts of scientists, 753 posts, which include 280 
newly created posts, are under process of requirement. The recruitment process of 
remaining 140 newly created posts shall be initiated in the third phase, in the 
recruitment year 2022. 
 
Govt. sanction for augmentation of 434 posts out of total posts in the first phase 
has been issued and in respect of two posts of the level of JS and above, proposal for 
approval of Cabinet for creation has been initiated. After the completion of recruitment 
process of posts sanctioned in the first phase, proposal for creation of remaining 880 
posts out of 1316 posts shall be taken up in two phases on priority.  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
17. The Committee note from the reply that dynamic manpower management 
system is being adopted for optimal utilization of manpower by DRDO and the 
process of recruitment is going on.  The Committee trust that after completion of 
requirements process of 434 posts in the first phase,  creation of remaining 880 
posts out of 1316 posts would be completed at the earliest so that R&D work of 
the DRDO is not affected. 
 
E. Manpower 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
18. During the oral evidence, the Committee were apprised that the Performance 
Related Incentive Scheme on the lines as it exists in ISRO and DAE has not been 
implemented in DRDO. The Committee, therefore, recommend that organizational and 
group incentives may be extended to scientists of DRDO keeping in view the fact that 
DRDO is involved in extremely critical research work and also bringing out products that 
are extremely vital not only for the security of the country but also for the development 
of defence manufacturing in the country.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
19. Performance Related Incentive Scheme (PRIS), was introduced based on 
recommendation of 6th CPC to be applied at Organisation (PRIS (O)), Group/Team 
(PRIS (G)) and Individual levels. The 6th CPC had further recommended that funding for 
this incentive scheme would need to be generated internally by the department through 
cost and efficiency improvements, productivity increases etc. However, in the case of 

 
- 14 - 
Department of Space (DoS) and Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), the 6th CPC 
recommended grant of PRIS without linking to savings.  
 
Regarding incentives at individual level, based on a combined proposal by the 
three strategic scientific departments, viz, DoS, DAE and DRDO, a scheme of variable 
increments on promotions based on meritorious performance, was implemented w.e.f. 
01 Jan, 2009, in the three departments.  
 
A scheme for grant of PRIS (O) and PRIS (G) in DRDO was approved in Nov, 
2011 (for a period of two years) but could never get implemented as the same differed 
from that implemented in DAE/DOS on the following two counts exclusively for DRDO:- 
 
(a) Payment of PRIS was to be linked to savings by the Department. 
(b) The quantum of incentive was to be decided on the basis of assessment of 
performance against targets set in the Results Framework Document (RFD) 
of the Department. 
 
To implement PRIS (O) in DRDO, a proposal showing savings from Establishment 
Heads to the tune of Rs. 150 Cr was submitted by DRDO in Aug, 2012. Department of 
Expenditure, however, rejected the savings shown by DRDO stating it to be notional 
and not related to any improvement in performance. DRDO also participated in the 
Assessment based on Results Framework Document (RFD) and achieved very high 
scores every year. 
 
The 7th CPC in its report recommended continuation of PRIS (O) and PRIS (G) to 
DoS and DAE. The Commission did not recommend PRIS to DRDO stating that DRDO 
has a system of variable increments that is similar to PRIS (Individual). This rationale 
offered by the Commission is discriminatory in view of the fact that both DoS and DAE 
have the same system of variable increments as in the case of DRDO. 
 
Meanwhile, pursuant to the recommendation No. 61 of the Committee of Experts 
to Recommend Measures to Enhance Combat Capability and Rebalance Defence 
Expenditure of the Armed Forces (Shekatkar Committee), approval of the Hon’ble RM 
was obtained to take up a case separately for implementation of PRIS (Organisational) 
and PRIS (G) in DRDO on the same lines as in DOS and DAE is being initiated. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
20. The Committee are satisfied to note that approval of the Hon’ble Raksha 
Mantri has  been obtained for taking up separately the case for implementation of 
PRIS (Organisational) and PRIS(G) in DRDO on the same lines as in DOS and 
DAE.  The Committee express the hope that the efforts of the Ministry in this 
regards would bear fruits and implementation of the Performance Related 
Incentive Scheme (PRIS) in DRDO will soon see the light of the day. 
 

 
- 15 - 
F. Nuclear, Biological and Chemical (NBC) Weapons Detection System  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
21. The Committee would like to recommend that sufficient budgetary allocations 
should be provisioned for R&D efforts of DRDO in the field of Nuclear, Biological and 
Chemical (NBC) warfare. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
22. Sufficient budgetary allocation is essential for continuity in R&D efforts for 
development of state-of-the-art technologies and products to make country self reliant in 
the field of NBC warfare. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
23. The Committee are of the view that since all kind of wars in future may be 
fought using NBC weapon systems, the Committee therefore, reiterate that 
adequate budgetary provision need to be earmarked for R&D efforts of DRDO in 
the field of NBC warfare.  
 
 
G. Collaboration with Universities/Academic Institutions  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24 ) 
 
24. The Committee are pleased to note that DRDO has established eight Centres of 
Excellence in advanced areas viz., Center of Propulsion Technology at IIT Bombay 
(CoPT), Joint Advanced Technology Center at IIT Delhi (JATC), Jagdish Chandra Boss 
Center for Advanced Technology (JCBCAT) at Jadavpur University, Kolkata, Research 
Innovation Center (RIC) IIT Madras, Advanced Center for Research in High Energy 
Materials (ACRHEM), University of Hyderabad and DRDOBU Center of Life Sciences at 
Bharathia University and two newly established i.e. North East Science & Technology 
Centre (NESTC), Mizoram University, Aizwal, Kalam Centre for Science & Technology 
(KCST), Central University of Jammy, Kathua (UT of J&K). The Committee would like to 
witness a scenario that more such centres be established in the future and fruitful 
research efforts be used for the benefit of Defence Services and the country. It is also 
appreciable that DRDO has started scholarship schemes, financial support to organize 
conferences/seminars/workshops in niche areas of technology of interest to DRDO at 
various academic institutions.  
 
  

 
- 16 - 
Reply of the Government 
 
25. In February 2021 DRDO has signed MOU with IISc, Bangalore for expanding the 
scope & objective of Joint Advanced Technology Program- Centre of Excellence (JATP-
COE) at IISc, Bangalore. Under Atamanirbhar Bharat Program, four workshops and 
eight seminars will be conducted and appropriate financial support will be provided. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
26. The Committee place on record their appreciation that DRDO has signed 
MOU with IISc., Bangalore for expanding the Joint Advanced Programme - Centre 
of Excellence. They trust that DRDO would establish many more centers of 
excellence in future to augment their R&D efforts, which would contribute to 
development of new technologies in the field of Defence Sector. 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL QUALITY ASSURANCE 
 
 
H. Manpower and Training 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
27. During the oral evidence, it was submitted that the role of the technical 
manpower was expanding and their role was also assuming greater importance thus 
enhancing their requirement. The Committee were apprised that an increment of about 
20 percent was required in technical manpower by DGQA. The Committee are happy to 
note that a Review Committee under the Ministry of Defence has already been formed 
which is reviewing and studying the technical manpower requirement of DGQA. The 
Committee hope that this Committee of the Ministry of Defence would rationalize the 
requirements and will help to augment the technical manpower of DGQA. The 
Committee recommend that all efforts may be made to fill up the vacancies in DGQA at 
an early date and end the 20 percent shortage of technical manpower in the 
Organization. The Committee also recommend that the report of the Review Committee 
of the Ministry of Defence may be shared with the Committee while furnishing the Action 
Taken Replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
28. DGQA Technical Manpower is the main pillar of DGQA Organisation to sustain 
and provide a boost to the ongoing various technical activities. Shortages/deficiencies 
beyond minimum inescapable requirement on this account are likely to have a bearing 
on overall performance of the system. The recommendation of Committee to increase 

 
- 17 - 
technical manpower of DGQA by 20% has been intimated to NPC Team constituted by 
MOD / DDP for restructuring of DGQA. The Committee has been asked to study and 
rationalize the requirements to augment the technical manpower, keeping in view the 
future programmes and anticipated gradual increase in the assigned responsibilities of 
DGQA. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
29. The Committee are satisfied to note that the work relating to increase of 
DGQA technical manpower has been entrusted to the National Productivity 
Council (NPC) Team constituted by MOD/DDP for restructuring DGQA.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the programme made in this regard. 
 
  

 
- 18 - 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
ORDNANCE FACTORIES 
 
 
Budgetary Provisions 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee had, in their Twenty-Second Report recommended as under: 
 
The Committee was apprised that Ordnance Factories (OFs) are an integrated 
base for indigenous production of Defence equipment and ammunition and form the 
backbone of the country's Defence production. Reading through budgetary allocations 
for OFs, the Committee find that the projection in BE 2021-22 was Rs. 14,406.00 crore 
and the allocation is Rs. 13,657.11 crore. The estimated receipts/recoveries BE 2021-
22 stage is worth an amount of Rs. 13,543.23 crore. The Committee were further 
apprised that the Funds are allocated for expenditure under various accounting heads 
to each Ordnance Factory under Ordnance Factory Board. The criteria for allocating 
funds include various parameters such as target of production and supplies, projections 
of factories, past trends and statutory obligation and planned investment on 
modernization etc. The Committee desire that absolute prudence and probity shall be 
exercised in allocation of funds to different factories under OFB. 
 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:- 
 
An institutionalized annual mechanism exists at Ordnance Factory Board Head 
Quarters level for detailed discussion with each factory and associated branch of 
Defence Account Offices to ascertain realistic allocation to various factories and Units 
based on a thorough/detailed analysis of the following factors: 
 
 Status of outstanding and committed liabilities 
 Production target of the Unit 
 Status of ongoing projects 
 Normal inflation 
 Overall budget /fund availability and expenditure ceiling.  
 
Order Book Position 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee had, in their Twenty-Second Report recommended as under: 

 
- 19 - 
 
On the issue of Order Book position in the Ordnance Factories, the Committee 
learn that OFB receives order in the form of Five Years Roll on Indent from Army for 
ammunition items to meet their war wastages as well as annual training requirement. In 
case of armoured vehicles, other stores and spares, fixed quantity indents are received 
from time to time. Considering all such indents, Order Book position as on 30.09.2020 
was Rs. 51,939 crores for the next five years for supply of Ammunition, Weapons, 
Troops Comfort items and Armoured Vehicles. The Committee also note that the 
present annual capacity of OFB for supply of equipment to the three services is to the 
tune of Rs17,000 crore (including GST). In this connection, the Committee recommend 
that OFB look into all possibilities to expand their client list for achieving 100 percent 
capacity utilization. 
 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:- 
 
The Order Book Position of OFB as on 31.12.2020 is Rs 52,783.64 Cr excluding 
GST. 
  
 DDP is enabling OFB to diversify its product profile and new market exploration, 
by various policy decision and delegation of financial powers to OFB. To increase 
Research and Development activities in OFB, enhancement of Delegation of Power up-
to Rs 10 crore has been accorded in July, 2020 for placement of Contracts for 
Acquisition of Research Assistance (CARS) from the government academic institutions 
and government owned laboratories. 
 
 OFB is diversifying its product portfolio and expanding its base in the 
international market as well as domestic civil sector. OFB launched 0.32 Revolver 
“Nishank” (0.32 Calibre) along with Biometric Enabled Holster (Kavatch). A recently 
indigenously developed Sniper rifle was handed over to Assam Rifles. Other Para-
Military forces have shown interest in recently developed Joint Venture Protective 
Carbine (JVPC, ex-OFB). Also an export order has been received from UAE, recently. 
 
Budget for Modernization 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee had, in their Twenty-Second Report recommended as under: 
 
The Committee were apprised that in Ordnance Factories modernization is a 
continuous process. To keep pace with the contemporary manufacturing technologies, 
OFB prepares a modernization plan for technological up-gradation as well as capacity 
enhancements. In the span of 5 years from 2015-16 to 2019-20, Rs. 5578.10 crore has 
been expended on various modernization work. After going through the data furnished 
to them, the Committee took note of numerous production activities 
completed/undertaken by OFs during last five years which include creation of capacity 
for the production of T-90 Tanks 100 Nos. per annum, creation of facilities for 

 
- 20 - 
production of Pinaka Rocket and many others. The Committee desire that OFB shall 
strive for imbibing best manufacturing techniques in production of goods so that 
Services get the latest State-of-the-Art equipment. 
 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:- 
 
Efforts are being made to bring the best manufacturing technologies to the 
country by means of allowing consortium of Indian vendors with foreign 
collaborators/technology partners. Provision for the same has already been made in the 
OFB Procurement Manual (OFBPM)-P&M-2013.  
 
Overseas firms involved in the business of manufacturing of Plant & Machineries 
are generally technology specific. These firms are now coming forward through 
consortium agreement with indigenous firms which are taking over civil and other labour 
intensive works of the project, whereas the technology is being provided by the foreign 
firm. This has also facilitated in speedy execution of work. As a result of allowing 
consortium of Indian & Foreign vendors, many Indian vendors are coming forward to 
participate in advance technology Plant &Machineries by making consortium with 
foreign OEM. These in turn will improve supply of latest state-of-the-art-equipment to 
the Armed Forces in due course of time. 
 
Corporatization of the Ordnance Factory Board 
Recommendations (Para No. 4) 
The Committee had, in their Twenty-Second Report recommended as under: 
 
During oral evidence, the representative of the Ministry of Defence submitted that 
with a view to address constraints in the existing system to take care of various issues 
raised by the users in respect of quality, timely delivery, cost etc. and with the goal to 
help OFB grow to the next level of turnover, exports and self-reliance, the Government 
has decided to convert Ordnance Factory Board, into one or more than one 100% 
Government owned corporate entity(ies). Various Expert Committees set up in the past, 
such as TK Nair Committee (2000), Kelkar Committee (2005), Raman Puri Committee, 
(2015) and Shekatkar Committee (2016), have given recommendations to corporatize 
OFB. This move is expected to improve autonomy, accountability, and efficiency in 
Ordnance supplies. The Committee concur with the view of the Ministry on this issue 
and believe that with necessitated structural improvements, OFB will be able to further 
improve quality of products and expand their market. The Committee were further 
informed that the Department has appointed a Consultant to suggest Organizational 
structural changes and business continuity plan for the new entity (ies) to continue on a 
sustainable basis. The study by the Consultant is presently under progress. The 
Committee recommend that the details be shared with them and at the same time would 
like to say that Ministry should weigh all the pros and cons in favour of OFB before 
arriving at any finality on the findings of the Consultants. 
 

 
- 21 - 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:- 
 
The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) in its meeting dated 29.07.2020 has 
accorded approval to convert Ordnance Factory Board (OFB), a subordinate office of 
Ministry of Defence, into one or more than one 100% Government owned corporate 
entities, registered under the Companies Act, 2013 and to constitute an Empowered 
Group of Ministers (EGoM) to oversee and guide the entire process including transition 
support and redeployment plan of employees while safeguarding their wages and 
retirement benefits. 
 
The Department has engaged Consultants for providing strategic and 
implementation management consulting services to assist the Department in the 
process of corporatisation of the OFB, which has commenced its services w.e.f. 
15.10.2020.The Consultant will provide the overall strategy, vision and operating model 
along with financial & legal implications and detailed roadmap for implementation. It will 
also support DDP in implementation of the corporatization process. 
 
The Consultant have submitted the following reports till date: 
 
(i) Inception Report: Covering methodology & work plan. 
(ii) Baseline & benchmarking Report. 
(iii) Preliminary Feasibility and Organisational Strategy Report. 
(iv) Financing structure & legal issues report. 
 
Empowered Group of Ministers under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Raksha 
Mantri has been constituted. The first meeting of the EGoM was held on 07.12.2020 
and the second meeting on 02.03.2021, in which various issues related to 
corporatization of OFB within the mandate of the EGoM were discussed. The findings of 
the Consultant were also brought before the EGoM. Further actions are being taken as 
per the approval of the EGoM. 
 
Manpower 
Recommendations (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee had, in their Twenty-Second Report recommended: 
 
As regards, to the authorized and existing strength of manpower in all Ordnance 
Factories both technical and non-technical, the Committee find that as on January 2021, 
the total strength is 77,199 as against a sanctioning of 1,45,503 number of posts. On 
the issue of huge gap in strength, the representative of Ministry of Defence informed the 
Committee that considering the declaration of items as non-core and decline of orders 
from Indian Army, very limited recruitment of the vacant posts has been carried out, in 
recent years. Further, in view of the initiation of OFB corporatization process, fresh 
recruitment are not being undertaken presently. The Committee recommend that the 
essential processes and due-diligence shall be undertaken in time bound manner so 
that capabilities are not left unutilized for long. 

 
- 22 - 
 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply has stated:- 
 
The requirement has been reviewed and all direct recruitments, including for 
Group ‘A’ officers, has been put on hold for the time being. All essential processes and 
due-diligence are being undertaken by the Ministry in order to ensure fruitful utilization 
of resources and capabilities of OFB in order to meet the requirement of customers. 
 
The new management after corporatization of OFB would be mandated to 
rationalise the manpower in a time bound manner. 
 
Quality Control 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
 
The Committee had, in their Twenty-Second Report recommended as under: 
 
It has come to the knowledge of the Committee that although hundred per cent 
Quality Control (QC) is done by Factories, non-conformities are still observed during 
Quality Assurance/Final Acceptance Inspection (FAI) resulting into high Return for 
Rectification (RFR). This high RFR is affecting overall productivity and resulting into 
delay in supplies to the users. On raising the issue with the representatives of OFB, the 
Committee were told that all the products developed and manufactured by Ordnance 
Factories are subjected to various Quality Checks. The Quality checks of products are 
being carried out at Ordnance Factories on the basis of Quality Assurance Plan 
(QAPJ/Acceptance Test Plan (ATP)/Quality Plan etc. These Quality documents have 
clear guidelines for all the checks to be carried out during the entire cycle of 
manufacturing of Defence Stores. The Committee wish that OFs shall strive to function 
on zero defect motto and they recommend that the enumerated guidelines shall also be 
practically implemented in processes of production. The accountability at all levels of 
workmanship shall be fixed in order to find fault-lines and take remedial action. 
 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:- 
 
All Ordnance Factories are making endeavor to upgrade quality systems with 
induction of modern technology, both in manufacturing as well as quality infrastructure.  
All Factories have been instructed to formulate Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
jointly between Quality Control/Factories & Quality Assurance Agencies (DGQA) on 
"Traceability and Accountability”. Accountability is being fixed among production 
agencies as well as QA agencies for any fault-line defect / accident being reported in 
any ordnance factory. 
 
  

 
- 23 - 
Delay in product delivery 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 7) 
 
The Committee had, in their Twenty-Second Report recommended as under: 
 
On the issue of Delay in supply of items produced by Ordnance Factories to the 
Forces, the Committee were guided that OFB supply the items to the Services based on 
mutually agreed targets fixed on yearly basis in consultation with Services. Supply is 
restricted within available budget with Services. The Committee take a serious note of 
the fact that delays not only affect the demands of Defence Forces but also lead to cost 
escalation thereby putting extra financial burden. Further, the Committee were updated 
on the measures being taken to overcome delays and install timely deliveries. In this 
connection, it was submitted by representatives of Ministry of Defence that OFB has 
institutionalized interaction mechanism with Indian Armed Forces. At apex level, Master 
General of Ordnance (MGO),is permanent invitee to the board meetings of OFB. There 
is structured interaction system at various levels. OFB also has annual target fixation 
meetings with Armed Forces. In these meetings and interactions, ascertainment of 
realistic time frames for manufacture of various products is discussed. MGO, being a 
permanent invitee for attending Board meetings of OFB, issues related to supplies, 
priorities and constraints are discussed at highest level periodically. Whenever some 
urgent requirement is highlighted by MGO, due priority is being accorded to meet that 
urgent need. The Committee wish that the above measures would be helpful in curbing 
inordinate delays and streamlining of demand supply activities. 
 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:- 
 
 To resolve delay in supply issues, DDP is monitoring progress of OFB on a 
regular basis. At the apex level in DDP, Quarterly Production Review Meeting is being 
held with the Services. Interaction with MGO is done on regular basis at Joint Secretary 
Level, for early resolution of quality issues. At OFB level, monthly Apex level meeting is 
held, wherein MGO is permanent invitee and detailed discussions about problems faced 
by user are deliberated. With above interaction at DDP/OFB level, all out efforts are 
made to ensure that requirements of Army are met. 
 
Export and Import of Ordnance Factories products 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 8) 
 
The Committee had, in their Twenty-Second Report recommended: 
 
During deliberations on DFG 2021-22, the Committee were pleased to find that 
OFB is diversifying its product portfolio range and expanding its base in the international 
market as well as domestic civil sector. In domestic civil sector, new Sporting Arms are 
being continuously developed and introduced in the civil market periodically, in exports 
also, OFB is exploring new areas/regions/countries to export products to the friendly 

 
- 24 - 
countries. It was further explored that as of now, OFB is only able to materialize 1% of 
their sales from export which even given to conservative estimates is a very meagre 
figure. The Committee feel that for sustained growth and achieving target of export of 
Rs.30,000 crores by 2026, OFB needs to increase its export base. The Committee 
recommend that OFB will have to explore methodologies and products for ingression 
into international markets. For this, appointing sales personnel in different global zones 
and vigorously following latest market needs are essential. OFs in the country are a 
large network of production base and unless and until the humungous world market is 
optimally protruded, the capacity of OFs cannot be fully utilized. Last but not the least, 
every expert success has a hidden story in terms of very strong Research and 
Development base. All achievements become subservient in the absence of any 
advance R & D base. Therefore, as a priority OFB should give more than due emphasis 
on continued R & D. 
 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:- 
 
OFB has started engagements with channel partners in foreign countries for 
boosting its exports. Indian Defence Attache’ (DA) posted abroad and DAs of various 
countries posted in India are being contracted for assistance in boosting export. OFB 
has also started customization of products as per user requirements. OFB has also 
invited various delegations from OEM and Foreign Countries for technical discussions 
to explore export potential. 
 
OFB is giving more and more emphasis on R&D activities to develop futuristic 
defence equipment/Weapon-platform. To achieve the objective, following actions/ 
efforts have been initiated by OFB: 
 
 MOU with CSIR: OFB has entered into an agreement with Council of Scientific 
& Industrial Research (CSlR). 
 MoU with DPSUs: OFB has concluded MoU with BEL and BEML for 
cooperation on various projects to jointly address the requirements of Indian 
Defence & Export market. OFB has MoU with MIDHANI to jointly address the 
requirements of critical and strategic material for Indian Defence Forces, 
Paramilitary Forces, Police organizations, civil and export market. 
 Interaction with Academia: OFB is taking project specific technical/ research 
assistance in design and prototype development from premier Govt. Academic 
Institutions such as IITs/IISc/NITs and Govt. owned Laboratories such as 
Central Institutes of Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET).  
 
  

 
- 25 - 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION  
 
Budget  
Recommendation (Para no. 9) 
 
The Committee find that during the financial year 2021-22, the proposed BE 
allocation of DRDO was Rs. 23460.00 crore and the approved allocation is Rs. 
20457.44 crore. There is a shortfall of Rs. 3002.56 crore. DRDO has pointed out that 
the insufficient left over amount is for R&D activities after meeting the mandatory 
expenses for strategic schemes and pay & allowances. The Department, as Committee 
understand, however, manages within the existing allocations by prioritizing project 
activities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Details of FBE, Budget Allocations for the Deptt. of Defence R&D at different 
Budgetary stages w.e.f FY 2017-18 is as under.  
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE Proposed BE Approved  RE Approved MA Approved 
2017-18 19935.60 14818.74 15463.25 15399.25 
2018-19 22203.74 17861.19 17610.38 17121.99 
2019-20 22953.95 19021.02 17730.78 17730.78 
2020-21 23457.40 19327.35 16466.29 16145.74  
2021-22 23460.00 20457.44   
 
It may be noted that against the projection of Rs. 23460.00 crore at BE stage 
during the FY 2021-22 An amount of Rs 20457.44 crore was allocated. Department is 
managing within the allocations by re-prioritising the project activities. Further, additional 
funds would be required to support various projects to be undertaken in futuristic areas. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 Further, in respect of the Budgetary grants, the Committee find a steady drop in 
DRDO expenditure as percentage of total GDP over past few years. The DRDO 
expenditure was 0.084% of the GDP in 2021-22 as compared to 0.088% in 2016-17. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Defence R&D Expenditure as percentage of GDP w.e.f. 2015-16 is as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Total GDP DD R&D Exp DD R&D Exp as % of 
Total GDP 
2016-17 15391669.00 13501.00 0.088  
2017-18 17098304.00 15399.25 0.090  
2018-19 18971237.00 17121.99 0.090  
2019-20 (PE) 20339849.00 17730.78 0.087  
2020-21  (AE) 19481975.00 16145.74 0.083  

 
- 26 - 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
 The Committee note that expenditure which has remained around 1% of GDP 
expenditure incurred on Defence Research and Development in the country is 
substantially less as compared to other developed nations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Yes, as illustrated in table above (Recommendation No.11), it is a fact that 
DRDO expenditure is less than 1% of GDP. 
 
Budgetary Provisions 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
The Committee were informed by the Ministry of Defence that the budget of 
DRDO has always been around 5-6% of the Defence Budget.  Though DRDO has 
identified 108 systems for development by private industry which will not be taken up by 
DRDO, there are other flagship projects/ programmes for the design and development 
of major platforms, weapon systems and sensors of DRDO for which enhancement in 
fund allocations is desirable. The Committee, therefore, recommend provision of 
adequate enhanced allocations to DRDO to enable it to scale up its R&D activities 
especially keeping in view the focus of the Government on ‘Make in India’ towards 
building an ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’. The Committee are of the view that without sufficient 
budgetary support, DRDO may fail to fulfil the indigenisation efforts of the Government. 
To tap the export potential of the country development of R&D activities in the defence 
sector is mandatory which still in nascent stage. The Committee also would like to 
stress upon the need for enhancement of expenditure of DRDO as percentage of total 
GDP as well as increasing its percentage share of the total Defence Budget to enable it 
to take up its flagship projects/programmes for the design and development of weapon 
systems etc.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2021-22, DRDO has been allocated an amount of Rs. 20,457.44 Crore 
(including both Revenue and Capital Heads) i.e. an increase of Rs. 3,991.15 Crore over 
RE 2020-21. 
 
2. Since the launch of ‘Make in  India’ in Sep. 2014, several measures have been 
taken by the Government to promote indigenous design, development and manufacture 
of defence & aerospace equipment in the country under ‘Make in India’ by harnessing 
the capabilities of the public and private sector. 
 

 
- 27 - 
3. It may be seen from the table below  that Budget Estimates (BE) of DRDO has 
been increasing consistently in absolute terms from 2016-17 onwards. 
 
        (Rs. in crore) 
Year Budget Estimates (BE) 
2016-17 13,593.78 
2017-18 14,818.74 
2018-19 17,861.19 
2019-20 19,021.02 
2020-21 19,327.35 
 
4. It may not be always appropriate to consider DRDO’s allocation in terms of 
national economic output. If the economy grows at a faster rate, budgetary allocation 
decreases as a percentage of GDP. But it doesn’t mean that the level of expenditure 
has fallen, or has even become inadequate. Also, keeping a certain percentage for any 
particular service out of total defence budget may not be advisable as it may put 
unnecessary strain on genuine and pressing operational requirements of other 
Services. Funds are allocated to the Services/ Organisations based on pace of 
expenditure, Committed Liabilities, operational requirements, etc. 
 
5. The Ministry is therefore of the view that keeping a particular percentage of GDP 
for Defence Expenditure or a certain percentage of total defence budget for any 
Service/ Organisation may not prove to be fruitful. Ministry of Defence is committed to 
extract the maximum value from each defence rupee, inter-alia, through rigorous 
prioritisation, restructuring of the defence forces, integration with defence production 
and focussing resources in areas likely to enhance the effectiveness of the defence 
forces. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
The Committee also appreciate the proposal of DRDO to enhance the budget to 
support research in academia to 5% and feel that a proper channelization and correct 
utilization of these funds can be a great boost to research in Indian industries especially 
MSMEs/Start-ups for indigenisation of imported systems/components and building new 
systems.  The Committee recommend that the provision of appropriate additional 
funding may be provisioned for in the revised allocations in this regard. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government may ensure adequate overall budgetary 
allocations to DRDO in the additional/supplementary grants stages.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2021-22, DRDO has been allocated an amount of Rs. 20,457.44 Crore 
(including both Revenue Head- Rs. 9,081.94 Crore and Capital Head-11,375.50 Crore) 
which is an increase of Rs. 3,991.15 Crore (i.e. 24.24%) over RE 2020-21. 
 

 
- 28 - 
2. The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional 
funds projected by DRDO at Supplementary/RE stage.  Further, the allocated funds will 
be optimally utilized towards operational activities. If required, the schemes will be 
reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any 
compromise to operational preparedness. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee were apprised that presently authorized strength of scientists in 
DRDO is 7773 while existing strength is 6959. It shows that there is 10% shortage in 
scientist in DRDO. The Committee note that the shortage of manpower can prove to be 
a hindrance towards fructification of committed R&D projects. In its written reply, the 
Ministry of Defence has stated that the Government of India has sanctioned creation of 
434 posts (420 Scientists and 14 works cadre posts) in phase-1 towards meeting 
immediate and unavoidable critical requirements of additional scientific and technical 
manpower against ongoing projects in DRDO out of the total manpower of 1316 which 
the Ministry of Finance had agreed for augmentation in three phases. The progress in 
this regard may be apprised to the Committee through the Action Taken Replies.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO optimally utilizes manpower through dynamic manpower management. 
The vacant posts created on account of superannuation/resignations etc are released 
regularly on annual basis after considering the functional requirements of Labs/Estts. of 
DRDO. Out of 814 existing vacant posts of scientists, 753 posts, which include 280 
newly created posts, are under process of requirement. The recruitment process of 
remaining 140 newly created posts shall be initiated in the third phase, in the 
recruitment year 2022. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 While appreciating the sanction of posts in phase-1 for augmentation of 
manpower in DRDO which the Committee feel can further bolster the capabilities of 
DRDO to meet its goals, the Committee recommend that all efforts be made to provide 
for the balance projected manpower requirement of 882 posts to DRDO on priority 
basis.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Govt. sanction for augmentation of 434 posts out of total posts in the first phase 
has been issued and in respect of two posts of the level of JS and above, proposal for 
approval of Cabinet for creation has been initiated. After the completion of recruitment 
process of posts sanctioned in the first phase, proposal for creation of remaining 880 
posts out of 1316 posts shall be taken up in two phases on priority.  

 
- 29 - 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 During the oral evidence, the Committee were apprised that the Performance 
Related Incentive Scheme on the lines as it exists in ISRO and DAE has not been 
implemented in DRDO. The Committee, therefore, recommend that organizational and 
group incentives may be extended to scientists of DRDO keeping in view the fact that 
DRDO is involved in extremely critical research work and also bringing out products that 
are extremely vital not only for the security of the country but also for the development 
of defence manufacturing in the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
1. Performance Related Incentive Scheme (PRIS), was introduced based on 
recommendation of 6th CPC to be applied at Organisation (PRIS (O)), Group/Team 
(PRIS (G)) and Individual levels. The 6th CPC had further recommended that funding for 
this incentive scheme would need to be generated internally by the department through 
cost and efficiency improvements, productivity increases etc. However, in the case of 
Department of Space (DoS) and Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), the 6th CPC 
recommended grant of PRIS without linking to savings.  
 
2. Regarding incentives at individual level, based on a combined proposal by the 
three strategic scientific departments, viz, DoS, DAE and DRDO, a scheme of variable 
increments on promotions based on meritorious performance, was implemented w.e.f. 
01 Jan, 2009, in the three departments.  
 
3. A scheme for grant of PRIS (O) and PRIS (G) in DRDO was approved in Nov, 
2011 (for a period of two years) but could never get implemented as the same differed 
from that implemented in DAE/DOS on the following two counts exclusively for DRDO:- 
 
(a) Payment of PRIS was to be linked to savings by the Department. 
(b) The quantum of incentive was to be decided on the basis of assessment of 
performance against targets set in the Results Framework Document (RFD) 
of the Department. 
 
4. To implement PRIS (O) in DRDO, a proposal showing savings from 
Establishment Heads to the tune of Rs. 150 Cr was submitted by DRDO in Aug, 2012. 
Department of Expenditure, however, rejected the savings shown by DRDO stating it to 
be notional and not related to any improvement in performance. DRDO also participated 
in the Assessment based on Results Framework Document (RFD) and achieved very 
high scores every year. 
 
5. The 7 th CPC in its report recommended continuation of PRIS (O) and PRIS (G) to 
DoS and DAE. The Commission did not recommend PRIS to DRDO stating that DRDO 
has a system of variable increments that is similar to PRIS (Individual). This rationale 

 
- 30 - 
offered by the Commission is discriminatory in view of the fact that both DoS and DAE 
have the same system of variable increments as in the case of DRDO. 
 
6. Meanwhile, pursuant to the recommendation No. 61 of the Committee of Experts 
to Recommend Measures to Enhance Combat Capability and Rebalance Defence 
Expenditure of the Armed Forces (Shekatkar Committee), approval of the Hon’ble RM 
was obtained to take up a case separately for implementation of PRIS (Organisational) 
and PRIS (G) in DRDO on the same lines as in DOS and DAE is being initiated.  
 
Public Private Partnership 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
 The Committee feel that the active involvement of private sector, Universities, 
Indian Institute of Technologies and Indian Institute of Science can play an important 
role in the process of modernization and re-orientation of the functions of DRDO. The 
Committee are happy to note that a conducive environment for better coordination 
between the Public Sector and Private Sector is created by DRDO and DRDO is 
passing on its research work to the benefit of the private sector without seeking any 
remuneration. The Committee recommend the fixation of some remittances in lieu of the 
Technology Transfer by DRDO to Private Industry which can then be used for 
augmenting the R&D efforts of the organization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The benefits of DRDO’s technological progress are passed on to Industries 
through Transfer of Technology (ToT) agreements for both military products and civilian 
spin offs products. The Category ‘A’ technologies pertains to the technologies for 
Military application, MHA and Government Departments. While the Category ‘B’ 
technologies pertain to the technologies for commercial application. 
 
‘Nil’ ToT fee is charged from the industry partners {Development cum Production 
Partners (DcPP)/ Development Partner (DP)} and zero royalty for supply to Indian 
Armed Forces and Govt Deptt. However, if the industry partner is not the DcPP/ DP, 5% 
ToT fee is charged from industries for ToT of Category ‘A’ technologies.  
 
Further, to execute ToT of Category ‘B’ technologies i.e. dual use spin off 
technologies, DRDO has entered into MOUs with four leading industry chambers 
namely Associated Chamber of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
(PHDCCI) and National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) for technology 
assessment and commercialization of dual use, non-security sensitive technologies so 
that fruits of our technological progress reach the common man. These ToTs are given 
to Industries by charging a nominal ToT fee based on ‘what market can bear’ concept. 
 

 
- 31 - 
The ToT fee so received from industries is deposited into Consolidated Fund of 
India through an eMRO. This is further utilized for various projects of Government of 
India. 
 
  DRDO has established Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme under 
Ministry of Defence (MoD) to involve Public and Private sector industry especially 
MSMEs including Start-ups that may work in collaboration with the academia or 
research institutions to carry out innovation, research and development in the field of 
Defence and Aerospace. Till now, Twenty-five (25) projects have been awarded under 
TDF scheme to various Indian MSMEs, Startups and large industries. The details are as 
follows:- 
 
SI. 
No. 
Type of 
Industry 
No. of 
Projects 
Total cost of 
Projects (In Lakh) 
Remarks 
1. MSMEs 17 7741.17 02 Projects to Public Sector 
and 15 Projects to Private 
Sector 
2. Large 04 3418.4  
3. Start ups 04 2860.58  
 Total 25 14020.15  
 
Total grant paid to various Developing Agencies (DA) during the FY 2020-21 Rs 
513.47806 (In Lakh) and planed grant to be paid to various Developing Agencies (DA) 
during FY 2021-22 Rs 5000.00 (In Lakh) under Technology Development (TDF) 
Scheme.  
 
Indigenization of Research and Development activities 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 The Committee note that steps have been taken by DRDO for better coordination 
with the armed forces to bring down the rejection rate as well as reduce the delay in 
supply of products. The Committee would like to reiterate that more stringent measures 
need to be taken by DRDO to ensure adherence to deliver timelines and minimize 
rejection rates of their products by the armed forces.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO has coordinated with various stake holders including Services for 
inclusion of Chapter-IV in DAP-2020 on “Procedure for Acquisition of Systems Designed 
& Developed by DRDO / DPSUs / OFB”. As a part of the procedure a JPMT (Consisting 
of Users, designers and certification agencies) will be constituted to review the project 
periodically. This will help in ensuring adherence to timelines as well as meeting the 
aspirations of the Users which will reduce the rejection rate of the equipment by the 
Armed Forces.  
  

 
- 32 - 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 The Committee appreciate that DRDO has managed to bring down the imports in 
missiles, radars, sonars, torpedo, electronic warfare systems, AWACs systems to 
almost negligible level due to their indigenization efforts. The Committee recommend 
that DRDO must make all efforts to develop a mechanism for regular and steady 
adoption of the ever developing state-of-art latest technologies to boost the 
indigenisation process.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO and Services have regular interactions to identify the future technologies 
and systems required by the Services. 
 
Nuclear, Biological and Chemical (NBC) Weapons Detection System  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 The Committee are aware of the ever increasing threat of nuclear, biological and 
chemical attacks in the current times. The Committee appreciate the R&D efforts of 
DRDO over the last two decades which has enabled the development of several 
products for NBC detection, protection, decontamination and medical management like 
Chemical Agent Monitor, Residual Vapour Detection (RVD), Water Poison towards high 
scientific developments in the field of NBC warfare capabilities by DRDO as it feels that 
the future warfares will be more and more NBC based.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO has successfully completed a CCS approved Programme on NBC 
Defence Technologies and developed following products: 
 
 NBC permeable Suit Mark V-  
 NBC respirator Mark II  
 Chemical agent detector  
 Decontaminants  systems      
 NBC inflatable  shelter, NBC mobile shelter 
 NBC unmanned surveillance vehicle 
 NBC first aid kits and  decontaminating agents 
 NBC protected food and water packaging 
 Other individual protective equipment ( over boots, gloves, canister etc) 
 H1N1 detection kit 
 
  However, as the technology has been rapidly advancing and newer and better 
NBC equipments being available, it is imperative to continue the effort in NBC defence 

 
- 33 - 
R&D to enhance indigenization level and save valuable foreign exchange. Keeping this 
in view, DRDO has undertaken projects to design: 
 
i) Biological agent detector;  
ii) Standoff chemical detector 
iii) Standoff biological detector 
iv) Mobile Decontamination System Mk II 
v) Next Generation Protective Ensembles, to equip our Armed Forces with 
state- of- the- art technology and retain the technological edge. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
 The Committee would like to recommend that sufficient budgetary allocations 
should be provisioned for R&D efforts of DRDO in the field of NBC warfare. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Sufficient budgetary allocation is essential for continuity in R&D efforts for 
development of state-of-the-art technologies and products to make country self reliant in 
the field of NBC warfare. 
 
Collaboration with Universities/Academic Institutions  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 The Committee have learnt that DRDO conducts many research programmes in 
collaboration with different universities/institutions. In this connection, they have been 
informed that 680 research projects costing 490 Crore were sponsored to various 
universities and academic institutions (100 nos. approx.) during 12th Plan. 579 research 
projects costing Rs. 689 Crore were sponsored in the 13th plan (2018 – till dated). This 
has accrued benefits to DRDO’s research programmes. The Committee also note in this 
regard that universities and academic institutions are full of budding talent. Therefore, 
more such collaborations need to be encouraged with a view to advancing research in 
the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The programmes running in collaboration with different universities/institutions 
are as follows:- 
 
 Name of centres No of Projects 
 
Cost (In Crores) 
12th Plan COPT 39 109.39 
JATC 23 157.82 
JCBCAT 06 36.90 
ACRHEM 30 113.27 

 
- 34 - 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
 The Committee are pleased to note that DRDO has established eight Centres of 
Excellence in advanced areas viz., Center of Propulsion Technology at IIT Bombay 
(CoPT), Joint Advanced Technology Center at IIT Delhi (JATC), Jagdish Chandra Boss 
Center for Advanced Technology (JCBCAT) at Jadavpur University, Kolkata, Research 
Innovation Center (RIC) IIT Madras, Advanced Center for Research in High Energy 
Materials (ACRHEM), University of Hyderabad and DRDOBU Center of Life Sciences at 
Bharathia University and two newly established i.e. North East Science & Technology 
Centre (NESTC), Mizoram University, Aizwal, Kalam Centre for Science & Technology 
(KCST), Central University of Jammy, Kathua (UT of J&K). The Committee would like to 
witness a scenario that more such centres be established in the future and fruitful 
research efforts be used for the benefit of Defence Services and the country. It is also 
appreciable that DRDO has started scholarship schemes, financial support to organize 
conferences/seminars/workshops in niche areas of technology of interest to DRDO at 
various academic institutions.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In February 2021 DRDO has signed MOU with IISc, Bangalore for expanding the 
scope & objective of Joint Advanced Technology Program- Centre of Excellence (JATP-
COE) at IISc, Bangalore. 
 
Under Atamanirbhar Bharat Program, four workshops and eight seminars will be 
conducted and appropriate financial support will be provided. 
 
 
Role of DRDO during Covid-19 Pandemic  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 The Committee are appreciative of the efforts made by DRDO at the time of 
‘COVID Crisis’ during past one year. The concerted efforts made by DRDO to help the 
common man in providing Ventilators for Covid patients in hospitals, hand sanitizers 
and N99 masks, body suits for doctors, medical staff, sanitation workers, Para Military 
Forces and other Government Organisations, overall proved to be very helpful in 
fighting the pandemic.   
 
13th Plan RIC 16 24.99 
JATC 15 53.99 
JCBCAT 18 19.60 
NESTC 03 2.01446 
COPT 01 2.68212 
KCST,Centre University of 
Jammu 
06 5.3842 

 
- 35 - 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee are appreciative of the efforts made by DRDO at the time of 
‘COVID Crisis’ during past one year. The concerted efforts made by DRDO to help the 
common man in providing Ventilators for Covid patients in hospitals, Hand sanitizers 
and N99 Masks, body suit for doctors, medical staff, sanitation workers, Para Military 
Forces and other Government Organisations, overall proved to be very helpful in 
fighting the pandemic. 
 
DRDO is committed to support the country in terms of providing products and 
technologies to fight against an unforeseen situation like COVID-19 pandemic and it will 
continue to contribute through its R&D in future also. 
 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
Budget  
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
The Committee note that in BE 2021-22, a total budgetary projection made by 
DGQA is Rs. 1360.08 crore whereas the allocation is Rs. 1294.40 crore for both 
Revenue & Capital Heads. The projection under Revenue Head is Rs. 1340.08 crore 
and the allocation is Rs. 1274.40 crore which records a shortfall of Rs. 65.68 crore. In 
case of Capital Head, the allocation is Rs. 20.00 crore against a projection of Rs. 20.00 
crore. Since the allocation for the Revenue Head is less than the projection, the 
Committee would like to know the reasons for the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The projections made by the Services/ Organisations, including DGQA, 
are forwarded to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration. Based on ceilings 
received and taking into account the projected requirements of all the Services/ 
Organisations, funds were allocated to DGQA. 
 
2. However, the Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain 
additional requirements projected by DGQA at Supplementary/RE stage.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
 The Committee, upon gleaning, the documents supplied, note the under-
utilization of the allocations given at the RE stage in the year 2020-21. In this regard, 
the Committee recommend that in future, DGQA should make all out efforts to ensure 
optimal utilization of final allocation and invariably a uniform pattern of expenditure 
throughout the year should be maintained. 
 

 
- 36 - 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Due to Covid-19, the expenditure for first three quarter was low and it was 
expected to pick-up in the last quarter. However, it appears that the expenditure could 
not pick-up as expected resulting into under-utilization of budgetary resources at the RE 
stage. The recommendation of the committee for optimal utilization of the final allocation 
and uniform pattern of expenditure throughout the year is noted for strict compliance in 
future. The budget is being released on quarterly basis and expenditure monitored 
through Monthly Expenditure Reports to ensure uniform pattern of expenditure 
throughout the year. 
 
Manpower and Training 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
 It is apparent that DGQA is one Organisation whose work affects performance of 
every other department/Organisation of Defence. The quality of products and by 
Defence uses is quality assured by DGQA of the products go unbridled, the very 
purpose of Production  would be defeated. In present times when technological 
advancements area frequent and regular feature, it becomes quite essential for DGQA 
to regularly update their training module. The Committee opined that being a technical 
service, constant up gradation of technological advancement taking place globally has 
to be regularly included in training curriculum of DGQA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Training of personnel to keep them in sync with advancement in technology has 
always been on the priority list of DGQA Organisation. The training requirements are 
regularly revised (annually), taking into account the emerging requirements and 
feedback from the establishments. Overall objectives is to enable employees to acquire 
new skills, sharpen the existing ones and  perform better and thereby contribute 
towards growth of the organisation. Suggestions of the Committee to include 
technological upgradation taking place globally in the training curriculum of DIQA has 
been noted for compliance. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
 During the oral evidence, it was submitted that the role of the technical 
manpower was expanding and their role was also assuming greater importance thus 
enhancing their requirement. The Committee were apprised that an increment of about 
20 percent was required in technical manpower by DGQA. The Committee are happy to 
note that a Review Committee under the Ministry of Defence has already been formed 
which is reviewing and studying the technical manpower requirement of DGQA. The 
Committee hope that this Committee of the Ministry of Defence would rationalize the 
requirements and will help to augment the technical manpower of DGQA. The 

 
- 37 - 
Committee recommend that all efforts may be made to fill up the vacancies in DGQA at 
an early date and end the 20 percent shortage of technical manpower in the 
Organization. The Committee also recommend that the report of the Review Committee 
of the Ministry of Defence may be shared with the Committee while furnishing the Action 
Taken Replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DGQA Technical Manpower is the main pillar of DGQA Organisation to sustain 
and provide a boost to the ongoing various technical activities. Shortages/deficiencies 
beyond minimum inescapable requirement on this account are likely to have a bearing 
on overall performance of the system. The recommendation of Committee to increase 
technical manpower of DGQA by 20% has been intimated to NPC Team constituted by 
MOD / DDP for restructuring of DGQA. The Committee has been asked to study and 
rationalize the requirements to augment the technical manpower, keeping in view the 
future programmes and anticipated gradual increase in the assigned responsibilities of 
DGQA. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
 During the oral evidence, the Committee were informed that DGQA has a training 
institute called ‘DIQA located in Bangalore’ whose training programme is based on 
international based best practices. Besides, DGQA has a number of training schools in 
Pune, Ahmednagar and Avadi where proper training is given. Besides, there is also 
involvement of various academies, IITs, private industries etc. in providing quality 
training. The committee appreciate these various training avenue being availed by 
DGQA and also observe that a due mechanism with synchronization with modern 
technological advances need to be incorporated in all training programmes being 
operated in DGQA especially due to the added responsibilities entrusted on DGQA 
owing to focus of the Government on ‘Make in India Policy’ an manufacturing under 
‘Defence Corridors’. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DGQA as a matter of its policy regularly updates and review its ongoing training 
programme conducted by various training establishment to keep pace with the 
advancement in the field of Science & Technology. This not only ensures enhancing 
professional skills of the employees but also improve their efficiency to contribute with 
vigor for organisational success. The suggestion of the committee to incorporate due 
mechanism in synchronization with modern technological advancement has been noted 
for compliance to take on emerging additional responsibilities, in an efficient manner to 
realize the Govt of India objective of ‘Make in India’. 
  
  

 
- 38 - 
Quality Check 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
 The Committee note that DGQA is mandated with quality assurance of a defence 
equipment and weapon systems such as arms, ammunition clothing etc. The 
Committee in their earlier reports had expressed their dismay at the faulty ammunition 
reaching out to Defence Forces despite quality check of products at DGQA. During the 
evidence, the Committee was apprised the one of the major challenges DGQA facing 
for quality maintenance was putting the processes in place in regard to impression upon 
all the manufacturing agencies to revisit the documents with the literature they have got, 
revisit their processes, update their plant and machinery etc. The Committee 
understand the difficulties being faced by DGQA in this regard to recommend that 
unwavering efforts may be made to ensure quality issues to employing more personnel 
and introducing more stringent procedures for better quality adherence as well as better 
coordination with all concerned agencies. In this regard, the Committee recommend that 
while carrying out inspection at various stages of production it should be ensured that 
inventory which reaches the names of user should be zero defect so they can believe in 
the armament being used. The DGQA should embrace hyperactive role in ensuring 
zero-effect on the environment. It shall also ensure that the industries/manufacturing 
units adopt best available practices/guidelines for production activities and waste 
disposal by putting in place state-of-the art waste disposal system. It is needless to say 
that old methodologies should be replaced with the new ones in due course of time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) Quality Assurance (QA) of defence stores is undertaken by DGQA as per the 
mutually agreed Quality Assurance Plan (QAP) / Acceptance Test Procedure (ATP) 
evolved in consultation with the manufacturer / production agency. The QAP / ATP is 
prepared based on the governing drawings / technical specifications duly aligned as per 
relevant International Standards (as applicable). DGQA carries out Quality Audits at 
Surveillance Points and Control Points on random sampling basis at pre-designed 
stages of production, which are critical to quality, in addition to Final Acceptance 
Inspection (FAI) at finished stage defined as per QAP / ATP.   
 
(b) QA of ammunition stores involve both non- destructive tests (including dynamic 
firing) to validate the safety, functionality and reliability aspects. Ammunition stores are 
manufactured in bulk  and invariably subjected to destructive tests prior to acceptance. 
Therefore, QA of ammunition stores is carried out on a random sampling basis which is 
also the internationally adopted practice.    
 
(c) In addition to regular QA of batches / lots of ammunition stores as mentioned 
above, DGQA also undertakes the following important activities:-  
 
        (i) Process Audit of critical processes / operations due to repetitive nature of non – 
conformities / defects observed during regular QA of ammunition stores as well as 
based on the feedback obtained from Users. 
 

 
- 39 - 
(ii) Defect Investigation to investigate the root cause of defects / accidents reported 
by Users during exploitation as well as the defects observed during regular QA of 
ammunition lots / batches. 
 
(d) The Committee may be assured that all efforts are being made by DGQA to 
ensure that Ordnance Factories supply “Zero-Defect” armament and ammunition to 
the Users. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
 The Committee appreciate the use of the user feedback for critical analysis of the 
quality of the product and the progressive improvement in the user feedback being 
received by DGQA. The Committee would like to be apprised of the analysis done in 
this regard in the Action Taken Replies. The Committee would also suggest the 
preparation of a comprehensive manual by DGQA on the best practices for quality 
maintenance. The Committee also recommend that the process of upgradation of 
infrastructure of manufacturing industries, production industries etc. may be expedited. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) The critical analysis of user feedbacks on quality of the product is carried out in 
relation to governing technical specifications to arrive at probable causes leading to 
quality issues. This activity is invariably followed by conduct of process audits of critical 
to Quality parameters. Non Conformances (NCs) observed during the process audits 
are communicated to the production agencies for initiating required remedial measures 
in a time bound manner. Regular updates on the improvement are given to the user 
during Quarterly Interaction Meetings (QIM) and other such interactions. Also, 
necessary advisories are issued to the User for storage / handling / exploitation related 
aspects (wherever applicable), based on the outcome of the Defect Investigation. In 
addition, an Annual Quality Review Report is prepared by DGQA for each Ordnance 
Factories and DPSU and given to these agencies for necessary action to improve 
quality. 
 
(b)  QAPs /ATPs are reviewed on a regular basis, duly incorporating the remedial 
measures suggested during Process Audit / Defect Investigation, so as to avoid 
recurrence of defects. 
 
(c)    DGQA has a comprehensive ‘Technical Standing order’ which is used as a 
guideline for executing QA functions. In addition a Quality Manual is also being updated 
incorporating the best QA practices. 
 
(d) Recommendation of  The Committee are being complied with  utmost seriousness 
by carrying out stringent QA checks to ensure defect free ammunitions and other 
defence stores are issued to the Armed Forces. 
 
Use of DGQA facilities by Private Sector 

 
- 40 - 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 33 & 34) 
 
33. The Committee find Capital expenditure is going to take a boost in DGQA as 
mentioned by a representative during the oral evidence. The DGQA has a plan to spend 
the capital expenditure on state –of –art testing infrastructure and proof ranging. 
 
34. The Committee consider, advent of Private Sector in the field of defence 
Committee feel that there lies an opportunity for DGQA for testing the stores and 
products manufactured by Private Industry. Therefore, they recommend that DGQA with 
its expertise in inspection and certification of ammunition can offer its services to the 
private sector in return of a specified fee, It would be mutually beneficial to both the 
parties as it would make DGQA self-reliant in financing its projects and the private 
sector expertise of DGQA at nominal fee. In the long run DGQA can give dividend back 
to the Government. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As proposed by the Committee, in order to facilitate Indian private industry for 
Testing, Trials, Proof Firing of their equipment, Weapons and Ammunitions, DGQA has 
already opened up its test facilities & proof ranges for private Industries. The guidelines 
for the same have already been issued by Govt. A Standard Operating Procedure for 
allotment and utilization of proof ranges have also been issued. These are available on 
various websites viz MoD, Make in India, DGQA etc. 
 
NATIONAL CADET CORPS  
 
Budget  
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
 
29. The Committee take note of the fact that, in Budget Estimate 2021-22, the total 
projection is Rs. 2400.81 crore against which there is an allocation of Rs. 1650.76 crore 
thereby registering a shortfall of Rs. 750.10 crore. Out of the total budget projection 
Revenue budget was Rs. 2385.81 crore and allocation Rs. 1635.76 crore, whereas in 
case of Capital budget, the projection was Rs. 15.00 crore and allocation Rs. 15.00 
crore. There is a deficit of Rs. 750.05 crore in Revenue budget, however in Capital 
budget there is no change in projected and allocated amount. The Committee are of the 
view that such a trend and a cut in the Revenue Expenditure which includes Pay and 
allowances of Personnel and no increase in the Capital Expenditure for the procurement 
of durable assets would slow down the expansion and training activities of NCC. The 
Committee, therefore, at this stage can only recommend and urge the Ministry of 
Defence to lay down appropriate financial provision for NCC in future allocation at the 
Revised Estimate stage to enable it to perform efficiently.   
 
  

 
- 41 - 
Reply of the Government 
 
30. The Committee may be assured that based on progress of expenditure during 
the course of financial year, pending committed liabilities etc., additional funds will be 
sought from Ministry of Finance at Supplementary/ RE stage. Also, if required, through 
reprioritization, it will be ensured that urgent and critical requirements of NCC are met. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 
Gleaning through the figures, the Committee note the under utilization of the 
allocations given at the RE stage in the year 2020-21 but considering the Covid 
situation in the country, the Committee would not like to comment adversely against it. 
However, they recommend that NCC should make all out efforts to ensure optimal 
utilization of allocation and a uniform pattern of expenditure throughout the year 
commencing from this year and invariably in future. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The observations of the committee are noted for compliance. 
 
 
Training and jobs in Armed Forces for NCC Cadets 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 37) 
 
 
The Committee appreciate the innovative training initiative of NCC by adoption of 
the IIT concept of ‘Super-30’. The Committee hope that by introducing such innovative 
methods the number of officers qualifying for this grade reach the optimal level in the 
next few years and in the future it would become a great source of rearing ground for 
the Cadets to join Armed Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This initiative is very popular among the cadets who are aspiring to join armed 
forces.  The numbers of cadets joining armed forces has improved by this concept. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 38) 
 
On the issue of the development of combat capabilities through the training being 
provided by NCC, the Committee observe that some cadets are given exposure to firing 
of the higher-grade weapons also. The Committee, therefore, recommend that efforts 
should be made by NCC to tailor the training programmes in a more effective manner to 
help the cadets to not only develop comradeship, self-less service, integrity and social 
integration but also combat capabilities and take part in frontline war duties in case of 
emergent situations like war etc. arise. 
 

 
- 42 - 
Reply of the Government 
 
Firing, Weapon Training, First Aid, Signal, etc are already part of Training 
Curriculum of NCC.  The NCC cadets are trained to be employed in specific civil 
defence duties. 
It is further informed that a High Level Expert Committee was constituted vide 
letter No.4/6/2020-D(GS-VI) dated 9th September, 2021 under the Chairmanship of Shri 
Baijayant Panda to conduct an objective, independent and thorough review of NCC.  
The terms and reference of the committee, inter-alia, include to review the role, 
objectives and organization structure of the NCC, and suggest measures to enhance 
the contribution of NCC to youth empowerment, nation building, and national 
integration; suggest measures for utilization of NCC Cadets as trained human resources 
to contribute in national developmental efforts; nurture NCC cadets as grassroots 
community leaders, motivators and catalytic agents for socio-economic progress; 
analyse and recommend improvements in components of NCC training and so on. 
 
 
Expansion of NCC in Schools and Colleges 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 39) 
 
The Committee observe that as on date 17,644 educational institutions (both 
schools & colleges) have been covered under NCC and there are 8902 waitlisted 
institutions throughout the country. The Committee are happy to note that under the 
scheme of expansion of NCC, one lakh cadets in Border Taluks/Coastal Taluks etc. 
have been sanctioned by the Ministry on 22.7.2020. This is a appreciable step and if 
implemented judiciously, can help gainful expansion of the footprint of the NCC in 
coastal and border areas of the country and also prove to be a boon for the students of 
schools and colleges in these uncovered areas and help in their development. It can 
also instill a patriotic fervor among these students and motivate them to join the armed 
forces. The Committee hope that this expansion programme would also help in bringing 
down the number of waitlisted institutions throughout the country. The Committee would 
like to be apprised on the implementation of this expansion programme of NCC while 
submitting action taken replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As on date 18864 educational institutions have been covered under NCC 
and there are 8472 waitlisted institutions. The Hon’ble PM announced the expansion of 
NCC by one lakh in 173 Border/Coastal Districts on 15 Aug 2020.  The Cadets strength 
has been allotted to 1283 educational institutions in these areas.  41,082 cadets have 
been enrolled in the year 2020-21 and 44155 cadets are expected to be enrolled in 
2021-22.  Balance of 14763 cadets will be enrolled in 2022-23. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 40) 
 
The Committee appreciate the various steps taken by the Ministry to enhance the 
worth of NCC Cadets. There are employment avenues in CAPFs, Railways and other 
security related jobs under Central and State government, Aviation and Shipping 
industry, training programmes with Red Cross and NDRFs, Certification Course for 

 
- 43 - 
Yoga through Ministry of Ayush, Conduct of classes and coaching in personality 
development, Increase in the various attachment training with the three services and 
their training establishments. The Committee also find that vacancies for various 
adventure activities and Special Camps under the Stewardship of NCC has been 
increased to 30000 annually to meet the aspirations of the cadets, Introduction of 
incentives in jobs by Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs)& state police for NCC A, B, 
C certificate holders have been institutionalized which will further motivate students to 
join NCC and Increase of YEP (Youth Exchange Programme) of NCC from 10 to 15 
countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Being observations no specific comments are offered. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 41) 
 
The Committee also observe that the performance audit of all education 
institutions is being carried out by NCC once in 2-3 years for schools and 3-4 years for 
colleges. In this regard, the Committee recommend that for better and more efficient 
monitoring of the system, the frequency of the performance audit may be improved and 
conducted once in a year for both schools and colleges. The decision in this regard may 
be taken expeditiously under intimation to the Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Performance audit of Educational institutions is carried out by a board of officers 
with following composition:- 
 
 Presiding Officer - Group Commander 
 Member  (i) 1 x Officer-in-Charge of NCC Unit 
    (ii) 1 x Administrative Officer of NCC Unit 
    (iii) 1 x Officer-in-Charge/Administrative Officer of a  
     Different unit detailed by the State Dte. 
 
2. There are 18,864 institutions spread in 98 Gps.  With the current frequency of 
audit (Schools in 2-3 years and Colleges in 3-4 years), the board will have to audit 5 
institutions every month throughout the year, which involves movement over large 
distances.  This is the same pool of staff which carries out training by visiting all the 
institutes on a weekly basis.  Auditing 100% institutions every year may not be feasible 
and would adversely affect the training activities.  This problem will compound since the 
number of institutes are increasing every year.  
 
Fully Self Finance Scheme (FSFS) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 42) 
 
The Committee note that to minimize the waiting list of NCC units in various schools 
and colleges, the NCC had started a self financing scheme. This scheme is fully self 
financing and the institutions have to take the responsibility to bear the expenditure of 
the cost of training, the uniform, the equipment, the hiring of the instructors etc. During 

 
- 44 - 
oral evidence, the representatives of the NCC have apprised the Committee that one 
lakh additional vacancies have been sanctioned under this Scheme out of which an 
allotment of 44000 vacancies have already been made. Further, the Committee also 
observe that the release of an additional One lakh vacancies of Junior Division /Junior 
Wing (JD/JW) under this Scheme is also under consideration.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Senior Division/Senior Wing (SD/SW) Scheme was launched on 13 Dec 
2019.  As on date 80,963 vacancies have been allotted to the State Directorates of 
which 65,000 vacancies have been utilized.  The institutions across the country are 
reopening after lifting of pandemic restriction. The enrolment is likely to increase. 
 
Junior Division/ Junior Wing (JD/JW) Scheme for additional one lakh cades was 
launched on 03 May 2021.  70,000 JD/JW vacancies ha e been allotted to State 
Directorates.  The enrolment is in progress. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 43) 
 
The Committee welcome the steps initiated by NCC for its expansion under Fully 
Self Finance Scheme (FSFS), however, they recommend that NCC should expedite the 
process of allotment of the remaining 56000 Junior Division/Senior Wing (SD/SW) 
vacancies which, even given to conservative estimates is a substantial number. The 
Committee also recommend that additional one lakh vacancies of Junior Division/Senior 
Wing (SD/SW) be also released and allotted expeditiously to ensure that the benefits of 
the scheme can be fully operationalized for the benefit of the students of the various 
schools and colleges in the country. The Committee also feel that a proper monitoring 
mechanism should be developed by NCC to ensure the correct implementation of the 
scheme in the various schools and colleges and adherence to the highest quality in the 
conduct of the training programmes. Therefore, they recommend that effective 
mechanism be devised for requisite monitoring then only the goals of the institution can 
be fully accomplished. The progress made in this regard should be intimated to the 
Committee at the earliest but definitely during submission of Action Taken Replies. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Fully Self Financing Scheme (FSFS) was introduced for Senior Division 
(SD)/Senior Wing(SW) on 13 Dec 2019.  A total of 01 Lakh Cadet vacancies were 
allotted under this scheme to Schools/ Colleges who are desirous to open NCC and 
ready to bear all expenditure on their own.  The scheme commenced in Training Year 
2020-21 and was extensively promoted across the country inspite of COVID19 
restrictions and closure of schools for prolonged period.  As a result, the scheme has 
received an overwhelming response within a short span of time and is gaining wide 
popularity across the country.  A total of 80,963 vacancies have been allotted to NCC 
State Directorates and approximately 65,000 vacancies have been utilized. 
Requirement of additional vacancies from the State departments is expeditiously 
catered from the reserve pool.  Over 600 eligible private Schools and Colleges have 
benefitted from this scheme.  The eligibility criteria for the institutions under this scheme 
has been well laid out in Policy Guidelines and Implementation Instructions which have 
been disseminated to all State Directorates for adherence and also made public through 
NCC website for easy access. 

 
- 45 - 
 
2. FSFS for Junior Division (JD)/Junior Wing(JW) has also been launched on 
similar lines as SD/SW on 03 May 2021 wherein additional One Lakh JD/JW cadet 
vacancies have been allotted and distributed to the State Directorates. The scheme is 
being given wide popularity and allotment of NCC to eligible institutions is in progress. 
 
3. An effective mechanism is already in place to ensure optimal performance of 
institutions in NCC activities.  A system of performance audit by Board of Officers have 
been instituted and deliberated upon to bring in more accountability to the institutions 
and also to week out the poor performers.  An exhaustive checklist for carrying out 
performance audit of educational institutions is strictly followed by Board of Officers. 
 
Skill Development 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 44) 
 
The Committee note that NCC do not provide any other Skill Development training 
and it is basically restricted to disaster management. The Committee, therefore, 
succinctly recommend that the incorporation of skill programmes as devised by the 
Ministry of Skill Development in the curriculum of training be incorporated for NCC 
cadets which will enhance their employment potential. The Committee also note that the 
NCC has not explored the private sector for training purposes. The Committee in this 
regard recommend that efforts should be made to explore all avenues and incorporate 
all good training practices in the training programmes of the NCC Cadets which would 
eventually lead to their induction in private sector as well. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a)  The curriculum of NCC has been devised based on the aim of NCC. The training 
imparted in NCC is a skill enabler and not a skill developer. The aims and 
objectives expected to be achieved based on which training curriculum has been 
designed are as follows:- 
(i) To  develop character, comradeship , discipline, secular outlook, spirit of 
adventure and the ideals of selfless service among the youth. 
(ii) To create a human resource of organized, trained and motivated youth, to 
provide leadership in all walks of life and be always available for the 
service of the nation. 
(iii) To provide a suitable environment to motivate the youth to take up a 
career in the Armed Forces. 
(b)  The recommendation to explore all avenues and incorporate good training 
practices in the training programmes which will lead to the cadets’ induction in a 
private sector has been noted. 
 
(c) It is further informed that a High Level Expert Committee was constituted vide 
letter No. 4/6/2020-D(GS-VI) dated 9th September, 2021 under the Chairmanship 
of Shri Baijayant Panda to conduct an objective, independent and thorough 
review of NCC. The terms and reference of the committee, inter-alia, include to 
review the role, objectives and organization structure of NCC to youth 
empowerment, nation building, and national integration; suggest measures for 

 
- 46 - 
utilization of NCC Cadets as trained human resources to contribute in national 
developmental efforts; nurture NCC cadets as grassroots community leaders, 
motivators and catalytic agents for socio-economic progress; analyse and 
recommend improvements in components of NCC training and so on. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 45) 
 
The Committee also observe that apart from the Armed Forces, the Forest 
Services etc. as well as the various State Governments are also being communicated 
with to explore gainful employment for the NCC Cadets. The Committee note that only 
seven States have given their response to the communication of Ministry of Defence, 
which is a meager figure. The Committee hope that concerted efforts should made to 
further take up the matter with remaining States as well as other Services to maximize 
the employment potential of the trained NCC Cadets. This would not only keep our 
youth focused but in the long run would make healthy and happy citizens. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the committee are noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 46) 
 
It is an encouraging development that the Government in Uttar Pradesh and 
Tamil Nadu have started two Defence corridors which will surely need suitable trained 
and skilled manpower in multi-faceted environment. The Committee feel that this great 
opportunity should be explored by NCC as a potential employment generator for 
especially those cadets who fail to make it to the armed forces and who can be 
imparted suitable technical training to serve in these two Defence corridors as well as in 
both the public and private Defence Production Sector organizations in general. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the provision of suitable technical training to NCC 
Cadets in the field of Defence Production Sector which can enable them to get gainful 
employment in this sector. It would not be out of place to mention here that NCC pass 
out cadets can be utilized for security purposes also with an attachment with 
established security forces such as Central Industrial Security Force(CISF) etc. or 
otherwise. The job market is proving security services as one of the fastest growing 
sectors of which NCC can make maximum use. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a)  The incentives for NCC cadets has been introduced by the Home Ministry in 
enrolment of NCC A,B & C certificate holder in all Central Armed Police Forces. 
(b)  Besides this, Indian Maritime University (IMU) has given 5% weightage to NCC 
‘C’ Certificate holders in all Marine courses conducted by IMU. 
(c)  NCC ‘C’ certificate holders are also being preferred by Corporate sector 
companies. In a recent enrolment process. Reliance Industries have enrolled 70 
NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders as Security Executive Officer after 6 months of 
training. 
 
  

 
- 47 - 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
  
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
- 48 - 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants 2021-22, the 
Committee find that in 2020-21, the approved BE allocation for DRDO was Rs. 
19,327.35 crore while the approved RE allocation was Rs. 16,466.29 crore. The 
Committee note that the RE allocation is lesser than the BE allocation by Rs. 2,861.06 
crore. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Yes, it is a fact that BE approved for DD R&D during the FY 2020-21 was Rs 
19327.35 cr and the same was reduced to Rs 16466.29 cr at RE stage. Thus overall 
reduction of Rs 2861.06 cr has been made. This includes a reduction of Rs. 2575.00 cr 
under Capital Head based on the expenditure trend during the FY. 
 
  

 
- 49 - 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
01 August, 2022 Chairperson 
10 Sravana, 1944 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence  
 
 
 
  

 
- 50 - 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2021-22) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2021-22) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 22 July, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM    -   CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri M.K. Madhusudan - Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Deputy Secretary  
 
  
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri  Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
4. Shri  Rattan Lal Kataria 
5. Shri  Kotagiri Sridhar 
6. Shri  Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada  
7. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
8. Shri Brijendra Singh 
9. Shri  Mahabali Singh 
10. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
12. Shri  Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
13. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi   
14. Lt. Gen. Dr. D P Vats (Retd.)  
15. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 

 
- 51 - 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda of the Sitting.  
 
*********** Does not pertain to the Report ********** 
 
3. The Committee then took up the draft Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on Ordnance Factories, Defence Research 
and Development Organisation (DRDO), Directorate General of Quality Assurance 
(DGQA) and National Cadet Corps (NCC) (Demand No. 20)' for consideration. After 
some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Report without any 
changes/modifications.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the 
above draft Report and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
 
*********** Does not pertain to the Report ********** 
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 
 
  

 
- 52 - 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SECOND 
REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (17TH LOK SABHA) ON 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2021-
22 ON ORDNANCE FACTORIES, DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
ORGANISATION, DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF QUALITY ASSURANCE (DGQA) 
AND NATIONAL CADET CORPS (NCC) (DEMAND NO. 20)' 
 
 
1. Total number of recommendations                        46 
 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
   
 Para Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25, 
   26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46
  
 
 Total : 45 
Percentage:  98%    
 
3.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government Chapter III): 
  
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
(Total - Nil) 
Percentage:  00%    
 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. 10  
(Total - 01) 
Percentage:  02% 
 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (V): 
  
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
           (Total - Nil) 
Percentage:  00% 
 
 
 