 
 
 
18 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVEN
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
Policy, Defence Planning and Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’
March
(i) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations
Lok Sabha) on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, 
Policy, Defence Planning and Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (Saka)  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Recommendations contained in the ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’. 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations 
Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
Policy, Defence Planning and Married Accommodation
. 
Presented
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
(ii) 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2020-21) 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations
Lok Sabha) on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement 
Policy, Defence Planning and Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.03.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.03.2021 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (Saka)  
  
Recommendations contained in the ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Project (Demand No. 20)’. 
  

(iii) 
 
CONTENTS 
            
PAGE NO. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21).……………………….....….........      (iv) 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….….................        (vi) 
 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………….......    01        
       
 
CHAPTER II A) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government ……………………………………...   10        
 
 B) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon.................    42   
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government ..44       
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon ………………….…...... 45       
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
 awaited………………………...............................................................   47        
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
  1.      Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                Defence (2020-21) held on 09.03.2021.………………................... 54 
 
2.      Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                Defence (2020-21) held on 15.03.2021.………………...................  57 
 
 
APPENDIX 
       Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
         Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh 
   Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  
   Defence........................................................................                   60         
  

(iv) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21)  
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari  
3. Kunwar Danish Ali 
4. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
5. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
6. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
7. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
9. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
10. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
11. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick  
12. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar  
13. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil  
14. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
17. Shri Prathap Simha  
18. Shri Brijendra Singh  
19. Shri Mahabali Singh  
20. Shri Kotagiri Sridhar  
21. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
24. Shri Sharad Pawar  
25. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Shri Rajeev Satav  
28. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi  
29. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
31. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

(v) 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2.         Dr. Sanjeev Sharma             - Director 
3.  Shri Rahul Singh                       - Deputy Secretary 
4.         Smt Shilpa Kant                             - Committee Officer 

(vi) 
 
                                                                INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2020-21), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Eighteenth Report of the Committee on 'Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh 
Report on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and 
Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’.  
2.  The Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 13.03.2020. The Report contained 36 Observations/Recommendations. The 
Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the Observations/ 
Recommendations in July, 2020 
3.  The Report was considered by the Committee at the Sittings held on 09.03.2021 and 
15.03.2021 and adopted at the Sitting held on 15.03.2021. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
15 March, 2021 Chairperson 
24 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence 
  

1 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE ON 
THE SUBJECT ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 
2019-20 ON CAPITAL OUTLAY ON DEFENCE SERVICES, PROCUREMENT POLICY, DEFENCE 
PLANNING AND MAP (DEMAND NO. 20)’ 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on Capital Outlay on Defence 
Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning And Map (Demand no. 20)’ which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.03.2020. 
 
2. The Committee's Seventh Report contained 36 Observations/Recommendations on the 
following aspects:- 
 
Para No.  Subject 
1-3 Capital Outlay on Defence Services 
 
4 
 
Projections and Allocations in respect of three services 
 
5-6 
 
Additional Allocation 
 
7 
 
Improvement in Perimeter Security 
 
8 
 
Ratio for Capital and Revenue Outlay 
 
9-10 
 
Modernization of Defence Forces 
11 Non Lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund – Defence Renewal Fund 
 
12-13 Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
 
14 Defence Procurement Policy 
 
15 Capital and Annual Procurement Plan 
 
16 
 
Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement  
17-19 Increasing Dependence on Foreign Suppliers for Military Hardware 

2 
 
20-21 Extreme Cold Weather Clothing System 
22-24 Offset Clause 
25-26 Import Contents in OFB and DPSUs 
27 Defence Investor Cell 
 
28-30 Five Year Defence Plans 
31 Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 
 
32 Advance planning for the Force 
33-34 Married Accommodation Project   
35 Current status of Phase II and III of MAP 
36 Priority allocation of Dwelling Units for Combat Forces 
 
 
3.  Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. However, the replies on Recommendation 
No. 20 and 21 have been termed as “classified” by the Ministry and have been forwarded to Hon’ble 
Chairperson in a sealed cover. These replies have been placed under ‘accepted’ category. The 
remaining replies have been examined and categorised as follows: 
 
(i) (A)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
                  Para Nos. 4,7,8,12,13,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,25,26,27,28,      
        29,30,31,32 and 36. 
                          (23 Recommendations) 
(Please see Chapter II (A) of the Report) 
 
(i) (B) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government and 
commented upon: 
            Para Nos. 1,2,3,5 and 6 
(5 Recommendations) 
(Please see Chapter II (B) of the Report) 
 

3 
 
(ii)   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies:  
                         Nil. 
                 (0 Recommendation) 
(Please see Chapter III of the Report) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration and to be commented upon: 
Para No. 33                          
    (1 Recommendation) 
(Please see Chapter IV of the Report) 
  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies: 
         Para No. 9,10,11,14,24,34 and 35 . 
(07 Recommendations) 
(Please see Chapter V of the Report) 
 
4.  The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments made in Chapter I 
of this Report and final replies to the recommendations/ Observations for which only interim 
replies have been given by the Government to be furnished to them at the earliest and in any 
case not later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
5. It goes without saying that Action Taken Statements which are due to be submitted 
within six months of the presentation of this Report, see the light of the day within the 
prescribed timeline.  
  

4 
 
 
A. CAPITAL OUTLAY ON DEFENCE SERVICES 
(Recommendation No. 1-3): 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
6.  The Committee had recommended as under: 
    “The Committee note from the information submitted by the Ministry that Capital Outlay provides 
allocation for Land & Construction Works of the three Services and other departments. In other words,  
it caters for the expenditure incurred on durable assets of Defence Services, i.e., Army, Navy, Air 
Force, Joint Staff, Defence Ordnance Factories, Defence Research & Development 
Organisation(DRDO), Director General Quality Assurance(DGQA), National Cadet Corps (NCC), 
Married Accommodation Project, National Defence Academy and Rashtryia Rifles etc.”  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
7.  “The Committee further note that during the year 2020-21, the Ministry allocated  Rs. 1,13,734.00 
crore in the Capital Budget head against the projection of Rs. 1,75,702.06 crore, which amounts to the 
shortage of Rs.61,968.06 crore.  Out of this head for the Services only Rs. 1,02,432 crore was 
allocated against the projection of Rs. 1,61,849.20 crore, leaving a gap of Rs. 59,416.63 crore. 
Similarly, the Capital (Acquisition including DGOF Supplies) is allocated Rs. 90,047.80  crore, Land & 
Works of three Services (including Married Accommodation Projects)Rs. 12,384.77 crore, DRDO, 
DGOF and other Defence Departments  Rs. 11,301.43 crore.” 
    
Recommendation No. 3 
8.  “The Committee are of the view that the  considerable shortage in the allocation of the budget in 
the Capital Head, which is 35 per cent  less the projection, would affect acquisition of latest weaponry, 
aircraft, ships, tanks and capital intensive projects including land, building and other infrastructure.  
The Committee feel and desire that to develop, and acquire the most modern state-of-the art fighting 
platforms, which can match Northern and Western neighbours, the requisite allocation to the Capital 
Head is very essential.  While approving the allocations for the Defence Budget, the Ministry of 
Defence should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance explaining them the importance of 
capital works which become made done to maintain the ideal ratio of 60:40 between the Revenue and 
Capital Heads. At this stage, the Committee can only recommend that the requisite funds under the 
Capital Head be allocated to the Ministry at the Supplementary Grants stage.”    
 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
“In BE 2020-21, an amount of Rs.  1,13,734.00 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 10,339.69 Crore 
over BE 2019-20) has been allocated under Defence Services Estimates in Capital Head by 
Ministry of Finance against projections of Rs. 1,75,702.06 Crore.  Additional requirements will 
be assessed under Capital Head and will be sought from Ministry of Finance at 
Supplementary/RE stage.” 
 

5 
 
10.  The Committee find that in BE for the year 2020-21, an amount of Rs. 1,13,734 crore has 
been allocated under Defence Services Estimates in Capital Head by Ministry of Finance which 
is an increase of Rs. 10,339.69 Crore over BE 2019-20. The Committee take a serious note of the 
fact  that there is still a shortfall of Rs 61, 968.06 crore which is a substantial amount keeping in 
view the defence needs.  As additional requirements were to be assessed under Capital Head, 
the Committee desire to know the total amount assessed by the Ministry of Defence and also 
the trajectory envisaged by the Ministry to meet the requirements in the face of this shortfall. 
 
 
B. ADDITIONAL ALLOCATION 
(Recommendation No. 5-6): 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under 
      “The Committee highlighted in their 3rd Report (17thLokSabha) that against projections of Rs. 
1,70,936.07crore under Capital Head, only Rs. 1,03,394.31 crore were allocated. In this context, the 
Ministry was asked to state the steps taken in overcoming the shortfall. The Committee note from the 
reply submitted by the Ministry that Ministry of Finance had not allocated requirements projected by 
this Ministry under Capital Budget for FY 2019-20, nevertheless, Capital Expenditure of the Ministry 
had gone up in absolute terms. It may be relevant to point out here that under Capital Head there was 
trend of cut in Budget Allocation at RE stage due to slow pace of expenditure. This trend was 
reversed in FY 2017-18 and 2018-19 due to extensive delegation of financial powers. The allocated 
Capital Budget has been fully utilised since 2016-17, reversing the previous trends of surrender of 
funds.   In the current financial year, based on pace of expenditure Ministry of Finance has allocated 
additional amount of Rs. 7,000 crore under Capital Head in RE 2019-20.”  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
12.  “The Committee are surprised over the fact that during the year 2019-20, the short fall in the 
projection to allocated amount was Rs. 67,541.76 crore, however, the Ministry of Defence is 
convinced with additional allocation of meagre Rs. 7,000 crore. The Committee, therefore, in 
unequivocal terms recommend that all-out efforts should be done to give first and foremost priority to 
the preparedness of the Defence Forces. It should be ensured that critical requirements of Services 
do not suffer due to want of funds. The Committee also hope that the Ministry of Defence will take 
measures for timely expenditure of the allocated fund so additional fund can be sought from the 
Ministry of Finance at Supplementary Grants stage.”  
  

6 
 
 
13.   The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
“The operational preparedness of the Defence Forces is the first and foremost priority of this 
Ministry.  All out efforts are made to ensure that critical requirements of Services do not suffer due to 
want of funds. Necessary instructions are issued from time to time for adherence to financial propriety 
and avoidance of underutilization of funds/wasteful expenditure. 
 The Committee is assured that all efforts will be made to ensure optimum utilization of scarce 
resources.  Based on progress of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc., additional funds will 
be sought from Ministry of Finance at appropriate stage(s).” 
 
14.  Pursuant to their recommendation of timely expenditure of the allocated funds and 
seeking of supplementary grants as additional funds from the Ministry of Finance, the 
Committee note that all efforts will be made by the Ministry to ensure optimum utilization of 
scarce resources.  The Committee were informed that based on the progress of expenditure, 
pending committed liabilities etc., additional funds will be sought from Ministry of Finance at 
appropriate stage(s).  The Committee, therefore, desire to know whether the Ministry had 
sought additional funds from the Ministry of Finance. In case of a positive response, they 
would like to be apprised of the details in this regard. 
 
C.   MODERNIZATION OF DEFENCE FORCES 
(Recommendations No. 9 -10): 
 
Recommendations No. 9 
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“From the replies submitted by the Ministry, the Committee note that the moderation involves 
the acquisition of new state-of-the-art platforms, technologies and weapon systems to upgrade and 
augment Defence capabilities and it is a continuous process based on threat perception, operational 
challenges and technological changes to keep the Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet the 
entire spectrum of security challenges. As per the assertion of the Ministry, the Government attaches 
the highest priority to ensure that the Armed Forces are sufficiently equipped to meet any operational 
requirement. This is achieved through induction of new equipment and technological upgradation of 
capabilities. The equipment requirements of the Armed Forces are planned and progressed through a 
detailed process which includes 15 Year Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a five year 
service-wise capability Acquisition Plan, a two year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and deliberations 
by the defence Acquisition Council Chaired by the Raksha Mantri.” 
 

7 
 
Recommendations No. 10 
16.  “The Committee appreciate the various measures taken by the Government to modernize our 
forces i.e. opening up of the Defence Industry sector for Indian private sector participation, with 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), notification of the Strategic Partnership (SP), Model which envisages 
establishment of long term Strategic Partnership  with Indian entities wherein they would tie up with 
global Original Equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to seek technology transfers to set up domestic 
manufacturing infrastructure and supply chain etc. However, the Committee feel that it is in fitness of 
things that first of all adequate allocation be made in  the Capital Budget so that procurement of new 
equipment and upgrading of existing equipment and systems can take place in a seamless manner. 
The Committee accordingly recommend that the more impetus should be given to promote indigenous 
design, development and manufacture of Defence & aerospace equipment in the country under ‘Make 
in India’ by modernization, capacity development of the Defence sector also take place.” 
 
17. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
 “Defence Procurement Procedure (DDP), 2016 is currently under revision towards 
promulgation of DPP, 2020. Enhancement of Indigenous Content and further 'Support to Make in 
India' initiative are some of the highlights of the proposed DPP, 2020.  Incentives have also been 
proposed to promote sourcing from local/indigenous vendors. Some of the proposals for providing 
further impetus to the indigenous defence manufacturing are mentioned below:- 
 
(a) New categories are being added to boost indigenization, viz.; Buy (Global-Manufacture in 
India) and Leasing (Indian). 
(b) Indigenous content requirements are being enhanced under various acquisition categories.  
(c) Provisions for Innovation, iDEX and open competition have been introduced for MSMEs and 
Start-ups. 
(d) Special sections/ provisions have been added to source military materials locally. 
(e) Utilization of indigenous software has been proposed. 
(f) Aero-engines and FAB (Facilities manufacturing Silicon Wafers) to be taken up as projects of 
national importance through indigenous source. 
(g) Incentives for MSMEs are being introduced. 
 
 As regards allocation of adequate Budget, it is submitted that this Ministry proposes 
projections made by the Services to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration. Ministry of 
Finance conveys ceilings, based on which funds are allocated to Services/ Organizations depending 
on trend of expenditure, projections made by the Services, committed liabilities to be fulfilled etc. 
Every effort is made to ensure that no project/ proposal is shelved for want of funds.”  
 
  

8 
 
18.  In pursuance to their recommendation regarding promotion of indigenous design, 
development, manufacture of Defence Aerospace equipments in the country under ‘Make in 
India’ by modernization, capacity development of the Defence sector, the Committee find that 
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2016 is currently under revision.  Further it was 
informed to the Committee that   incentives have also been proposed to promote sourcing 
from local/indigenous vendors.  As around one year has been passed since the Committee 
gave their recommendation, they would like to be apprised of the progress made in this 
direction by the Ministry. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should expedite 
the finalisation and implementation of DPP, 2020 in order to manufacture defence and 
aerospace equipments in the country at the earliest. 
 
D.  MARRIED ACCOMMODATION PROJECT   
Recommendation No 33: 
19.  The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Commitee note that Directorate General of Married Accommodation Project (DG MAP) 
was raised by Government of India under the aegis of Engineer in Chief to construct married 
accommodation for the three services, with the aim of eradicating the deficiency of married 
accommodation for service personnel. The MAP was setup to fulfill the promise made to the Armed 
Forces by the Government of India. The total deficiency of two lakh dwelling units have been slated 
for construction in four phases. After construction of dwelling units over the time period, at present, 
there is a deficiency of 70,432 dwelling units in respect of Army and 670 in respect of Air Force.“ 
 
20. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
   “The overall progress of MAP at present across all phases are as under :-  
 
PH STNS DUs COST (IN CR) OVERALL PROG 
I 86 57,875 6,032.70 100% 
II 157 69,904 13,681.90 94% 
III A  13 24,592 7,259.38 DPR for eight packages are under 
progress 
B 145  46,510 16,020.32  
Total 401 1,98,881 42,994.30 1,15,267 of 1,27,779 DUs(90.20%) 
completed till date 

9 
 
 
The total deficiency of two lakh Dwelling Units (DUs) had earlier been slated for construction in 
four phases. However the third and fourth phases of MAP were amalgamated to complete the entire 
requirement in three phases. Accordingly planning of MAP Ph III was sanctioned for 71,102 Dwelling 
Units. However, due to non availability of funds it was decided to undertake construction of Ph III in 
two parts and activity was restricted to 24,592 Dwelling Units. In accordance with the directions, 
planning of MAP Ph III has commenced at 13 locations (08 packages) and the DPR for the same are 
in advanced stage of completion. The present MAP PH III can thus be treated as MAP Ph III ‘A’ and 
the left over Dwelling Units can form part of MAP Ph III ‘B’. The Ministry is contemplating alternative 
sources for funds for the project.   
 
The present impetus towards modernization of requirements of defence services, does not 
allow adequacy of funds for MAP Phase-III.  The Government is therefore, contemplating to take up 
some Dwelling Units based on the NBCC’s model as a pilot project.   The draft CCS Note on MAP for 
commencement of MAP Phase III will be processed after finalization of the Dwelling Units under 
NBCC’s model on pilot basis by carrying out subsequent changes in the number of Dwelling Units to 
be taken up through the MAP route and the estimated cost etc.” 
 
21.   The Committee note that planning of MAP Ph III was sanctioned for 71,102 Dwelling Units 
(DU). The Committee are constrained to note the perennial problem of paucity of funds under 
the MAP due to which there is non-completion of the sanctioned number of DUs for the last 
few years. The Committee commend the Ministry to opt for alternative sources of funds to 
meet the requirements and wish to be intimated of the progress made by the Ministry in this 
regard. Taking into account the draft CCS Note on MAP for commencement of MAP Phase III 
will only be processed after finalization of the DUs under NBCC’s model on pilot basis, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to take concrete steps to finalise the CCS Note on MAP at the 
earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the consequent developments in this 
regard.  
  

10 
 
CHAPTER II (A) 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Projections and Allocations in respect of three services 
Recommendation No. 4: 
 
From the information submitted by the Ministry, the Committee note that since 2015-16, none 
of the three Services have been given the matching allocation as per the projection.  The gap which 
was there in 2015-16 for Army Rs. 4,596 crore  has increased to Rs. 17,911.22 crore in 2020-21 (from 
14 per cent to 36 per cent). In case of Navy, the difference was Rs. 1,264.89 crore in 2014-15, which 
has increased to Rs. 18,580 crore in 2020-21 (5 per cent to 41 per cent) and for Air Force, the gap 
which was Rs. 12,505.21 crore in 2015-16   has increased to Rs. 22,925.38 crore in 2020-21 (27 per 
cent to 35 per cent). The Committee opine  that such situation is not conducive for preparation of 
country  to  modern day warfare, where possession of capital intensive modern machines are pre 
requisite for not only tilting the result of war in our favour but also having a credible deterrence 
capabilities. The Committee observe that Navy’s fighting capabilities depends on the high value 
platforms like Aircraft Carrier, Submarines, destroyers and frigates  but  the allocation of Capital 
Budget for Navy (percentage)  wise has the sharpest decline. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry not to make any cut while allocating Budget for Capital Head for any of the Services in the 
Demands to be made in the coming years. 
Reply of the Government 
Earlier, there was a trend of reduction in BE allocations under Capital Head at RE stage based on 
pace of expenditure. This trend was reversed in 2017-18 and no cut was imposed in RE 2017-18 as 
well as RE 2018-19. In RE 2019-20, Rs. 1,10,394.31 Crore has been allocated to Ministry of Defence 
under Capital Head i.e. an increase of Rs. 7,000 Crore over BE 2019-20. In BE 2020-21,Rs. 
1,13,734.00 Crore has been allocated which is an increase of Rs.10,339.69 Crore over BE 2019-20 
allocations under Capital Head.  The budget is allocated to the Services based on the allocation 
received from Ministry of Finance. 
Improvement in Perimeter Security 
 
Recommendation No. 7: 
The Committee note with satisfaction that in the wake of past attacks on military stations and 
accommodations,  approval of Hon’ble Raksha Mantri for invoking Emergency Powers of procurement 
under Schedule-23 of DFPDS-2016 to be exercised by Vice Chief of Army Staff has been conveyed in 
February-March, 2018 for undertaking expenditure amounting to Rs.1,587.27 crore on strengthening 
of the perimeter infrastructure and access control mechanisms covering military bases/ aviation bases 

11 
 
of six Army Commands. Further, after the review of Security requirements of all the bases, Indian Air 
Force has incurred an expenditure ofRs. 907 crore from 2016 to 2019. Similar provisions have also 
been made by Indian Navy. Considering that very high value assets are kept in the Defence 
establishment, the Committee desire that continuous flow of funds for the improvement and 
upgradation of the perimeter infrastructure and also for access control mechanisms for all the Defence 
establishment should be provided. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance and it may be ensured 
that critical requirements of Services do not suffer due to want of funds. Based on progress of 
expenditure, additional funds will be sought from Ministry of Finance at appropriate stage(s). 
Ratio for Capital and Revenue Outlay 
Recommendation No. 8:  
 
The Ministry submitted the information about theratio for Capital and Revenue outlay from 
2014-15 onwards, which reflected a sharp increase in favour of Revenue budget in case of  Army, 
which  had a ratio of 84:16 in 2014-15 to 82:18 in 2020-21. This ratio is way short of the ideal ratio of 
60:40 (Revenue: Capital) as mentioned by the representatives of Army during deliberations before the 
Committee. The trend in respect of the other seems to be up to the mark but the allocation in 
monetary term is not supporting it. The Committee are of the view that measures should be taken to 
bridge the gap and the Ministry should try to achieve ideal ratio in respect of Army and other services.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Army is a manpower intensive force and Navy and Air Force are Capital Intensive forces and 
the same is being reflected in the distribution of funds in the Revenue and Capital Segment of the 
respective Services. 
2. This Ministry proposes projections made by the services under Revenue and Capital Budget to 
Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration. Ministry of Finance conveys ceilings separately for 
Revenue (Salary and Non-Salary) and Capital, based on which funds are allocated to Services. The 
procedure followed for allocation involves trend of expenditure, projections made by the Services, 
committed liabilities to be fulfilled etc. Therefore, it may not be possible to maintain a particular ratio in 
favour of Capital or Revenue. However, every effort is made to ensure that no project/ proposal is 
shelved for want of funds. As and when required additional funds are sought from Ministry of Finance. 
In absence of receipt of additional funds, requirements are reprioritized for optimum utilization of 
available resources.  
 

12 
 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
(Recommendation No. 12-13): 
  
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee note that Committed Liability refers to payments anticipated during a financial 
year in respect of contracts concluded in previous years.  Under the Defence Services Estimates, 
Committed Liabilities constitute a significant element in respect of the capital acquisition segment, 
since one project may span several financial years.  As such, it is important to track the element of 
Committed Liabilities which holds first charge on the budget allocation.  Inadequate allocation for 
committed liabilities would definitely lead to ‘default situation’ on contractual obligations. New 
Schemes include new projects/proposals which are at various stages of approval and are likely to be 
implemented in near future.   
Recommendation No. 13 
The Committee learn that at present, the Ministry has removed separate allocation to 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes in the Defence Services Estimates (DSE) and now it is 
covered under Capital Acquisition. The allocation for it in the year 2020-21 for Army is Rs.  26,068.61 
crore against the projection of  Rs. 41,530.80 crore. In case of Navy, allocation is Rs. 24,598.00 crore 
against the projection of Rs. 40,927.91crore and similarly, in case of Air Force, allocation is allocation 
is Rs. 39,030.91 crore against the projection of Rs. 60,840.17 crore.  The Committee also take note of 
the fact that the Ministry has assured that the allocated funds are optimally and fully utilised towards 
operational activities and if required, the schemes would be re-prioritized to ensure that urgent and 
critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence 
Services. The Ministry of Defence had sought an additional fund of Rs. 70,478.38 crore at RE stage 
2019-20 under Modernization (Capital Acquisition) head but based on the allocations received from 
Ministry of Finance, an additional amount of only Rs. 8877.08 crore has been provided for in RE 
2019-20. Considering such apathy towards allocation in Capital Acquisition fund, the Committee are 
wary of the fact that without sufficient allocation for Committed Liabilities, there would be difficulty in 
matching deadlines in the payments towards already committed purchases. Similarly, if there is no 
budget available for New Schemes, there would be no procurement for latest weaponry and 
modernization would take a back seat. Therefore, the Committee has no option but to recommend 
that a dedicated fund should be earmarked for Committed Liabilities and New Schemes, invariably 
from next Budget onwards. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Committed Liability refers to payments anticipated during a financial year in respect of 
contracts concluded in previous years.  Under the Defence Services Estimates, Committed Liabilities 
constitute a significant element in respect of the Capital Acquisition segment, since one project may 
span over several financial years.  As such, it is important to track the element of Committed Liabilities 
which holds first charge on the budget allocation.  New Schemes include new projects/proposals 
which are at various stages of approval and are likely to be implemented in near future.  Both 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes are included in Capital Acquisition segment of Capital 
budget.  Allocations under Committed Liabilities and New Schemes are dependant on ceilings 

13 
 
received from Ministry of Finance.  The allocated funds are optimally and fully utilised towards 
operational activities.  However, if required, the schemes are re-prioritized to ensure that urgent and 
critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence 
Services. 
 
Capital and Annual Procurement Plan 
Recommendations No. 15: 
 The Committee note that Capital and Revenue procurement cases under this policy are taken 
up by Ministry of Defence based on Annual Acquisition Plans for Capital and Annual Procurement 
Plan for Revenue and are processed as per delegation of financial powers. Navy, Air and Army Wings 
are the nodal points in Ministry of Defence for revenue procurements and three Joint Secretary cum 
Acquisition Managers are the nodal points for capital procurements for each services respectively. 
Capital procurement cases upto Rs. 150 crore are delegated to Service HQs and cases above Rs. 
150 crore are processed by Ministry of Defence. During the period 2016-17, the Defence Services 
progressively delegated higher financial powers for both routine as well as emergency procurements 
with the aim to reduce time frames and enhance Defence preparedness. The Committee welcome 
this move by the Ministry of Defence, such financial delegation of power would not only instill sense of 
responsibility in the delegated authorities but also help in quick decision making, avoiding 
unnecessary delays. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation of the Committee on Capital and Annual Procurement Plan has been gone 
through.  It is clarified that the cases under this policy based on Annual Acquisition Plans pertain to 
Capital Acquisition only and not to Revenue Procurement. It is also intimated that capital procurement 
cases upto Rs. 300 crore are delegated to Service HQs and cases above Rs. 300 crore are 
processed by Ministry of Defence. 
 
Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
Recommendations No. 16: 
 From the information submitted by the Ministry, for ensuring accountability and transparency 
in Defence Procurement cases, the Committee note that measures for promoting Probity, Public 
Accountability and Transparency in Defence capital procurements, include execution of Pre-Contract 
Integrity Pact (PCIP) for all cases above Rs. 20 crore, to ensure corruption free procurement process 
(binding agreement between parties that their officials will not offer or accept bribes), guidelines for 
handling of complaints provide for time bound disposal of complaints which are aligned to 
CVC/DOP&T guidelines, instructions issued for ascertaining vigilance status of L1 vendor before 
seeking approval of the Competent Financial Authority (CFA) and guidelines for penalties in business 
dealings with entities and capacity assessment for shipbuilding entities notified. The Committee 
recommend that the above measure be strictly followed and firm monitoring mechanism be in place 
for early procurement of weapon systems. At this juncture, the Committee would also like to 

14 
 
recommend that after these measured are ensured, the Ministry should not pay heed to uncalled for 
interventions from unreliable sources and go for the procurements as planned. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee to follow strictly all the  measure for promoting 
Probity, Public Accountability and Transparency in Defence capital procurements and put in place a 
firm monitoring mechanism for early procurement of weapon systems, has been circulated to all stake 
holders for strict compliance. 
 
Increasing Dependence on Foreign Suppliers for Military Hardware 
(Recommendations No. 17 – 19): 
Recommendations No. 17 
 The Committee observe that the burgeoning import in Arms and Equipment is the cause of 
worry, on being largest importer in the World, the Ministry apprised the Committee that no 
authoritative and official information of India being the largest importer of Defence equipment is 
available as no country officially reveals information on import of Defence equipment. However, in the 
report published in February 2017 by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), 
India has been shown as the largest importer of Defence equipment for the year 2012-16 Capital 
procurement of Defence equipment is undertaken from various domestic as well as foreign vendors, 
as per extant Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) , based on threat perception, operational 
challenges and technological changes so as to keep the Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet 
the entire spectrum of security challenges. 
 
Recommendations No. 18 
 The Committee understand that Capital procurement of Defence equipment is undertaken 
from various domestic as well as foreign vendor based on operational requirements of the Armed 
Forces, the availability or capacity to produce the equipment in India and abroad and to keep the 
Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet the entire spectrum of security challenges. The 
Committee note that during the last four financial years (2015-16 to 2018-19), Out of total 210 
contracts, 75 contracts worth about Rs. 1,67,898 crore have been signed with foreign vendors 
including USA, Russia, Israel, France etc. for procurements of Defence equipment for Armed forces. 
The Defence equipment imported during this period includes helicopters, aircrafts, missiles, rifles, 
artillery guns, simulators  and ammunition. 
 
Recommendations No. 19 
 The Committee also note that during the year 2019-20 (upto 31.12.2019), total expenditure 
on foreign contracts under Capital Acquisition budget for the Defence Forces was Rs. 31058.34 crore 

15 
 
which is 38.36% of the BE of Rs. 80959.08 crore for the Financial year 2019-20. The Committee are 
of the view that Ordnance Factories, DPSUs, DRDO and Private Industries should work in 
coordination to produce not only import substitute products but also expand their export potential so 
that the country become an exporter of defence equipment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Detailed submissions in this regard have been made in Action Taken Replies to 
Recommendation No. 25 and 26 of instant Report. Further, following is also submitted to supplement 
the submissions made in response to Recommendation No. 25 and 26 in respect of Ordnance 
Factories and DRDO:- 
A. Ordnance Factories Board (OFB). 
 
OFB is persistently pursuing the national goal of self-reliance in Defence manufacture through 
high level of indigenization. In case of T-90 tanks, ToT was provided by Russian OEMs. On the other 
hand ‘Dhanush’ is an indigenous Artillery Gun System. This gun system has remarkably high 
indigenous content of more than 80% at prototype stage. 
 
 
Greater thrust has been accorded to export. Structured mechanism has been created within OFB 
for achieving the same. It is brought out that OFB has achieved many fold growth in export revenue 
realization over the previous years. In order to boost up export potential, the following action has been 
initiated:  
 
a. Identification of following products for the next few years:  
 Large caliber ammunitions to Middle East, South East Asia & other countries. 
 Medium & small caliber ammunitions to African, Middle East, South East Asia & other 
countries. 
 Armored vehicle to Middle East, South East Asia & other countries. 
 Troop comforts and other items to African, South East Asia, Central Asia & other countries.  
 Propellant, Chemicals & Explosives to Africa, America, South East Asia & other countries 
 
 
b. A separate post of Member/Export & Marketing has been created at OFB to review and 
monitor export activities. 
c. Nodal Officers have been nominated at factory level for improving export performance and 
identifying potential products which can be offered from the respective unit as per the market 
requirement.  
d. Started engagements with channel partners in foreign countries for boosting its exports. 
e. Participating in various international exhibitions to promote its products in foreign countries. 
f. Indian Defence Attaché posted abroad and Defence Attaché of various countries posted in 
India are being contacted for assistance in boosting export. 
g. For targeted countries, OFB has also started preparing Bilingual product catalogues in English 
&Country’s local language.  

16 
 
h. To explore export potential, various delegations from Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) 
and foreign countries were invited for technical discussions. 
i. Started customization of products as per user requirements.  
j. OFB is certifying products & packing as per International standards accepted by international 
buyers. 
 
B. DRDO  
 
 DRDO, in its pursuit for excellence in developing the cutting edge technologies for Advanced 
Defence Systems and Platforms, has delivered many state of the art flagship products to the country. 
In current global scenario, there is a persistent need to accelerate technology innovation and world-
class product development, for boosting the “Make in India” policy to its higher level and to achieve 
self-reliance in defence and security. DRDO strategic academic persuade will foster to enhance the 
research eco system within academic environment in the country. 
 
DRDO has been exploring the knowledge and expertise existing within the country at various 
academic institutes and research organizations by providing research grants for faculty driven 
projects through Five Research Boards. The objective of these grants has been to foster knowledge-
based growth in science and advanced technologies, catalyze cross-fertilization of ideas and 
experience between DRDO and academic experts. 
 
In last five years, DRDO has given impetus to collaboration with academia for DRDO 
requirement driven research in the indentified futuristic technology thrust areas. The Directed 
research is managed by Directorate of Futuristic Technology Management (DFTM) and DRDO has 
established eight Advanced Technology Centers (ATCs) at the premier institutes for carrying out 
research in the niche technology areas related to defence & security. 
 
DRDO primarily awards projects to MSME through Technology Development Fund (TDF) for 
indigenous technology product development. Within this scheme industry can engage academia for 
better engineering solutions. 
 
DRDO has research collaboration with around 155 institutes. DRDO has developed a network 
of more than 1500 industries including MSMEs. 
 
DRDO works in close association and collaboration with private industries for development of 
it’s defence systems and technologies. DRDO has evolved various industry models for engagement 
and development of Industries. These are Development Partner Model, Consortium Model, 
Concurrent Engineering Model, Joint Venture (JV) Model, Joint Development Model, Limited Series 
Production (LSP) Model, Government Owned and Company Operated (GOCO) Model, International 
Collaboration Model and Transfer of Technology (ToT) Model. These modes of industry 

17 
 
engagements, facilitate smooth transfer of DRDO developed technologies, provide necessary hand 
holding support to industries, provide technical support and support to facilitate exports. 
 
The following steps have been taken by DRDO during the last three years to enhance the 
involvement of private sector in DRDO projects and programmes: 
 
 DRDO has promulgated new ToT policy and procedures with zero ToT fee for its industry 
partners (Development cum Production Partners (DcPP)/ Development Partner (DP) and zero 
royalty for supply to Indian Armed Forces and GovtDeptt. Nil ToT fee and royalty will reduce 
the financial burden on Indian industries and Indian Armed Forces. Only 5 % ToT fee will be 
charged from non DcPP/DP industries. The policy has been made compatible with DPP-2016. 
This will provide further boost to Indian industries in defence manufacturing sector to achieve 
more self reliance.  
 
 To facilitate ToT for Cat A (Military Technologies) and Cat B (Spin off/ Commercial use 
Technologies), a user friendly portal has also been launched for more transparency and clarity 
for the industry entrepreneurs.  
 
 To unearth the hidden potential of spin off technologies and bring in more transparency, 
DRDO has entered into MOUs with four leading industry chambers namely Associated 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), Confederation of Indian Industry 
(CII), PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI) and National Research 
Development Corporation (NRDC) for technology assessment and commercialization of dual 
use, non-security sensitive technologies so that fruits of our technological progress reach the 
common man.  
 
 DRDO has carried out intense interactions with industries all over the country to boost 
Defence Manufacturing sector and to achieve self reliance in Defence manufacturing. More 
than 900 industries from various cities in India were apprised on DRDO technologies and to 
facilitate the industries (including MSMEs) to absorb DRDO technologies to boost defence 
manufacturing sector and achieve self reliance in the defence technologies. 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
Offset Clause 
Recommendation No. 22: 
The Committee note that Offsets under Defence Capital Acquisition were introduced in the 
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) in 2005 based on the recommendation of the Kelkar 
Committee. The Offset guidelines in DPP have been amended 5 times thereafter. As per Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DPP 2016) there are 05 categories of capital procurement for Defence 
equipment’s i.e. (i) Buy (Indian-IDDM), (ii) Buy (Indian), (iii) Buy & Make (Indian), (iv) Buy & Make and 
(v) Buy (Global). The offset provision is applicable only on “Buy Global” and “Buy and Make” category 
of contracts. The offset provisions apply in capital acquisition contracts which are of more than Rs. 
2,000 crore. The threshold level of Rs. 2,000 crore was raised from Rs.300 crore in 2016. However, 
the offsets are not applicable to procurements under “Fast Track Procedure” and in “Option Clause” 
cases if the same was not envisaged in the original contract. It is relevant to note that offset 
applicability on Indian companies under ‘Buy Global” cases do not arise in case the indigenization 
component is more than 30%. Offset contracts are co-terminus with the main procurement contract 
and signed along with the main procurement contract after approval of CFA. The period of offset 
discharge can be extended on exceptional ground by a maximum period of 02 years. The DPP 
stipulates eligible products/services for discharge of offset obligations which covers Defence products, 
products for internal security and civil aerospace. The responsibility for fulfilment of offsets obligations 
lies with the main vendor. However, the vendor is permitted to discharge his obligations through Tier-1 
subvendors based on their work share. The vendors are free to select their Indian Offset Partners 
(IOP) from DPSU/OFB/DRDO/private industry. The vendors are allowed to submit offset details either 
at the time of seeking offset credits or one year prior to discharge of offset obligations. Foreign 
vendors are permitted to bank offset credit in anticipation of future contracts. Banking of offset credits 
is permissible only for eligible avenues under the offset guidelines. The banked offset credits are non-
transferable except between the main contractor and his Tier-1 sub-contractors within the same 
procurement contract. Assignment of offset credits to the vendors is only after completion of 
transactions and audit by MoD. Offset banking period has been allowed up to 7 years and pre-banked 
credits being allowed to fulfil maximum 50% offset obligation of any given contract. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The observations of the Committee are factual in nature and hence no comments are offered. 
 
Recommendation No. 23: 
The Committee have been apprised that as on date, a total of 54 Defence offset contracts 
have been signed in MoD out of which 32 cases pertain to Indian Air Force and 15 cases of Indian 
Navy and 07 of Indian Army. The total offset obligations are estimated at approximately US $ 11.80 
billion to be discharged over a period from 2008-2024. 
 
  

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As per the updated status, till date, a total of 56 Defence offset contracts have been signed in 
MoD, out of which 32 cases pertain to Indian Air Force, 16 cases are of Indian Navy and 08 cases of 
Indian Army. The total offset obligations are estimated at approximately US $ 13.02 billion to be 
discharged over a period from 2008-2027. 
 
(Recommendation No. 25 – 26): 
Recommendation No. 25 
The Committee find that in Spite of the Make in India Policy executed by the Government, 
there exist imports in terms of value and percentage in the Defence Production Units. In OFB as 
already brought out, the average import rests around 10%. In HAL, which is currently manufacturing 
platforms for various aircrafts, the import content in value terms ranges from 40 to 60 per cent. In 
BEL, the import content until 3rd quarter of 2019-20 is around 30 percent which was merely 20% in 
the year 2014-15. Likewise, in BEML, the import content upto December, 2019 was 21.41% in terms 
of net value of production. In BDL, during 2018-19, it registered 12.8% in comparison to 7.8% during 
20-17-18. MDL has intimated that their import content for the warships and submarines under 
construction ranges between 28 to 70%. The import content of GSL upto December, 2019 was 16% 
which has come down from the average of about 25% from 2016-17 till 2018-19. GRSE has also 
supplied its figures which have also come down to 8.26% upto 2nd quarter of 2019-20 from that of 
14,73 % during the year 2014-15. HSL has also maintained almost the same figures in terms of import 
content which is around 12.26% between April to December, 2019 in comparison to 15.47% during 
the year 2018-19. 
 
Recommendation No. 26 
While taking note of the above figures in regard to import contents, the Committee at this 
stage would not like to recommend anything which would adversely affect the pace and quality of the 
production of various assets. Nevertheless, they would like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken 
to reduce the import contents in future. They would also like to recommend that all-out concerted 
efforts be undertaken not only within the Defence Production Units, but from private manufacturers 
also by sharing their co-expertise developed in terms of R & D. The detailed note may be supplied to 
the Committee for their perusal at the time of furnishing the Action Taken Replies. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Department of Defence Production has taken several initiatives to reduce the import of Defence items. 
Some of the initiatives are enumerated as under: 
 Indigenization: Policy for Indigenization was notified by Department of Defence 
Production on 08 March, 2019, with the objective to create an industry ecosystem. It is 

20 
 
estimated that Defence PSUs will reduce the import bill through indigenization of products 
and processes. 
 
 Development of Indigenization Portal: DPSUs/OFB are uploading the data on the link 
provided. The proposed Indigenization portal will be a centralized one in which 
DPSUs/OFB and other stakeholders will be showcasing their imported items to be 
indigenized. Vendor will become aware of the above items and they can in turn, show their 
interest in those items where they have capability to manufacture.  
 
 Study on savings in cost – IDSA, Delhi is studying savings in cost due to indigenization 
in the last 5 years in DPSUs/OFB. Final report submitted in Jan 2020. 
 
 Implementation of Make-II – The Make-II framework for implementation by DPSUs/OFB 
was notified on 11.02.2019.DPSUs/OFB have identified approx. 2500 items under Make-II. 
These items are at various stages of development process.  
 
 Long Term Orders -“Framework for placing Long Term Orders by DPSUs” has been 
approved by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri on 04 Nov 2019. Under this Framework, the procuring 
organization may aggregate demand of the item for a long period of upto 10 years, in 
cases where it finds challenges in indigenization. 
 
 Public Procurement Order: 127 items have been notified under this order, thereby giving 
preference to domestic manufacturers in procurement of these items. 
 
 IGA With Russia for Indigenous Manufacturing of Spares: An Inter-Governmental 
Agreement (IGA) on “Joint manufacturing of Spares, Components, Aggregates and other 
materiel related to Russian/ Soviet origin Arms and Defence Equipment” was signed during 
the 20th India-Russia Bilateral Summit held at Vladivostok on 4th Sept. 2019. The 
objective of the IGA is to enhance the After Sales Support of Russian origin equipment 
currently in service in Indian Armed Forces through partnership of Russian OEMs with the 
Indian industry under the framework of “Make in India” initiative.  First list of spares 
proposed to be manufactured in India has been received from IAF, Indian Army, Indian 
Navy, OFB and HAL. The list comprising of nearly 1100 items has been shared with the 
Russian Side.  
 
 CPSE Conclave: All DPSUs have identified project for Indigenization as part of 
Challenges identified in CPSE Conclave 2018. 
 
 Inclusion of import reduction as parameter in MoUs of Defence PSUs. 
 
 Around 700 items, manufactured by DPSUs and OFB, under various categories have been 
identified for inclusion in the proposed Negative list of import for Defence items. 
 
 All DPSUs have been issued instructions to go domestic tenders only for projects less Rs 
200 Crs. 
  

21 
 
The Defence PSUs/OFB wise reply is as under:  
 
OFB: Regarding import substitute products, it is intimated that present level of indigenization in OFB 
is already very high at 92% due to continuous efforts in Ordnance factories over the years for 
both in-house development of imported items as well as development of new venders in Indian 
industry. The total value of imports was less than 8% in 2019-20. Import dependency of OFB is 
only for those items for which complete ToT has not been made available by the OEMs.  
 
Achieving self-reliance through indigenization of items and reducing dependency on imports, is 
one of the key objectives of OFB. For this drive, OFB is focused to indigenize items being 
imported with the association of Indian vendors. OFB has identified these items and uploaded 
on OFB website and is linked to Make in India site of MoD. Factory wise list of items, made 
available on OFB website also have the details of Nodal officers. Interested firms may contact 
the concerned Nodal Officers to obtain more details about these items. 
 
OFB is pursuing a planned strategy to enhance the indigenous content in various products 
through various mode like provision of IGA for Russian items (mainly spares), in-house efforts, 
source development open tender enquiry, Make-II, and iDex.  
 
HAL: The aircraft, helicopters and their systems are built to standard SOP (Standard of Preparation) 
after evolving component/module/system level specifications at the design stage. Any 
modification on SOP requires an elaborate re-certification process involving long gestation 
period and cost. Presently, import substitution on the platforms have been happening broadly 
under three circumstances;  
 
 To upgrade existing system with a superior one to give better technical and functional 
capability or 
 
 To address the issues of obsolescence in order to support and sustain fleet availability for its 
entire lifecycle. 
 
 To indigenize high volume Standard parts/ Fasteners,etc. 
 
In house development of a system as a substitute to imported one when the latter is already 
operational, with the sole moto of indigenization, is a less occurring phenomena. 
Indigenisation needs to be viewed in the perspective of techno-economic viability, in-house 
capability to offer high-end technology and the development time frame and its exploitation for 
a longer span of time on larger number of aircraft sets. Availability of good order book is a 
must to exploit the true economic benefits of indigenisation.  

22 
 
 
Indigenisation is a continuous endeavor at HAL on various platforms including LCA and 
futuristic projects. Major LRUs/ Components like Gyro Reference Unit, GPS Antenna, 
Actuators, Smart Multi-Function Display, Mission computer and Battery etc. are planned/ 
taken-up for Indigenisation.  
 
Non-availability of aeronautical grade raw materials, consumables and standard parts of from 
indigenous sources is a serious limitation in achieving self-reliance as major proportion of the 
same is presently imported.  Low volume of consumption, un-sustained order book, high cost 
and extensive qualification and certification procedure restrict the indigenization. These 
restrictions result in insufficient local demand and economy of scale could not be achieved for 
most of the items unless export opportunities are explored by the local vendors. 
 
In respect of bought-out items like bearings, connectors or system equipment like actuators, 
ejection seats, fuel pumps, radars, EW equipment etc., the indigenous capability for 
Aeronautical standard is limited or does not exist in the country, and these will have to be 
invariably procured from foreign OEMs. It is also important to develop / Indigenise the raw 
materials such as metals/alloys/ composites/ semiconductor materials and electronic 
components such as Integrated Circuits (IC's)/ Resistors/ Capacitors etc.  
 
In an ideal scenario, HAL would aim to achieve even higher levels of indigenisation which 
again is linked to the numbers to be produced. However, apart from the platform development, 
HAL also undertakes indigenisation of various high value systems and equipment of foreign 
origin fitted on HAL platforms and reduce dependence on imports and manage obsolescence, 
thus fostering self-reliance. Since, HAL is committed for the life cycle support of all its flying 
platforms which spans for 30-40 years, Indigenisation greatly helps in this endeavor. HAL has 
made following concerted efforts to raise the level of Indigenous content through in-house and 
outsourcing to Indian vendors.  
 
 Dedicated Indigenisation Cells at Division level and an Indigenisation Department at 
Corporate level. A Permanent Monitoring Committee at HAL is formulated to oversee 
Indigenisation activities, efforts and monitor company-wide.  
 
 Every year HAL indigenizes sizeable no. of imported items comprising of detail components, 
sub-assemblies and LRUs for sustenance of fleets and avoid production/ overhaul hold ups.  
 
 In addition to HAL manufactured products, it also extends full support for maintenance and 
upgrades of aircraft & helicopters which are directly procured from foreign OEMs & used by 
defence services like AN-32, Mirage-2000, UAV (Heron/ Searcher), Seaking helicopters etc.  
 A ‘Make in India’ portal is hosted in HAL website to offer opportunity of indigenization to 
private sector under regular indigenisation (Make I) and Make II programs.  
 

23 
 
 Details of test facilities available at HAL are also hosted for private vendors to utilize them 
during the course of Indigenisation. 
 
 HAL has recently implemented the Make-II (Industry Funded) procedure with assured order 
quantity after successful development of items through private vendors in compliance of the 
framework promulgated by MoD with an objective of wider participation of Indian industry 
and impetus for MSME/start-ups sector. HAL has identified more than 2000 items for 
indigenisation under Make-II. The list of items identified for indigenisation under Make-II is 
hosted in HAL website along with the details of the concerned nodal officers of the 
respective HAL Divisions. 
 
 HAL has hosted around 300 imported systems and sub systems of mechanical, electrical, 
avionics, instrumentation categories and more than 100 Tools, Testers and Ground 
Equipment (TTGE) in HAL’s website to  enable private industries to take up for 
indigenization through regular indigenisation route. Contact details of division wise nodal 
officer for each item is also provided in the website. 
 
 Data of imported items being populated in the MoD Portal (Indigenisation) created by DPIT, 
MoD to facilitate import substitution through Indian Vendors. 
 
 HAL is organizing/participating various vendor development programmes to identify capable 
vendors for Indigenization.  
 
 HAL has also hosted in HAL’s website, the list of test facilities which can be shared with 
private vendors 
 
HAL is India’s only aerospace major with indigenous design and manufacture capabilities. 
Procurement of HAL’s indigenous products are effective import substitutes which obviate the 
need for import of flyaway platforms from foreign manufactures. Hence, products like ALH, 
LCA, LCH, LUH, HTT-40 and license platforms like Su-30 MKI, Hawk, Dornier if inducted in 
greater numbers would definitely bring economy of scale to the Indian private vendors and 
would contribute to further reduction of imports in the long term.  
BEL: BEL generally does not import fully finished Defence equipment. However, for the design, 
manufacture & supply of Defence equipment, the company resorts to imports only for some of 
the special Components/Raw materials, proprietary items/sub-systems etc., (input material) that 
are not being manufactured in the country. Around 87% of BEL's turnover, on an average is, 
generated from products based on indigenous technology and the remaining mere 13% is on 
foreign ToT. The import content during 2019-20 was around 27% on value of production. BEL 
continuously strives to minimize the dependence on import of these items through consistent 
efforts on indigenization, outsourcing from domestic industry, vendor development, and 
collaborative R&D process involving Indian Pvt. Industry including MSMEs etc.  
 
Towards achieving the objectives of self-reliance by continuous reduction in imports, BEL has 
evolved clear Roadmaps for Indigenization, including Make-II process and Collaborative R&D 

24 
 
projects to develop products. Some of the major specific measures deployed to enhance 
indigenization to minimize import content are listed below: 
 
 Items with large quantities & high future business potential targeted for Indigenization. 100 
items uploaded in BEL Website. Projects with order available or higher probability of 
acquisition are selected on priority. Projects with estimated prototype cost of upto Rs.25 
lakhs reserved for MSMEs/Start-ups. 
 
 Commonly Generic items targeted to build indigenous vendor base (Crystals, Filters, 
Power Supply, Convertors, Mechanical items, Raw Materials, Transformers, Connectors, 
Cables etc). 
 
 36 EOIs under Make-II have been published on BEL's e-Procurement portal to attract 
capable/prospective domestic manufacturers for indigenization. Responses received for 9 
EOIs. Till date, 1,332 items are uploaded on 'Srijan' (DDP) Portal for indigenization. 
 
 Preference to indigenous components/Sub-Assemblies over imported without compromise 
on quality & certification requirements. 
 
 As part of CPSE Conclave action points of GoI, BEL has identified specific projects for 
Indigenization as part Challenges pertaining to "Minimizing Import Bill" and "Integration of 
Innovation & Research" through which various projects have been taken up for 
indigenization in collaboration with other CPSEs/OFB.  
 
 Indigenization is one of the major avenues of BEL's Cost Reduction efforts where the 
company sets annual targets for achieving. Reduction in Import as a % of Revenue from 
Operations over the previous year is one of the Performance Criteria under MoU signed 
with Ministry.  
 
 During 2019-20 BEL was able to indigenize around 330 items (provisional), which will 
result in considerable savings on import in future. 
 
 Import bill reduction can be achieved through self-reliance in terms of manufacturing as 
well as design & development within the country. Following steps are being taken in BEL to 
enhance indigenisation. 
 
Manufacturing: BEL is investing in Industry 4.0 technologies in areas of Manufacturing, 
Supply Chain and other broader digital transformation initiatives with specific, focused 
technology that span the entire organisation. The upcoming manufacturing Plants of BEL i.e. 
‘Defence Systems Integration Complex’ at Palasamudram, Advanced EO and IIR seeker 
manufacturing facility at Nimmaluru and Land based EW Systems at Ibrahimpatnam and 
future plants will leverage the specific technologies of Industry 4.0. BEL can quickly diversify 
into new technology segments through necessary partnerships and scale up manufacturing. 

25 
 
e.g., BEL has manufactured and supplied 8153 nos. ventilators to several State 
Government. 
 
R&D: With an aim to reduce the need for foreign ToT based products (which involve heavy 
imports), BEL will continue to take the following steps towards design & development of  
products indigenously: 
 
 R&D investment of 8%-10% of the turnover every year. Last 5 years data: 
 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
9% 9% 10% 9% 8%Appx. (Prelim.) 
 
 Collaborations with National Labs (e.g., DRDO), academia and societies:  
 
Radars Naval 
systems 
Missile 
Systems Comm. EO & 
Lasers Encryption 
Futuristic 
technologies 
LRDE NSTL, 
NPOL 
RCI, 
DRDL 
DEAL, 
DRDL IRDE CAIR, 
SETS 
IITs (Kanpur, Karagpur, 
Hyderabad, Roorkee, 
IIIT-Jabalpur, IISc 
 
 Development of 20 (or more) new products every year. Last 5 years data: 
 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
15 20 23 21 22 
 
 Import substitution of several expensive Modules and subsystems in various business segments. 
These include: Maritime Domain Awareness-Decision Support Software for NC3I,Radars (e.g 
Coastal Surveillance Radar, Compact Tactical Surveillance Radar, X-Band Active Phased Array 
Radar), Head Up Displays (Ex, Su 30 Aircraft), DMR Radios, Satellite On The Move (Ex, Ku Band 
SOTM), Chassis (Ex. Dip Brazed Chassis for DFCC), Power Systems (ex. SAPSU of Atulya 
Radar), Communication equip. (Radios, Switches, Gateways etc.) for Missile programs (QRSAM, 
Akash-NG, CIWS, etc.), Zoom lens & EO Sight systems, AI based solutions and Traffic 
Management for Smart Cities, Railways (RTIS), Metro Railways (AFC for DMRC), etc. 
 
 Setting indigenization targets for every Business Unit and monitoring the progress. An 
indigenisation committee has been entrusted with this responsibility. Make-II process is being 
adapted to build an Indian ecosystem. Some of the ongoing efforts are as follows: 
 

26 
 
Sl# Subsystem Indian partner 
1 5kVA UPS for ADTCR 
3 MSMEs identified 2 Rugged 24" LED Display 
3 Line Interface and Detector Unit 
4 OFC Cable Assy. EoI Re issued as no 
response from 
MSMEs 5 Voltage Controlled SAW Oscillator 
6 Gyro sensor based True North Finder (TNF) 
EoI being prepared 
– to be issued to 
MSMEs 
7 Power Supply 5V/60A 
8 VCOs (120MHz, 80MHz, 80MHz, 350MHz) 
9 SFP Transceivers (9 variants) 
10 Multi Output Power Supply To Be Identified  
11 Electronically Tunable High Power Microwave Band Pass 
Filter 
Multiple MSMEs 
identified 
12 Electronically Tunable Microwave Band Pass Filter 
13 Microwave Low Noise Amplifier 
14 Dehydrator with SNMP 
15 Wormed Gear Box 
 
 Strengthening the two Central Research Labs (CRL), BEL Software Technology Centre (BSTC) 
and  Product Development & Innovation centre (PD&IC) for development of cutting edge futuristic 
and critical (cost extensive) technology Modules through: 
 
 CRL, Bengaluru CRL, 
Ghaziabad BSTC PD&IC 
Current 
Manpower 260 187 249 269 
 
 Empanelment of collaborative partners: 
 
 Design Service 
Providers 
Production 
Service 
Providers 
R&D 
Consultants 
R&D Solution 
Providers 
Empanelment  
in 2019-20 165 38 35 30 

27 
 
 
 
Defence Innovation Organisation (DIO): "Defence Innovation Organisation", under Section 8 
of Companies Act, 2013, has been created by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) and Bharat 
Electronics Limited (BEL), each holding 50% of the capital to implement the Defence Innovation 
Fund (DIF) initiative of MoD. 
 
 Innovation for Defence Excellence (iDEX) frame work, under the ambit of DIO, is primarily 
aimed towards fostering innovations & nurturing entrepreneurship in the field of defence 
production.   
 
 iDEX will function as the executive arm of DIO, carrying out all the required activities for Co-
innovation/co-creation of relevant technologies, Piloting of candidate technologies in 
important platforms and Indigenization of various defence and aerospace related platforms. 
 
 Under this scheme, it has been envisaged to work with India’s innovation entities like existing 
incubators, which would help in discovery and exploration of Startups/MSMEs that can 
perform the function of co-creation. iDEX would work with these incubators closely, tracking 
upcoming Startups/MSMEs and Innovators, and investing in them opportunistically. These 
incubators are roped for carrying out the following tasks: 
a) Explore & discover Start-ups/MSMEs that can co-create innovative defence technologies 
with the Indian Armed Forces. 
b) Mentor & nurture such Start-ups/MSMEs. 
c) Run programs like accelerators to support the identified Start-ups/MSMEs. 
d) Promote defence innovations at schools & college levels. 
e) Support identified Start-ups/MSMEs with prototyping and piloting defence related 
products/technologies. 
f) Support DIO-iDEX in building the eco-system for Start-ups to interact with the Indian 
Defence establishment. 
 
 iDEX-DIO has so far entered into MoUs with the following eight incubators: 
i. Coimbatore Innovation & Business Incubator (CIBI), (FORGE)  
ii. Centre for Innovation Incubation & Entrepreneurship, IIM, Ahmedabad  
iii. IITM Incubation Cell, Chennai 
iv. Society for Innovation & Entrepreneurship (SINE), IIT- Bombay (Mumbai) 
v. T – Hub, Hyderabad 
vi. Foundation for Innovation and Technology Transfer (FITT), IIT DELHI  
vii. IISc, Bengaluru, IIT Hyderabad  
viii. Maker Village as Partner Incubators  
 
The above measures are expected to further bring down the import content in the coming years. 
 

28 
 
BEML: BEML’s has achieved indigenization levels of over 90% in the mainline Mining & Construction 
products, Rail coaches & EMU's, over 80% in High Mobility Vehicles and over 65% in Metro 
cars. The overall import content depends on product mix manufactured each year. As the 
portion of Metro cars in the overall sales has increased from 15% to 41% during the last 5 
years, the import content as percentage of overall Value of Production has increased. 
 
  BEML has planned to set up ‘Make in India Parks’ by attracting potential partners with niche 
technology and consequently minimize import dependency while creating export 
opportunities. This will not only facilitate indigenization of complex aggregates but will also 
create employment opportunities. 
 Indigenisation for cabin of High Mobility Vehicles through ToT 
 Indigenous manufacture of Defence Spares through JV. 
 Indigenous manufacture of propulsions for Metro Cars / EMUs through JV. 
 BEML is also Working towards 'ZERO IMPORT' policy of the Government, through ToT / JVs; 
BEML has published ‘Expression of Interest’ for indigenous development of 1269 imported 
items under Make-II procedure. Development POs have already been placed for 139 items. In 
line with MoD guidelines, Top-20 imported items have been identified for Indigenization out of 
which 7 items have been indigenized during 2019-20. Import content was 20% (Provnl.) 
during FY 2019-20. 
 
 To further enhance indigenisation, BEML has invited ‘Expression of Interest’ for 
manufacturing and technology partnerships with reputed global OEMs looking to establish 
and / or expand their supply chains / manufacturing base in India for the manufacture of 
various goods and/or service business in the areas of Defence & Aerospace, Rail & Metro, 
Mining & Construction, Engines and aggregates with the overarching objective of “Aatma 
Nirbhar Bharat”. 
 
 Towards protecting the Intellectual property of the Company, the Innovation Cell has 
succeeded in filing 155 IPRs since setting up, including 70 IPR during 2019-20 covering 
innovations in product design, manufacturing and operations. Eight patents have been 
awarded so far. During the year, patent was awarded for “Radio control system for clutch 
control geared dozer”. 
 
 The Company is also working with industry partners to leverage technology for the benefit of 
customers such as introducing AI features in machines. During the year 2019-20, three 
following AI based products were developed: 
 Mobile Medical Health Diagnostic System, 
 Sleep / Fatigued operator alert system on Dump Trucks, 

29 
 
 Predictive maintenance of Mining equipment thru big data analytics and Machine 
learning algorithms. 
 
BDL: Indigenous content in BDL products varies from 78% to 99 %. The product mix of the 
production during a year decides the import content and may not directly related to the value of 
production. During 2017-18 the product mix contains the products which have higher 
indigenous content. Whereas during 2018-19, the product mix contains the products which 
have lower indigenous content.   
 
All out efforts were put to indigenize the items which are being imported. All items being 
imported are taken up for indigenization.  
 
Extra efforts are put up by BDL for top 20 items in terms of import value for indigenization. As 
on date, 14 items are already indigenized. Most of these items are explosives and are 
developed by reverse engineering with the help of HEMRL and OFB. Very few vendors 
manufacture these items in India. These items constitute major import content of BDL. BDL is 
importing items for which indigenous capacity is not sufficient to meet the requirements of 
Indian Armed Forces.  
 
Indigenization of other items (like miniature bearings etc.,) is not economically viable as the 
quantity requirements are very low.  
 
% of Indigenization completed by value in BDL products range from 78% to 99%, which is very 
high and efforts are underway to further increase the indigenization % in the products having 
lower indigenization. 
 
MIDHANI: MIDHANI is manufacturer of super alloys, titanium alloys and special steel for strategic 
sectors like Defence, space and energy, the import content in these products are any of 
the raw materials such as Chromium Metals, Nickel, Titanium, Cobalt etc. is ranging from 
20 to 30%. These raw materials and its mineral sources are not available in the country. 
 
MIDHANI has developed several important materials which include special steels, super 
alloys and titanium alloys for strategic application like Defence, Space and Energy. The 
indigenous development of these materials has reduced the dependency of India on 
import from other nations. Some of the major development as import substitution are 
mentioned below. 
 High-pressure compressor disc to HAL for Adour engine of Jaguar Aircraft  

30 
 
 Titanium sea water filters and high-pressure valves for nuclear submarine. 
 Composite Armour for Mi 17 helicopter.  
 Light weight body Armour product based on Bhabha Kavach 
 High temperature super alloys Superni 617, Superni 740, Superfer 800L required for 
Advanced Ultra Supercritical Power Plants to be built in India.  
MDL: MDL is in the business of construction of Naval Ships and Submarines where Major equipment 
are buyer (Navy) nominated. For remaining items / Equipment MDL is putting efforts to 
Indigenize the imported items/Equipment which will reduce the dependency on Import. For this 
purpose, MDL is taking following actions – 
 
 MDL has set-up a dedicated Department of Indigenisation in Oct 2015 to boost and 
strengthen the indigenisation effort and to provide focused impetus to the Hon’ble Prime 
Minister’s vision of “Make-in-India”. 
 
 Since setting up of a dedicated Indigenisation Department, items as listed below have 
been indigenised till date. The expected cost savings in FE to the exchequer, for the 
ongoing projects would work out to Rs. 456 Crores if procured, from these vendors as 
listed below: - 
 
S No Item/ 
Equipment 
Earlier Source 
of Import 
Now Indigenised 
by 
Expected Cost 
Saving in FE           
(for 4-P15B & 7-
P17A Ships)                        
1. SICADS M/s Smith, 
Germany. 
M/S L&T, SEC 
Bengaluru & DRDE, 
Gwalior 
17  Crores 
2. Bridge Window 
Glass 
M/s Saint 
Gobain, Spain. 
M/S Jeet&Jeet 
Glass Jaipur 
22  Crores 
3. MCT Glands M/s Roxtec, 
Sweden. 
M/S Wallmax, 
Noida, Delhi 
11  Crores 
4. Remote Controlled 
Valves 
Thompson 
Valves, UK. 
M/S DelValves, 
Satara, Pune 
15  Crores 
5. Chladon Gas 
(for Magazine Fire 
Fighting System)  
M/s ROE, 
Russia 
M/s United 
Technologies, 
Gurugaon. 
M/s EKC, Mumbai. 
99 Crores 
 

31 
 
6. Ref Plants for 
Submarines 
M/s SNORI, 
France 
M/s ACCEL, 
Ahmedabad 
1.5 Crores  
7. Battery monitoring 
System for 
Submarines 
M/s Naval 
Group, France 
M/s Precision Power 2.5 Crores 
8. Static Frequency 
Converter for 
Submarines 
M/s Naval 
Group, France 
M/s Precision Power 1.1 Crores 
9. Various HVAC items 
for Ships 
 
M/s Axima, 
France 
M/s SAF,  
M/s Del Valve, 
M/s Chamunda 
Valve 
14.9 Crores 
 Total Expected FE Savings 184  Crores 
 
Moreover, the various items/equipment planned to be indigenised/being indigenised 
are as follows:  
(a) Magazine Fire Fighting System along with CFEES, DRDO. 
(b) RSS Screens for Ships. 
(c) Life Raft for Submarines. 
(d) PolyChloroprene Rubber Band/ Continuity Straps for submarines. 
(e) Battery loading trolley for SSK Submarines. 
Although Indigenisation Dept.  is taking all out measure on selective basis to indigenise 
the import equipment/ items/spares, reduction of import bill on substantial basis may be 
attained if technical specifications of requirements is determined at formulation stage by 
Customer, IN to promote indigenous sourcing. Further, we are also outreaching the vendors 
dealing with us to take advantage of ‘Make in India’ policy towards promoting indigenisation 
either by developing their own innovative technological products or by executing TOT with 
foreign partners 
 
 
  

32 
 
GRSE: Import Content of Value of Production (VoP) as on as to 31st Mar 2020. 
 
Value of 
Production 
(VoP) 
Direct Import Value of 
Import 
Content 
from 
Domestic 
Suppliers 
Indigenous 
Content  
Percentage 
of Indigenous 
Content of 
VoP 
Percentage 
of Import to 
VoP 
(Rs. In 
Crore) 
(Rs. In Crore) (Rs. In Crore) (Rs. In Crore) % % 
1 2 3 4= 1-2-3 5= 
(4)/(1)*100 
 
2019-20 (up to 4th Quarter)  
1424.70 90.44 3.78 1330.48 93.39% 6.61% 
Indigenization road map, including Make II process:- GRSE has identified items for 
development under indigenisation for next five years and furnished to DDP under five year 
indigenisation plan. This five year plan is also covering development of DAPS under Make II. 
The extract of Plan is given below:- 
 
GRSE’s 5 Year INDIGENISATION PLAN/ Yearwise Milestones for FY 2019-20 onwards 
Till 15 
Aug 
2022 
1-Year 
2019-20 
2-Year 
2020-21 
3-Year 
2021-22 
4-Year 
2022-23 
5-Year 
2023-24 
 8 Nos.  Helo connecting  
gear for Rail less 
Helo traversing 
system for 
Advanced Light 
Helicopter 
 
Pole Mast of 
composite material 
for Project – P28 
10T 
Telescopic 
Deck Crane 
 
Assault 
Bridge 
 
Double Lane 
Portable 
Steel Bridge 
Data Acquisition 
and Processing 
System(DAPS)  
 
HP Air Fittings & 
Reducing 
Station 
 
Magazine Fire 
Fighting System 
for SVL 
Window Wiper  
 
Telescopic Helo 
Hangar 
 
Magazine Fire 
Fighting System 
for ASW (SWC) 
- 
 
  

33 
 
GSL: The import content of GSL for FY 2019-20 is as follows: 
     (Rs in crore) 
Value of Production (VoP) 
(Provisional) 
Import Content 
 (Provisional) 
% of Import Content 
to VoP 
862 167 19.37% 
 
Concerted efforts are being made by GSL to reduce the import content on every 
project being executed in the Yard. GSL has taken following measures to reduce import 
content for Shipbuilding projects: 
 
 (i) Indigenisation (‘Make in India’ Policy): 
 
 GSL has adopted, introduced and promulgated Make in India (Outsourcing, Long 
Term Procurement & Vendor Development and Indigenization) Policy in October, 
2015 to enhance the local content / indigenization through increased vendor / 
manufacturing base in Defence Shipbuilding Sector.  
 Purchase Preference Clause.GSL has implemented Preference to Make in India 
2017 and accordingly arranged Purchase Preference to Local Indian Manufacturers 
over Foreign Manufacturers. Further, GSLaligned Purchase Preference clause for 
indigenization in GSL tender enquiry for procurement under Buy Global Category 
(open as well as limited tenders) in line with MoD Order for Public Procurement 
(Preference to Make in India). Indian bidder quoting in INR with minimum 50% 
indigenous content (aggregate, over series of ships) will be eligible for preference 
upto 20% higher price.  
 
 GSL aligned with MoD notifications for the items reserved for indigenization for 
surface ships in line with preference to Make in India Policy. 
 
 Make– II Procedure. GSL has implemented Make – II Procedure in May, 2019 to 
encourage indigenous design, development and manufacture (IDDM) of defence 
equipment/weapon systems. 
 
 Framework for Placing Long Term Orders for Indigenization. GSL adopted 
framework for Placing Long Term Orders for Indigenization in line with MoD 
letter dated 15.11.2019. 
 

34 
 
 Proactive steps are being taken by the Company for involvement of local industries 
for having maximum indigenous content in projects to meet the objective of self 
reliance.  
 
(ii) Modernisation of Yard. GoI has funded the modernisation of GSL yard to enhance GSL 
capabilities and infrastructure capacity. Infrastructure Modernisation plan is being implemented 
in phases of which phase 1, 2 & 3A have been completed. Implementation of balance phases 
(Phase 4 & 3B) are in progress. On completion of Modernisation plan, GSL will have the 
capability to build high technology Glass-Fibre Reinforced Plastic (GRP) vessels indigenously 
with the help of foreign technology provider.  
 
(iii) In-house Design Facility. GSL has its own in-house design facility which is recognized 
by Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. Indigenous in-house designs are 
developed for the Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard. Offshore Patrol Vessels and Fast Patrol 
Vessels developed indigenously were delivered to Navy and Coast Guard. The in-house design 
facilities are being constantly upgraded for meeting increased indigenous design requirement.  
 
(iv) Award of Project 1135.6. Under Make in India initiative, GSL has been entrusted with 
indigenous construction of 02 follow-on ships of Teg class (P 1135.6) and the contract was 
signed on 25 Jan 2019 with the Indian Navy. The execution of this project will result in 
developing indigenous capability in construction of high-tech Naval ships, which are hitherto 
being acquired from foreign countries. Many major items have been identified for indigenisation. 
It is likely to achieve 60-70% Indigenization content, which will be significant improvement 
against 02 ships being imported from Russia. With such large indigenous content, the 
dependency on Russian firms for spares and services support would reduce drastically. 
 
 (v) The ongoing 05 CGOPV project in GSL has been indigenized under ‘Make in 
India’ initiative of GoI and indigenous content has increased from 60% to 70% in the 
ongoing 05 CGOPV Project, compared to the previously built 06 CGOPV Project. Gear 
Boxes, Steering Gear System, Fin Stabilizer System, Steel Plates, Doors & Hatches, 
Gemini Boats, Heli Grid etc. have been indigenized through outsourcing to local 
industries. 
 
(vi) Mine Counter Measure Vessel (MCMV). GSL has been nominated for construction of 
MCMVs for the Indian Navy with hull made of composite material. Ships of this class would be 
built in the Country for the first time and it is envisaged to seek technology from shipyard having 
experience of building such vessels. Technology absorption in this process will provide self 
reliance in this rare technology and elevate GSL as one of the few shipyards in the world 
capable of making state-of-the-art MCMVs with composite material for requirements of defence 
forces. 
 

35 
 
(vii) As a result of implementing indigenization, which is a part of ‘Make in India’ initiative, a 
saving of valuable foreign exchange and procuring import substitute assemblies have been 
achieved. Gradually with this increasing of indigenization levels and manufacturing with 
partnership of local industrial units as per “Make in India” policy, the import content requirement 
for shipbuilding project will be reduced. 
 
(viii) GSL has also signed/entered into MoUs/Collaboration agreements with the following 
foreign firms to jointly manufacture defence platforms/equipment: 
 
(a) M/s. Naiad Dynamics Ltd., UK for indigenous manufacture and assembly of 
Steering Gear and Fin Stabilisers. 
 
(b) M/s. FHS, Germany for indigenous manufacture of Heli Landing Grid, Traversing 
System and Hanger doors. 
 
(c) M/s. DCNS, France (now Naval Group), for setting up advanced Submarine 
Escape Training Tower (SETT), IPMS Simulator and Combat Management 
Simulator for Submarines for the Indian Navy. 
 
(d) M/s. Wartsila, France to indigenously manufacture and supply of CPP Stern 
Gear for ships built for the Indian Navy and Coast Guard, etc. 
 
(ix) GSL has been making efforts to seek domestic as well as export orders for its products 
and services and other diversified projects. In order to explore the export and domestic business 
opportunities and jointly develop the products and then market and secure orders for the same, 
GSL decided to tie-up with reputed organizations and utilize the combined capabilities and 
synergies of each other for mutual benefit. During the ‘BANDHAN’ Ceremony at DEFEXPO-20 
Exhibition held in Lucknow, GSL has signed the MoUs with L&T Ltd., Mumbai and BEL, 
Bengaluru for co-operating in promotion of Defence Exports; BEL, Bengaluru, to explore and 
address Projects/Products by using Composite materials/Technology and with NBCC (India) 
Ltd. for collaboration in PMC and execution of civil construction projects.  
 
HSL: Indigenisation is being promoted by HSL by avoiding imported equipment and sourcing 
equipment / machineries from domestic vendors wherever feasible and permitted. Import content as a 
% of VoP achieved during the last 5 years is tabulated below. 
  

36 
 
 
Year VoP 
(Rs Cr) 
Value of imported 
materials consumed 
during the year  
(Rs Cr) 
Import content as a 
% of VoP 
(1) (2) (3) (4) = [(3)/(2)]*100 
2014-15 294.16 99.52 33.83 
2015-16 593.29 159.63 26.91 
2016-17 629.05 65.18 10.36 
2017-18 644.78 72.84 11.30 
2018-19 594.91 92.04 15.47 
2019-20 
(Prov.) 563.33 110.00 19.53 
 
The list of items being imported and 5 year Indigenisation Plan through import substitution / MAKE II 
(tabulated below) has been prepared. 
S No. Year Methodology Item / Equipment 
Amount  
(Rs Cr) 
1 2019-20 Import Substitution Dynamic Positioning System 7.00 
2 2020-21 MAKE-II Pneumatic Quick Closing 
valves 0.20 
3 2021-22 MAKE-II Flight Deck safety net system 2.00 
4 2022-23 MAKE-II Air vent hoods of NW300 & 
above sizes 0.15 
5 2023-24 Import Substitution Fire class / Gas tight doors 1.00 
Further, the items above has been taken up with Indian Navy /Directorate of Indigenisation.  Draft 
technical specification for the two items have been prepared and being refined as user acceptance 
trials of the two items (procured from foreign OEMs) installed on a ship due for delivery in 2020 are in 
progress and is likely to be completed by mid-2020. The technical observations made by Indian Navy 
user acceptance team during the trials are being examined and incorporated into the technical 
requirements that would form part of the EoI. The EoI is expected to be issued in the month of Aug 
2020 depending upon the inputs required from vendors which is delayed due to COVID issues. 

37 
 
 
Further, following efforts have been made by HSL in order to harmonize Defence Procurements with 
the ‘Make in India’s initiative.  
 
(a) Provisions contained in ‘Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India), order 
2017’, issued by DPIIT, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, have been incorporated 
in Purchase Manual for implementation. 
(b) MAKE-II Procedure has been incorporated in the Purchase Manual in order to 
indigenize imported items through development of prototype. 
(c) Relaxation of norms (prior experience and prior turnover) for MSMEs and start-ups in 
all public procurements, subject to meeting quality and technical specifications. 
(d) Alignment to payment terms i.e; provision of advance payments to MSMEs. 
(e) Deemed registration of vendors (Vendors registered in other Defence PSUs are to be 
considered as deemed Registered). 
(f) Efforts are being made to identify Tier-I & Tier-II Vendors so as to facilitate 
development of import substitutes. 
(g) ‘Make in India’ Portal has been created in the HSL Website to attract vendors. The 
contact details of Nodal Officer have been provided in the portal. The list of items 
which are hitherto being imported are displayed on the website with an intent to 
Indigenise. 
(h) With a view to familiarize the Vendor, a special link ‘Information to Vendors’ has also 
been incorporated in the HSL portal, which provides information like Guidelines for 
vendor registration, commercial questionnaire for indigenous and foreign suppliers, 
HSL Standard business  terms & conditions, List of items imported to be Indigenised, 
materials, equipment & works, HSL Manual on procurement of materials and 
services, MSMEs – List of items reserved for purchase from small scale industries, 
Vendor registration form – Supplier ,Vendor registration Form- Contractor etc. 
(i) A direct link to the Make in India Page of Government of India 
(http://www.makeinindia.com)   has also been provided in the portal. 
 
  

38 
 
Defence Investor Cell 
Recommendation No. 27: 
The Committee were apprised about the new initiatives taken by the Ministry of Defence to 
promote Defence production in the country where in a Defence Investor Cell (DIC) was set up by the 
Department of Defence Production in January 2018 to provide all necessary information including 
addressing queries related to investment opportunities, procedures and regulatory requirements for 
investment in the sector. One more positive initiative by the Ministry is the Export Promotion Cell 
which has been setup to co-ordinate and follow-up on export related action including enquiries 
received from various countries and facilitate private sector and public sector companies for export 
promotion. The Ministry has also apprised that Department of Defence Production has launched a 
`Make in India’ Portal ‘makeinindiadefence.gov.in’ where information related to all the major policies 
initiatives taken by the department to promote indigenous defence manufacturing is made available 
for easy dissemination to the industry. The Committee also welcome the move of the Government to 
establish two `Defence Industrial Corridors’ to serve as an engine of economic development and 
growth of Defence industrial base in the country. They span across Chennai, Hosur, Coimbatore, 
Salem and Tiruchirappalli in Tamil Nadu and spanning across Aligarh, Agra, Jhansi, Kanpur, 
Chitrakoot and Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh (UP). The details of the same have been enumerated in the 
narration portion- Part I of the report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The observations of the Committee are factual in nature and hence no comments are offered. 
 
DEFENCE PLANNING 
FIVE YEAR DEFENCE PLANS 
(Recommendation No. 28-30): 
Recommendation No. 28 
The Committee note that the Defence Five Year Plans are formulated to elaborate the 
necessary steps to maintain and augment Defence capabilities in line with the RM’s Operational 
Directive, the Long Term Perspective Planning and the current threat perception. These plans help to 
estimate the outlay required to achieve the planned objective. The Ministry also stated that under 
these Five year Plans operational activities are done within the available budget allocations and while 
allocated funds are optimally and fully utilized, the schemes are reprioritized to ensure that urgent and 
critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence 
Forces.  
Recommendation No. 29 
The Committee in their earlier Reports have been recommending the Ministry to adopt 
measures for full proof budgetary planning and implementation.   The Committee are surprised to 
know that the 12th Plan was approved by the RM but the Ministry of Finance, however, did not 

39 
 
approve the Plan. While formulating the guidelines for the 13th Defence Plan it was decided that the 
Plan may be sent to Ministry of Finance only for information and not for its approval. The Ministry of 
Finance will be kept in loop about the requirements of the Defence Forces in the coming years. The 
Committee also note from the replies submitted that on approval of the Defence Plan does not act as 
hindrance in implementation of Defence projects. Activities planned are likely to proceed according to 
available annual budget allocations and the Defence Plan serves only as a guide for formulating 
annual budgetary projections even without the formal approval of the Ministry of Finance.   
 
Recommendation No. 30 
In the 12th (2012-17) plan, the Ministry was able to spend Rs. 10,55,763.75crore out of Rs. 
10,95,262.55 allocated. However, in the annual plans, during the plan period of the 13th Plan, the 
allocated amount is always less than the projection. In the year 2017-18, against the projection of Rs.  
3,23,217.10crore, only Rs. 2,59,261.90 crore was allocated. In year 2018-19, against the projection of 
Rs. 3,95,851.34crore, only Rs. 2,79,305.32 crore was allocated. In the year 2019-20, against the 
projection of Rs. 4,05,784.84crore, only Rs. 3,05,296.07 crore was allocated. Similarly, in the year 
2020-21, against the projection of Rs. 4,30,130.70crore, only  Rs. 3,23,053.00 crore was allocated. 
While gleaning through the data supplied, the Committee note that the Ministry was able to spend 
allocated amount in full. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Finance should desist 
from any cut in the financial allocations in annual plans, especially when the Ministry of Defence is 
able to absorb allocated amount. The Committee are of the view and accordingly recommend that the 
Ministry of Defence should also formally get their plans approved by the Ministry of Finance since they 
have an obligation to fulfil.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that non-approval of the Defence Plan does not act as hindrance in implementation 
of Defence projects. Activities planned are likely to proceed according to available annual budget 
allocations. The Defence Plan serves only as a guide for formulating annual budgetary projections 
even without the formal approval of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
2. Further, Government has set up a Defence Planning Committee (DPC) to facilitate 
comprehensive and integrated planning for defence matters.  The DPC is a permanent body under 
the chairmanship of the National Security Adviser (NSA). The DPC comprises of the Chairman, Chief 
of the Staff Committee (COSC), the Service Chiefs, Defence Secretary, Foreign Secretary and 
Secretary (Expenditure), as members. 
 
3. The DPC analyses and evaluates all relevant inputs relating to defence planning, inter-alia, 
national defence and security priorities, foreign policy imperatives, operational directives and security 
related doctrines, defence acquisition and infrastructure development plans, including the 15-year 
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), defence technology and development of the Indian 
defence industry and global technological advancements.  

40 
 
 
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 
Recommendations No. 31: 
 The Committee note that the headquarters Integrated Defence Staff (HQIDS), in consultation 
with the Service Headquarters(SHQs), had evolved the 15 year Long Term Integrated Perspective 
Plan (LTIPP). Presently, LTIPP 2017-2027 is in vogue and has been approved by the Defence 
Acquisition Council. Proposals for acquisition of capital Assets flow out from the Defence procurement 
Planning process which covers the 15 year LTIPP, 5 year Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) 
and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). The LTIPP is translated into the SCAP, covering a five year 
period. The AAP of each service is a two year roll on plan for capital acquisition and consists of the 
schemes from the approved five year SCAP. Thus, the long term plan (LTIPP) gets finally translated 
to short term plan (AAP) and the cases included in the AAP are progressed for acquisition as per the 
Defence Procurement Procedure. Progress of procurement cases is regularly reviewed in SHQ and 
MoD. Amendments are made to the DPP, as and when required, to streamline the simplifying 
Defence Procurement Procedure and to give a boost to ‘Make in India’ initiative of the Government of 
India, by promoting indigenous design, development and manufacturing of Defence equipment, 
platforms, systems and sub-systems. The Committee, therefore, recommend that more impetus 
should be given with adequate budgetary support for successful and efficient completion of LTIPP, 
SCAP and AAP. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The realization of the projections included in LTIPP on ground is through the 5 year Defence 
Plans.  The XII Defence Plan for the period being 2012-17, being the first sub-set of LTIPP (2012-27) 
has already completed and currently implementation of projects under the XIII Plan recommendations 
is in progress. 
Acquisition Plans are linked with budget availability. Based on the budgetary trends of last 3 
years, projections are made to Ministry of Finance in the beginning of the year. These are revised at 
the RE stage depending upon the outgoes and the committed liabilities pending for balance part of the 
year.  In the Acquisition Plans, the schemes are reprioritised based on the available resources 
envelope and operational expediencies. 
 
Advance planning for the Force 
Recommendations No. 32: 
 The Committee understand that Capital procurement of defence equipment is undertaken 
from various domestic as well as foreign vendor based on operational requirements of the Armed 
Forces, the availability or capacity to produce the equipment in India and abroad and to keep the 
Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet the entire spectrum of security challenges. During the 
last four financial years (2015-16 to 2018-19), 135 contract have been signed with Indian vendors and 
75 contracts have been signed with foreign vendors for procurement of defence equipment for Armed 

41 
 
Forces. The defence equipment contracted during this period includes helicopters, missiles, Bullet 
Proof Jackets, aircrafts, rifles, artillery guns, simulators and ammunition. The Committee, at this 
stage, can only recommend that the Ministry should make all out efforts for fructification of contracts 
signed and necessary allocations should be made for it.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Capital Acquisition schemes are planned and prioritized to optimally utilize the allocated 
budget.  Budgetary allocation requests are forwarded to Ministry of Finance at BE/RE stages to meet 
the fund requirements/projections of the Armed Forces towards modernisation. 
 
Recommendation No 36:  
 
During the oral evidence, when the deliberations on the deficiency of dwelling units was taking 
place, it was informed that the ranks and officers who are in the combat wing of the Armed Forces, 
suffer the most as they spend larger part of their service in the field or difficult areas. The committee 
after contemplating over the issue, view that for such ranks and officers, dwelling units should be 
constructed near the Regimental Centres or other Military Establishments, so these centers can look 
after the families of soldiers in their absence and ranks and officers can be free from any worry about 
well being of their families. At other places priority allocation of Dwelling Units for Combat Forces 
should be made. The committee welcome this idea and accordingly recommend that as a 
consequentialment of such arrangement, our Armed Forces Officers would be in a far better position 
mentally and physically to serve their nation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Dwelling Units are constructed in the various stations based on the authorization and 
deficiency of Married Accommodation of the station. The Field Area Family Accommodation for the 
families of officers and men posted to field areas are also earmarked in all the stations based on the 
requirements and respective Station Headquarters are responsible to look after these families. 
 
 

42 
 
CHAPTER II (B) 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT AND COMMENTED UPON 
CAPITAL OUTLAY ON DEFENCE SERVICES 
(Recommendation No. 1-3): 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee note from the information submitted by the Ministry that Capital Outlay 
provides allocation for Land & Construction Works of the three Services and other departments. In 
other words,  it caters for the expenditure incurred on durable assets of Defence Services, i.e., Army, 
Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Defence Ordnance Factories, Defence Research & Development 
Organisation(DRDO), Director General Quality Assurance(DGQA), National Cadet Corps (NCC), 
Married Accommodation Project, National Defence Academy and Rashtryia Rifles etc.  
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee further note that during the year 2020-21, the Ministry allocated  Rs. 
1,13,734.00 crore in the Capital Budget head against the projection ofRs. 1,75,702.06 crore, which 
amounts to the shortage of Rs.61,968.06 crore.  Out of this head for the Services only Rs. 1,02,432 
crore was allocated against the projection of Rs. 1,61,849.20 crore, leaving a gap of Rs. 59,416.63 
crore. Similarly, the Capital (Acquisition including DGOF Supplies) is allocated Rs. 90,047.80  
crore,Land & Works of three Services (including Married Accommodation Projects)Rs. 12,384.77 
crore, DRDO, DGOF and other Defence Departments  Rs. 11,301.43 crore. 
    
Recommendation No. 3 
The Committee are of the view that the  considerable shortage in the allocation of the budget 
in the Capital Head, which is 35 per cent  less the projection, would affect acquisition of latest 
weaponry, aircraft, ships, tanks and capital intensive projects including land, building and other 
infrastructure.  The Committee feel and desire that to develop, and acquire the most modern state-
ofthe art fighting platforms, which can match Northern and Western neighbours, the requisite 
allocation to the Capital Head is very essential.  While approving the allocations for the Defence 
Budget, the Ministry of Defence should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance explaining 
them the importance of capital works which become made done to maintain the ideal ratio of 60:40 
between the Revenue and Capital Heads. At this stage, the Committee can only recommend that the 
requisite funds under the Capital Head be allocated to the Ministry at the Supplementary Grants 
stage.    
Reply of the Government 
In BE 2020-21, an amount of Rs.  1,13,734.00 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 10,339.69 Crore 
over BE 2019-20) has been allocated under Defence Services Estimates in Capital Head by Ministry 
of Finance against projections of Rs. 1,75,702.06 Crore.  Additional requirements will be assessed 
under Capital Head and will be sought from Ministry of Finance at Supplementary/RE stage. 

43 
 
 (Comments of the Committee. Please see Para No.10 of Chapter I.) 
 
Additional Allocation 
(Recommendation No. 5-6): 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee highlighted in their 3rd Report (17thLokSabha) that against projections of Rs. 
1,70,936.07crore under Capital Head, only Rs. 1,03,394.31 crore were allocated. In this context, the 
Ministry was asked to state the steps taken in overcoming the shortfall. The Committee note from the 
reply submitted by the Ministry that Ministry of Finance had not allocated requirements projected by 
this Ministry under Capital Budget for FY 2019-20, nevertheless, Capital Expenditure of the Ministry 
had gone up in absolute terms. It may be relevant to point out here that under Capital Head there was 
trend of cut in Budget Allocation at RE stage due to slow pace of expenditure. This trend was 
reversed in FY 2017-18 and 2018-19 due to extensive delegation of financial powers. The allocated 
Capital Budget has been fully utilised since 2016-17, reversing the previous trends of surrender of 
funds.   In the current financial year, based on pace of expenditure Ministry of Finance has allocated 
additional amount of Rs. 7,000 crore under Capital Head in RE 2019-20.  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee are surprised over the fact that during the year 2019-20, the short fall in the 
projection to allocated amount was Rs. 67,541.76 crore, however, the Ministry of Defence is 
convinced with additional allocation of meagre Rs. 7,000 crore. The Committee, therefore, in 
unequivocal terms recommend that all-out efforts should be done to give first and foremost priority to 
the preparedness of the Defence Forces. It should be ensured that critical requirements of Services 
do not suffer due to want of funds. The Committee also hope that the Ministry of Defence will take 
measures for timely expenditure of the allocated fund so additional fund can be sought from the 
Ministry of Finance at Supplementary Grants stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The operational preparedness of the Defence Forces is the first and foremost priority of this 
Ministry.  All out efforts are  made to ensure that critical requirements of Services do not suffer due to 
want of funds. Necessary instructions are issued from time to time for adherence to financial propriety 
and avoidance of underutilization of funds/wasteful expenditure. 
2. The Committee is assured that all efforts will be made to ensure optimum utilization of scarce 
resources.  Based on progress of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc., additional funds will 
be sought from Ministry of Finance at appropriate stage(s). 
 
       Comments of the Committee. Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I. 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES. 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

45 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON. 
 
Married Accommodation Project   
Recommendation No 33: 
The Commitee note that Directorate General of Married Accommodation Project (DG MAP) 
was raised by Government of India under the aegis of Engineer in Chief to construct married 
accommodation for the three services, with the aim of eradicating the deficiency of married 
accommodation for service personnel. The MAP was setup to fulfill the promise made to the Armed 
Forces by the Government of India. The total deficiency of two lakh dwelling units have been slated 
for construction in four phases. After construction of dwelling units over the time period, at present, 
there is a deficiency of 70,432 dwelling units in respect of Army and 670 in respect of Air Force. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The overall progress of MAP at present across all phases are as under :-  
 
PH STNS DUs COST (IN CR) OVERALL PROG 
I 86 57,875 6,032.70 100% 
II 157 69,904 13,681.90 94% 
III A  13 24,592 7,259.38 DPR for eight packages are under 
progress 
B 145  46,510 16,020.32  
Total 401 1,98,881 42,994.30 1,15,267 of 1,27,779 DUs(90.20%) 
completed till date 
 
The total deficiency of two lakh dwelling units had earlier been slated for construction in four 
phases. However the third and fourth phases of MAP were amalgamated to complete the entire 
requirement in three phases. Accordingly planning of MAP Ph III was sanctioned for 71,102 Dwelling 
Units. However, due to non availability of funds it was decided to undertake construction of Ph III in 
two parts and activity was restricted to 24,592 Dwelling Units. In accordance with the directions, 

46 
 
planning of MAP Ph III has commenced at 13 locations (08 packages) and the DPR for the same are 
in advanced stage of completion. The present MAP PH III can thus be treated as MAP Ph III ‘A’ and 
the left over Dwelling Units can form part of MAP Ph III ‘B’. The Ministry is contemplating alternative 
sources for funds for the project.   
 
The present impetus towards modernization of requirements of defence services, does not 
allow adequacy of funds for MAP Phase-III.  The Government is therefore, contemplating to take up 
some DUs based on the NBCC’s model as a pilot project.   The draft CCS Note on MAP for 
commencement of MAP Phase III will be processed after finalization of the DUs under NBCC’s model 
on pilot basis by carrying out subsequent changes in the number of DUs to be taken up through the 
MAP route and the estimated cost etc. 
 
           (Comments of the Committee. Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I.) 
  

47 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations/Recommendations In respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies. 
 
Modernization of Defence Forces 
(Recommendations No. 9 &10): 
Recommendations No. 9 
 From the replies submitted by the Ministry, the Committee note that the moderation involves 
the acquisition of new state-of-the-art platforms, technologies and weapon systems to upgrade and 
augment Defence capabilities and it is a continuous process based on threat perception, operational 
challenges and technological changes to keep the Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet the 
entire spectrum of security challenges. As per the assertion of the Ministry, the Government attaches 
the highest priority to ensure that the Armed Forces are sufficiently equipped to meet any operational 
requirement. This is achieved through induction of new equipment and technological upgradation of 
capabilities. The equipment requirements of the Armed Forces are planned and progressed through a 
detailed process which includes 15 Year Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a five year 
service-wise capability Acquisition Plan, a two year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and deliberations 
by the defence Acquisition Council Chaired by the Raksha Mantri. 
 
Recommendations No. 10 
 The Committee appreciate the various measures taken by the Government to modernize our 
forces i.e. opening up of the Defence Industry sector for Indian private sector participation, with 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), notification of the Strategic Partnership (SP), Model which envisages 
establishment of long term Strategic Partnership  with Indian entities wherein they would tie up with 
global Original Equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to seek technology transfers to set up domestic 
manufacturing infrastructure and supply chain etc. However, the Committee feel that it is in fitness of 
things that first of all adequate allocation be made in  the Capital Budget so that procurement of new 
equipment and upgrading of existing equipment and systems can take place in a seamless manner. 
The Committee accordingly recommend that the more impetus should be given to promote indigenous 
design, development and manufacture of Defence & aerospace equipment in the country under ‘Make 
in India’ by modernization, capacity development of the Defence sector also take place. 
 
 
  

48 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Defence Procurement Procedure (DDP), 2016 is currently under revision towards 
promulgation of DPP, 2020. Enhancement of Indigenous Content and further 'Support to Make in 
India' initiative are some of the highlights of the proposed DPP, 2020.  Incentives have also been 
proposed to promote sourcing from local/indigenous vendors. Some of the proposals for providing 
further impetus to the indigenous defence manufacturing are mentioned below:- 
 
(a) New categories are being added to boost indigenization, viz.; Buy (Global-Manufacture in 
India) and Leasing (Indian). 
(b) Indigenous content requirements are being enhanced under various acquisition categories.  
(c) Provisions for Innovation, iDEX and open competition have been introduced for MSMEs and 
Start-ups. 
(d) Special sections/ provisions have been added to source military materials locally. 
(e) Utilization of indigenous software has been proposed. 
(f) Aero-engines and FAB (Facilities manufacturing Silicon Wafers) to be taken up as projects of 
national importance through indigenous source. 
(g) Incentives for MSMEs are being introduced. 
 
2. As regards allocation of adequate Budget, it is submitted that this Ministry proposes 
projections made by the Services to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration. Ministry of 
Finance conveys ceilings, based on which funds are allocated to Services/ Organizations depending 
on trend of expenditure, projections made by the Services, committed liabilities to be fulfilled etc. 
Every effort is made to ensure that no project/ proposal is shelved for want of funds. 
  
              (Comments of the Committee. Please see Para No.18  of Chapter I.) 
 
Non Lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund – Defence Renewal Fund 
Recommendation No. 11: 
 
The Committee in their various previous reports have recommended making Capital Budget 
‘Non-lapsable’ and ‘Roll-on’ in nature. The Ministry was consequently asked to convey the current 
status of the same. The Ministry of Defence apprised the Committee that the matter of creation of 
‘Non-lapsable Capital Fund Account’ was taken up with M/o Finance and the same was not agreed to 
by M/o Finance. Further, Hon’ble Finance Minister had written to the then Hon’ble Chairman of the 
Standing Committee on Defence requesting therein to consider following the present mechanism of 
authorisation of budget from Parliament on Annual basis, which is simple and working well currently.  
The Committee note that the matter of creation of non-lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund is being 
taken up again with Ministry of Finance. However, the Committee were apprised during the oral 
evidence, that for Capital Acquisitions and border infrastructure, there is a need to create Defence 

49 
 
Renewal Fund. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to take up the matter at higher 
levels for creation of Defence Modernisation Fund – Defence Renewal Fund so that procurement can 
be done unhampered without pursuing for funds to receive at Supplementary or Additional Grants 
stages.  
 
Reply of the Government 
A draft Cabinet Note for creation of Non-lapsable Defence Modernization Fund  has been 
prepared and is under consideration of Ministry of Finance and 15th  Finance Commission. The draft 
Cabinet Note is presently under inter-ministerial consultation. 
 
Defence Procurement Policy 
Recommendations No. 14: 
 The Committee find that the policy for procurement of Defence equipment for the Armed 
Forces aims to ensure timely procurement of military equipment, systems and platforms as required 
by the Armed Forces in terms of performance capabilities and quality standards, through optimum 
utilization of allocated budgetary resources, The policy also seeks to ensure that the highest degree of 
probity, public accountability, transparency, fair competition and level-playing field are achieved in the  
process of procurement. In addition, self-reliance in Defence equipment production and acquisition is 
steadfastly pursued as a key aim of the policy. The policy is implemented through the mechanism of 
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). During the oral evidence, the Committee were apprised that 
the Procedure has been revised in 2002, 2005 and six times during 2005 to 2016. During oral 
evidence, the Committee came to know that the Acquisition process includes Approval of Annual 
Acquisition Plan (AAP), Acceptance of Necessity (AoN), issue of Request for Proposal (RFP), 
Technical Evaluation & Approval Trials, General Staff Evaluation & Approval, Contract Negotiation 
Committee (CNC), Competent Financial Authority (CFA) Approval, Contract Conclusion and Post 
Contract Management. The Committee are hopeful that new Defence Procurement Procedure, which 
is going to be implemented soon, will make the procedure fast track and the Services will get assured 
supply of arms, equipment and ammunition in time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A number of amendments are being proposed in the Revised DPP 2020 to remove 
procedural bottlenecks and hasten defence acquisitions.  Some of these are highlighted below: 
 
  
  

50 
 
 SIMPLIFYING PROCEDURE  
 Acceptance of necessity (AoN) 
 Single stage approval of AoN except DAC cases (>500 crore) 
 Time frame laid down for obtaining AoN(one year from receipt of RFI responses) 
 
 Request for Proposal (RFP) 
 RFP & Standard Contract Document aligned. 
 Guidelines included to ensure correct formulation 
 Detailed Trial Methodology. 
 
 Guidelines and flowcharts included to facilitate decision making by Users at various stages.  
Repeat Order 
 Single stage accord of AoN by the according authority 
 No FET, limited validation, if required 
 
CONDUCT OF FIELD EVALUATION TRIALS 
 Trials with an objective to nurture competition, not as a process of elimination 
 User Trial by specialised agencies i.e. Trial Wings 
 Document/certification over physical trials. 
 More opportunities for in situ repairs/modifications during trials.  
 
QUALITY ASSURANCE ASPECTS 
 QA Plan (to include rejection criteria & sample size) as part of RFP. 
 Draft Acceptance Test Procedure submitted by all vendors, finalised in DGQA 
Evaluation. 
 No overlap of evaluation in Pre Dispatch Inspection (PDI) & Joint Receipt 
Inspection (JRI). 
 Third Party Inspection permitted for acceptance. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 24: 
While appreciating that the Defence Offset Monitoring Wing is effectively discharging its 
duties, the Committee recommend the Ministry to follow the best international practices as the scope 
of Offset has been increased from Rs. 300 crore to Rs. 2,000 crore. The Ministry should also try to 
establish some import substitute products industry while discharging the 30 per cent offset obligation. 
 

51 
 
Reply of the Government 
In the Defence Offset Guidelines, which has been promulgated as part of Draft Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DDP) 2020, The following reforms have been done: 
(i) The thrust of draft Guidelines is to have enabling provisions to attract investment and 
technology. 
(ii) It is expected to enhance capability in the domestic defence manufacturing sector and 
promote ‘Make in India’ initiative. 
(iii) Investment in defence manufacturing including in Defence Industrial Corridor could be 
through FDI. 
(iv) The eligible defence products have been streamlined to ensure high technology based 
on investments through offsets. 
(v) To incentivise transfer of technology to Indian industry/ DRDO/ OFB/ DPSUs and to 
attract direct investment, higher multipliers have been provided. 
(vi) Higher preference has been given for purchase of defence products as compared to 
components. 
(vii) Investments have been incentivised through higher multipliers: 
(viii) Discharge of Offset obligations through entities other than vendor/Tier-I sub-vendor 
has been envisaged for investments/Transfer of Technology on case to case basis. 
(ix) Flexibility to provide details of products and Indian Offset Partners (IOPs) at later stage 
even after signing of contract. 
 
Married Accomodation Project 
Recommendation No 34:  
As the budget constraints are always there in Capital intensive projects like MAP, therefore, a 
suggestion was floated during deliberations while examining Demands for Grants that a model may 
be developed by the MAP on the lines of NBCC in Delhi. In this model, land of the MAP may be 
utilised by housing construction organisations for equal value so that there would be no burden on the 
budget of Ministry of Defence. This suggestion as brought before the Committee is evidently in its 
nascent stage. However, this model is successful in Delhi, but due care and caution has to be taken 
before implementing it in sensitive areas like Defence Establishment where safety and security of the 
officers and their families are of paramount importance than the savings in terms of money. Therefore, 
the Ministry, after weighing all pros and cons, may develop this proposal any further. 
 
Reply of the Government 
DG MAP has been raised and mandated by Government of India to construct married 
accommodations for three services with an aim to eradicate the deficiency as calculated during the 
year 2002. MAP Dwelling Units are being constructed on A1 Defence land already identified by 
services and is funded through OTCA budget under Capital Head. Suggestion of creating defence 
infrastructure projects by generating corpus by asking ‘Equal Value Infrastructure’ in lieu of defence 
land was deliberated during examination of Demand for Grants to ease the burden on budget of MoD.  
The suggestion has potential to effectively tide over the shortage of funds as faced during Ph-III.  The 

52 
 
Ministry would look into all aspects carefully before adopting the NBCC Model or Equal value 
Infrastructure.  
  
Recommendation No 35:  
The committee note that due to reduced budgetary allocaton many constraints are being faced 
by the MAP i.e. Low satisfaction level, delay in commencement of MAP Ph III, delay in execution of 
MAP Ph III, cost escalation of MAP Ph III. Even after completion of DPR for 8 packages of MAP Ph III, 
work could not commence. In 2002, against the authorisation of 4,40,111 dwelling units, held units 
were 1,97,506 in respect of Army. For Navy, out of authorisation of 31,252 dwelling units, held 
strength were 18,800. For Air Force out of authorisation of 75,775 DUs, held strength was 31,776 
units. MAP constructed 94,920 units for Army till date, 5,829 units for Navy and 13,630 units for Air 
Force but the satisfaction level remained quite low at 66%, 79% and 60% in respect of Army, Navy 
and Air Force respectively by 2019. The ministry are hopeful that after construction of additional units 
it would reach at 85%, 100% and 73% for Army, Navy and Air Force respectively. The committee, 
therefore, recommend that till the time new ‘Equal Value Infrastructure’ is finalised, additional 
allocation sought by the MAP should be provided as it is devoid of Rs.2,180 crore in 2019-20, which 
would affect the pace of construction of dwelling units.   
 
Reply of the Government 
DG MAP after incorporating lessons of two phases is poised to develop integrated, self 
sustaining, aesthetically landscaped mini townships conforming to eco friendly and energy efficient 
green norms. 71,102 Dwelling Units are to be constructed in MAP Ph III where Army is the major 
stake holder as 70,432 Dwelling Units are to be constructed for them. The competent authority has 
approved distribution of work load between DG MAP and MES with a ratio of 55% and 45% 
respectively. A major portion of these are planned to be constructed using modern construction 
technology (Pre cast or Shear Wall). Due to limited availability of funds for Army, Army authorities 
have conveyed the decision to restrict the planning for MAP Phase III to 24,592 Dwelling Units only. In 
accordance with these directions, planning for MAP Phase III has commenced at the following eight 
locations :-  
Ser No. Stations No of Dwelling 
Units Technology 
(a) Delhi & Gurgaon 4045 Precast Construction 
(b) Meerut 1798 Shear Wall 
(c) Chandimandir, Amabala & Patiala 6783 Precast Construction 
(d) Panagarh 1809 Shear Wall 
(e) Dehradun 4407 Shear Wall 

53 
 
 
The proposal for MAP Phase-III is under consideration. The MoD is contemplating alternative sources 
for funds for the project. The present impetus towards modernization of requirements of defence 
services, does not allow adequacy of funds for MAP            Phase-III.  The Government is therefore, 
contemplating to take up some DUs based on the NBCC’s model as a pilot project. The draft CCS 
Note on MAP for commencement of MAP Phase-III will be processed after finalization of the DUs 
under NBCC’s model on pilot basis by carrying out subsequent changes in the number of DUs to be 
taken up through the MAP route and the estimated cost etc. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
15 March, 2021 Chairperson 
24 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence 
  
(f) Jaisalmer 1915 Conventional 
(g) Pune, Kirkee & Dehu Road 1950 Shear Wall 
(h) Bangalore 1885 Shear Wall 

54 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 09 March, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM   –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2  Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
3 Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
4 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
5 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
6 Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
7 Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy 
8 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
9 Shri Prathap Simha  
10 Shri Brijendra Singh 
11 Shri Kotagiri Sridhar 
12 Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
13 Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
14 Shri Sanjay Raut  
15 Shri Rajeev Satav 
16 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
17 Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
 
 

55 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Additional Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
gave a brief on the following six reports to be adopted during the meeting and also solicited 
their suggestions :- 
(i) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘General 
Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence 
Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 
Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pensions (Demand Nos. 
18 and 21)’; 
 
(ii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Army, 
Navy,  Air Force, Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik Schools (Demand Nos.19 and 20)’; 
 
(iii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning  and 
Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’;  
 
(iv) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on 
‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance, and National Cadet Corps (Demand 
Nos. 19 and 20)’; 
 
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on Capital Outlay on 
Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and Married 
Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’; and  
 
(vi) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report  (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject  ‘Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on Capital Outlay on 
Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and Married 
Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’. 
  

56 
 
 
3. However, some members requested Hon’ble Chairperson for some more time to study 
the Reports.  As per consensus arrived at in the meeting, Hon’ble Chairperson postponed the 
meeting to 15.03.2021 (Monday). 
 
4. Hon’ble Chairperson also informed the Committee that the responses to Members, 
supplementary questions will be received from the Ministry in due course of time. 
Accordingly, Hon’ble Chairperson directed that those responses would be incorporated at 
subsequent stages such as examination of subject reports, drafting On the Spot Study Tour 
questionnaires and even at the time of finalizing Action Taken Reports, if required.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******* 
 
 
 
  

57 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 15 March, 2021 from 1000 hrs. to 1045 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM   –   CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
2. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
3. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
4. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
5. Shri Anumula Revnath Reddy 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
7. Shri Prathap Simha 
8. Shri Brijendra Singh 
9. Shri Kotagiri Sridhar 
10. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
12. Shri Sanjay Raut 
13. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
14. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

58 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Additional Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration the 
following draft Reports:- 
 
(i) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘General 
Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence 
Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 
Department, Welfare of  Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pensions(Demand Nos. 
18 and 21)’; 
 
(ii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Army, 
Navy,  Air Force, Joint Staff, Military Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’; 
 
(iii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on ‘Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning  and 
Married Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’;  
 
(iv) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2021-22 on 
‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance, and National Cadet Corps (Demand 
Nos. 19 and 20)’; 
 
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on Capital Outlay on 
Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and Married 
Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’; and  
 
(vi) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report  (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject  ‘Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on Capital Outlay on 
Defence Services, Procurement Policy, Defence Planning and Married 
Accommodation Project (Demand No. 20)’. 
 
  

59 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications.  During the deliberations, certain issues on the working of BRO, Ex-
Servicemen Contributory Heath Scheme and Defence Estates Organisation/ Cantonments 
figured.  The Committee decided to include these issues during in-depth examination of the 
subject reports.  
 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft Reports and 
present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
******** 
 
 
  

60 
 
   
APPENDIX 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
ON ‘CAPITAL OUTLAY ON DEFENCE SERVICES, PROCUREMENT POLICY, DEFENCE 
PLANNING AND MARRIED ACCOMMODATION PROJECT (DEMAND NO. 20)’ 
 
1.    Total number of recommendations                                                                    36                                                                             
2 (A). Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 (please see Chapter II (A)): 
 Recommendation Nos. 4,7,8,12,13,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,25,26,27,28,      
        29,30,31,32 and 36. 
Total :      23 
Percentage:   63.9%  
 
2 (B). Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government and 
commented upon  (please see Chapter II (B)): 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,5 and 6. 
Total :      05 
Percentage:   13.9%  
  
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view   
of the replies received from the Government   (please see Chapter III): 
 
- NIL- 
                 Total : 0    
 Percentage:    0% 

61 
 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee, which require reiteration and commented upon.    (please 
see Chapter IV): 
 
Para No. 33 
                             (1 Recommendation) 
 Percentage:   2.8 % 
 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies/replies awaited   (please see Chapter V): 
 Para No. 9,10,11,14,24,34 and 35 . 
 (07 Recommendations) 
Percentage: 19.4 % 
 
 