 
40 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-sixth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2022
Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, Welfar
(Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’] 
 
i 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Defence for the year 2022-23 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border 
Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector 
Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pension 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2023 / Sravana 1945 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Lok Sabha) on Demands for 23 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector Servicemen and Defence Pension 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-sixth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2022
Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, Welfar
(Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’] 
 
 
 
Presented
 
August, 2023 / Sravana 1945 (Saka)
ii 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Defence for the year 2022-23 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border 
Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector 
Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pension 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  10.08.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2023 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2023 / Sravana 1945 (Saka) 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Lok Sabha) on Demands for 23 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector Servicemen and Defence Pension 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II  Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
21 
Chapter III Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
107 
Chapter IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration and to be 
commented upon 
 
110 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
awaited 
 
111 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2022-23) HELD ON 09.08.2023. 
 
112 
II ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (17TH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF 
THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2022-23 ON 
‘GENERAL DEFENCE BUDGET, BORDER ROADS 
ORGANISATION, INDIAN COAST GUARD, DEFENCE ESTATES 
ORGANISATION, DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS, 
CANTEEN STORES DEPARTMENT, WELFARE OF EX-
SERVICEMEN AND DEFENCE PENSION (DEMAND NOS. 19 
AND 22)’. 
114 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23)  
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE:-  Two seats vacant in Lok Sabha. 
  @ Nominated w.e.f  08.12.2022. 
     Nominated w.e.f 16.11.2022. 
$ Shri Rahul Gandhi ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his  disqualification from 
Membership of Lok Sabha vide LSS Notification No.21/4(3)/2023/TO(B) dated 24/03/2023; and disqualification 
ceased to be operate vide Lok Sabha Secretariat Notification No. 21/4(9/2023/TO(B), dated 7 August, 2023. 
^ Sad demise of Shri Rattan Lal Kataria on 18/05/2023 notified vide Lok Sabha Secretariat Notification No. 
21/4(7)/2023/TO (B) dated 22 May, 2023. 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
3. Shri Devaragunda Venkappa Sadananda Gowda 
4. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
5. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
6. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
8. Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand@ 
9. Kunwar Danish Ali 
10. Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
11. Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari* 
12. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
13. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
14. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
15. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
16. Shri Prathap Simha  
17. Shri Brijendra Singh  
18. Shri Mahabali Singh  
19. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 Vacant$ 
 Vacant^ 
Rajya Sabha 
20. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
21. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
22. Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
23. Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi 
24. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
25. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
26. Smt. P.T. Usha 
27. Shri G.K. Vasan 
28. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
29. Shri K.C. Venugopal 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt. Preeti Negi  - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2022-23), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Fortieth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2022-23 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian 
Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen 
Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’.  
2.  The Twenty-sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 16 March, 2022. The Report contained 43 Observations/ Recommendations. 
The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in February 2023. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 09 August 2023. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence is 
given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
… August, 2023 Chairperson 
…  Sravana, 1945 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
  
CHAPTER – I 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report of Standing Committee on 
Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2022-23 on 
‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates 
Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-
Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 16 March, 2022.  
  
2.        The Twenty-sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 43 Observations/ 
Recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No.             Subject 
General Defence Budget 
1 Ministry of Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2022-23: A bird’s 
eye view 
2 Projection and allocation under Defence Budget 2022-23 
3 Growth of Defence Budget vis-a-vis rate of inflation 
4-5 Expenditure on Research & Development 
6-7 Initiatives taken under Aatmanirbhar Bharat 
8 Integrated Theater Commands 
9 Maintenance of airports controlled by Defence Forces 
Border Roads Organisation 
10 Budgetary Allocation to BRO 
11 Required and existing number of equipment with BRO 
12 Creation of all Women Road Construction Company (RCC) 
Indian Coast Guard 
13-14 Indian Coast Guard 
15 Induction of Anti-Drones and Drones in ICG 
16 Shortage of Manpower 
Defence Estates Organisation 
17-18 Budgetary provision 
19 Resolution of bottlenecks/disputes pertaining to Defence Lands 
20 Amendment in Cantonment Act, 2006 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings 
21 Defence PSUs 
22 Order Book Status of DPSUs 

2 
 
23-24 Profitability and efficiency of the DPSUs 
25 Challenges encountered by DPSUs 
26 Disinvestment 
27 Defence Exports 
28 Indigenization efforts and self reliance in Defence sector 
29 Defence Corridors 
Canteen Stores Department 
30 Budgetary Allocations 
31 Provision of combat uniforms for the Forces through CSD 
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen 
32-36 Welfare of Ex-Servicemen 
  Defence Pension 
37 Budgetary Provisions 
38-39 SPARSH-System for Pension Administration (RAKSHA) 
40 One Rank One Pension (OROP) 
41 Military Service Pay (MSP) 
42-43 Welfare of the cadets boarded out of Defence Training 
Academies/Institutions on Medical Grounds 
  
3.        The complete Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 43 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on 23.02.2023. Replies to Recommendation 
Nos. 31, 36 and 41 are of classified nature and have been categorized as ‘Accepted’.  Replies to rest of 
the recommendations have been examined and categorized as follows:- 
  
(i)        Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
  
Para Nos. 1,2,3,5,6,7,8,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22, 
23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33, 34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42 and 43 
  
 (Total - 41) 
  
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
  
Para No.   9 
(Total -1) 
  
(iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
  
Para Nos. Nil 

3 
 
(Total - 0) 
  
(iv)      Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
  
                        Para No.  4 
 (Total - 1) 
  
  
4.        The Committee observe that in the normal course, the replies pertaining to the 
Twenty-sixth Report of the Committee should have been received within three months of 
the presentation of the Report, i.e. by June, 2022 and accordingly, the Action Taken 
Report on the subject would have been presented to the House before the presentation of 
the Report on Demands for Grants for the year 2023-24 (i.e. 35th Report).  Therefore, the 
Committee desire that  Action Taken Notes should invariably be furnished within the 
prescribed time line and in future, all efforts may be done to obviate such delays.    
 
  
  
5.        The Committee also desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments of 
the Committee contained in Chapter I and V of the Report should be furnished to them at 
the earliest and in any case, not later than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
  
  
6.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the Observations/Recommendations made in the Twenty-sixth Report in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
  
  
  

4 
 
General Defence Budget 
  
A.        Ministry of Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2022-23: A bird’s eye view and 
Projection and allocation under Defence Budget 2022-23 
  
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1 & 2) 
  
7.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
  “The Defence Budget is categorised/grouped under four Demands for Grants viz. 
Demand No. 19 – Ministry of Defence (Civil), Demand No. 20 – Defence Services 
(Revenue), Demand No. 21 – Capital Outlay on Defence Service and Demand No. 22 – 
Defence (Pension). Demand Nos. 19 and 22 come under Civil/Pension Estimates and 
Demand Nos. 20 and 21 fall under Defence Services Estimates. The Committee note 
that the requirements for the Civil expenditure of the Ministry of Defence Secretariat, 
Defence Accounts Department, Canteen Stores Department, Defence Estates 
Organisation, Coast Guard Organisation, Jammu & Kashmir Light Infantry (J&K LI), 
Border Roads Organization etc. are provided for in Demand No. 19- MoD(Civil).  The 
Defence Services Estimates (DSE) reflects the detailed estimates for the Defence 
Services and Organizations/Services covered under Grant Number 20 and 21 of the 
Ministry of Defence. The Services and Organizations covered under DSE are Army 
(including National Cadet Corps, Director General Quality Assurance, Military Farms 
and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme), Navy (including Joint Staff), Air 
Force, Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) and erstwhile 
Defence Ordnance Factories/Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & Services) [7 
newly created Defence Public Sector Undertakings]. Demand No. 22 provides for 
Pensionary charges [Service pension, gratuity, family pension, disability pension, 
commuted value of pension, leave encashment etc.] in respect of retired Defence 
personnel (including Defence civilian employees) of the three Services viz. Army, Navy 
and Air Force. The Committee note that the total allocated budget for the Ministry of 
Defence for Financial Year 2022-23 is ₹ 5,25,166.15 crore. Out of this amount, the 
largest share of 73.38 percent, i.e. ₹ 3,85,370.15 crore has been allocated for Defence 
Services Estimates (Grant Numbers 20 and 21).  The Capital Outlay on Defence 
Services (Grant number 21) has been allocated an amount of ₹ 1,52,370 crore for the 
coming Financial Year. Defence Pensions (Grant Number 22) has secured 22.79 
percent i.e.  
₹ 1,19,696 crore of the total budget. The remaining 3.83 percent i.e. ₹ 20,100 crore of 
the total Defence budget have been allocated to Ministry of Defence (Civil) (Grant 
Number 19).  
  

5 
 
The Committee, after detailed analysis of the budgetary provisions of Defence, observe 
a shortfall of approximately ₹ 1 lakh crore in the allocated Defence budget i.e. ₹ 
5,25,166.15 crore as compared to the projected amount of ₹ 6,33,346.02 crore for 
Financial Year 2022-23. The Committee note the Ministry’s contention in this regard that 
during the last few years, allocations are lesser than the projections made. However, 
greater projections at Budget Estimates stage become a justification for enhanced 
allocation at Revised Estimates stage. Further, additional funds are allocated by the 
Ministry of Finance contingent upon spending capacity of the Ministries/Organisations. 
The Committee also note the assurance of the Ministry of Defence that operational 
preparedness of the Defence Services will not be affected and the Ministry of Finance 
will be approached for additional allocation of funds, if needed, at Revised Estimates 
stage. The Committee, in this context, are of the considered view that inspite of the 
Ministry’s affirmation that operational preparedness of the Services will not be 
compromised due to want of funds and the additional funds, if needed, will be sought at 
Revised Estimates stage, the huge mismatch between projected and allocated funds is 
a cause of concern. They are of the considered view that as the Defence budget caters 
to the Revenue and Capital expenditure for the Forces, the tendency for greater 
projections in anticipation of greater allocation of funds at Revised Estimates stage is 
not desirable as it gives impression of huge gap between required and allocated 
Defence budget. Therefore, the Committee recommend that a method may be 
formulated by the Ministry of Defence in consultation with the Ministry of Finance for 
pragmatic budgetary projections. It is needless to say that this mechanism will also 
require cooperation and, to some extent, assurance of the Ministry of Finance for 
allocation of requisite funds to the Ministry of Defence at both Budget and Revised 
Estimates stage so that combat preparedness of our Forces remain at an optimum level. 
” 
  
  
8.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “This Ministry submits the requirements projected by the Services to Ministry of Finance 
for favourable consideration. In the pre-budget meeting discussions with M/o Finance, 
broad reasons for requirements projected by the Services are justified/elaborated. While 
allocating funds, Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption capacity of the Services, 
pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall resource envelope available 
and pressing demands from other quarters etc.  Based on the overall ceilings conveyed 
by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates funds among the Services and 
Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-Services priorities, pace of 
expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.   
  

6 
 
The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional 
funds projected by the Services at Supplementary/RE stage. The additional 
requirements projected by the Services are also discussed in detail with Ministry of 
Finance during pre-budget meeting discussions. Further, the allocated funds are 
optimally utilized towards operational preparedness of the Services. If required, the 
schemes are reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired 
without any compromise to operational preparedness.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
9.        The Committee, in their Twenty-sixth Report, had recommended that a method 
may be formulated by the Ministry of Defence in consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance for pragmatic budgetary projections. The Committee are satisfied to note that 
pursuant to their recommendation, the gap between projection and allocation in 
Defence Budget has decreased from approximately ₹ 1 lakh crore in Budget Estimates 
2022-23 (₹ 5,25,166.15 crore as compared to the projected amount of ₹ 6,33,346.02 crore) 
to approximately ₹ 44,000 crore in Budget Estimates 2023-24 (₹ 5,93,537.64 crore as 
compared to the projected amount of ₹ 6,37,113.51 crore) as mentioned in their 35th 
Report. The Committee have been given to understand that while allocating funds, the 
Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption capacity of the Services, pace of 
expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall resource envelope available and 
pressing demands from other quarters etc.  They have also been given to understand 
that based on the overall ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence 
allocates funds among the Services and Organizations under MoD, taking into account 
Inter-Services priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.  The 
Committee are surprised to note that despite following such cautious approach in 
allocating funds, there still remains a gap between projection and allocation in Defence 
budget, which is a matter of  concern for the Committee.  Therefore, the Committee 
desire  that the Ministry, while planning for budgetary projections, should take into 
account the entire gamut of issues and meticulously analyze them so that the projected 
Defence budget is kept close to actual requirements as far as possible for a particular 
financial year.   Further, the Committee reiterate that cooperation and, to a large extent, 
assurance of the Ministry of Finance for allocation of requisite funds may be fully 

7 
 
extended to the Ministry of Defence at both Budget and Revised Estimates stage so that 
operational preparedness of our Forces remain at an optimum level.    
  
INDIAN COAST GUARD 
  
B.        Induction of Anti-Drones and Drones in ICG 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
  
10.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
  “The Committee note that Indian Coast Guard’s main duty and function is the 
protection of the Country’s maritime interests in the Maritime Zones of India.  To fullfil 
this purpose, helicopters are used on the ships, which on one hand increase the search 
area and on the other decrease the surveillance time. The Committee are of the 
considered view that  keeping in mind the contemporary technological developments 
taking worldwide and looking at the futuristic  technology in the Armed Forces and the 
present security scenario in the country, usage of drones is an imperative need of the 
hour, as these  are cost effective and will be useful in search and rescue operations, 
surveillance, traffic monitoring in the waters, firefighting and so on.  Further these are 
evidently a cheaper option than the helicopters not only in their operations but also in 
procurement and maintenance. Operating drones can be mastered with more ease than 
training a helicopter pilot. The Committee were informed that a proposal for acquiring 
Drones and Anti-Drones is already under consideration of the Government. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take steps to expedite 
finalization of the proposal for induction of drones and anti-drones along with Drone 
Interceptors in the Indian Coast Guard Organisation and facilitate the ease in their 
procurement on urgent basis. The Committee would like to be informed of the steps 
taken in this regard within three months of the presentation of this Report to the 
Parliament.” 
  
  
11.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
  
 “Presently, Indian Coast Guard is not using drones or anti-drones. However, Drone is 
an emerging technology which can be utilized for search & rescue operations, aerial 
survey of the oil spill, pre-boarding close scan during boarding operations and for visual 
inputs to the command team during fire fighting operations. Therefore, induction of 
drones in Indian Coast Guard is under examination, keeping in line with the 
contemporary development and induction programme in the other Services.  

8 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
12.      The Committee, after being informed that a proposal for acquiring Drones and Anti-
Drones is already under consideration of the Government, had recommended that the 
Ministry should take steps to expedite finalization of the proposal for induction of drones 
and anti-drones along with Drone Interceptors in the Indian Coast Guard Organization and 
facilitate  ease of procurement on urgent basis.  In the normal course, the Committee 
expect that their recommendations be taken in right earnest and the implementation of the 
recommendations should commence as soon as practicable consequent to the 
presentation of the Report.  However, it has been reported that the Indian Coast Guard has 
concluded a maiden contract for multi-copter (vertical take-off and landing) drones. In this 
context, the Committee would like to be informed about the update regarding the 
induction of drones in the Coast Guard.  
  
DEFENCE ESTATES ORGANIZATION 
  
C.        Budgetary provision 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
  
13.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
  “The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence (MoD) provides financial assistance 
to Cantonment Boards in the form of ordinary Grant-in-Aid to balance their budgets. 
Besides ordinary grant-in-aid, grants for creation of capital assets like under-ground 
sewerage system, water supply schemes, construction of hospitals and schools etc. are 
also being provided from 2012-13 onwards. The Committee also learn that the 
Cantonment Boards have powers to raise resources through taxation, fees, lease 
rentals in respect of lands under their management and rentals in respect of properties 
belonging to and vested in the Board. The main sources of income of a Cantonment 
Board are local taxes such as house tax, conservancy tax, water tax, lighting tax, trade 
and profession tax, Service Charges etc. During oral evidence, a representative of 
DGDE candidly admitted that the financial challenges encountered by the Cantonment 
Boards are due to limited trade and business activity and also due to Government 
ownership of the properties in the Cantonment areas. It was also submitted that amount 
of General Grant-in-Aid being given to the Cantonments has been showing a downward 
trend, declining from ₹ 361.60 crore in 2019-20 to ₹ 239.80 crore in 2021-22; while cost 

9 
 
of running the establishments and maintenance of assets has been increasing over the 
years. In light of these facts, the Committee recommend that adequate financial support 
should be provided to the Cantonments to enable them to provide efficient civic services 
to the residents as well as to run various welfare schemes/initiatives in an unhampered 
manner.” 
  
14.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
  “ 
Grant-in-Aid details of last 04 years 
Year Annual Demand 
(Initial Projected amount in 
crore)   
Allotment 
(Rs. in crore)  
Grant-in-Aid (General) 
2052.00.092.03.01.31                                              (BE)            (MA) 
2018-19 803.44 297.75            289.99   
2019-20 1160.96 297.15            361.60 
2020-21 1281.12 254.60            304.60 
2021-22 1666.77 222.87              239.80 
Grants for Creation of Capital Assets 
2052.00.092.03.01.35 
2018-19 312.72 68.67              31.88 
2019-20 301.71 53.53              10.00 
2020-21 110.00 10.00              10.00 
2021-22 30.00 8.75                8.75 
Grant-in-Aid (SAP) 
2052.00.092.03.96.31 
2018-19 127.54 0                      10 
2019-20 93.76 15                    15 
2020-21 93.76 1.00                1.00  
2021-22 27.50 0.87                0.87 
Apart from Grant-in-Aid to Cantonment Boards, the 15th Finance Commission (FC), for 
the first time, made recommendations for release of FC grants to the Cantonment 
Boards. Accordingly, 15th FC grants were released to the Cantonment Boards as under: 
15th Finance Commission grants received during the last 02 years 
Sl. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
Amount (in 
Rs.) 
1. 2020-21 1,43,21,78,541 
2. 2021-22 98,93,73,464 
 Matter has also been taken up with the State Governments to provide GST 
compensation to the Cantonment Boards. The State of Punjab has started 
compensating Cantonment Boards of Ferozepur and Jalandhar against GST loss. In 

10 
 
addition, 14 States/UTs are also releasing funds to the Boards as grants / share of State 
revenue. Efforts are also being made to augment the local revenue by the Boards.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
  
15.      The Committee, in their original report, had recommended that adequate financial 
support should be provided to the Cantonments to enable them to provide efficient civic 
services to the residents as well as to run various welfare schemes/initiatives in an 
unhampered manner. The Committee comprehend from the Action Taken Reply of the 
Ministry that apart from Grant-in-Aid, the Cantonment Boards in certain cases have 
received Finance Commission Grants and Goods and Services Tax (GST) compensation 
from certain States in the past few years. The Committee in order to enable them to gauge 
a clearer picture, would like the details regarding revenue/income earned and expenditure 
made/done by each Cantonment Board in the country for the past three financial years. 
The Committee also desire that details regarding the efforts being made to augment the 
local revenue by the Boards, as submitted in the Ministry’s reply, may be furnished at the 
time of submitting Action Taken Statements. 
  
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS  
D.        Indigenization efforts and self-reliance in the Defence sector 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
  
16.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee note various steps being taken for realization of goal of self-reliance in 
Defence sector. These inter alia include notification of two Positive lists of indigenization 
of weapons and platforms, preference to ‘Buy Indian Indigenously Designed Developed 
and Manufactured (IDDM)’ in procurement and launching of SRIJAN portal for 
facilitation of private industry to become part of indigenization drive. Further, process 
has been initiated for identification of major Line Replaceable Units (LRUs) and 
Subsystems for industry led design and development. The Committee appreciate that 
various measures are being taken for major transformation in the entire Defence 
ecosystem so as to encourage maximum indigenization and visible results are also 
being seen in this regard, for instance, pursuant to notification of positive lists of 
indigenization of DPSUs of assemblies/sub-assemblies, 2500 items have already been 

11 
 
indigenized and 351 items are to be indigenized in 3 years, resulting in expected 
savings of ₹ 3000 crore per year. The Committee find that some of the critical 
components are not being produced in the country and this resulted in decrease in the 
indigenous content in various equipment /platforms made by the DPSUs. The 
Committee, in order to gauge the contribution of the DPSUs in indigenization efforts, 
desire that a detailed note on the indigenous content vis-a-vis import content being used 
in manufacturing and production by the DPSUs may be furnished. The note should also 
contain the critical components which are not indigenously produced and the efforts 
being made by the Ministry and the DPSUs for local production of the same. The 
Committee, while understanding the need for import content, which is unavoidable in 
some cases so as to cater to various critical requirements of our Armed Forces, 
recommend that stringent and synergized efforts be taken by all stakeholders i.e. 
Ministry, DPSUs, Research and Development Institutions, academia etc. for realization 
of objective of ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ in Defence sector.” 
  
17.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
  
  “1.      Synergised efforts are being taken for realization of objective of ‘Aatmanirbhar 
Bharat’ in Defence Sectors which have already been informed to the Committee. In 
addition, recent efforts undertaken are as under:- 
  
(a)        The Department of Defence Production has notified ‘Policy for Indigenization of 
components and spares used in Defence platforms for DPSUs on 08th March, 2019. The 
objective of the Policy is “to create an industry ecosystem which is able to indigenize the 
imported components (including alloys & special materials) and sub-assemblies for 
defence equipment and platform manufactured in India and to leverage the said 
capability to create export market. 
(b)          SRIJAN portal (srijandefence.gov.in) to promote indigenization was launched 
on 14 Aug 2020. As on date i.e 07.04.2022, 19595 items, which were earlier imported 
by DPSUs/SHOs, have been displayed on the portal. The Indian industry has shown 
interest for 4162 displayed items so far. DPSUs/SHQs are interacting with these 
industries for indigenization of the items as per extant procedures.  
  
(c)        In continuous pursuit of self-reliance in defence manufacturing under 
‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan’ and to minimize import by DPSUs, Ministry of Defence 
has notified a Positive Indigenisation list of sub-systems/ assemblies/ sub-assemblies/ 
components on 27th Dec 2021. The list contains 2500 items, which are already 
indigenized, and another 351 items which will be procured from Indian Industry after the 
timelines indicated in the list.  
  

12 
 
(d) On 28th March 2022, Ministry of Defence has notified 2nd Positive Indigenisation list 
of 107 Line Replacement Units (LRUs)/ sub-systems for indigenisation of Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs), for which there would be an embargo on the 
import beyond the timelines indicated against them.  
  
(e) In a significant boost to Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision on ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat 
Abhiyan’, and in sync with the announcement in the Union Budget 2022-23 that 
allocated 25% of Defence R & D Budget for industry led R & D, 18 major platforms have 
been announced by the Ministry of Defence on 11th March 2022, for industry led Design 
& Development under various routes. 
  
(f)        Make-II category (Industry funded), introduced in DPP 2016 to encourage 
indigenous development and manufacture of defence equipment has number of industry 
friendly provisions such as relaxation of eligibility criterion, minimal docuemntaiton, 
provision for considering proposals suggested by industry/individual etc. So far 72 
projects relating to Army, Navy & Air Force, have been accorded ’Approval in Principle’, 
valuing about Rs 30,000 Crores. 
  
(g)        In order to promote Indigenous manufacturing, though not designed / developed 
indigenously, import substitution for product support of weapon system/equipment held 
in             the inventory of the services, a new ‘Make-III’ procedure have been 
introduced in DAP 2020 so that Indian firms may manufacture these either in 
collaboration or with ToT from foreign OEMs. 
(h) An innovation ecosystem for Defence titled Innovations for Defence Excellence 
(iDEX) has been launched in April, 2018. iDEX is aimed at creation of an ecosystem to 
foster innovation and technology development in Defence and Aerospace by engaging 
Industries including MSMEs, Start-ups, Individual Innovators, R&D institutes and 
Academia and provide them grants/funding and other support to carry out R&D which 
has potential for future adoption for Indian defence and aerospace needs. The 
procurement of the final product will be processed under the ‘Buy (Indian-IDDM)’ 
category. So far, 130+ Start-ups have been engaged and 71 contracts have been 
signed. One procurement order has been placed by Navy. 
(i)        To give a major boost to development of innovative defence technologies and 
support the growing Start-up base in the country, Ministry of Defence has also approved 
a new scheme worth Rs 498.80 Crores during 2021-22, which would support about 300 
new Start-ups and 20 incubators during the next 05 years.  
  
(j)        DAC has recently cleared the procurement of 14 items worth Rs 380.43 Crore 
from the innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) startups/MSMEs. The DAC also 
has approved the new simplified procedure for procurement from iDEX 

13 
 
startups/MSMEs. This would fast-track the procurement from the startups/MSMEs. The 
procurement cycle for iDEX from the AoN to contract signing will be around 22 weeks as 
per the new procedure and similar provisions are included for Make-II Procedure and 
time taken from issue of PSO to signing of contracts has been reduced from existing 
122-180 weeks to 101-119 weeks. The fund disbursement under iDEX has been 
recently further liberalised so that it does not become an impediment for startups who 
are technically progressing well for prototype development. 
  
(k)        Government of India has established Technology Development Fund (TDF) 
Scheme under ‘Make in India’ initiative to create an eco-system for enhancing cutting 
edge technology capability by inculcating R&D culture in Industry for building indigenous 
state-of-art systems for defence applications and import substitution. The scheme has 
been established to promote self-reliance in Defence Technology as part of the ‘Make in 
India’ initiative by encouraging participation of public / private industries especially 
MSMEs including Start-ups. The procurement will be made under the ‘Buy(Indian-
IDDM)’ Category. 
  
(m)      Reforms in Offset policy have been included in DAP 2020, with thrust on 
attracting investment and Transfer of Technology for Defence manufacturing. Higher 
multipliers have been assigned to offset discharge in case of development of MSMEs, 
manufacturing in India, Transfer of Technology etc. Value of Offset discharge so far is 
worth 3565 Million USD. 
  
(n)      Government has notified the ‘Strategic Partnership (SP)’ Model in May 2017, 
which envisages establishment of long-term strategic partnerships with Indian entities 
through a transparent and competitive process, wherein they would tie up with global 
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) to seek technology transfers to set up 
domestic manufacturing infrastructure and supply chains. 
 
2.        Indigenous Content viz-a-viz import content being used in manufacturing and 
production with respect to Value of Production (VoP)” received from DPSUs/OFB (Now 
Department of Ordnance (C&S) and Seven Defence Companies for last three years are 
as under: 
 
(Value in Rs. Crore) 
Year Import 
Material 
Indigenous 
Material 
Total (VoP) 
2018-19 8459.79 
(22.43%) 
29263.86 
(77.57%) 
37723.65 
2019-20 14551.51(25.81
%) 
41830.78 
(74.19%) 
56382.29 
2020-21 13534.96 
(23.83%) 
43267.52 
(76.17%) 
56802.48 

14 
 
3.        Data of Controller General of Defence Accounts (CGDA) on procurement of 
defence equipment by the three Services (Army, Navy and Air Force) in the last three 
years, brings out that increasing reliance has been laid on procurement from domestic 
sources and the expenditure on procurement from foreign sources has shown 
significant reduction in percentage terms. 
Year Expenditure on 
Procurement (both capital 
and revenue) from 
Domestic sources 
Expenditure on 
Procurement (both capital 
and revenue) from 
Foreign sources 
Total expenditure on 
Procurement (both 
capital and revenue) 
  Value (In Rs. 
Crore) 
Percentage Value (In Rs. 
Crore) 
Percentage Value (In Rs. 
Crore) 
2018-19 50500 54.0 42974 46.0 93474 
2019-20 63722 58.8 44618 41.2 108340 
2020-21 88631 63.6 50709 36.4 139340 
  
 4.        The details of FDI/JV proposals which have been approved in the Defence 
sector in the past five calendar years is as below:- 
 
Name of JV Activity 
2017 
M/s Ideaforge 
Technology Pvt Ltd 
Manufacture of unmanned aerial systems used in Defence 
sector. 
  
M/s Alpha-Elsec 
Defence and 
Aerospace Systems 
Pvt Ltd 
Manufacture of optical goods and equipment and optical 
instruments. 
2018 
Indo Russian 
Helicopters Ltd 
To manufacture, supply, maintain and service Helicopters to 
the Indian Defence Forces. 
2019 
M/s Indo Russian 
Rifles Pvt Ltd 
Design, Development and Production of Kalashnikov Series 
Rifle. 
2020 
M/s Omnidyne 
Systems Pvt Ltd 
Research, Development and Manufacturing of advanced, state of 
the art, unmanned vehicle systems and related technologies.  
M/s Elbit Systems 
Ltd 
Primarily undertaking research and development in the defence 
sector in India, executing design and development programs and 
also for engaging in upcoming defence programs in the Indian 
defence sector as well as in the international market by providing 
services as a sub-contractor in compliance with applicable law 

15 
 
including Defence Procurement Procedure issued by the 
Government of India, as amended from time to time. Further, the 
applicant has stated that it will undertake research and 
development in the Indian defence sector, execute design and 
development programs, as well as undertake manufacturing of 
products that do not require industrial license.  
2021 
M/s Everchem 
Asia Pvt Ltd 
Engage exclusively in holding indirect investment in M/s 
Calimara Matters Pvt Ltd, subject to 74% acquisition of M/s 
Calimara Matter Ltd by M/s Calibre Chemicals. 
        
  
5.        There are some critical components that are not indigenously produced for 
various unavoidable reasons such as uncertainty that the indigenised items would be 
used in designated shipbuilding projects during construction & operational life of the 
ship/platform, lack of volume of order for the developer/indigenising vendor, 
unavailability of qualifying technical documents from the collaborator is considered for 
indigenisation under various routes. Further few major platforms have been identified by 
the Ministry of Defence for Industry led design & development under various routes 
which is in sync with the announcement in the Union Budget 2022-23 that allocates 25% 
of Defence R&D Budget for Industry led R&D. The list is as follows:- 
Sl. No. Equipment Description 
  Make-I 
1 Hypersonic Glide Vehicle 
2 Directed Energy Weapons (300 KW and more) [High Powered 
Electromagnetic Devices and High Powered Laser Devices] 
3 Naval Ship Borne Unmanned Aerial System (NSUAS) 
4 Light Weight Tank 
5 Self-Healing  Mine Fields  
6 Unmanned Autonomous AI Based Land Robot 
7 127 mm Naval Gun 
8 127 mm Guided Projectile 
9 Electric Propulsion(Engines) for Ships 
10 Standoff Airborne Jammer 
11 Li-ion Cells/Li-Sulphur Cells [Portable High Capacity Energy Systems 
replacing the Conventional Hydrocarbons] 
12 Communication System (AFNET System Switches, routers, Encryptors& 
VOIP phones) 
13 Electro Optical (EO) Pod (with subsequent upgrade to EO/IR) with high 
resolution sensing  
14 ‘Plug and Play’ Housing/Infrastructure for soldiers posted at extreme 
altitudes. 
 

16 
 
  Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) Model 
  
15 Long Range Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)[ High Altitude Long 
Endurance (HALE)} 
16 Indian Multi Role Helicopter (IMRH) 
  iDEX 
  
17 Low Orbit Pseudo Satellites 
  Make-II 
  
18 Anti-Jamming Systems for Multiple Platforms 
  
6.        Efforts are also being made to take up indigenisation of equipment for future 
projects under ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ and ‘Make in India’ programs. A separate 
indigenisation cell in DPSUs have also been constituted to give thrust to indigenisation 
of equipment/item at DPSUs level. These items are planned to be indigenised in-house 
Make-I, Make-II and DRDO route. Further, DPSUs have been able to successfully 
indigenise some of the critical equipment/items required for warships and submarines. 
The list is attached as Annexure I. 
7.        DPSUs are also outsourcing some of the activities like hull fabrication and 
equipment outfitting to domestic vendors to encourage public/private partnership in 
indigenous warship building. The list is attached as Annexure II.  
8.        “Offset portal” has been created in May 2019 to ensure Greater transparency, 
efficiency and accountability in the process. Reforms in Offset policy have been 
included in DAP 2020, with thrust on attracting investment and Technology for Defence 
manufacturing. The new Offset Policy is expected to encourage investment for Transfer 
of Technology /  Critical Technologies to Indian Industry in Defence Sector. Higher 
preference has given for purchase of defence products as compared to components, as 
under: 
            (a)      Multiplier: 
  
(i)        For products / systems (x 1.0) 
(ii)        For components (x 0.5) 
(iii)      For MSME (x 1.5) 
 
            (b)      Investments incentivized through higher multipliers: 
 
            (i)        In Defence Manufacturing (x 1.5) 
            (ii)        In Defence Industrial Corridors (x 2.0) 
            (iii)      For Transfer of Technology to Indian Enterprises (x 2.0) 
            (iv)      For Transfer of Technology to OFB / DPSUs (x 3.0) 
            (v)        Higher Multiplier for Critical Technology (x 4.0)” 

17 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
18.      The Committee are happy to note that synergized efforts are being taken for 
realization of objective of ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ in Defence Sectors. They are also happy 
to learn that efforts are also being made to take up indigenization of equipment for future 
projects under ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ and ‘Make in India’ programmes.  The Committee 
note, from the data supplied by the Ministry, that the expenditure on procurement (both 
capital and revenue) from domestic sources has displayed an increasing trend since 2018-
19. The percentage of such procurement stands at 63.6 per cent in 2020-21 as against 54 
per cent in 2018-19. The Committee have been apprised that there are some critical 
components that are not indigenously produced for various unavoidable reasons. These 
reasons are uncertainty that the indigenized items would be used in designated 
shipbuilding projects during construction and operational life of the ship/platform, lack of 
volume of order for the developer/indigenizing vendor, unavailability of qualifying 
technical documents from the collaborator being considered for indigenization under 
various routes.  In this regard, the Committee hope that the Indigenization Cell constituted 
in DPSUs will be able to successfully indigenize some of the critical equipments/items 
required for warship and submarines. They also have been apprised that a few major 
platforms have been identified by the Ministry of Defence for Industry-led design & 
development under various routes which are in sync with the announcement in the Union 
Budget 2022-23 that allocates 25 per cent of Defence Research & Development (R&D) 
Budget for Industry-led R&D. They, therefore, recommend that efforts for design and 
development of the identified platforms be made in a mission mode so as to further boost 
‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ and ‘Make in India’ initiatives. They also desire that updates 
regarding the progress of such identified platforms be intimated to the Committee at the 
time of submitting the Action Taken Statement. 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
DEFENCE PENSION 
E.        Welfare of the cadets boarded out of Defence Training Academies/Institutions on 
Medical Grounds 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 43) 
  
19.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
              “The Committee have been informed that during the last few years, on an 
average, approximately 11 to 12 cadets have been boarded out because of disabilities 
due to training attributable issues and accidents etc. The Ex-gratia benefits granted to 
the cadets on being medically boarded out include Ex-Gratia Disability Award (for 100% 
disability, reduced proportionately) of ₹ 16,200 per month plus Dearness Relief, monthly 
Ex-Gratia of ₹ 9000 plus Dearness Relief and Constant Attendance Allowance (for 
100% disability only) of ₹ 6,750/- per month. In addition, Army Group Insurance Fund 
(AGIF) provides certain insurance coverage for death. The Committee have been 
informed that proposal to increase the insurance coverage under AGIF is under 
examination of the Ministry. The Committee are of the considered view that non 
providing of adequate financial benefits and other avenues for settlement/ rehabilitation 
of such disabled cadets/corps would not only discourage the youth from joining the 
Forces but would also add to the already existing numbers of vacancies in the Armed 
Forces. Exhorting the need for having a humanitarian approach towards such cadets 
who decided to serve the country by joining the Armed Forces but unfortunately were 
medically boarded out due to certain reasons, the Committee recommend that facilities 
of Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) and Canteen Stores 
Department (CSD) may also be extended to such cadets. The Committee also 
recommend that periodic review of ex-gratia amounts to the medically boarded-out 
cadets based on the extant cost of living and inflation should be undertaken by the 
Ministry and the financial aid to such cadets be enhanced suitably.  Based on the 
degree of disability, all out efforts should be made and all avenues be looked into by the 
Government in providing any kind of employment including civil jobs to such candidates 
who had taken risks and were inadvertently injured/harmed during training period.”  
  
20.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
  
  “The Ex-gratia benefits granted to the cadets on being medically boarded out due to 
their disability attributable to or aggravated by military service include Ex-Gratia 
Disability Award (for 100% disability, reduced proportionately) of Rs. 16,200/- per month 
plus Dearness Relief, monthly Ex-Gratia of Rs. 9000/- plus Dearness Relief and 
Constant Attendance Allowance (for 100% disability only) or Rs. 6750/- per month.  

19 
 
CSD Facilities to Medically Boarded Out Cadets 
Cadets who have been boarded out and are in receipt of disability award are already 
entitled to Canteen facilities through Canteen Stores Department (CSD) excluding 
Against Firm Demand Category-I (AFD-I) items. 
In the past three years, 49 such cadets have applied for and have been issued with 
Canteen Smart Cards to avail the facility through Unit Run Canteens (URCs). 
As per MoD (DoESW) letter 12/1/2005/D(Res) dated 05 Sep 2011, it has been clarified 
that the “the proposal for granting Ex-Servicemen status to ex-cadets who were boarded 
out on medical grounds has been examined. The Competent Authority has not 
approved the proposal to grant Ex-Serviceman Status to disabled cadets.” 
ECHS facilities  
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) is not entitled to ex-cadets since 
they do not meet the mandatory twin criteria of being ex-servicemen and pensioners 
through defence estimates.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
  
21.      The Committee have been apprised that Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme (ECHS) is not entitled to the ex-cadets being medically boarded out due to their 
disability attributable to or aggravated by military service since they do not meet the 
mandatory twin criteria of being ex-servicemen and pensioners through defence 
estimates. The Committee find that the ex-gratia benefits granted to such cadets include 
the Ex-Gratia Disability Award (for 100% disability, reduced proportionately) of Rs. 16,200/- 
per month plus Dearness Relief, monthly Ex-Gratia of Rs. 9000/- plus Dearness Relief and 
Constant Attendance Allowance (for 100% disability only) or Rs. 6750/- per month. The 
Committee understand that a sizeable portion of the ex-gratia financial benefits provided 
to such cadets by the Ministry of Defence may be required to be spent on medical 
expenses. Therefore, adopting a humanitarian approach towards such cadets who 
decided to serve the country by joining the Armed Forces but unfortunately were 
medically boarded out due to certain reasons, the Committee recommend that feasibility 
of tie-ups with empanelled hospitals of ECHS on the lines of ‘Ayushman Bharat’ may be 
explored by the Ministry for ex-cadets. Further, a study may be conducted by the Ministry 
for revision of the ex-gratia financial benefits to the ex-cadets keeping in view the vagaries 
of inflation and the rising cost of healthcare. The findings and recommendations of the 

20 
 
study may be intimated to the Committee at the stage of submitting Action Taken 
Statements by the Ministry. 
The Committee note that the reply of the Ministry is silent on the Committee’s 
recommendation regarding efforts to be made and all avenues be looked into by the 
Government in providing any kind of employment including civil jobs to such medically 
boarded out candidates. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their recommendation that 
sincere efforts should be made by the Government for providing employment including 
civil jobs to such candidates. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
 Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
GENERAL DEFENCE BUDGET 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1-2) 
 
The Defence Budget is categorised/grouped under four Demands for Grants viz. Demand 
No. 19 – Ministry of Defence (Civil), Demand No. 20– Defence Services (Revenue), Demand No. 
21 – Capital Outlay on Defence Service and Demand No. 22 – Defence (Pension). Demand Nos. 
19 and 22 come under Civil/Pension Estimates and Demand Nos. 20 and 21 fall under Defence 
Services Estimates. The Committee note that the requirements for the Civil expenditure of the 
Ministry of Defence Secretariat, Defence Accounts Department, Canteen Stores Department, 
Defence Estates Organisation, Coast Guard Organisation, Jammu & Kashmir Light Infantry (J&K 
LI), Border Roads Organization etc. are provided for in Demand No. 19- MoD(Civil).  The Defence 
Services Estimates (DSE) reflects the detailed estimates for the Defence Services and 
Organizations/Services covered under Grant Number 20 and 21 of the Ministry of Defence. The 
Services and Organizations covered under DSE are Army (including National Cadet Corps, 
Director General Quality Assurance, Military Farms and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme), Navy (including Joint Staff), Air Force, Defence Research and Development 
Organization (DRDO) and erstwhile Defence Ordnance Factories/Directorate of Ordnance 
(Coordination & Services) {7 newly created Defence Public Sector Undertakings}. Demand No. 22 
provides for Pensionary charges {Service pension, gratuity, family pension, disability pension, 
commuted value of pension, leave encashment etc.} in respect of retired Defence personnel 
(including Defence civilian employees) of the three Services viz. Army, Navy and Air Force. The 
Committee note that the total allocated budget for the Ministry of Defence for Financial Year 
2022-23 is ₹5,25,166.15 crore. Out of this amount, the largest share of 73.38 percent, i.e. 
₹3,85,370.15 crore has been allocated for Defence Services Estimates (Grant Number 20 and 
21).  The Capital Outlay on Defence Services (Grant number 21) has been allocated an amount 
of ₹ 1,52,370 crore for the coming Financial Year. Defence Pensions (Grant Number 22) has 
secured 22.79 percent i.e. ₹ 1,19,696 crore of the total budget. The remaining 3.83 percent i.e. ₹ 
20,100 crore of the total Defence budget have been allocated to Ministry of Defence (Civil) (Grant 
Number 19).   
 
Projection and allocation under Defence Budget 2022-23 
 
2. The Committee, after detailed analysis of the budgetary provisions of Defence, observe a 
shortfall of approximately ₹ 1 lakh crore in the allocated Defence budget i.e. ₹ 5,25,166.15 crore 
as compared to the projected amount of ₹ 6,33,346.02 crore for Financial Year 2022-23. The 
Committee note the Ministry’s contention in this regard that during the last few years, allocations 
are lesser than the projections made. However, greater projections at Budget Estimates stage 
become a justification for enhanced allocation at Revised Estimates stage. Further, additional 
funds are allocated by the Ministry of Finance contingent upon spending capacity of the 
Ministries/Organisations. The Committee also note the assurance of the Ministry of Defence that 
operational preparedness of the Defence Services will not be affected and the Ministry of Finance 

22 
 
will be approached for additional allocation of funds, if needed, at Revised Estimates stage. The 
Committee, in this context, are of the considered view that in spite of the Ministry’s affirmation that 
operational preparedness of the Services will not be compromised due to want of funds and the 
additional funds, if needed, will be sought at Revised Estimates stage, the huge mismatch 
between projected and allocated funds is a cause of concern. They are of the considered view 
that as the Defence budget caters to the Revenue and Capital expenditure for the Forces, the 
tendency for greater projections in anticipation of greater allocation of funds at Revised Estimates 
stage is not desirable as it gives impression of huge gap between required and allocated Defence 
budget. Therefore, the Committee recommend that a method may be formulated by the Ministry 
of Defence in consultation with the Ministry of Finance for pragmatic budgetary projections. It is 
needless to say that this mechanism will also require cooperation and, to some extent, assurance 
of the Ministry of Finance for allocation of requisite funds to the Ministry of Defence at both 
Budget and Revised Estimates stage so that combat preparedness of our Forces remain at an 
optimum level.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This Ministry submits the requirements projected by the Services to Ministry of Finance for 
favourable consideration. In the pre-budget meeting discussions with M/o Finance, broad reasons 
for requirements projected by the Services are justified/ elaborated. While allocating funds, 
Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the 
current Financial Year, overall resource envelope available and pressing demands from other 
quarters etc.  Based on the overall ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence 
allocates funds among the Services and Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-
Services priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.   
 
2.  The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional funds 
projected by the Services at Supplementary/RE stage. The additional requirements projected by 
the Services are also discussed in detail with Ministry of Finance during pre-budget meeting 
discussions. Further, the allocated funds are optimally utilized towards operational preparedness 
of the Services. If required, the schemes are reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical 
capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness. 
 
 
Growth of Defence Budget vis-a-vis rate of inflation 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that the as per Economic Survey 2021-22, Consumer Price Index-
Combined (CPI-C) inflation moderated to 5.2 percent in 2021-22 (April to December, 2021) from 
6.6 per cent in the corresponding period of 2020-21 and was recorded at 5.6 per cent 
(provisional) in December, 2021. The annual rate of inflation based on monthly Wholesale Price 
Index (WPI) increased to 12.5 percent (provisional) during 2021-22 (April-December). The 
Committee also note that the actual increase in percentage in Defence Budget at the stage of 
Revised Estimates 2021-22 over 2020-21 (Actuals) amounts to (-) 1.66 percent after adjusting 
inflation. The Committee recommend that considering the factor of inflation, the additional funds 

23 
 
sought at the Revised Estimates stage in Financial Year 2022-23 should be allocated to the 
Ministry of Defence so as to ensure that planned Capital and Revenue Expenditure for the Forces 
continue unhampered. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 5,25,166.15 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs.46,970.53 Crore 
over BE 2021-22) has been allocated to M/o Defence which is an increase of 9.82% over BE 
2021-22 allocations. If required, additional funds will be sought at Supplementary/ Revised 
Estimate stage to meet the requirements to ensure that planned Capital and Revenue 
Expenditure for the Forces continue unhampered. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that for Financial Year 2022-23, 25 per cent of the R&D Budget has 
been earmarked for private industries, start-ups and academia. It has been stated by the Ministry 
that private industry will be encouraged to take up design and development of military platforms 
and equipment in collaboration with Defence Research and Development Organisations (DRDO) 
and other organizations through Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) model. Besides, an independent 
nodal umbrella body will also be set up for meeting wide-ranging testing and certification 
requirements. The Committee also note that the scheme of opening of R&D to private industry 
and academia and providing suitable assistance to them has to be formulated following the 
announcement in the Budget 2022-23. The Committee understand that this scheme of 
engagement of DRDO and other organizations with private industry and academia is in an 
embryonic stage, however, they recommend that a timeframe should be fixed for expeditious 
formulation of modalities of this scheme and establishment of nodal umbrella body for wide-
ranging requirements of testing and certifications of defence systems so that budget reserved for 
this purpose is relevantly utilized in 2022-23. Further, the Committee desire that details of the 
schemes so formulated containing inter alia identification of willing and competent private 
industries, start-ups and academia, scope of revenue generation through assistance to such 
entities, infrastructure and manpower required etc. may be furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
SPVs are being proposed in areas such as Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft (AMCA), Twin 
Engine Deck Based Fighter (TEDBF), Long Range Surface to Air Missile (LRSAM), Tanks, 
Future Infantry Combat Vehicle etc. 
 
Defence Technology Promotion Board (DTPB) is being proposed which will coordinate & facilitate 
provisioning of R&D test facilities to industry. Details of scheme formulated for enhancement of 
Indian industry are:  
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
 Existing Scheme: 
 
(a) Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme implemented to fund industry, MSMEs 
and Start-ups (upto Rs. 10 Cr for design and development of a product). Funding 
proposed to be enhanced to Rs. 50 Cr per project. 
 
(b) Industry as Development Cum Production Partner (DcPP): A new concept of industry 
as DcPP to take along industry as a partner right from the development stage so that 
industry builds capability of producing. 
 
(c) Development Contract: All system developed by DRDO are produced by industries. 
Minimum 50% of project funds go to industry as development contract. 
 
(d) Basic & Applied Research through Academic Institutes: DRDO has multiple 
mechanisms for working with academic institutes such as Extramural Research (ER), 
Research Boards and Contract for Acquisition for Research Services (CARS). 
 
(e) DRDO- Academic Centers of Excellence (CoES): 10 CoES established at academic 
institutes to work on specific advanced & futuristic areas.  
 
 New Scheme: 
 
 Advanced Defence Acquired Research (ADAR) Scheme has been proposed to promote 
disruptive research/ technology among Academia, R&D Centers, Start-ups and 
Industries. 
 New scheme has been proposed for funding D&D project upto Rs. 500 Cr for each 
industry. 
 
Setting up of Design & Development of Systems by Industry (DeSI) has been proposed as 
a scheme where design and development (D&D) of large systems and platforms shall be taken 
up by industry against funding and technical handholding provided by DRDO. The funding for 
these projects shall be up to ₹500 Cr. 
 
 
Initiatives taken under Aatmanirbhar Bharat  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that the share of domestic capital procurement which was earmarked at 58 
percent and 64 percent in 2020-21 and 2021-22, respectively, has been enhanced to 68 percent 
of the Capital acquisition Budget of the Defence Services for the year 2022-23, which 
approximately amounts to Rs84,598 crore. As regards the quality of equipment/platforms/ 
weapons being manufactured indigenously under Aatmanirbhar initiative, the Defence Secretary 
submitted that there is no change in standards of quality of items procured through other 
countries or under ‘Make in India’. The Committee, while taking note of the submission of the 
Defence Secretary, urge upon the Ministry to continue strict monitoring of the quality' of products 

25 
 
being manufactured/produced under ‘Make in India’ initiative so that our Services are 
armed/equipped with world class products. In this regard, the Committee desire that the details of 
the complaints/ grievances, if any, received in the last three years from the users i.e. the Armed 
Forces regarding the quality and standards of equipment/ platforms/weapons produced 
indigenously be furnished to them at the earliest. The Committee also desire that estimates 
regarding cost involved in procurement and percentage of indigenous content in 
weapons/items/equipment, barring sophisticated and hi-technology ones, being manufactured 
/produced in domestic Defence sector may also be furnished to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The capital expenditure on purchase of defence equipment from Indian and Foreign 
vendors for the Services during the last three years shows increasing trends in procurement from 
Indian Vendors, same is as given below:- 
 
(Rs. In crore) 
 Total 
Procurement 
Procurement 
from Foreign 
Vendors 
Procurement 
from Indian 
Vendors 
% of Procurement 
from Indian Vendors 
2018-19 75913.06  36957.06 38956.00 51.32% 
2019-20 91004.94  38156.83 52848.11 58.07% 
2020-21 118860.52 42786.54 76073.98 64.00% 
2021-22 113511.11 40325.09 73186.02 64.47% 
 
2. During the past three financial years and the current financial year (upto Nov 2021), total 
185 contracts have been signed, out of which 115 contracts have been signed with Indian 
vendors for capital procurement of defence equipment for Armed Forces. No complaint regarding 
quality has been reported for the delivered indigenous products during last 3 years by the 
services. 
 
3. The percentage of indigenous content in recently delivered platform by DPSU is furnished 
below:- 
 
Major Platform % Indigenous 
ASW Corvette – P28 > 85 
Landing Craft Utility (LCU) > 90 
Fast Patrol Vessel (FPV) > 70 
Water Jet Fast Attack Craft > 70 
Sighting system of BMP-II 100% 
Sighting and Fire Control system of Tk T72 100% 
Sighting and Fire Control system of Tk T90 68% 
STP 23% 
RO Plant 63% 
Gear Box 85% 
3HP Air compressor 98% 
Capstan 100% 

26 
 
Emergency Generator 80% 
HVAC 60% 
Centrifugal pumps (80 cmh to 600 cmh) 70% 
Centrifugal pumps (1 cmh to 10 cmh) 100% 
PD Pumps (2 cmh to 40 cmh) 60% 
PD Pumps (3 cmh to 5 cmh) 100% 
MSB 100% 
Steering Gear 97% 
Fin Stabilizer 85% 
Sighting system of BMP-II 100% 
Sighting and Fire Control system of Tk T72 100% 
Sighting and Fire Control system of Tk T90 68% 
LCA 60% 
Su-30MKI 60% 
ALH 56% 
Do-228 40% 
Water tight, Weather tight doors 100% 
Heli Landing Grids 50% 
Steel Plates 100% 
Long Range Surface to Air Missile & Multi-
Function Surveillance and Threat Alert Radar 
(LRSAM & MFSTAR) 
37.88% 
VARUNA Electronic Warfare System  100% 
Combat Management System (CMS) 100% 
Advance Composite Communication System 
(ACCS) 
100% 
Ship Data Network (SDN) 100% 
Fire Control System IAC-MOD-C 100% 
Direction Finder NAYAN  100% 
Integrated Bridge System (IBS) 40% 
Indigenous Rocket Launcher (IRL) 100% 
DMR 249A Steel Plate 100% 
 
4. In the last three years i.e. 2019-20 to 2021-22, the Government has accorded Acceptance 
of Necessity (AoN) for 118 proposals worth Rs 1,38,936.212Crores approximately, in ‘Buy 
(Indian-Indigenously Designed & Developed Manufactured (IDDM)’, ‘Buy (Indian)’, ‘Buy and 
Make (Indian)’, ‘Make’, ‘SP Model’, ‘Buy & Make’ categories of capital acquisition. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
With regard to the challenges being faced by the new entrepreneurs and suppliers in 
domestic Defence sector, the Defence Secretary has stated that to aid ‘ease of doing business’ 
for Indian entrepreneurs willing to enter Defence sector, steps such as simplification of process of 
granting industrial licences, transaction through 'Government e-Marketplace (GeM) to bring 
transparency and creation of Defence Industry Cell have been taken. The Committee, while 

27 
 
taking note of these measures, recommend that concerted efforts on the part of all stakeholders 
i.e. the Ministry of Defence, the Services, DRDO etc. are required for removing the bottlenecks 
and hesitancy, if any, faced by the Indian entrepreneurs/ small companies who want to 
participate in ‘Make in India’ initiative so as to make the country a giant and competitive Defence 
manufacturing hub in the world. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Government has taken the following policy initiatives for promotion of Indian 
entrepreneurs/MSMEs to make the country a giant and competitive Defence Manufacturing Hub 
in the world:- 
 
(i) In the Defence Acquisition Procedure 2020, there are specific reservations on Orders 
up to Rs. 100 Crore/ year for MSMEs and Small Shipyards.  
 
(ii) A Scheme for scaling up iDEX has been launched in May 2021 with a budgetary 
support of Rs. 498.80 crore for the next five years i.e. from 2021-22 to 2025-26. The 
Scheme aims at providing financial support to nearly 300 Start-ups/ MSMEs/ individual 
innovators and 20 partner incubators under the Defence Innovation Organisation (DIO) 
framework.  
 
(iii) The Defence Offset guidelines have further paved the way for proactive participation of 
MSMEs of India by incorporating a scheme of multipliers of 1.5 for engaging MSME as 
Indian Offset Partners (IOP). 
 
(iv) Industries are partnering in DRDO projects and DRDO developed technologies are 
also being transferred to them. They are important partners in industry ecosystem for 
the production of DRDO developed products. DRDO through its Technology 
Development Scheme (TDF) funds industries, especially Start-ups and MSMEs upto 
an amount of Rs 10 Cr, for innovation, research and development of Defence 
Technologies in the field of Defence and Aerospace. 
 
(v) Department of Defence Production (DDP) conducts outreach programs in various 
parts of the country to interact with Industry Associations, Industry especially MSMEs 
and academia, to spread awareness about the potential export opportunities. A 
scheme aimed to promote MSMEs in defence is in place. Under this scheme, 
conclaves/ seminars are being organized in Tier II and Tier III cities across the country 
with strong industrial MSMEs presence with the support of the DDP.  
 
(vi) Regular interactions are taking place to settle the grievance of vendors at DPSUs. 
Defence Investor Cell has been opened in DDP to address the issues being faced by 
Indian vendors. 
 
(vii) Private investment in Defence Production.  In addition, the Government has taken 
several policy initiatives in the past few years under 'Make in India' program and 
brought in reforms to encourage indigenous design, development and manufacture of 

28 
 
defence equipment in the country including by the private sector. These initiatives, 
inter-alia, include according priority to procurement of capital items from domestic 
sources under Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP)-2020; Announcement of 18 
major defence platforms for industry led design & development; Notification of three 
‘Positive Indigenisation Lists’ of total 310 items of Services and two ‘Positive 
Indigenisation Lists’ of 2851 items and 107 Line Replaceable Units (LRUs) of Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings(DPSUs), for which there would be an embargo on the 
import beyond the timelines indicated against them; Simplification of Industrial 
licensing process with longer validity period; Liberalisation of Foreign Direct 
Investment(FDI) policy allowing 74% FDI under automatic route; Simplification of Make 
Procedure; Implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order 
2017; Launch of an indigenization portal namely SRIJAN to facilitate indigenisation by 
Indian Industry including MSMEs and reforms in Offset policy with thrust on attracting 
investment and Transfer of Technology for Defence manufacturing by assigning higher 
multipliers. 
 
(viii) Defence Corridors. Defence Corridors-To fillip domestic Defence manufacturing and 
creating an ecosystem of Defence production in country, Government of India 
announced two Defence corridors in Feb 2018. Uttar Pradesh Defence Industrial 
Corridor (UPDIC) has 06 nodes spaning across Aligarh, Agra, Jhansi, Chitrakoot, 
Kanpur and Lucknow. Tamil Nadu Defence Industrial Corridor (TNDIC) has 05 nodes 
spaning across Chennai, Hosur, Salem, Coimbatore and Tiruchirappalli. At UPDIC, 
investments of Rs. 1552.00 Crore have been reported till March 2022. UPEIDA the 
nodal agency has signed 63 MoUs with potential investments of Rs. 8764.00 Cr. At 
TNDIC, investments of Rs. 2217.00 Crore have been reported till March, 2022. TIDCO 
the nodal agency has arranged potential investment of Rs. 11103.00 Cr. through 
MoUs etc. from 39 companies. The Defence Industrial Corridors (DICs) are an integral 
part of the Prime Minister’s “Gati Shakti”, the National Infrastructure Development 
Master Plan (NMP), aiming to boost economic growth through infrastructure building. 
The NMP aims to lay the foundation for overall infrastructure development and 
integrated pathway to the economy and help in generating employment opportunities 
for the youth.  
 
(ix) A draft Defence Production and Export Promotion Policy (DPEPP) 2020 has been 
prepared to promote defence production capabilities of the country for self-reliance 
and exports by active participation of public and private sector.     
 
(x) Department of Defence Production has notified 46 items under the latest Public 
Procurement Order 2017 notified by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade (DPIIT), for which there is sufficient local capacity and competition and 
procurement of these items shall be done from local suppliers only irrespective of the 
purchase value. 
 
(xi) Defence products list requiring Industrial Licences has been rationalised and 
manufacture of many parts or components are delicensed. The initial validity of the 
Industrial Licence granted under the IDR Act has been increased from 03 years to 15 

29 
 
years with a provision to further extend it by 03 years on a case-to-case basis. A total 
of 573 defence industrial  licenses have been issued to 353 companies so far i.e. upto 
31 Mar 2022.                      
 
(xii) Ministry has introduced an end-to-end online export authorisation system that has 
resulted in a marked increase in the number of online export authorisations issued. 
This has reduced the average time taken for issuance of export Authorisations 
considerably from 86 days to 35 days in case of Systems/Sub-systems and from 24 
days to 13 days in case of components. 
 
2. Since the focus of the Government is on indigenization and promotion of defence industry 
to achieve Atmanirbharta, the proposals which were accorded Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) 
under Buy (Global) category of Capital Acquisition in the past have been reviewed as per DAP-
2020 and the Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) has approved cancellation/closure of AoN for 
09 such proposals worth Rs. 46,695 Crore. 
 
3.  Contracts for worth Rs. 53,838 Crore for 31 equipment have been awarded by the Armed 
Forces to the domestic industry since notification of the earlier two Positive Indigenization Lists 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
Integrated Theater Commands  
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Military Affairs has been entrusted with the 
onerous responsibility of spearheading the reforms within the military establishment towards 
enhancing synergy and jointness among the Services and ensuring optimum utilisation of 
resources. In this connection, renewed impetus has been provided to the establishment of 
Theatre/ Joint Commands to complete the process in a time bound manner. Presently, Lead 
Commanders-in-chief (C-in-Cs) have been nominated to work out the contours of respective 
Theatre/ Joint Commands in consultation with all stakeholders. Further, a study is also in 
progress by Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS) to strengthen Joint structures to 
support these Theatre/ Joint Commands. The Committee cognizant of the fact that that 
establishment of Integrated Theatre/ Joint Commands is a gargantuan task, nevertheless, 
recommend that the creases in creation of Integrated Joint Commands need to be ironed out 
expeditiously so that the Services adopt a concerted approach in the event of any threat 
perception/war and the resources of manpower and infrastructure of the Services are synergized 
so as to make the nation a formidable force.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) As brought out above, the Lead C-in-Cs are working out the contours of Theatre/Joint 
Commands in consultation with all stakeholders. Further, a study is also in progress by HQ IDS 
to strengthen Joint Structures to support these Theatre/Joint Commands. 
(b) These Study Reports, once finalised would be examined in details and thereafter a way-
ahead would be charted to establish Theatre/Joint Commands in consultation with all 
stakeholders. 

30 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 
Budgetary Allocation to BRO 
 
 The committee note that for the year 2021-22, the final allocation to Border Roads 
Organisation (BRO) under MoD (Civil) was Rs. 7,432.42 crore and the expenditure upto January 
2022 was Rs. 5773.15 crore. For 2022-23, the BE allocation is Rs. 7882.36 crore under MoD 
(Civil). The Committee also note that Capital Budget of Border Roads Organisation has increased 
by 40 percent to Rs. 3,500 crore in BE 2022-23 vis-à-vis Rs. 2,500 crore in BE 2021-22. The 
committee appreciate that funds allocated to BRO under the Capital Section have been 
remarkably enhanced for BE 2022-23 which signifies the strategic role of BRO in developing and 
maintaining infrastructure in Border Areas as well as being the first responders to various natural 
calamities in the country. They also note BRO’s salient achievements such as completion of 102 
infrastructure projects, construction of road over Umlingla Pass, adoption of new technologies 
such as Geo Cell for road works, Plastic coated aggregate, extended opening of Zojila and other 
major Himalayan Passes, automation of BRO, Government e-Marketplace (GeM) procurement 
etc. in 2021. The Committee trust that the record increase in Capital Budget of BRO in FY 2022-
23 would enable BRO to ramp up their scale and capabilities and equip them in better and 
speedy execution of works of construction and maintaining operational road infrastructure for the 
Forces in Border Areas as well as contributing towards the overall economic growth of remote 
border areas. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Enhancement in Capital budget of BRO in FY 2022-23 will give the necessary boost to the 
speedy execution of works of construction and maintaining operational road infrastructure for the 
Forces in Border Areas as well as contributing towards the overall economic growth of remote 
border areas. It would also help for completion of road projects as per their planned probable 
date of completion.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
Required and Existing Number of Equipment with BRO 
 
 The Committee note that based on the requirement of BRO, an Annual Procurement Plan 
(APP) amounting to Rs. 262.34 crore has been approved for FY 2021-22 for procurement of 
critical equipment, where 222 Dozer size II equivalent, 7 Hot Mix Plants and 10 Motor Graders 
would be procured. Out of the requirement of 222 Dozer size II equivalent, supply order for 90 
equipment has been placed/procured. The Committee, while taking note of the mismatch 
between the required and existing critical equipment, would like to be apprised as to whether the 
quantity procured under APP would be sufficient and meet their work requirements in the FY 
2021-22. In this regard, the Director General BRO submitted that enhanced delegation of powers 
for procurement of equipment and machines would enable BRO to procure more equipment in 
2022-23 and this would increase the progress of works undertaken by BRO by 25 percent. 
Keeping in view the enhanced capital budget of BRO for FY 2022-23, the Committee recommend 

31 
 
that procurement of requisite critical equipment for operational needs of BRO should be 
expedited so as to ensure that execution of various infrastructure projects by BRO are not 
affected. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Annual Procurement Plan (APP) is prepared each year based on the targets allotted in 
Annual Works Plan for carrying out works on strategically important roads and as per priority set 
by Armed Forces in order to complete the Project as per laid down probable date of completion. 
Accordingly, a total of 222 Nos of Dozer size II were approved under APP 2021-22. Out of these, 
90 Nos Dozer size-II have been procured. In addition, supply order for procurement of 40 
equipments is under preparation and tendering action (opening of bids) for balance 92 
equipments is under progress. Thus, entire demand of 222 No of Dozer size-II approved under 
APP 2021-22 is likely to be realized shortly. Further, all efforts are underway for timely 
procurement of requisite critical equipment for the FY 2022-23 to meet operational needs of 
BRO.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
Creation of All-Women Road Construction Company (RCC) 
  
 The Committee appreciated that initiative taken by BRO for creating the first ever all 
Women Road Construction Company (RCC) in their Organisation, which is an encouraging 
development and evidently would lead to empowerment of women and give recognition to the 
contributions made by them. The Committee hope and wish that such a move will definitely pave 
the way for other Government and Private Industries for providing more employment 
opportunities exclusively for women. It goes without saying that female-friendly facilities and 
infrastructure should be created at the place of posting/working. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Requisite infrastructure at all detachments of various sectors of these RCCs have been 
provided/being provided to create women-friendly environment. Facilities like ladies toilet, 
Medical Inspection room, separate single accommodations etc. have also been provided.  
 
 
INDIAN COAST GUARD 
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 
 The Committee note that Indian Coast Guard (ICG) is an Armed Forces of the Union 
constituted upon enactment of Coast Guard Act, 1978, under the Ministry of Defence, for 
protection of the country’s maritime interests in the Maritime Zones of India.  The Committee note 
that in the year 2021-22, against projection of Rs. 6400.00 crore under combined Revenue and 
Capital Budget, ICG received only Rs. 5244.72 crore which was revised to Rs. 6033.72 crore at 
RE allocation stage.  In the budget of 2022-23, ICG had been allocated only Rs. 7310.29 crore 

32 
 
vis-à-vis projections of Rs. 10803.85 crore.  The Committee are aware that ICG is an armed force 
and primary law inforcement agency whose 24x7 presence in the ocean ensures safety in marine 
thereby having a direct impact on safety of maritime trade as well as checking infiltrations through 
sea routes.  The Committee also note that ICG envisages an increase of their current fleet from 
158 to 190 ships and 72 to 80 aircrafts by 2025.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that for 
facilitating timely materialization of targeted force level, a strong financial support is inevitable.  
Since this is an ongoing process and the Ministry is already aware of this expansion plan, the 
Committee at this stage, can only recommend that the projected demands of Coast Guard are 
given due weightage as the Committee can see the allocations for Coast Guard are far less then 
the projections both under capital and revenue heads.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should vigorously pursue with the Ministry of Finance for securing additional 
allocations atleast at the RE/supplementary grants stage. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the amount of additional allocation received by ICG in 2021-22. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry submits the requirement projected by the Departments, including Indian 
Coast Guard, to Ministry of Finance for favorable consideration. While allocating funds, Ministry 
of Finance analyses past absorption capacity of the Organizations, pace of expenditure in the 
current Financial Year, overall resource envelope available and pressing demands from other 
quarters etc. Based on the overall ceiling conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates 
funds among the Departments and Organizations of MoD, including Indian Coast Guard, taking 
into account inter-Organizations priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.  
 
2. The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional funds 
projected by Indian Coast Guard at Supplementary/RE stage under Revenue and Capital head.  
Further, the allocated funds will be optimally utilized towards operational activities. If required, the 
schemes will be reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without 
any compromise to operational preparedness.  
 
3. It is submitted that additional funds of Rs. 202.54 crore under Revenue Section and 
additional funds of Rs. 586.46 crore under Capital Section were allocated to ICG in Financial year 
2021-22. Out of additional funds of Rs. 586.46 crore, a sum of Rs. 350.00 crore was allocated for 
Acquisition of Ships, Aircraft & Fleet.  
    
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that in 2021-22 only Rs. 4232.7316 crore have 
been utilized till 31st December, 2021 vis-à-vis RE allocation of Rs. 6033.7200 crore. It is 
apparent that an amount of Rs.1,800.9884 crore remains unutilized in the last quarter of the FY 
i.e. 2021-22. The Committee cannot but recommend that prudent financial planning and strict 
monitoring of expenditure should be done so that such a scenario does not recur. The Committee 
learn that around 80 percent funds under Capital Head and 85 per cent under Revenue Head 
were utilized till the mid February 2022. The Committee were assured by the Ministry during the 
evidence that the unutilized allocated funds would be completely utilized by the end of this FY. 
The Committee trust that in view of the enhanced demands and allocations under BE for the year 

33 
 
2022-23, the Ministry would take appropriate measures in the right direction to utilize the rest of 
unutilized amount by the end of 2021-22 so that unutilized funds are not surrendered at the end 
of the financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. During the Financial Year 2021-22, against the Modified Allocation (MA) of Rs. 2919.14 
crore in Revenue Head, an amount of Rs. 2918.2932 crore (i.e 99.97%) has been utilised. 
 
2. In case of Capital head, an amount of Rs. 3181.9575 crore (i.e 97.15%) has been utilised 
against MA allocation of Rs. 3275.41 crore. 
 
3. In overall basis Rs. 6100.2431 crore (i.e 98.48%) have been utilised till 31st March, 2022 
vis-a-vis MA allocation of Rs. 6194.5500 crore by Indian Coast Guard for the financial year 
2021-22. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
Induction of Anti-Drones and Drones in ICG 
 
 The Committee note that Indian Coast Guard’s main duty and function is protection of the 
Country’s maritime interests in the Maritime Zones of India. To fulfill this purpose helicopters are 
used on the ships, which on one hand increase the search area and on the other decrease the 
surveillance time. The Committee are of the considered view that keeping in mind the 
contemporary technological development taking worldwide and looking at the futuristic 
technology in the Armed Forces and the present security scenario in the country, usage of 
drones is an imperative need of the hour, as these are cost effective and will be useful in search 
and rescue operations, surveillance, traffic monitoring in the waters, firefighting and so on. 
Further, these are evidently a cheaper option than the helicopters not only in their operations but 
also in procurement and maintenance. Operating drones can be mastered with more ease than 
training a helicopter pilot. The Committee were informed that a proposal for acquiring Drones and 
Anti-Drones is already under consideration of the Government. The committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should take steps to expedite finalization of the proposal for 
induction of drones and anti-drones along with Drone interceptors in the Indian Coast Guard 
Organisation and facilitate the ease in their procurement on urgent basis. The Committee would 
like to be informed of the steps taken in this regard within three months of the presentation of this 
Report to the Parliament. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Presently, Indian Coast Guard is not using drones or anti-drones. However, Drone is an 
emerging technology which can be utilized for search & rescue operations, aerial survey of the oil 
spill, pre-boarding close scan during boarding operations and for visual inputs to the command 
team during fire fighting operations. Therefore, induction of drones in Indian Coast Guard is 
under examination, keeping in line with the contemporary development and induction programme 
in the other Services.  

34 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
Shortage of Manpower 
 
The Committee note that there is around 17 per cent shortage of manpower in Coast 
Guard Organisation vis-à-vis sanctioned strength in the categories of Officers, Enrolled 
Personnel and Civilian Staff, which is 2344, 12,645 and 1970 respectively. The borne manpower 
(including deputation) in respect of Officers is 1977, for Enrolled Personnel it is 10748 and 1334 
for Civilian Staff. The Committee observe that Indian Coast Guard is one of the largest Coast 
Guard Organisations in the world that provides search and rescue operations in 4.6 million 
square kilometers of coastal waters around the Indian peninsula. The Organisation is involved in 
tackling with cross-border terrorism, maritime transactional crimes, maritime safety and 
environment protection to name a few. To accomplish these tasks and operations, it goes without 
saying that copious and adequate manforce to commensurate to the tasks it performs, is required 
at all levels. Taking into account the vast coverage area of the ICG as well as its multi-faceted 
roles and responsibilities, the Committee recommend that extensive publicity should be given to 
the recruitments in ICG at both at officers level as well as at the jawans level through electronic 
and print media, including local and regional languages so that youth in far flung villages and 
towns are made aware of the opportunities available in ICG. The Committee appreciate the 
efforts of the Ministry in introducing online examination and direct recruitment of the civilians and 
hope that this will aid in filling up the vacancies in the organization in an expeditious manner. The 
Committee desire that ICG may explore the possibilities for giving due weightage to the local 
youth and regional representation while filling up the vacancies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The expeditious induction of manpower by affording wide publicity is a continuous 
process. Migration to online computer based examination for recruitment has facilitated wider 
outreach and tapping of a larger pool of talent. The same has been aimed to achieve quicker 
reduction of shortages as well as proportionate representation of the youth from Regions all 
across India. 
 
2. In addition, following steps have been undertaken by ICG to give suitable weightage to 
local youth and Regional representations while filling up the vacancies: 
 
(a) Community Interaction Programme. Indian Coast Guard organizes Community 
Interaction Programmes (CIP) in the coastal villages on routine basis. During the course of 
interaction, the youth are encouraged to join Indian Coast Guard and are also elaborated 
about the recruitment procedures for joining Indian Coast Guard. Further, outreach 
assistance is also being rendered by local Indian Coast Guard stations if sought by the 
local youths/villagers. 
 
(b) Establishment of recruitment centers in hilly area. In order to tap/ attract talent pool 
from the Northern/North-Eastern (hilly) areas, Indian Coast Guard is planning to set up two 
recruitment cum orientation/liaison centres at Dehradun and Guwahati, for which the 

35 
 
approval-in-principle has already been accorded. The envisaged centres will act as an 
extended nodal point to spread information/publicity about Indian Coast Guard. After 
successful implementation of these two pilot projects (recruitment centres) of Dehradun 
and Guwahati, many more such recruitment centres will be proposed for setting-up in 
other parts of India in the hinterland. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that as against the projected amount of 1,101.98 
crore for Directorate General Defence Estates (DGDE), an amount of₹ 574.98 crore has been 
allocated in Budget Estimates 2022-23, i.e. a gap of ₹ 527 crore. Out of these, ₹ 401.95 crore 
and ₹ 173.03 crore have been allocated under Revenue and Capital Head, respectively. The 
Committee note that as against the projected amount of ₹ 1635.44 crore in BE 2020-21, the 
amount allocated to DGDE at Budget Estimates (BE) stage was₹ 397.36 crore and the actual 
expenditure incurred was₹ 409.19 crore. Further, in Financial Year 2021-22, ₹ 364.56 crore was 
allocated against the projection of ₹ 1927.46 crore, whereas the actual amount spent upto 
December 2021 was ₹ 201.79 crore. The Committee, on sifting and analyzing the data supplied 
by the Ministry, deduce that allocated funds at BE stage during the recent financial years suffice 
for functioning of DGDE. Thus, taking into account the trend of actual expenditure incurred by 
DGDE vis-a-vis the projections made at BE stage during the past few financial years, the 
Committee regret to note that there is lack of judicious financial planning by DGDE while 
projecting the Budget Estimates under Demands for Grants. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the reasons for projecting unrealistically high figures for Demands for Grants from 
2020-21 onwards. The Committee urge upon the Ministry to streamline their procedures of 
financial planning so as to ensure that the projections made at BE stage are done prudently and 
realistically. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 It is intimated that the amount of Rs.1102.33 crores was projected under BE 2022-23. The 
said projections also include amount of Rs. 611.48 crores as Grant-in-Aid (General), Rs. 45 
crores as Grant for Creation of Capital Assets and Rs. 30.25 crores as Grant-in-Aid-General 
(SAP) to deficit Cantonment Boards. Therefore, out of total of Rs.1102.33 crores, Rs.686.72 
crores was the projected demand for Cantonment Boards and Rs. 415.61 crores was projected 
under various Revenue and Capital Heads. 
  
The details on the projected demand and allotment to Cantonment Boards for last 03 
years are as under:- 
 
Initial Projected Demand (in crores) 
 Grant-in-Aid 
(General) 
 
       (BE) 
Grant for 
Creation 
of Capital 
Assets 
 
(BE) 
Grant-in-
Aid-General 
(SAP) (BE) 
Projected loss 
due to 
implementation 
of GST (BE) 
Total   (BE) 

36 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
FY 2020-21 952.40  110.00 93.76 328.72 1484.88 
FY 2021-22 1047.64  30.00 27.50 619.13 1724.27 
FY 2022-23 611.47  45.00 30.25 0 686.72 
 
 
Allotment 
(in crores)      
(BE) (MA) (BE) (MA) (BE) (MA) (BE) (MA) (BE) (MA) 
FY 2020-21 254.60    304.6 10          10  1                1      0                0 265.60       315.60 
FY 2021-22 222.87 239.8 8.75 8.75 0.87          0.87          0 0 232.49        249.42 
FY 2022-23 236.82        NA 18 NA 2 NA 0 0 256.82         NA 
 
 
Demand for Grant-in-aid for Cantonment Boards  
 
1. The total demand for the Financial Year 2020-2021 was Rs. 1484.88 crores. This included 
an amount of Rs. 328.72 crores as demand on account of accumulated loss incurred by the 
Cantonment Boards due to subsuming of certain local taxes imposed by the Cantonment Boards 
post implementation of GST.  
2. Similarly, for Financial Year 2021-22, a total demand of Rs. 1724.27 crores was projected 
on the same line as done for Financial Year 2020-21. An accumulated loss due to 
implementation of GST of Rs. 619.13 crores was projected in the said demand.  
 
3. The projection made by DGDE was reviewed comprehensively in BE 2022-23. It has been 
noted that compensation in lieu of loss due to implementation of GST should not be separately 
demanded, as there is no statutory or administrative mechanism available for the same. Efforts 
are being made to get GST compensation through the State Governments. The State of Punjab 
has started compensating Cantonment Boards of Ferozepur and Jalandhar against GST loss by 
way of Grant-in-Aid. 
 
4. Accordingly, for Financial Year 2022-23, a total demand of Rs. 686.72 crores only was 
projected as BE without linking it to the GST loss.  
 
5. It is, however, submitted that the Cantonment Boards project the Grant-in-Aid in the 
Budget Estimates (BE) on basis of their annual plans & outstanding liabilities which include 
various development works and expenditure for providing civic amenities. However, based on the 
actual allocation of Grant-in-Aid in the BE, the works are prioritized and expenditure incurred 
accordingly. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence (MoD) provides financial assistance to 
Cantonment Boards in the form of ordinary Grant-in-Aid to balance their budgets. Besides 
ordinary grant-in-aid, grants for creation of capital assets like under-ground sewerage system, 
water supply schemes, construction of hospitals and schools etc. are also being provided from 
2012-13 onwards. The Committee also learn that the Cantonment Boards have powers to raise 

37 
 
resources through taxation, fees, lease rentals in respect of lands under their management and 
rentals in respect of properties belonging to and vested in the Board. The main sources of 
income of a Cantonment Board are local taxes such as house tax, conservancy tax, water tax, 
lighting tax, trade and profession tax, Service Charges etc. During oral evidence, a representative 
of DGDE candidly admitted that the financial challenges encountered by the Cantonment Boards 
are due to limited trade and business activity and also due to Government ownership of the 
properties in the Cantonment areas. It was also submitted that amount of General Grant-in-Aid 
being given to the Cantonments has been showing a downward trend, declining from ₹ 361.60 
crore in 2019-20 to ₹ 239.80 crore in 2021-22; while cost of running the establishments and 
maintenance of assets has been increasing over the years. In light of these facts, the Committee 
recommend that adequate financial support should be provided to the Cantonments to enable 
them to provide efficient civic services to the residents as well as to run various welfare 
schemes/initiatives in an unhampered manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Grant-in-Aid details of last 04 years 
Year Annual Demand 
(Initial Projected amount in 
crores) 
Allotment 
(Rs. in crores) 
Grant-in-Aid (General) 
2052.00.092.03.01.31 
 
BE 
 
MA 
2018-19 803.44  297.75 289.99  
2019-20 1160.96  297.15 361.60 
2020-21 1281.12  254.60 304.60 
2021-22 1666.77  222.87 239.80 
Grants for Creation of Capital Assets 
2052.00.092.03.01.35 
2018-19 312.72  68.67 31.88 
2019-20 301.71  53.53 10.00 
2020-21 110.00  10.00 10.00 
2021-22 30.00  8.75 8.75 
Grant-in-Aid (SAP) 
2052.00.092.03.96.31 
2018-19 127.54  0 10 
2019-20 93.76  15 15 
2020-21 93.76  1.00 1.00  
2021-22 27.50  0.87 0.87 
  
Apart from Grant-in-Aid to Cantonment Boards, the 15th Finance Commission (FC), for the 
first time, made recommendations for release of FC grants to the Cantonment Boards. 
Accordingly, 15th FC grants were released to the Cantonment Boards as under: 
 
 
 

38 
 
15th Finance Commission grants received during the last 02 years 
 
Sl. No. Financial Year Amount (in Rs.) 
1. 2020-21 1,43,21,78,541 
2. 2021-22 98,93,73,464 
 
Matter has also been taken up with the State Governments to provide GST compensation 
to the Cantonment Boards. The State of Punjab has started compensating Cantonment Boards of 
Ferozepur and Jalandhar against GST loss. In addition, 14 States/UTs are also releasing funds 
to the Boards as grants / share of State revenue. Efforts are also being made to augment the 
local revenue by the Boards. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
The Committee note that there are several cases relating to demands/requests of the 
State/ local Government for land transfer from the Defence authorities to them for infrastructural 
development in various places in the country. The major reasons cited for these demands were 
use of roads passing through the Cantonments, use of schools etc. by the civil population. The 
Committee note from the submission of the Director General Defence Estates that one of the 
challenges in this context is the rule to provide A-1 category of land to Army according to their 
requirements. It was also submitted that as per present policy of the Ministry of Defence, cases 
pertaining to infrastructural development are being processed in one month. The Committee are 
cognizant of the fact that resolution of such disputes between civil dispensation and military 
authorities is an onerous task as it involves security concerns and legal implications. They also 
understand that proposals for transfer of equal value land in exchange for Defence lands by 
certain States are in the offing. In light of these facts, the Committee recommend that, wherever 
necessary, meetings with the State Governments, local military authorities and the Ministry of 
Defence may be organized in a periodical manner to enable the fast-tracking of resolution of the 
disputes pertaining to Defence lands. The Committee have come to learn about a case where a 
Government school, which is 102 year old, in Hebbal in Bengaluru is locked in ownership of land 
dispute with Defence authorities/establishment, which is lying unresolved. The representative of 
the Ministry in his deposition has stated that a committee has already been constituted to look 
into the problem and its report is awaited. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
pursue the matter vigorously and resolve the problem at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 It is submitted that in order to expedite the pending applications of different Central/State 
Govt departments/PSUs, for transfer of defence land for public infrastructure projects, regular 
meetings are conducted in MoD with reps of Services concerned i.e. Army, Navy, Air Force, 
Coast Guard, DGDE etc. and concerned indenting agencies. So far, 128 Working Permissions on 
defence land have been issued for public infrastructure projects during the period from 
01.01.2021 to 30.09.2022.  
 
2. Further, with regard to case pertaining to 102 years old Govt. School situated in 
Bengaluru, it is submitted that the land in question, forms a part and parcel of land measuring 

39 
 
373 acres 33 guntas in Revenue Sy. No. 1 of Sawar Lines, which is Ex-State Forces property of 
the Mysore Maharaja and later of Mysore Government. Consequent upon the Merger of State 
forces into Indian Union, the then Mysore Government transferred all the Ex-State Force 
properties located in Bangalore and Mysore to the Gol, MoD in the year 1954-55. As per Military 
Land Register (MLR) maintained by DEO Bangalore, the said land is under the management & 
occupation of Army/QMG since 1954-55. The instant case relates to encroachment by Govt 
School at Sawar Line at JC Nagar and not Hebbal. 
 
3. As reported by DGDE an area measuring 2.891 acres has been encroached by the State 
Government for the school. In the past, Chief Minister of Karnataka vide DO letter dated 
31.08.2017 had included the instant land in his proposal for transfer of number of pockets of 
defence land at various locations in Karnataka. 
4. During 2018, a Joint Task force (JTF) has been constituted by the State Government 
under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary, Government of Karnataka to resolve various 
issues/problems related to Defence lands in a time bound manner.  
 
5. The Joint Task Force assembled on 16.01.2019 and26.11.2019 to discuss issues 
pertaining to mutation of defence land in State Revenue records, ownership/title disputes and the 
sharing of documents by MoD& State Govt. During the last meeting held on 08.09.2021, a draft 
report was submitted by the State Government which could not be finalized for want of 
consensus among revenue authorities, DEO & LMA. The State Government has been requested 
to convene JTF meeting for resolution of the issues. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
As per entry 3 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, Parliament is 
competent to make laws for delimitation of Cantonment areas, local self-government in such 
areas, the constitution and powers of Cantonment authorities in such areas and the regulation of 
house accommodation including the control of rents in such areas. 74th amendment of the 
Constitution necessitated a de-novo look into administration of Cantonments and the role of 
Cantonment Boards under the Cantonments Act, 1924. Accordingly, the Cantonments Act, 2006, 
which came into force on 18.12.2006, was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating to 
the administration of Cantonments with a view to impart greater democratization, improvement of 
their financial base, to make provisions for development activities and for other connected 
matters. During the course of examination of DFG 2022-23, the Committee were informed that 
the new Cantonment Bill is under final examination. The salient features of the proposed new Bill 
inter alia include increase in number of elected members in the Cantonment Board, greater 
democratization and modernization of Cantonment structure, more financial power to the elected 
representatives, application of modern municipal act and consideration of 'ease of living' for the 
residents. The Committee understand that various exercises pertaining to the residents of the 
Cantonment areas and democratic functioning of the Cantonment Boards are contingent upon 
enactment of the new Cantonment Bill. One such exercise is holding elections in various 
Cantonment Boards in the country. The Committee have been informed that as on date, 61 
Cantonment Boards, where elections are due, are varied under Section 13 of the Cantonments 
Act, 2006. The Committee can understand very well that varying the Cantonment Boards is an ad 
hoc arrangement and regular elections are required for fair representation of the residents living 

40 
 
in the Cantonment areas. The Committee understand that opinion was sought from various 
stakeholders in the yester years and based on that, a new draft Bill was put in the public domain. 
Keeping in view welfare of the residents in the Cantonment areas and maintenance of democratic 
structure in the Cantonment Boards in the country, the Committee recommend that the new 
Cantonment Bill may be finalized without any further loss of time and introduced in the Parliament 
at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 It is intimated that for the administration of Cantonments with a view to impart greater 
democratization, modernization and efficiency thereof, and to achieve greater developmental 
objectives in alignment with municipalities across the country and to facilitate “ease of living” in 
Cantonments; the draft Cantonments Bill, 2022 is under consideration of the Government.  
 
 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
The Committee note that the decision of corporatization of 41 production units (Ordnance 
Factories) of the Ordnance Factory Board was taken by the Union Cabinet on 16th June, 2021 
and in pursuance thereof, the management, control, operation and maintenance of 41 production 
units was handed over to the newly formed 7 Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) 
namely Munitions India Limited (MIL), Armoured Vehicles Nigam Limited (AVNL), Troop Comfort 
Limited (TCL), India Optel Limited (IOL), Advanced Weapons and Equipment India Limited 
(AWEIL), Yantra India Limited (YIL) and Gliders India Limited (GIL) w.e.f 1st October, 2021. 
Presently, there are 16 Defence Public Sector Undertakings under the administrative control of 
the Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence. The Committee find that out of 
overall production of Rs. 85000 crore by the country’s Defence Industry, the contribution of public 
sector is Rs. 68,000 crore. They are pleased to learn that two DPSUs viz Hindustan Aeronautics 
Limited (HAL) and Bharat Electronics Ltd. (BEL) have secured 42nd and 66th position, 
respectively, in ‘The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) top 100 arms-
producing and military services companies’ report. The Committee are quite hopeful that with 
creation of new DPSUs, the overall volume of production by domestic Defence industry will be 
augmented and that the requirements of modernization of the Armed Forces will be fulfilled timely 
and in qualitative and cost effective manner, and more Indian companies would establish 
themselves globally as Defence manufacturing giants. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The creation of new DPSUs is to transform Ordnance Factories into productive and 
profitable assets, improve expertise in product range, increase competitiveness, improve quality, 
enhance cost-efficiency and ensure self-reliance in defence preparedness. 
 

41 
 
As a part of transformation exercise, all the existing indents placed by the Services on 
erstwhile OFB were converted into deemed contracts, thereby ascertaining sustained work load 
to various units for next four years. These deemed contracts provide annual targets for delivery of 
products. Every year, 60% of amount pertaining to that year’s target shall be paid by the Services 
to the DPSUs as advance as per the terms and conditions stipulated in the deemed contract. The 
advances provide the working capital to the newly constituted DPSUs. 
 
These newly created DPSUs have the potential to earn profit from their supplies to 
Services, other Government organizations (like MHA), civil trade and exports through 
participation in competitive bidding. 
 
 Further, modernization is an on-going process to ensure the product quality and retention 
of manufacturing capacities through induction of latest technology and state-of-the-art Plant & 
Machineries available across the world. These DPSUs have comprehensive modernization plan 
to ensure the product quality and capacity retention to meet the requirement of Indian Armed 
Forces. Capacity augmentation plans are also underway for meeting requirements of customers 
and increasing indigenization content to meet the objective of “Atmanirbhar Bharat”. 
 
 In order to secure the futuristic load, impetus is being given in the development of 
technically advanced niche products and indigenization of ex-import items, so as to cater the 
futuristic requirement of the Services.   
 
DPSUs are focusing on widening their customer base, including exports to augment the 
volume of defence production. As an outcome of such actions taken to tap export market, these 
new companies have secured export orders of more than Rs. 600 crore. Also, the DPSUs are 
pursuing export opportunity through interaction with defence attaches at various Indian 
embassies and missions abroad and are also exploring the opportunity of entering into MoUs 
with private defence industries.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
The Committee note that cumulative order book status of the 9 DPSUs, as on 16th 
February, 2022, stands at Rs. 2,48,487 crore. After examining the data furnished by the Ministry 
regarding order book status of each DPSU, it is inferred that out of the nine DPSUs, Hindustan 
Shipyard Limited (HSL) and Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) has considerably low order 
book value when compared to the other DPSUs. The order book value, as on 16th February, 
2022, in respect of HSL and MIDHANI amounts to Rs. 2,673 crore and Rs. 1,350 crore, 
respectively. The committee also learn that in case of HAL, there is no firm order currently 
available with the company for platform manufacturing beyond 2022-23, except the 83 LCA Mk1A 
order received in February 2021. The major part of existing orders for supply of aircraft and 
helicopters will be liquidated shortly with the major manufacturing order of Su-30MKI completed 
in 2022-21. BEML is stated to be having an order book position of over Rs. 10,000 crore which 
will be executed by 2024-25. As regards MDL, the balance order book of Rs. 47,728 crore is 
slated to be completed in next 5 to 6 years. Admittedly, the order book position of HSL is low 
when compared with other Defence shipyards and the balance orders are scheduled to be 
completed by end of March 2024. In this connection, the Committee note that the steps taken by 

42 
 
the Ministry for strengthening the order book of DPSUs amongst others, include reforms in 
promoting exports, indigenization, ease of doing business in Defence and supporting 
Technology, Innovation, Research and Development in DPSUs. The Committee, after 
examination of the data provided in respect of the DPSUs, find that challenge of underutilization 
of production facilities and other resources in the coming years is also being faced by even well 
performing DPSUs such as HAL. The Committee also understand that due to complexities 
involved in the Defence procurement process, translation of an Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) 
into a concrete order for DPSUs takes time. Therefore, in order to ensure that the DPSUs 
maintain a healthy order book position, the Committee recommend that timely placement for 
orders and other requirements by the Services and long-term planning for maintaining financial 
viability of the DPSUs should be carried out by the Ministry in consultation with the DPSUs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
HAL:The order book position of HAL as of 31st Dec2022 is Rs. 83707 Crs.  This includes the firm 
platform manufacturing order for LCA Mk1, LCA MK1A, and LCH.  
 
Various manufacturing orders are in advance stages of approval with Defence acquisition and 
these are: 
 
 HTT-40 Basic Trainer Aircraft for IAF 
 Su-30 MKI Aircraft for IAF 
 ALH for Army 
 Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) for Army and IAF 
 Do-228 aircraft for IAF and ICG 
 AL-31FP Engine for IAF 
 RD-33 Engine for IAF 
 Mid Life Upgrade of Do-228 for IN 
 
 Further, following manufacturing proposals have been projected to SHQs to initiate activities 
for putting up AoN for approval by DG (Acq)  and subsequent release of RFPs: 
 
 LCH for Army and IAF 
 LUH for Army and IAF 
 Utility Helicopter – Marine (UHM)  
 Addl. ALH for ICG 
 Addl. HTT-40 aircraft 
 Mid Life Upgrade of Do-228 for IAF 
 
These anticipated orders along with the repair & overhaul task, once materialized would help 
in sustaining the growth of organization in the coming years. 
 
BEL: BEL’s current order book stands at around Rs. 49,598 Cr as on date. The deliveries are 
spread over next few years in a phased manner as per the time-lines of customer contract. 
Considering the current order book, BEL Utilization of Capacity/Production facilities by all 

43 
 
Units/SBUs is to the maximum. It is also pertinent to mention here that timely placement of some 
of the major orders as listed below will help BEL strengthen its financial viability. Major Projects 
for which receipt of LoI, Preparation of draft orders, Completion of trials & BQ submitted are: 
(Orders expected during FY 2022-23) 
 
Product/System Approx. Order Value (Rs. Cr) 
Akash Prime - 3rd & 4th Reg (Main Equipment) 4350 
Mountain Terrain EW Systems - Himshakti 2526 
MPR (Arudhra) 2407 
BMP-II Upgrade 2425 
MSWS for Mi-17 upgrade - IAF 2000 
 
Major Projects for which receipt of LoI, Preparation of draft orders, Completion of trials & 
BQ submitted are: (Orders expected during FY 2023-24) 
 
Product/System Approx. Order Value (Rs. Cr) 
QRSAM - Army 10400 
MRSAM & MFSTAR-RA FOR SHIVALIK, TALWAR 
/ TEG CLASS OF SHIPS 8621 
MRSAM FOR NEW GENERATION CORVETTES 8176 
Sub-Nodes -IACCS 7000 
ADC&RS (Phase-II) 1973 
 
BEML: At present, BEML Limited is having an order book position of over Rs. 9,042 Cr. as on 
date, comprising all 3 business verticals (Defence & Aerospace, Mining & Construction and Rail 
& Metro) which will be executed over next few years in a phased manner as per the time-lines of 
customer contract. Further orders are required from MoD and Indian Railways for having 
continuity in production and utilisation of facilities. As far as BEML Limited is concerned, the 
orders received from MoD in the last 3 years is as below: 
 
Year Value in Rs. Cr. 
2019-20  45 
2020-21 2090 
2021-22 197 
2022-23 (Upto end Jan’23) Nil 
 
 

44 
 
Also, major orders which are in various stages from MoD where BEML has submitted the offer / 
PNC under process / RFP anticipated / BQ submitted etc: 
 
(a) Command Post Vehicle  
(b) Mechanical Mine Marking Equipment Mk II  
(c) Sarvatra Bridge System  
(d) Self Propelled Mine Burrier (SPMB)  
(e) Arjun Armoured Repair and Recovery Vehicle (ARRV)  
(f) Articulated All Terrain Vehicle (AATV)  
(g) Rough Terrain Fork Lift Truck (RTFLT)  
 
BDL: Order book position of BDL is around Rs 12000 Cr and spread over a period of six to seven 
years whereas BDL has already established its capability in giving a turnover of Rs 3500 Cr and 
above in earlier years. With this the present Order Book Position available in hand keeping the 
capability of BDL will not last more than three to four years. Projects like Akash, Invar ATGM are 
being underutilized with respect to the capacity and capability of divisions and also the skilled 
manpower. Various orders which are under pipeline needs to be expedited in placement of order 
on BDL to utilize all its resources in an optimum manner and also the capacity can be fully 
utilized. Invar ATGM order is already completed and manpower is underutilized due to non-
availability of firm order. Similarly, Akash division will have only 10% of its capability and capacity 
load for next year. Hence these two divisions need to be immediately loaded with firm orders. 
 
The following are the anticipated orders which are in pipeline and under various stages of 
approval: 
 
1. Akash 3rd & 4th Regiment order 
2. MRSAM(IN) 
3. Refurbishment of R73 
4. SAAW 
5. Helina 
6. Spike ER2 
7. Invar ATGM 
 
MIDHANI: MIDHANI currently has open order of Rs. 1,402 Cr. as on 01-Feb-2023 and is further 
expected to book around Rs. 200 Cr. till end of Mar-2023. Presently, the major orders are 
received from Defence sector. However, newly set up Wide Plate Mill has started production and 
MIDHANI supplied trial orders of Special steel & Nickel Alloy wide plates and obtaining regular 
orders. Supplies from newly set-up Armour plant at Rohtak also started. It is expected to improve 
sales from wide plate mill & Armour Plant in the FY 2023-24 onward. Hence, the order book 
position will improve in coming years. 
 
MDL: MDL is currently building Destroyers, Advance Stealth Frigates and Conventional 
Submarines. In addition to the above, MDL is also carrying out Medium Refit & Life Certification 
of Submarine. These projects constitute MDL’s order book position of Rs. 40,252 Cr approx. as 
on 31st Jan 2023. 

45 
 
GRSE: GRSE Ltd is primarily engaged in Warship Construction for Indian Armed Forces. GRSE 
has supplied Warships to Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, Govt of Mauritius and Govt of 
Seychelles. GRSE completed its Infrastructure Modernization creating Integrated Shipbuilding 
Facility in 2013, with an aim to build quality warships in reduced timeframe with Modular 
Construction Technology. GRSE has an executable order book of Rs. 22,242.42 Crs as on 
31.12.2022.  
 
 Towards utilization of infrastructure, GRSE has responded to various RFI / RFPs floated 
by IN / ICG. Over and above, GRSE has also submitted BQ worth over 600 M USD through MoD 
facilitation to various Friendly countries under GOI LOC/G-2-G scheme. Further, considering 
GRSE’s expertise in constructing and delivering specialized vessels such as Corvettes, Survey 
Vessels, Fast Patrol Vessels etc., GRSE has also recommended placement of orders on GRSE 
for additional P17A ships, Next Generation Corvettes, Next Generation Survey Vessels, Water 
Jet Fast Attack Crafts for the Indian Navy and Fast Patrol Vessels for the Indian Coast Guard. 
 
GSL: The order book position of GSL as on 31st Jan 2023 is Rs 14,413 Cr (provisional). GSL has 
emerged the lowest bidder for seven Next Generation Offshore Patrol Vessels (NGOPVs) for the 
Indian Navy (IN) with expected contract value of Rs 6,000 Cr. (approx). CNC has been concluded 
and CCS approval is being processed. Contract along with build specification is expected to be 
signed by end of March 2023. Post signing, the total order book position will be approx. Rs 
20,000 Cr. With the above order book, the utilization of production facilities and other resources 
will be optimal till FY 2026-27 for Steel & Aluminum line of production. However, with regards to 
GRP/FRP line of production, the optimum utilization of state-of-the-art GRP Complex developed 
under Goa Shipyard Modernization Plan has been a challenge since 2019, due to non finalization 
of MCMV Project for which GSL has been selected as production agency by MoD/IN. 
GSL is putting up concerted efforts to ensure a healthy order book position for maintaining 
financial viability of the Company and therefore, responding to various RFIs/RFPs of IN and 
Indian Coast Guard. GSL, leveraging its in-house design capability and shipbuilding skills, has 
always been exploring export markets by offering customized solutions to potential customers 
meeting their specific requirements. 
 
HSL: The Shipbuilding order book value of HSL is about Rs 1818 Cr as on 01 Feb 2023 and it 
comprises of projects viz. construction of 2 Nos Diving Support Vessels and 1 No Floating Dock 
for Indian Navy. These projects are scheduled to be completed by Aug 2024. With a view to 
improve order book position, HSL has been nominated by MoD for construction of 5 Nos Fleet 
Support Ships (FSS) for Indian Navy. The contract negotiations were concluded with the Contract 
Negotiation Committee (CNC) on September 28, 2022. The contract is expected to be signed 
with Indian Navy post approval of Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS). Timely placement of 
this order will help HSL strengthen its financial viability. Further, HSL is vigorously participating in 
all competitive tenders issued by Indian Navy, Coast Guard, other Govt/Private organizations in 
order to secure more contracts and thereby improve declining order book position.  
 
 
 
 

46 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
On examination of the financial performance of the DPSUs in 2020-21, the Committee 
observe that except HSL which incurred loss off 14 crore due to lack of submarine refit orders 
and COVID pandemic, all DPSUs have registered profit in the said Financial Year. Amongst the 
profit making DPSUs, the low profit i.e. Rs74.8 crore was made by BEML in Financial Year 2020-
21. With regard to profitability of BEML Mysuru Plant, the Chairman & Managing Director of 
BEML candidly admitted during evidence that margin of profits were less due to competitive 
environment, especially in the mining and construction field. The Committee also note from the 
submission of a representative of the Ministry that albeit the number of employees is 
considerable in DPSUs, there is an increasing trend in the DPSUs to move towards outsourcing 
and becoming system integrators. The Committee are of the considered view that focus of the 
DPSUs should be on increasing and improving Research & Development so that avant-garde 
technologies and platforms can be developed and offered to our Armed Forces and friendly 
countries, in the form of exports. This will ensure that the DPSUs remain relevant, profitable and 
combative amongst the current globally competitive environment. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that along with vigorous efforts to promote Research & Development ·in the DPSUs, 
an exercise for pruning unproductive expenditure and rationalisation of manpower should be 
undertaken by the Ministry for each DPSU. Further, the Committee desire that a statement 
reflecting each DPSU's annual turnover, profit after tax, dividend paid in the last three years and 
the sanctioned versus held manpower and manpower deployed in core and non-core activities 
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
HAL: The required information pertaining to HAL is as follows: 
 
a) Financial Parameter           (Rupees in Crores) 
SN Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
1 Annual Turnover 21228 22369 12852 
2 Profit After Tax 2842 3233 1985 
3 Dividend paid 1112 1003 468 
 
b) Sanctioned vs. Manpower Strength:  
 
Particulars Overall Manpower Sanctioned 
Strength (2017-18) 
Total Strength 
(As on 31.03.22) 
Officers  9270 7783 
Direct Labour  14438 11284 
Indirect Labour  9125 6345 
Total  32833 25412 
 
 
 

47 
 
c) Manpower deployed in core activities (Regular including Tenure based Personnel): As on 
31.3.2021  
 
i. Officers = 7783 
ii. Workmen =17629 (Direct =11284 and Indirect = 6345) 
 
d) Manpower deployed in non-core activities: ( As on 28.2.2022) 
 
i. Contract Labour =10658 
ii. Casual Labour = 191 
 
 It is further submitted that HAL is taking all out efforts in Research & Development and to 
reduce unproductive expenditure. 
 
BEL: BEL has been preparing long term Strategic Growth Plans aligning with Perspective Plans 
(like Technology Perspective Capability Roadmap-TPCR) of Indian Defence Forces/DRDO labs. 
BEL operates on 3 year R&D Plan and Technology Roadmaps have been drawn aligning to 
TPCR with the objective of developing futuristic products/systems that are best in class 
comparable to international standards.  
 
As regards pruning of expenditure and rationalization of manpower, BEL has been 
undertaking Cost Reduction and Austerity Measures under various avenues as an on-going 
process with annual targets. The progress is reviewed periodically by the ‘Corporate Cost 
Reduction cum Indigenization Review Committee’. 
 
With reference to rationalization of manpower, it is pertinent to mention here that, BEL is an 
R&D focused organization and provide enhanced thrust on indigenous design & development of 
futuristic technologies/products that caters primarily to Indian Defence Forces, thus contributing 
to the Defence Preparedness. Around 50% of the company’s manpower are engaged in R&D 
activities. Adequate thrust is provided for indigenization towards self-reliance and only optimum 
no of staffs are engaged in other activities including Production, Quality, Marketing & Customer 
Support, Materials Management, Information Systems etc. 
 
 
 The desired details are tabulated below: 
Rs. Cr 
Year 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Turnover 10085  12608 13818 14212 14816 
PAT 1927  1794 2065 2231 2407 
Dividend Paid 828.44  682.24 974.64 1003.4 1104.2 
Manpower (Nos.): Core & Non-core Activities   
Sanctioned  9726  9612 9279 9279 9201 
Deployed  9726  9612 9279 9279 9201 
BEML: BEML is operating under highly competitive environment and 74% of sales is achieved on 
competition basis. 

48 
 
 
 Under Mining & Construction segment, the Company competes with global companies viz. 
Caterpillar, Komatsu, etc. and holds over 50% market share in Dozer & Dumper market.  
 
 Also, BEML is the only Indian PSU manufacturing State-of-the-Art Metro Cars competing 
with Global Players viz. Alstom, CRRC, etc. and has market share of over 45% in Metro 
segment. 
 
 With the ever-increasing competition in the retail market, competitive pricing is fast 
becoming one of the most sought-after pricing strategies. 
 
 BEML is participating in the tenders which are finalized and orders are placed on BEML only by virtue of being lowest bidder. As such, the quotes are always competitive and the margins are wafer thin that are charged on itemsand vary from case-to-case , depending on competition.  
 BEML has its own world-class composite R&D establishment for Design & Development of 
products. The R&D establishment has CAD Centre, Fluid-power, Powerline, Structural 
Engineering & Material Science laboratories and is continuously engaged in New Product 
Development and Upgradation of existing products to meet customer requirements. More than 
69% of Company’s Sales Turnover is through in-house developed R&D products. The average 
R&D expenditure is more than 3% of its turnover. 
 
 The statement / table showing Turnover, PAT and Dividend paid in last three years is as 
follows:  
 Rs.in Crores 
 
 Details of sanctioned versus held manpower and manpower deployed in core and non-core 
activities are as follows:  
 
Table: 1 Executive (Group A & B) 
  
Category Operational Sanction Positions 
(as on 31.03.22) 
Technical 1712 1655 
Non-Technical  327 245 
Total 2039 1900 
 
 
 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Turnover 3028.82 3557.21 3602.1 
PAT 68.38 74.80 76.30 
Dividend 24.99 24.99 24.99 

49 
 
Table : 2  Employees (Group C & D) 
Category Operational 
Sanctions 
Positions  
(as on 31.03.22) 
Direct (Technical areas) 2294 2268 
Indirect (Technical support 
areas and Non-Technical 
areas) 
1562 1423 
Total 3856 3691 
 
* Direct activities correspond to core activities of the Company in terms of Manufacturing, 
Fabrication and Assembly of products. Indirect activities correspond to various support functional 
activities towards manufacturing of products. 
 
 The Company follows a practice for fixing the operational manpower strength of 
Executives and Employees, on yearly basis, based on the following factors: 
 
(a) Business and Production Plan 
(b) Manpower attritions because of superannuation and resignations. 
(c) Load vis-à-vis Capacity calculations and Sub-contract / outsourcing (for direct labour 
category) 
(d) Productivity increases through incentive schemes, optimum utilization of manpower 
through multi-machine manning, multi skilling development, process improvement, 
ERP, Business Intelligence Management software (SCM, SRM etc). 
(e) Operational improvements through process improvements, Quality improvements, 
technology leveraging such as; adopting online mode of operation for various manual 
processes, online file approval system etc., benchmarking the best practices, 
outsourcing possibilities etc. 
(f) Engagement of temporary manpower linking to fluctuations in the work load. 
 
 
BDL: BDL is a profit making Defence PSU and the performance of the company is as follows-  
         (Amount in Cr.) 
 
Sl. No Particulars 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 
1 Annual Turnover 2817.40  1913.76 3104.87 
2 Profit after Tax 499.92  257.77 534.90 
3 Dividend Paid 145.71  169.53 145.16 
3a Interim dividend of current year 133.80 122.80 114.55 
3b Final Dividend of previous years 11.91 46.73 30.61 
 
 Details of Sanctioned versus held manpower and manpower deployed in Core (Technical) 
and Non-Core (Non-Technical) pertaining to Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL) is furnished 
hereunder: 
 

50 
 
Category Sanctioned 
Strength 
Manpower deployed as on 
31.03.2022 
 
  Total Technical Non-
Technical 
Total Vacancies 
as on date, 
Notification 
issued and 
recruitment 
under progress 
Executives 882  820 699 121 62 
Non-Executives 1845  1838 1400 438 07 
Total 2727  2658 2099 559 69 
 
Note: Board of Directors of the Company approved overall sanctioned strength is 1200 
Executives (Below Board Level) and 3000 Non-Executives (Workmen). However, based on the 
Company's Business requirement, the above figured Sanctioned Strength is being operated with 
the approval of CMD/BDL. 
 
e) MIDHANI: Financial data in respect of MIDHANI is as under:  
(Rupees in Crores) 
 
Particulars  2021-22  2020-21 2019-20 
Turnover 53619.92  81,323.08 71,287.50 
PAT 9531.96  16,629.15 15,973.38 
Dividend paid for the year  2960.03  5,170.61 2,828.83 
Dividend paid to Govt. (74%) 2,190.42 3,826.25 2,093.33 
 
Sanctioned Vs Actual Manpower data: 
 
Manpower as on  Sanctioned 
Strength  
Actual Strength  
01.04.2019 1456 789 
01.04.2020 782 
01.04.2021 760 
31.12.2021 755 
 
MDL: 
 
Research and Development (R&D): MDL is actively involved in developing innovative 
technologies through R&D using in-house resources and collaboration with academic institutions. 
Since 2017, MDL is recognized as an In-house R&D center by Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (DSIR). MDL is having an in-house R&D team of dedicated personnel with 
specific targets in pursuit of quality R & D work with a view to bridge gaps in engineering and 
technology. A dedicated section has also been formed in the Submarine Division for business 
development and innovation. MDL is putting efforts for increasing and improving research and 
development. 

51 
 
R&D plan – Current status: 
 
(i) MDL has broadly identified the avenues for R&D initiatives as below: 
 Product Improvement 
 Improvement of processes and/or services in shipbuilding 
 Improvement of operating procedures 
 Improvement of efficiency in various spheres of MDL’s operation 
 Performance improvement techniques 
 Quality improvement initiatives for processes and/or services 
 Cost reduction measures 
 Customized solutions to generic and specific problems 
 Studies for improvement of Project Timelines 
 Development of new hull forms of ships 
 Efficiency improvement 
 Performance improvement 
 
(a) Strategy and status of collaboration with Industry/Academia for R&D: 
 
MDL has entered into Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with the institutions with an 
active participation of MDL executives designated for various functional domains and the 
academia.  
 
MDL, in association with IIT Madras incubated start-ups has carried out the development of 
three Artificial Intelligence(AI) projects as follows: 
 
 Artificial Intelligence enabled Robotic Weld Inspection tool using Phased Array 
Technique to replace Manual Radiography. 
 Artificial Intelligence enabled Robotic Weld Inspection tool using Phased Array 
Technique to replace Computerized Radiography. 
 Artificial Intelligence enabled Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) 
 
The R&D initiatives taken up by MDL is expected to contribute to accelerate development 
and growth in the indigenous warship building capabilities and also will continue to be a major 
contributor in nation’s journey for technological self-reliance. 
 
Pruning unproductive expenditure: There is NIL unproductive/wasteful expenditure pertaining 
to MDL. Further, in order to reduce overheads, MDL has implemented cost reduction measures 
in the following areas:  
 
a) Optimization of expenses on major events like launching, commissioning, etc. 
b) Overtime allowances /Honorarium. 
c) Hiring of vehicles  
d) Office expenses  
e) Foreign Travels  
f) Sponsorships etc.  
 

52 
 
Rationalization of Manpower: MDL being a project based organization, has adopted a lean 
structure of manpower comprising a mix of employees on permanent, fixed term and outsourcing 
basis to avoid having long term liability.  In addition to employees on permanent rolls, MDL has 
employees on fixed term basis for a period of 3 years which can be extended by 2 more years 
based on the project requirement.  MDL has also identified the Non-Core trades/activities and 
has outsourced these trades/activities viz. housekeeping, canteen, guest house, data entry 
operators, messengers etc.  MDL recruits/inducts employees in the core areas in the permanent 
rolls of the company from time to time to maintain continuity of talent pool and skill sets for 
manufacturing of Ships and Submarines.  At present MDL has 4943 employees on its rolls 
against sanctioned strength of 9972.  
 
 Revenue from operations, Profit after tax and dividend paid by MDL during the last 
three years is as under:  
 
(Rs. In Cr) 
 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 (Restated) 
Revenue from 
Operations 
4327.10 4047.82 4904.84 
PAT 512.78  479.57 408.48 
Dividend paid during 
the year (Excl DDT) 
174.12 155.28 217.16 
 
 Manpower details pertaining to MDL are tabulated as below:   
 
a) Sanctioned vs. held manpower: 
 
Category 
 
Sanction 
 
Borne 
Permanent Fixed Term Total 
Executive 1271  963 0 963 
Staff 819  220 114 334 
Operative 7882  2156 1490 3646 
Total 9972  3339 1604 4943 
 
b) Manpower deployed in core and non-core activities 
 
Category Borne 
Permanent Fixed Term Total 
Core (Prod/Tech) 3248  1604 4852 
Non-Core (Non 
Prod/Non Tech) 
91 0 91 
Total 3339  1604 4943 
 
GRSE: GRSE’s R&D policy was adopted in 2012 with the objectives of Technology 
Development, Product & Process Development, Value Engineering, Cost reduction, improvement 

53 
 
in Quality, Efficiency and Performance, Import Substitution for strategic reasons and providing 
solutions to generic problems. Dept. of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR), Ministry of 
Science & Technology, GoI has conferred recognition to “61 Park Unit” of GRSE as its ‘In-house 
R&D Unit’ vide letter dt. 18th Jan 2019 which is valid upto 31 March 2024. 
 
 The expenditure on R&D incurred by company in last 05 years is as follows: - 
 
Financial Year Rs. (In Lakhs) 
2016-17 1318.66 
2017-18 1118.60 
2018-19 1172.00 
2019-20 1536.00 
2020-21 1328.00 
 
Recent R&D Initiatives- 
 
(i) Hull Form development of Inland Ferry Catamaran Type Electric Propulsion 
(ii) Basic Design of Cargo cum Pax Ferry for operation in South America coast area  
(iii) Hovercraft Design Acquisition from EPS Corporation, USA 
(iv) Hull Form development of New Generation Corvette Vessel by CFD & Model Test 
(v) Design & Development of New Modular Steel Bridge with carriageway width 5.3 M 
(Model GBB-9000) 
 
Pruning unproductive expenses: Efforts and steps being adopted to rationalize and cut-off 
unproductive expenses incurred in company's premises- 
 
i. Expenses like electricity charges, transportation and travelling, advertisement and 
publicity are rationalised by adopting several measures like maximising solar energy, 
using electric vehicles and using websites for advertisements etc. 
ii. Maximisation of IT software has been developed for record keeping to minimise the 
expenses of stationery and printing. 
iii. Other unproductive expenses are also under identification and necessary measures are 
under implementation to eliminate such expenses. 
 
 Financial Figures for last 3 years- 
(Rs. In Crores.) 
Particulars Financial Year 
2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 
Annual Turnover 1748.35  1132.76 1424.70 
Profit After Tax 189.53  153.47 163.48 
Total Dividend paid* 69.87  60.13 149.70 
 
* Dividend paid consists total dividend paid during the financial year, which includes Final 
dividend of previous year and interim dividend of current year. 
 
 

54 
 
 Manpower : Requirement of manpower is subject to review from time to time keeping in 
view the dynamic business scenario. GRSE conducted manpower study by an outside 
Agency. As a part of optimum utilization of manpower, the skilled category work force is 
engaged in core and high technology areas. The Company has resorted to outsourcing of 
various noncore, low and medium technology areas to meet the manpower requirement in 
unskilled and semiskilled category of work force. In addition to the above initiatives, 
automation and IT technology like ERP, Biometric Attendance, Digital payments, Data 
Management System, Business Intelligence solutions, etc. have been introduced. 
Sanctioned strength vs held and manpower deployed in core & non-core activities are as 
follows: - 
 
Category 
 
(Below Board 
level 
Employees) 
 
Overall 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
 
(Under 
permanent 
Category) 
Actual strength of 
employees as on 
01.04.2022 
 
(Under permanent 
Category) 
No. of temporary/ 
Contractual 
Employees as on 
01.04.2022 
 
(Fixed term Contract) 
Core Non-core Total Core Non-
core 
Total 
Executive 540  279 198 477 1 3 4 
Non-Executive 1783  896 372 1268 28 11 39 
Total 2323  1175 570 1745 29 14 43 
 
GSL: The details of annual turnover, profit after tax and dividend paid in the last three years of 
GSL are furnished below: 
            (Rs. in Cr) 
Sl. No. Particulars FY 2019-20 FY 2020-21 FY 2021-22 
1 Value of Production (Turnover) 902.94 827.39  703.70 
2 Profit After Tax 197.77 127.91   101.09 
3 Dividend Paid*:-    
(a) Total Dividend excluding DDT 66.35 55.29 49.47 
(b) Government Share @ 51.09% 33.90 28.25  25.27 
 
* Dividend amounting to Rs 49.47 Cr includes Final Dividend for FY 2020-21 of Rs 11.64 
Cr paid during FY 2021-22 on 04.10.2021 and Interim Dividend for FY 2021-22 amounting 
to Rs 37.83 Cr paid on 31.12.2021. 
 
Details of the manpower deployed in GSL are as follows: 
  
Manpower as on 30.03.2022 
 Group A & B Group C& D 
Sanctioned Strength 
(including FTEs) 287 1630 

55 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pruning unproductive expenditure: 
 
There is NIL unproductive expenditure pertaining to GSL. Further, in order to reduce overheads, 
GSL has implemented cost reduction measures in the following areas: 
 
(a) Optimisation of expenditure on major events like Launching, Commissioning etc; 
(b) Curtailing Overtime; 
(c) Travelling Expenses; 
(d) Hiring of Vehicles; 
(e) Foreign Travel; 
(f) Advertisement & Publicity; 
(g) Office Expenses; 
(h) Reduction in expenditure towards Technical /Commercial/Price negotiation meetings by 
conducting virtual meetings wherever feasible; 
(i) Savings in Advertisement and Publicity cost of tender enquiries by publishing 
advertisements in GSL website or NIC portal for e-procurement or GeM portal; 
(j) Saving in tender enquiry printing and postage cost by resorting procurements through e-
tendering through NIC portal &GeM portal; 
Borne Strength as on 
30.03.2022 (including FTEs) 255 1046 
Department wise Manpower as on 30.03.2022 
Department Manpower 
CMD & Director's Sectt.                          9 
Ship Repairs                      33 
Commercial & Outsourcing                104 
Planning                           28 
Production               688 
Technical Services                     91 
General Engineering Services       52 
Quality Assurance & 
Reliability                         36 
Modernisation cell                 33 
Information Technology             16 
Finance                            39 
HR & Admin.                         126 
Secretariat & Legal                9 
Safety Health & Environment        16 
Forward Project Group       16 
Vigilance                          5 
   TOTAL 1301 

56 
 
(k) Provision made for resorting to Repeat Order or including Option Clause in tender 
enquiries thereby reducing processing cost in case of additional requirement arising at a 
later stage within allowable time. 
 
HSL: The details of Turnover, Profit After Tax, Dividend paid in respect of Hindustan Shipyard 
Ltd (HSL) in the last three years is tabulated below:- 
 
Financial Year 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
Turnover (Rs Cr) 594.91 573.54 477.95 489.21 
Profit After Tax (Rs Cr) 36.23 13.03 (-)14 8 
Dividend *** Nil Nil Nil Nil 
*** As per third proviso of Section 123(1) of Companies Act 2013 as amended 
vide Companies (Amendment) Act 2015, the Company is not eligible for 
declaration of dividend due to its accumulated losses and unabsorbed 
depreciation. 
 
2. Details of sanctioned versus held manpower and manpower deployed in core and non-core 
activities are as below:- 
 
Category Sanctioned 
Manpower  
Held Manpower 
as on date 
Deployed in 
Core 
Activities 
Deployed in 
Non-Core 
Activities 
Permanent Employees 
Officers 350* 335 335 -- 
Staff 904** 124 124 -- 
Workmen 1275** 332 331 01 
Fixed Term Employees 
Officers -- 40 40 -- 
Staff -- 79 79 -- 
Workmen -- 304 304 -- 
 
 * Rationalized strength of Officers informed to the Board in its 408th Board Meeting held on 
04 Mar 2020. 
 
 ** Strength of Staff & Workmen freezed by the Board in its 356th Board Meeting held on 16 
Nov 2010. 
 
3. HSL has implemented strict expenditure control and cost cutting measures during the past 
few years with a view to economize on the expenditure to the maximum extent feasible. The 
expenditure control measures implemented in HSL are as below:- 
 
(a) Manpower Capitalization Cost. Strength of permanent employees and fixed term contract 
employees have been rationalized which has led to reduction in manpower cost. No major 
recruitment has been done in staff and workmen category in last five years. Presently, 
recruitment is being done only to meet urgent requirements in order to meet the production 
targets.  

57 
 
(b) Employee related benefits. Following employee benefits have been curtailed during the 
past few years: 
 
(i) Holiday working allowance has been withdrawn totally for Officers working on 
Holidays. 
(ii) Reduction of Overtime expenditure and no Overtime is allowed unless it is production 
exigencies 
 
(c) Other expenditure control measures. Some of the various other cost cutting measures 
adopted by the shipyard are listed below:- 
(i) Reduction in expenditure towards transportation by conducting virtual meetings.  
(ii) Reduction in expenditure towards stationary by implementing the online software 
module of File Lifecycle Management (FLM) system.  
(iii) Savings in Advertisement & Publicity expenses by resorting procurements through e-
tendering, GeM portal.  
(iv) Savings in energy cost through installation of 03 MW Rooftop Power System and 
adoption of efficient energy conservation measures  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
 From written submission of the Ministry, the Committee understand that a visioning 
exercise on devising a 'Business cum Growth Model' for each. DPSU is under way under the 
supervision of Department of Defence Production. The vision exercise will come with the long 
term perspective planning for the DPSUs so as to make them financially viable, making their 
products globally competitive and gain business opportunities. In this connection, the Committee 
recommend that the visioning exercise may be completed expeditiously and the findings thereof 
may be intimated to the Committee accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The visioning exercises of the DPSUs are in various stages of completion. The findings 
and recommendations of these visioning exercises shall be shared with the Committee 
separately.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 The Committee find that several challenges are being faced by the DPSUs which inter alia' 
include shortage of semi-conductor chips, delayed clearances by stakeholders in Turnkey 
projects, retention of talent, procurement through Government e-Marketplace (GeM), supporting 
platforms for a long duration which involves high cost, extensive testing and economy of scale, 
competition from long term established players in export market, idling of facilities and resources, 
delay in projected timelines due to COVID-19, volatility in price of imported input raw material 
volatile & limited availability, pending permission from Foreign Original Equipment Manufacturer 
(FOEMs) to export missiles. The Committee recommend that urgent and intensive focused efforts 
from the Ministry and the DPSUs are required in order to ensure that the DPSUs, besides 

58 
 
fulfilling the requirements of the Armed forces, are able to achieve their targeted level of 
production and profits. The Committee desire that concrete measures be initiated/ taken by the 
Ministry and the DPSUs to address and resolve each of the said bottlenecks being faced by the 
DPSUs and the outcome thereof may be apprised to them within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
HAL:Major challenges faced by HAL are given below: 
a. Shortage of Semiconductor chips 
 
S No. Issue Action Taken / Planned 
1 Demand of semi-conductor 
chips surges due to pandemic. 
HAL has faced shortage of 
semi-conductor chips in some 
cases due to non-receipt of 
items. 
HAL has rigorously followed-up with 
OEMs and identification of alternate, 
which resulted in minimisation of 
impact in procurement of semi-
conductor chips used in manufacturing. 
 
b. Retention of talent 
 
The attrition rate of HAL during the year 2020-21 is 0.23%. The measures / initiatives taken by 
HAL to address the challenge of Retention of Talent are as below: 
 
i. The Company has a Policy for Sponsorship for Higher Studies and grant of Study Leave 
upto a maximum period of 2 years. Sponsorship / Study Leave is granted for pursuing  
 
(a) Courses in the Technical Disciplines at IITs, IISc, Cranfield University, UK; and 
(b) Courses in Non - Technical Disciplines at premier Management Institutes like XLRI, 
IIM- Bangalore etc. 
 
ii. The Company also has a Policy for Sponsoring Officers for PhD Programmes (in both 
Technical & Non - Technical Disciplines) at various Institutes of repute. 
 
iii. The Company has a Sabbatical Scheme applicable to all Executives in Grades I to X. HAL 
Sabbatical Scheme provides Executives to avail Sabbatical leave for the duration of 
minimum 6 months and upto a maximum cumulative period of 2 years, and can be availed 
upto a maximum of two spells. The Sabbatical leave helps Executives to avail leave / 
break for self-renewal, enhancement of expertise / knowledge; to pursue hobbies, literary / 
artistic / multi-disciplinary interests; to discharge various familial / social obligations etc.  
 
iv. Through Training Facilities at HMA, programmes that cater to develop functional, 
operational, technical, managerial and leadership competencies are provided to 
Executives.  
 
v. Job Rotations / Transfers are effected annually in order to provide varied work experience 
to Employees. 

59 
 
c. Procurement through Govt e-Marketplace 
 
HAL is registered as a Buyer in GeM Portal and is taking up procurement of items which are 
available in GeM Portal. HAL is also procuring several items which are not available in GeM 
Portal utilizing Custom Bid Module/BoQ Module extensively. Through this method large set of 
domestic vendors are given opportunities in our procurement process.  
 
d. Supporting platforms for a long duration which involves high cost 
 
S. 
No. 
Issue Action Taken / Planned 
1  HAL supports platforms for 
longer durations of more than 
40 to 50 years. Due to short 
lifecycle of electronics 
technology, spares and 
components, various 
obsolescence issue arise 
which is a serious challenge 
for long-term platform support. 
Maintenance of old platforms 
involves very high cost, 
extensive testing (in case of 
substitutions) and also very 
difficult to justify economies of 
scale. 
 Dependency on imports for 
materials is another issue of 
concern which poses great 
challenge in volatile 
international economic, social 
and unpredictable situations.  
 Life cycle support is being included in all 
upcoming platforms/projects. 
Obsolescence management is being 
done through OEMs help or through 
indigenous development of spares to the 
extent possible.   
  
 HAL also takes up midlife upgrade of 
platforms with or without the support of 
the OEMs which apart from increasing 
the lethal capabilities of existing platforms 
also help in obsolescence management. 
  
 Strategic electronic manufacturing units 
for manufacture of Semiconductors and 
defence electronic materials need to be 
developed in country to support defence 
manufacturing. This will reduce imports 
and also greatly reduce supply chain lead 
times. 
 
e. Extensive testing and economies of scale 
 
 Economy of scale is being achieved through parallel production and ROH activities, 
Process improvements, IT process integration etc. Focus on core technical area including 
final integration/ extensive testing through outsourcing of non-core activities. 
 Quantity requirements for orders are not so attractive and occasional and hence scope of 
indigenisation is very limited and in most of the cases suppliers are not coming forward for 
such programs.   
 Economy of scale is required to increase the indigenization content for manufacturing of 
parts within India for which firm projections by customer for future volumes is a must. 
 
 
 

60 
 
 
f. Competition from long term established players in export market. 
 
S. No. Issue Action Taken / Planned 
1 Export market is dominated 
by the existing OEMs. 
Various marketing initiatives/efforts are being 
taken in HAL to enhance export and cater to 
the competition from established players, 
e.g. continuous interaction with existing and 
probable customers globally as well as pan 
India, participation in various global events 
like Defexpo, Aero India, Wings India etc 
and various awards. Many Customers are 
also being interacted through Ministry and 
various State Govts to increase the customer 
base. Continuous feedback on our Products 
and Services is being taken from existing 
Customers to enhance the satisfaction level. 
 
HAL is also undertaking various measures to 
increase its products cost competitiveness, 
technological enhancement, and after sales 
supports etc. 
2 Products and components 
manufactured under ToT 
are restricted by ToT 
agreements signed with 
OEM for supply products 
/services to export 
customers. 
To explore such opportunity, HAL seek 
approval from OEMs on case to case basis. 
 
 
g. Idling of facilities and resources 
 
HAL is optimally utilising its facilities & resources to execute the available workload. In addition, 
specific test facilities (like environmental facilities, vibration facilities etc) are also being offered to 
Indian companies and listing of facilities are available on HAL website. 
 
h. Delay in projected timelines due to COVID-19. 
 
Domestic as well as Global Supply chains are constrained and disrupted due to COVID 19. 
Primary effects have been higher inflations, material shortages, labour problems, facility closures 
(temporary & permanent) and logistics issues.  Following measures are taken to address these 
issues:  
 
 Issues with domestic suppliers:   
- Interim in-house measures to address short term disruptions and hand holding of 
suppliers to overcome such short term disruptions 

61 
 
- Implementation of Govt policies like Bid security declaration (in lieu of EMD), 
reduction in Performance Bank guarantee etc 
- Faster payment process to address their liquidity issues 
- Widening of Supplier base 
 
 Issues with Foreign OEMs: 
- Price Negotiations 
- Priority based Indigenization  
- Defining Alternate parts and sources   
- Pro-active Forecasting, Provisioning & Risk mitigation measures 
- Pro-active procurement of Raw Materials required for Indigenization  
- Close coordination with suppliers, other supply chain partners and rigorous follow up 
 General measures: 
- Shift operations were implemented to ensure minimum contact while full utilization of 
capacity thus avoiding delays to the extent possible. 
- Close monitoring and all out efforts to enable timely completion of projected targets 
- Proactive procurements considering factor of uncertainties 
- Extensive use of online mode for coordination, Price negotiations, inspections (to the 
extent feasible), audits and enforcement of Covid appropriate behaviour 
- Business process re-engineering wherever required to overcome issues. 
 
i. Volatility in price of imported input Raw Material and limited availability 
 
S. No. Issue Action Taken / Planned 
1 HAL has faced difficulty in 
procurement of raw material 
due to non-availability or 
due to high price. 
 HAL has explored procurement of raw 
material from Indian suppliers viz. 
MIDHANI, Star Wire etc.  
 Volatility in price of imported input raw 
material is being catered through 
LTBA/LTRA arrangements with various 
vendors.  
 Multiple Vendor development is being 
progressed in the Division to reduce the 
dependency on single vendor.  
 Optimised utilisation of raw materials 
 
 
BEL: 
 
(a) Shortage of semi-conductor chips is certainly delaying completion of the projects as per 
the delivery terms however rigorously followed-up with OEMs and identification of alternate, 
which resulted in minimisation of impact in procurement of semi-conductor chips used in 
manufacturing. 
 

62 
 
(b) Delayed clearances by stakeholders in Turnkey projects: The following additional 
measures are initiated to address the product support obligation during the life of the 
product/system/platform: 
 
 Long term arrangement with supply chain/technology partners, where ever feasible 
 In-house Redesign in form and fit 
 To leverage indigenous design and manufacturing capability of MSMEs/start up etc., for 
in service equipment through MAKE II in BEL 
 Policy changes being facilitated by DDP through DPePP2021 Policy with regard to 
testing infrastructure. 
 
(c) Retention to talent: BEL has been focusing on retention & sustained development of its 
employees, both at the individual & at the team level through various human resources 
development initiatives.  
 
 In order to address Competency development across levels, various management 
development, technology, quality & employee well-being programmes are organized both 
internally and through premier institutions.  
 
 Employee skills are continuously upgraded with latest technologies relevant to the 
business. Towards this, ‘BEL Academy for Excellence’, was setup to focus on developing 
personnel in Leadership, Technology & Quality domains. Training programs various 
technology areas are conducted.  
 
 Executives are also sponsored for M.Tech programmes offered by Defence Institute of 
Advanced Technology, IIT-Madras, BITS-Pilani, IIM-Kozhikode etc., which help the 
Engineers to manage various defence projects better from “concept” to “commissioning” 
stage. These programs up skill the competencies for addressing Customer requirements. 
 
 On the Quality front, ASQ certifications are conducted for executives in CRE, CMQ/OE, 
CQE, CMQ/OE, CSQE courses and PMP- PMI, USA Certifications. 
 
 BEL is having well defined policy for  career progression which helps to: 
 
 To attract & retain best talent in disciplines appropriate to BEL’s requirements and to 
maintain a competitive edge through effective development of executive potential. 
 
 To provide for effective succession to top managerial posts. 
 
 To ensure fair & equitable career opportunities to Executives consistent with their 
performance, potential and needs of the Company.  
 
 BEL has a robust Performance Management System (PMS) that is integrated to BEL 
behavioral competency model. PMS enable a continuous dialogue on performance and 
identify measures to improve it. The process is focused on measurable objectives that 

63 
 
individual are trying to achieve which in turn provide critical inputs for development, 
promotion, job rotation and placement of Executives. 
 
 BEL has various welfare measures including adequate canteens, recreation facilities, 
medical facilities, arrangements for travel to & from place of work, accommodation and 
amenities & facilities, including social security measures. 
 
 BEL has been promoting health & well-being programs for all employees. Such programs 
not only have a positive impact on employee wellness, they also lead to significant 
increase in productivity, overall engagement & cohesiveness of workforce. 
 
 BEL has introduced scheme BESAFE (Bharat Electronics Scheme for Assistance to the 
Family of deceased Employees) in order to support the families by providing relief to 
mitigate the hardship and to cope with the adverse circumstances due to the unfortunate 
demise of the Employee. The benefits are applicable in case of deaths (either due to 
COVID or Non-COVID) occurred on or after 01.04.2021 viz., Ex-Gratia Payment, Medical 
Assistance, Education Assistance, Skill Development Assistance & Extension of Stay in 
Company Quarters 
 
(d) Procurement through Government e-Marketplace (GeM): BEL has adopted GeM for 
procurement of all Capital & non-production items. However, for production related items like 
Electronic Modules, ICs, PCB Assemblies, Power Supply Units, Microwave parts, 
Transistors, Capacitors, Resistors, cables, components that are specific in nature depending 
on the project are to be sourced from the approved sources only for which there is no option 
in GeM. Also the items being supplied by the vendors in GeM are not OEM and reliability of 
the items are not satisfactory. The prices in GeM compared to other sources are also high 
and GeM transaction fee being levied by GeM is also additional cost that impacts the 
company.  
 
(e) Competition from long term established players in export market: 
 
 To overcome competition from long-term established players to enhance exports 
business, BEL is focussing on potential markets that can be tapped with medium-low 
technology products having low-medium price in South-east Asia, South America, Middle 
East and other developing countries having very price sensitive, state of low level 
warfare, not capable of maintaining sophisticated US or European defence equipment. In 
this direction, BEL has established Overseas Marketing Offices in Vietnam, Myanmar, Sri 
Lanka, Oman, Singapore, New York and further planning to establish in Nigeria, 
Armenia, Kazakhstan & Brazil. BEL has identified and appointed prospective local 
companies/representatives for partnering with BEL in getting the exports from these 
targeted countries to enhance export business. 
 Naval Segment business is one of the core competencies of BEL. Indian Shipyard 
manufacture Platform and BEL deliver & integrates the on-board Sensors & Weapon 
System to cater to the market in the Indian Ocean Region counties.  
 
 

64 
 
(f) Majority of the BEL products are evolved & developed for the end-use of Indian Defence 
Forces. As part of the NOC proceedings for export of the products & systems, BEL is 
directed by the Indian stakeholders (Army, Navy, AIAF,DRDO, MEA) to change the 
frequency/algorithm & dilute the specifications which in turn results a Non-World Class 
Products and often the time available to derive alternate products is very limited.  
 
(g) Idling of facilities & resources: BEL’s current order book stands at around Rs.57000 Cr as on 
date. The deliveries are spread over next few years in a phased manner as per the time-lines 
of customer contract. Considering the current order book, BEL Utilization of 
capacity/Production facilities by all Units/SBUs is to the maximum thus avoiding idling of 
facilities & resources. It is pertinent to mention here that, besides optimum utilization of 
available capacity/resources/facilities, BEL also provides its test facilities to Indian Private 
Industries including MSMEs with the objective of handholding its supply chain partners. 
 
(h) Delay in projected timelines due to COVID-19: The Pandemic had created minor hardships 
initially during the beginning of FY. The issues related to logistics have been impacting the 
timely delivery of input material by the supply chain thus affecting BEL’s production. 
However, the company has been taking remedial measures through proactive approaches in 
order to ensure timely delivery to customers, especially Defence Forces. 
 
(i) Volatility in price of imported input raw material volatile & limited availability: Shortage of 
semi-conductor chips is creating delays in completion of the projects as per the delivery 
terms. All contracts signed between BEL & MoD are fixed price contracts and are based on 
negotiated prices firmed up prior to signing of contract. Any delay in completion of projects 
does not lead to cost escalation unlike Cost Plus contracts. Though similar terms are applied 
to vendors who supply input material, the global crisis due to Pandemic is expected to 
significantly impact the raw material price in the days to come. 
 
(j) Pending permission from Foreign Original Equipment Manufacturers (FOEM) to export 
Missiles: BEL has received In-principle approval (NOC) from MoD for exports of Akash 
Missile system to countries shown interest. 
 
BEML: BEML is striving to address and resolve the challenges being faced in the industry due to 
presence of globally established players for exports, volatility in prices, clearances from 
stakeholders etc. by actively engaging in discussions with the various stakeholders (end user / 
customer / vendors) and having suitable tie-ups / MoUs with global market leaders to address the 
upcoming opportunities. 
 
 Retention of talent is the main challenge which BEML Limited is facing today.  With MNCs’ 
presence in Indian market, Talent attraction & Retention, especially for technology & Engineering 
Talent, has become extremely challenging to match with the compensation offered by the MNCs. 
Also, young Talent seeks to work with latest global standard technology with an opportunity to 
have exposure in the overseas setup. Today’s talent seeks to have faster career growth, early 
responsibilities, meritocracy, camaraderie in place of Authoritative and Bureaucratic work culture. 
 

65 
 
However, with above challenges, notably the compensation issue, BEML has placed the various 
actions to attract, engage and retain Talent viz.  
 Company has been maintaining excellent townships with school, cultural, medical, sports 
facilities for the family members, whereby creating a conducive atmosphere for healthy, 
happy and balanced life styles towards better engagement and retention of talent. 
 BEML has several forward-looking People Practices including welfare & health measures, 
people development, career progression, job rotation, Succession Planning systems which 
supports talent retention. 
 Despite stiff competition from global giants in all three Business verticals, BEML has 
developed its internal capabilities (through R&D, creativity and continuous improvement 
process) to design & manufacture world-class heavy engineering products whereby the 
talents apply their knowledge, skills and creativity thereby providing immense job 
satisfaction resulting in long-term retention.  
 BEML has been maintaining an open culture and informal environment (with discipline) 
whereby talent across level and age groups can approach senior Management with new 
ideas, observation & issues.   
 Company provides significant importance to training & development, mentoring & coaching, 
diversity and inclusion, Community Development. 
 Focused efforts are being given to streamline key result areas (under PMS system) to 
provide challenging role, more accountability and scope for building up skills and knowledge 
to take up higher responsibility at a younger age and in a flatter organisation structure. 
 To strengthen Learning culture in today’s constantly changing business world, BEML has 
been providing impetus to various training initiatives including developing internal training 
capability (both Technical &Behavioural training) through certified programmes, adopting 
‘Action Learning’ process to solve business issues though training, leveraging the Centres 
of Excellence (COE) to impart latest technical training etc., 
 Two way, Open & Fast communication, dissemination of information and interactions are in 
place to meet the requirements of external & internal stakeholders at a speedy manner.   
 
 Towards, procurement through GeM, BEML is continuously increasing procurement through 
GeM portal and the year wise details is as follow. 
 
Sl. No. Year Procurement (in Rs Crores) 
1. 2019 - 20 1.37 
2. 2020 - 21 106 
3. 2021 - 22 329 
 
However, in order to achieve 25% of local Procurement thru GeM, some of the following major 
challenges are being faced by BEML: 
 
 Items like proprietary, buyer nominated & OEMs could not be procured through as sellers 
informed that their prices will be known to their other customers and their competitors. 
 0.5% of the order value is being taken as GeM charges which the sellers were not ready to 
accept as their margins are getting reduced. (other than CPSE to CPSE suppliers) 

66 
 
 Major items of project items are of Proprietary, Limited tender in nature as quality and 
other parameters have to established which cannot be floated open tender. 
 
BDL: Shortage of Semiconductor chips: The semiconductor-based items (like Switch 
Transistor, Ceramic Capacitor, Power transistors, Relays, DC/DC convertors, Isolators, Crystal 
Oscillator, Opto Coupler, A/D Convertors, Micro Controllers, Micro Processors, FPGAs, Memory 
Devices) are required in the critical sub-assemblies of all BDL products and also on R&D 
products.  
 
To overcome these problems, BDL is closely following up with the vendors on daily basis and 
trying to prepone the deliveries as per the timelines of BDL products. 
 
Procurement through GeM: Bharat Dynamics Limited is a Defence Public Sector Undertaking 
involved in manufacturing of missiles and allied defence equipment. The annual procurement 
consists of project related components, subsystems, systems. These are high technology-
oriented and critical/sensitive in nature. The project related items are procured through developed 
vendors after critical evaluation and validation for quality and reliability. DRDO / Designer 
develops the vendors for specific item / sub-system/ system of each project, which required 
prolonged validation. So all production components are procured from out-side GeM. Other 
standard / common goods & services are procuring from GeM. 
 
Extensive testing and economy of Scale: BDL indents are small in quantity. Any development 
required critical evaluation and validation for quality and reliability. Limited Vendors are coming 
forward to develop the item indigenously. Some defence items required extensive testing for 
validity of the indigenized item. The testing procedure may take lot of time. Manufacturing of 
complex components requires technology and Investment. Domestic manufacturing of such 
components in small quantities are not feasible economically.   
 
Idling of facilities and resources: BDL presently have only Konkurs-M orders in hand for next 
four years. Invar is completing in 1st Qtr of 2022-23 and total manpower is idle after words. 
Akash manpower also idle as no full load to meet the established capacity and existing order will 
be completed by 2023-24. 
 
Delay in Project timelines due to Covid-19: The Corona pandemic had impacted on supply 
chain management as a result the supplies got affected in first Qtr. Most of the Vendors could not 
supply due to this pandemic situation. BDL has taken initiative and approached all the vendors by 
taking all necessary precautions to stabilize the supply chain management. Most of the vendors 
were also encouraged to take vaccination doses. Now, slowly the impact is coming down and 
BDL is making efforts to achieve the targets. All out efforts have been made to identify alternative 
vendor for the material which are being delayed from vendors and the same are being validated. 
 
Volatility in price of imported input raw material & limited availability: Raw material cost 
volatility impacts cost forecasting. There is no provision for price adjustment with the customer 
(Armed forces), in case of change in foreign exchange etc. In some ToT contract BDL is bound to 
procure raw material from the OEMs as per the contract. 
 

67 
 
MIDHANI: 
 
(i) Procurement through Government e-market place (GeM): The challenges being faced are:  
 
a. Few suppliers are backing out after releasing the PO 
b. Few suppliers are quoting higher prices in GeM mentioning that they have to pay   
transaction charges to GeM 
c. Non-availability of certain functionalities in GeM like procurement from foreign sources, 
job works, repeat order etc. 
 
MIDHANI is taking up these issues with GeM authorities for earlier resolution of the same. In 
view of these challenges, it is difficult to target 25% of procurement through GeM as per MoU 
mandate. MIDHANI has represented multiple times to DPE through MoD to relax MoU 
targets. The same was not considered by DPE & the target is now part of compliance 
parameter for MoU FY 21-22 for MIDHANI  
 
(ii) Volatility in Price of imported input raw material and limited availability: MIDHANI is releasing 
tenders on annual basis for major raw materials to overcome price volatility challenges. There are 
no production losses due to non availability of raw materials. 
 
(iii) Retention of talent: The attrition rate in MIDHANI is around 2%. 
 
(iv) Export challenges: 
 
a) DFARS (Defence Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement) - USA procures raw 
materials only from DFARS countries. Currently around 20 countries are part of 
DFARs. Currently India is not in DFARS country list. Due to which we are not able to 
export materials to USA for DRAFS required applications. There is a huge demand for 
special metals and alloys in USA which can be met by India in the event of adding 
under DFARS countries. 
 
b) SCOMET (Export restriction on Titanium alloys & Maraging Steels) - Due to export 
restriction on Titanium alloys & Maraging steels under SCOMET, we are unable to 
export Titanium alloys & Maraging Steels. Export restriction needs to be exempted for 
the mentioned alloys.  
 
c) Export Incentives - Major products of MIDHANI are special steels (HSN Chapter 72), 
Titanium alloys (HSN Chapter 81) and Super alloys (HSN Chapter 75). Special steels 
are not included as a part of RoDTEP (Refund of Duties and Taxes on Exported 
Products) due to which no export incentives is offered. Incentives for Super alloys and 
Titanium alloys are also very less (around 0.1%). By providing more incentives (upto 
5%), India will be better equipped to compete with global suppliers. Thus enabling an 
increase in export revenue and helping to meet our export targets of 5 billion USD by 
2025. 
 

68 
 
(v) Project challenges: Ongoing capital projects like wide plate mill, reheating furnaces of forging 
facility, tempering furnace for wide plates, furnaces & equipment of spring manufacturing facility, 
8 T capacity vacuum inducting melting facility, skull melting facility, armour manufacturing facility 
and different civil works,  etc were affected due to Covid-19 pandemic. 
 
Actions taken for mitigation are : 
 
a) Providing support for transportation of equipment form port to the project site during 
lock down on request of the supplier  
b) Following Covid-19 guidelines to resume work immediately after relaxation of lock 
down 
c) Sensitization at project site and offices were done as per guideline & requirement  
d) Maintaining social distancing  
e) Sent request letter to embassy for consideration of visa for foreign experts arrival 
where their presence were essential for some OEM  
f) Organising video conferencing for technical matters to reduce travelling 
g) Allowing access for remote login to expedite certain activities of programmers, etc. 
 
MDL: Following are the measures initiated/taken by MDL to address and resolve the bottlenecks: 
 
1. Retention of Talent- MDL recruits/inducts employees in the core areas in the permanent 
rolls of the company from time to time to maintain continuity of talent pool and skill sets for 
manufacturing of Ships and Submarines. The attrition rate at MDL is 0.51% during the current FY 
and has been less than 1% in the last 5 years.  MDL is strategically located in the city of Mumbai 
having best in class facilities in education, healthcare, social life etc. which helps in the retention 
of employees.  
 
2. Competition from long term established players in export market: On the export front, 
some of the challenges faced by Indian Ship building Industry/MDL are enumerated below: 
 
(a) Competition with Chinese companies in terms of Pricing and Build period  
(b) Non-competitive pricing on account of high import content in Indian built project. 
(c) Absence of a strong local Ancillary Industry  
(d) Govt. subsidy is lower in India as compared to China. 
(e) Being Govt owned enterprise; PSU shipyard has limited operational and financial 
decision-making powers and financial autonomy is restricted.  
(f) Funding options are limited for countries having export potential, especially African 
Countries. 
(g) Local/Domestic preference during bidding in International tenders. 
(h) Mandatory to have JV with Local Shipyard /Partner in International tenders. 
 
 MDL is putting all efforts for achieving the Annual Defence Exports target of Rs. 4500 
Crore by 2024-25. MDL has initiated effort for exports and has been carrying out promotional 
activities in various geographical location. Agents have been appointed overseas to bring export 
orders for ship building. Market study being undertaken with in-house expertise and with help of 
external sources to win competitive bids. MDL efforts are on for pursuing exports with various 

69 
 
countries following both the G2G route wherein the GoI have opened Lines of Credit with funding 
typically extended by EXIM bank as well as the B2B route with sovereign guarantee of the 
recipient nation.  
 
 
3. Idling of facilities and resources: 
 
a) The human skill sets are unique and specialized, developed through training programs 
designed for the respective job areas and experience gained over the years on the job 
and also MDL has successfully developed and nurtured a large number of 
subcontractors in and around Mumbai for such a highly complex submarine 
construction project. These vendors were specifically developed, trained and qualified 
for stringent construction norms of submarines. The skill sets and facilities with 
vendors can be best utilised only with continued orders on MDL for submarine 
construction.  
b) To overcome idling/underutilization of infrastructure capacity, MDL is in process of 
exploring other markets such as refits & repairs of Warships, Submarines, Merchant 
vessels and other heavy engineering orders. Accordingly, MoUs are being signed with 
suitable vendors for taking orders.  
c) MDL is actively preparing to bag the order for construction of six submarines under 
P75(I) program for which RFP has been issued to shortlisted strategic partners. 
Discussion with OEMs for bid preparation is in process. 
 
4. Delay in projected timelines due to COVID-19: Due to COVID-19 lockdown, apart from various 
restrictions on travel and deputation of manpower, challenges like non-availability of OEMs from 
Europe, delay of material from foreign OEMs have been a cause of concern and have impacted 
progress of the project. 
 
Notwithstanding above, following measures have been taken by MDL to minimize project delays, 
expedite delivery of ships and for efficient execution of orders:  
 
a) Outsourced all non-core activities  
b) Parallel hull construction at multiple locations through Mega Block outsourcing  
c) Shaft Loading undertaken in Dry Dock with innovative shafting methodology to 
advance the readiness of GTAs  
d) Structural work for shafting being undertaken on slipway itself to reduce Dry Dock 
duration and Overall production timeline  
e) Preliminary Inspection (PI) work commenced on slipway itself to get higher 
compartment readiness  
In spite of challenges, MDL is confident that advance planning and close monitoring 
shall prove that productivity targets are fully met. 
 
GRSE: 
 
Semiconductor Chips- GRSE is not directly importing semiconductor chips and semiconductor 
devices from abroad for its various projects. However, our different OEMs like M/s BEL, M/s L3 

70 
 
etc. have dependence on semiconductor chips and semiconductor devices for a multitude of ship 
systems and Deck Machinery items. Therefore, indirect impact on the supply chain is 
apprehended which may have a bearing on delivery time lines of the ongoing projects of the 
shipyard. However, close coordination with the suppliers is being ensured to arrest slippages in 
the delivery schedule of the equipment. 
 
Delayed clearances by stakeholders- The Technical specifications for procurement of 
customer nominated main equipment are required to be approved by the customer and 
customers representative to be present during TNCs with the OEMs/Vendors. In majority of the 
cases delays are occurring for approval of technical specifications and conclusion of Technical 
Negotiation Committees (TNCs), resulting in delay in order placement. This delay results in late 
availability of binding data required for detailed design and delayed equipment delivery resulting 
in project delay. Efforts have been made to address the issue by finalizing the technical 
specifications & TNC through collegiate meeting attended by all stake holders. Discussions have 
been held with stakeholders of end customer (IN & ICG) to ensure faster approval of 
drawing/documents and conclusion of technical negotiations. 
 
Retention of talent- To retain the talent within the organization, GRSE focus on nurturing 
and developing a well-balanced workforce who can contribute towards enhancing organization’s 
growth trajectory. In order to attract and retain talents, various measures have been undertaken 
by the Company. Some of such initiatives are, 
 
 Comprehensive structured induction programme for the new recruits.  
 A structured mentorship scheme for new joinees joining at the rank of Assistant 
Managers (E-1). 
 Various training and development programs are conducted to impart necessary 
knowledge and skill upgradation of the employees  
 Number of Reward Schemes are in place for recognizing the meritorious performance 
of the employees. 
 Employee Engagement programmes are conducted to boost up employee morale. 
 A robust and transparent online Performance Management System for officers and 
Supervisors has been implemented.  
 The Promotion Policies and career upgradation schemes for Officers and non-officers 
encourage First Track Promotion for deserving candidates who have demonstrated 
outstanding performance.  
 The pay, allowances and other facilities provided to employees at par with other 
Private and Public Sector Undertakings.  
 
With all the above measures the Company is successful in retaining the talents and 
attrition rate in GRSE is very low.  
 
Challenges on GeM procurement - Being a catalogue-based procurement model, it is 
not feasible to onboard all the requirements on GeM. However, in compliance with the Ministry 
directive to onboard all procurement on GeM, a parallel initiative of system upgradation is being 
undertaken with inclusion of new functionalities. 
 

71 
 
Supporting platforms for a long duration- Almost all the warships and auxiliary vessels 
of the Indian Navy (IN) and Indian Coast Guard (ICG) have been built by the DPSU shipyards. 
GRSE itself has delivered 105 warships to IN and ICG. As the integrators of these platforms, the 
shipbuilders have the technical knowhow, captive network of equipment suppliers and the 
infrastructure & facilities to provide seamless life cycle support to the ships built by them. 
Towards this, the first step would be to formally recognize the shipbuilder as OEM and for their 
own ships, they need to be accorded PAC status.  
 
Economy of Scale- The volume of production plays a vital role in the reduction in build 
period and arresting cost overrun of shipbuilding Projects. The standardisation achieved for 
design, procurement and production processes will be phenomenal for a shipbuilder producing a 
particular class of warship in large numbers which will result in drastic reduction in build period. 
This level of standardisation that leads to faster production rate cannot be achieved with low 
volume of production. In addition, the higher numbers of similar platforms help in greater visibility 
of orders and hence the scale of items/materials which strengthens the ship building eco system. 
 
Competition from long term established players in the Export market 
 
i. GRSE is the first Indian shipyard to export a warship, an Offshore Patrol Vessel to Mauritius 
in 2014. GRSE’s initiatives to export Naval ships to the friendly foreign countries has borne 
fruit with the award of Export order worth approximately Rs. 100 Crores for supply & 
Maintenance support of 01 No. Fast patrol Vessel for the Govt. of Seychelles, signed on 03 
Feb 2021. The Ship ‘SCG PS Zoroaster’ was delivered by GRSE to the Govt. of Seychelles 
on 15 Feb 2021. GRSE also succeeded in bagging the Export order of 12.73 Million USD 
for supply of one Ocean Going Passenger & Cargo Ferry Vessel to Republic of Guyana. 
The Contract was signed on 13 Jan 2021. In FY 21-22, GRSE won the contract for 
construction and delivery of six Patrol Boats for Govt. of Bangladesh. This is the first export 
order from Bangladesh through global competitive bidding, with participants of other 
shipyards, including from Netherland, South Korea, Finland and UAE. The contract value 
stands at around 1.82 M USD. 
 
ii. The focus areas for exports are SAARC, ASEAN, African & Latin American countries. The 
MoD has allocated six countries namely Bangladesh, Philippines, Oman, UAE, Saudi Arabia 
and Seychelles for export promotion of maritime platforms on behalf of MoD as areas of 
focus. Export opportunities are also being explored with aggressive marketing initiatives in 
allocated as well as other countries like Vietnam, Myanmar, Egypt, Maldives, Mauritius etc. 
Some of these requirements are covered under DLOC, more favourable Terms & 
Conditions would result in faster acceptance by recipient country. GRSE has also signed 
MoUs with reputed Foreign Shipbuilders towards collaboration in Shipbuilding. 
 
iii. Government Support- Coordinated effort by Ministry of External Affairs for concerted Export 
campaign across the friendly nations to secure export orders is essential. A corpus may be 
created at the MoD to provide financial support/incentivise exports in line with the 
“Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy (2016-2026)” formulated by the Ministry of 
Shipping. Policy initiatives, like incentives in terms of taxes / duties and subsidies to 
ancillary industries supporting the export initiatives may be considered to target reduction in 

72 
 
input cost. All these measures will be instrumental in winning orders promoting Defence 
export.   
  
Idling of Facilities and Resources 
 
Currently GRSE has an executable order book of Rs. 28,864.21 Crs (as on 31.12.2022), 
and the Shipyard has capacity to build 20 ships (08 large & 12 small) concurrently with the state-
of-the-art infrastructure spread over 3 shipbuilding units namely Main Works, Fitting Out Jetty and 
Raja Bagan Dockyard.   
 
Delay in Projected timelines due to Covid-19 
 
Mitigation Measures. The following measures were undertaken by the Shipyard to mitigate the 
impact of Covid -19  
 
(aa) Implementation of shift system with reduced timings and work from home for balance 
employees (in applicable areas of operation). 
(bb) Arranging Covid vaccination for all employees, their families and contract workers to 
reduce probability of Covid infections and to ensure minimum impact on production work 
due to direct Covid infection or quarantine period of the employees  
(cc) Arranging transport facility for workers including contract workers when public transport 
was stopped by local Govt 
(dd) Arranging accommodation inside shipyard premises for workers for progressing very 
critical works. 
(ee) Conduct of TNCs/ PNCs with OEMs and other vendors through virtual mode. 
(ff) Schedules reworked and catch-up plans prepared to reduce impact of disruptions. 
 
Volatility in price of imported raw material- Minimal impact for GRSE as major import orders 
have been placed under fixed price contracts for ongoing projects. 
 
GSL: Challenges encountered by GSL are as follows: 
 
(i) Retention of talent: Talent retention is the key challenge in GSL owing to the fact that 
GSL being a Defence PSU the compensation level are fixed and to retain the talent, GSL 
has look beyond compensation to other initiatives which will attract and retain talent. The 
HR initiatives listed below have helped to create a environment of growth of internal 
employees which has in turn helped in talent retention. 
 
Following are the talent retention initiatives being implemented at GSL: 
 
(a) Learning & Development Opportunities: Investing in human capital learning and 
education raises motivation of the human resource thereby increasing the 
organizational belongingness in them. As a part of talent retention and with a view to 
develop middle and junior management, initiative of sponsoring executives to pursue 
higher studies in M.Tech from Defence Institute of Advance Technology has been 

73 
 
started from 2015. Further, there is a scheme for reimbursement of 100% tuition fees 
for executives to undergo higher education. Apart from this, GSL has also framed a 
Study Leave Scheme in line with sabbatical policy for pursuing higher studies in India 
and abroad. 
 
(b) Mentorship Development Programme: Every new inductee is assigned a mentor for 
the initial 52 weeks for professional guidance, initial hand-holding & grooming and 
exposure to organization culture with the periodic assessment. This mentorship 
development program helps the new inductee to be an integral part of GSL family 
thus increasing the job satisfaction level.  
 
(c) Standardization of Job Specification & Job Description through Role Profiling: Any 
employee will give his best only when the expectations from his job are clearly 
defined. Hence, with an aim to standardize the job description and job specification of 
each and every existing role as well as any future positions that may arise in GSL, 
the role profiling study was undertaken. This study was conducted with the co-
operation and efforts of the entire Shipyard wherein each & every person was 
involved to define the role being performed. Hence, they can now better connect with 
the report. Role profiling has inter-alia aided in streamlining the job requirements of 
each role avoiding redundancy and further bringing clarity to the individual regarding 
his role in the organization & his accountability at work. 
 
(d) Job Rotation: GSL believes in multi skill development wherein the individuals are 
rotated within the organization periodically to aid in his/her professional growth in a 
helical manner. A Job Rotation policyhas been implemented with an objective to 
provide opportunities to the executives for lateral/horizontal movements to fully 
develop their talents in other areas of activities rather than adhering to one line. This 
has helped in overall development and fulfillment of career aspirations of executives. 
 
(e) Transparent & Robust Performance Management System: Increased satisfaction 
level among executives due to Online Performance Management System which is 
based on Management by objectives, principle and is robust & transparent. The 
system aids the individual to prepare his/her targets at the beginning of the year and 
monitor its progress throughout the year. The targets which are defined need to 
follow the SMART principle: Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Timely, 
thus empowering the individual to achieve what is predefined and rate him 
accordingly. Also, GSL has introduced the Disclosure of Performance Appraisal 
Report, so as the individual gets a fair chance to know what he has been rated for his 
performance and also an opportunity is provided to make an appeal against the 
ratings. Thereby, leading to a high satisfaction and trust by the employees. 
 
(f) Succession Planning: Succession planning for key leadership and operational 
position at senior management level has been executed in GSL which mainly 
focuses on identifying and developing internal people with the potential to fill key 
business leadership positions in the Company. Every year there is review over the 
Succession Plan. 

74 
 
(ii) Procurement through Government e-Marketplace (GeM): To attend to supply chain 
side delays following measures have been / are being taken: 
 
a. Management reviews are being conducted on regular basis for project related items 
and services.  
b. Cargo handling system has been introduced to attend to delays on account of 
logistics. Also close co-ordination with the shippers and freight forwarder for timely 
availability of vessels for shipment of import items based on FOB delivery schedule.  
c. Penal provisions are inbuilt in purchase order as a safeguard.  
d. Requirement to submit monthly progress report/bar chart along with photographs 
incorporated in contract/purchase order. 
e. Close monitoring for the firms where the purchase orders are placed for the first time 
by reviewing progress through bar charts, co-ordination with class surveyor for timely 
approval of drawings and inspection of equipment at the vendors premises.  
f. Hand holding of vendors in terms of technical support, knowledge sharing sessions, 
classification society support, GeM training.  
g. Deputation of GSL Reps to OEM site, wherever required, to monitor & expedite 
supply. 
 
(iii) Delay in projected timelines due to COVID-19: GSL has put concerted efforts and 
successfully delivered 05 CGOPV Project within the schedule timelines in line with the 
delivery extension of 6.5 months (4+2.5 months) provided by GoI under Force Majeure 
Clause vide ltr No.4 (4)/D(Acq)/20 dated 12 Jun 2020 and 02 Sep 2021 due to COVID-19. 
Other projects at GSL which include P11356 Frigates and Pollution Control Vessels are 
under construction and efforts are in hand to minimize the effects of COVID-19.  
 
 Notwithstanding the above, GSL is undertaking  concrete  measures and intensive 
focused efforts to address, resolve and overcome the above challenges to ensure timely 
delivery to Armed forces and achievement of targeted level of production and profits. 
 
HSL: The initiatives / remedial measures taken by HSL to overcome the various challenges faced 
are as below:- 
 
Sl. 
No. Challenge Initiatives / Remedial Measures 
1 Shortage of semiconductor chips. 
Shortage of semiconductors has literally 
wrecked entire parts of the global supply 
chain including defence industry, it does not 
end soon. This has impacted key systems 
like MB/SRE, Fin stabilisers, Steering gear, 
STCOM and equipment’s ordered on BEL 
are expected to be delayed. 
 
HSL has advised its vendors to look for 
alternate solutions viz. conduct of testing 
by using PLC and then replacing at the 
later part. 
 
2 Delayed clearances by stake holders in 
Turnkey Projects. 
Ship building is a turnkey project and most 
 
 
HSL has prepared check lists & list of 

75 
 
Sl. 
No. Challenge Initiatives / Remedial Measures 
of the orders placed on HSL are getting 
executed in concurrent design and 
construction. Multiple agencies are involved 
in vetting design proposals and in some 
cases, there are being done in a sequential 
manner. Delays in getting 
approvals/clearances has got a cascading 
effect on the projects including cost and 
time overruns. 
pre-requisites for key activities and 
engaged approving agencies through 
VCs to clarify their quarries to reduce the 
time of standard communication.   
3 Retention of talent. 
Shipbuilding is labour intensive industry in 
India and its processes cannot be fully 
automated as the number of orders are in 
single digits. At the same time mass 
production of projects/orders is not possible 
in view of change in designs, product mix & 
user operational requirements. Series of 
orders will engage yard personal and there 
by talent & skill transfer is ensured. 
 
Various measures have been taken by 
HSL towards retention of talented 
manpower. HSL is in the frontrunner in 
HR policies to ensure that the employees 
are well motivated and towards this 
Promotion Policy has been revised to 
give more chances to officers to perform 
and recruitment reforms have been 
undertaken which resulted in drawing the 
best available talent in the market. A 
rotational transfer policy has been 
promulgated in order to ensure right 
person in right job and for the overall 
development of officers. Mid-Career 
Refresher Training Programme has been 
introduced for executives. The training 
consists of class room lectures, PPTs, 
Behavioural Science in management 
topics by eminent external faculties, 
Vigilance Capsule and industrial visits 
(Peer Learning). The mentorship 
programme has been introduced for 
improving the skill set and providing the 
new inductees with a Mentor who would 
act as philosopher and guide. MoU has 
been signed with IIM, Vizag for 
conducting Capacity Development 
Programs for executives. In addition, 
regular training programs are also being 
conducted with internal faculties as per 
the training calendar for improving the 
skill set of the employees. 
4 Procurement through GeM.  
HSL has started to float tenders in GeM 
 
All efforts are being made by the 

76 
 
Sl. 
No. Challenge Initiatives / Remedial Measures 
(preference to Make in India concept), 
however most of the OEMs are not 
interested to participate tenders in GeM 
portal since the sellers are required to pay 
transaction charges on clocking the 
threshold value of Rs. 20 lakhs in each 
financial year as per the revenue policy of 
GeM. These charges are based on the 
order value and range from 0.2% to 0.5% 
which are added cumulatively to the 
transaction / order value. The transaction 
charges have an unappealing effect on the 
sellers. This is especially in single vendor 
nomination cases where price discovery 
through competitive bidding over the GeM 
platform is not feasible. As some material 
are specific in nature, domestic vendors are 
not available to participate in tender for 
concurrent design project case.  
shipyard to mitigate the delays due to 
continuous monitoring with OEMs and by 
conducting vendor awareness programs 
& conducting pre-bid meeting. Frequent 
visits are made to OEMs locations for 
motivating and to participate through 
GeM portal.  
 
5 Supporting platforms for a long duration 
which involves high cost. Present market 
uncertainties are due to many factors like 
Globalisation, rapid growth in technology, 
difficulties to retain talent, lack of vendor 
base for alternate solutions, frequent 
changes in import policies & non-availability 
of specific spares due to low economy of 
scale. Most of critical components are 
customer made and not readily available. 
 
HSL has established service contracts 
for extended periods with major OEMs 
for uninterrupted Supply of critical parts 
and also developed indigenous solutions 
for certain items by creating awareness 
among vendors. 
 
6 Extensive testing & economy of scale. 
Majority of the shipbuilding projects at HSL 
are concurrent design and construction 
which necessities for extensive testing 
during Factory trials. Adaption of new 
technology demands changes to proven 
design which limits shipbuilder for going 
mass production. Very few domestic 
vendors have got the capability & 
infrastructure to produce equipment & 
material with in the time frames. 
 
HSL is trying to standardise key 
machinery & components irrespective of 
platform requirements so that extensive 
testing is not required.  
 
7 Competition from long term established 
players in export market.  
Shipbuilding is known as one of the oldest, 
most open and highly competitive markets 
Shipyard is trying to partner with 
renowned design houses for design 
optimisation by using widely available 
products of Indian market and 

77 
 
Sl. 
No. Challenge Initiatives / Remedial Measures 
in the world. Though there is highly 
favourable climate for export, there is 
relatively negative climate for domestic 
construction of ships for Indian owners. 
DPSU Shipyards have to take prior 
approval from Ministry before import. These 
additional burdens on DPSU shipyards 
make them uncompetitive in the bidding 
process. The Indian shipbuilding industry is 
dependent on government support for Tax 
resume. More over India is not having vide 
spread of vendors in all equipment’s. DPSU 
shipyards have to procure material from 
Buyer nominated Vendors. 
encouraging vendors for innovation & 
alternate solutions. 
 
 
8 Idling of facilities and resources.  
Shipbuilding is technology driven, skill and 
material intensive assembly operation. 
Being a labour-intensive industry, the cost 
of labour plays an important determinant in 
a country’s competitive position. If new 
technology adopts for different classified 
projects, personnel engaged on that project 
to be trained and to be perform their jobs 
according to Industry standards. If the mass 
production is not happened as per that skill 
set, automatically resources will be idle it 
leads to drain budget.  
 
 
Presently, the yard is engaging the 
trained labour from ship building division 
to ship repairs division based on the 
need basis. Offering yard resources to 
vendors & other industry partners to use 
the facilities like slip ways, jetties, 
workshops and certain part of factory 
lands. 
 
9 Delay in projected timelines due to Covid-
19 
Construction activities in all fronts of 04 x 
50T BP tugs & 02 x DSVs have been 
delayed primarily due to uncertainty caused 
by the Covid-19 Pandemic. There is a 
severe outbreak of Covid-19 since Mid Mar 
20 and like any other organization, HSL has 
also been severely affected by this virus 
outbreak and its cascading effects viz., 
lockdown/curfew in AP and other states, 
exodus of the contract workmen, non-
availability of industrial oxygen and 
necessary material for production, strict 
government rules iro quarantine, isolation, 
containment zones etc. All these factors 
 
 
Implemented staggered working timings, 
improved working conditions by 
provisioning of ventilation, clean ship, 
hygiene, vaccinated workforce, Micro 
scheduling activities, daily monitoring, 
engaged vendors, inspection agencies, 
workforce through social media for better 
communication & updates. Modified 
payment terms for part payment & part 
supply to facilitate case flow to vendors. 
Motivated work force through 
commendations and promotions. 
Conducted VCs with vendors for 
resolutions of problems and to provide 

78 
 
Sl. 
No. Challenge Initiatives / Remedial Measures 
have led to complete disruption of the 
supply chain. Several vendors, including 
major nominated OEMs / Vendors were 
delayed the material delivery as per the 
committed timelines during Covid-19. 
Disruption of works and supply chain 
network due to Covid-19 constrained HSL 
to claim force majeure on Tugs & DSVs.  
clarity on specifications & requirements 
for timely receipt of material.   
 
  
Other initiatives taken by HSL to utilize the idling submarine refit facilities, improve the order book 
position, generate alternate source of revenue, reducing delivery timelines and construction cost 
of the projects are as below:- 
(a) Idling of Submarine refit facilities. HSL has requisite capability, infrastructure & spare 
capacity for executing EKM class submarine refits. The Normal Refit of INS Sindhuvir has been 
completed by HSL on 31 Jan 2020 ahead of the contractual schedule. Post completion of Normal 
Refit of INS Sindhuvir, infrastructure and human capital at HSL and amongst MSMEs for EKM 
submarines has been lying idle. HSL is expecting that Normal Refit (NR) of INS Sindhukirti for a 
duration of 24 months would be outsourced by Indian Navy to HSL based on successful 
completion of Sindhuvir.  
(b) Order Book Position. HSL has been nominated by MoD for construction of 5 Nos Fleet 
Support Ships (FSS) for Indian Navy to improve the order book position of the Shipyard. Towards 
this project, HSL has signed a collaborator contract with M/s Anadolu Shipyard on 20 Mar 2020 
for Design, Supply & installation of Key Machinery Equipment. Build specifications have been 
formulated and submitted to IHQ MoD (N)/DSP on 21 Sep 2020 and got them approved in 4 
months. Price bid for this largest ever contract was prepared and submitted to MoD on schedule 
i.e 30 Mar 21. 
(c) Alternate Sources of Revenue Generation. To diversify the business and generate 
alternate sources of revenue, HSL is also undertaking short activities such as berthing facilities 
for Over Dimensioned Consignments of L&T and heavy weight consignments of SBC, Indian 
Navy. HSL has signed MoUs with Defence Shipyards, BEL, BHEL, L&T, Naval Group for mutual 
cooperation for tapping domestic & export market, both in defence and non-defence sectors. To 
enhance the Ship Repair business, HSL has signed MoUs with SCI & DCI and entered a Rate 
contract with Naval Dockyard, Visakhapatnam to undertake partial refits of Naval Vessels 
including dry-docking. A tripartite agreement has been signed between HSL, M/s L&T 
Hydrocarbon Engineering and M/s Penta Energy Services for utilisation of Shipyard facilities for 
12 months. The total value of the agreement would be approx. Rs.69 Cr. 
(d) Efforts for reduction in delivery timelines & construction cost of the projects. Various 
SOPs / orders have been promulgated viz. Reduction of Build Period and Production Cost 
(RBPPC) to ensure quality and efficiency. Committee has been constituted for Evaluation and 
approval of Tender Specification (CEATS) for bridging the time delays in procurement. Integrated 
Project Teams have been constituted for monitoring Shipbuilding projects for improving delivery 
timelines. In order to control costs, an environment of creating cost consciousness and concept 
of real time monitoring of project cost has been introduced and is being followed diligently. 
 

79 
 
Recommendation (Para No.26) 
 
The Committee note that Government is following the policy of disinvestment of minority 
stake without transfer of management control, for priority sector PSUs including Defence CPSUs 
to unlock their value, promote public ownership, meet the minimum public shareholding norms of 
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and for ensuring higher degree of accountability. 
For non-priority sector PSUs where competitive markets have come of age, the policy of strategic 
disinvestment is being followed. Further, the decision to decrease shareholding in DPSUs is 
taken by the Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) in consultation 
with the administrative Ministry. The Committee learn that BEML is in final stage of 
disinvestment. The committee note that since DPSUs are investing considerable amount in 
Research & Development, possess both core and non-core assets and many of them are 
registering profits over the last few years, besides laying emphasis on DPSUs’ product 
expansion, investment in cutting edge technologies and increasing competitiveness in terms of 
cost and qualify. They recommend that while pursing the policy of strategic disinvestment, 
justified concerns pertaining to protection of national interest, DPSUs future, comparison of 
disinvestment proceeds vis-à-vis profitability of the DPSU and employee welfare may be 
suitability addressed by the Ministry of Defence.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Disinvestment in Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs) is under taken as per the extant 
disinvestment policy of the Government on ‘Strategic Disinvestment/ privatization and minority 
stake sale’. Strategic Disinvestment/ privatization implies sale of entire or substantial Government 
shareholding of PSEs along with transfer of management control. Disinvestment of minority stake 
of PSEs, where Government continues to retain control, is made to increase public participation 
and for greater accountability through various SEBI – approved methods such as Initial Public 
Offer (IPO), Offer for Sale (OFS), Buyback of share etc. from time to time, depending on market 
condition and investors’ interest. Profitability is not a relevant criterion for disinvestment. 
2. Till January, 2021, NITI Aayog identified CPSEs for strategic disinvestment, which are not 
in ‘priority sector’, based on the criteria of (i) National Security; (ii) Sovereign function at arm’s 
length; and (iii) Market imperfections and Public Purpose. Based on the recommendation of the 
NITI Aayog, CCEA accorded in principle approval for strategic disinvestment of BEML Ltd. in 
October 2016. 
 
 
3. In February 2021, Government notified New PSE Policy for Atmanirbhar Bharat which lays 
down a broad roadmap for PSEs. The policy delineated four broad Strategic Sectors, which 
included Defence Sector, based on the criteria of national security, energy security, critical 
infrastructure, provision of financial services and availability of important minerals. In strategic 
sectors bare minimum presence of the existing public sector commercial enterprises at Holding 
Company level will be retained under Government control. The remaining enterprises in a 
strategic sector will be considered for privatization or merger/subsidization with another PSE or 
for closure.  
4. The timing for specific transactions will be contingent on the considerations such as 
appropriate sequencing, sectoral trends, administrative feasibility and investors’ interest.  

80 
 
5. Strategic Disinvestment intends to ensure to optimize the growth, productivity, 
competitiveness and job creation potential of the enterprises. The resources unlocked can be 
used to finance various social sector/development programmes of the Government in public 
interest.  
6. The terms and conditions of the strategic disinvestment suitably addresses employees’ 
concern in the employee protection clauses in the Share Purchase Agreement (SPA)/ Share 
Holders Agreement (SHA) to be signed by the Government with the strategic buyer.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.27) 
 
The Committee learn that the value of Indian Defence Exports has increased to almost six 
times from Rs.1500 crore to Rs.9000 crore in the last five years. Further, as per Report of SIPRI 
2020, India stands in the list of Top 25 countries in the Defence Exports. The participation of 
private sector in the exports currently stands at 90 percent. The Committee, after gleaning 
through the data furnished by the Ministry, observe that while value of exports by Mazagon Dock 
Shipbuilders Limited (MDL), Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) and Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL) 
was 'Nil' for Financial Year 2020-21, the value of exports in Financial Year 2020-21 in case of 
BEL, HAL, BEML, GRSE, BDL and MIDHANI stood at Rs.376.46 crore, Rs 194 crore,  Rs.463 
crore (including deemed exports), Rs.87.49 crore, Rs.145 crore and Rs.19.42 crore, respectively. 
In their presentation, the DPSUs had apprised the Committee about various export orders 
received/in pipeline. The Committee, taking cognizance of the fact that Defence exports bring 
valuable foreign exchange and render the indigenous Defence industry more competitive, urge 
upon the Ministry to help DPSUs in increasing their exports. The Committee express the hope 
that BrahMos deal, which is the first major defence system export deal, between India and 
Philippines will prove to be a harbinger in the Defence exports. They, therefore, recommend that 
development of state-of-the-art equipment and platforms besides timely completion and delivery, 
superlative quality of the Products / platforms / equipment should be ensured and followed by 
DPSUs so that they establish and emerge as very competitive and reliable destination of Defence 
products. In this regard, feasibility of creation of a separate wing in each DPSU, solely dedicated 
for realization of these objectives, may be mulled upon by the Ministry and the DPSUs. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department of Defence Production has taken following steps to enhance Defence Exports of 
DPSUs:  
1. Export Promotion cell under DDP, MoD is formed to co-ordinate and follow-up on export related 
action including enquiries received from various countries and facilitate private sector and public 
sector companies for export promotion.  
2. Defence Attaches have been mandated for export promotion of Indigenous defence products of 
both public and private sector. Also a scheme for Export promotion of Indian Defence Equipment 
Manufactured in India by Indian Defence Attache is in place wherein Defence Attachés are 
provided financial support of approx. Rs 2 Crs per annum to promote export of indigenous 
defence equipment including the indigenous platforms from DPSUs.  

81 
 
3. Subject to strategic considerations, domestically manufactured defence products are being 
promoted through Lines of Credit/Funding. Defence Lines of Credit (LOCs) are extended to 
sovereign governments to enable buyers in those countries to import goods and services from 
India on attractive credit terms.  
4. Two export booklets i.e. “Indian Defence Industry a Global reach” and “Catalogue Indian Defence 
Industry 2022” for promotion of Indigenous Defence products from both Public and Private sector 
have been released during the month of March 2022. Soft copies of both the e-booklets have 
been shared with Indian Defence Attaches posted at Indian Missions abroad and also available 
on the websites http://defenceexim.gov.in and http://ddpmod.gov.in. Hard copies of the booklets 
will be shared with Foreign delegation visiting India vis-à-vis Indian Delegation visiting foreign 
countries. 
5. An online portal has been created through which export leads received from various stakeholders 
are being disseminated directly to the Indian Defence Exporters including all DPSUs who are 
registered on the portal.  
6. In order to boost defence exports, webinars are being organized with Friendly Foreign Countries 
(FFCs) under the aegis of DDP, MoD through Industry Associations with active participation from 
all the DPSUs. Total 24 webinars have been organised since Sept’2020. 
7. Geographical countries/regions have been allocated to DPSUs/OFB for focused export promotion 
of Indigenous Defence Platforms/equipment in their countries of allocation.  
8. Powers have been delegated to DRDO and CMDs of DPSUs for exploring export opportunities 
and participation in global tenders.  
9. A completely end-to-end online portal for receiving and processing export authorisation 
permissions has been developed. The applications submitted on this portal are digitally signed 
and the authorisations are also issued digitally, at faster pace.  
10. Regular review meetings are being held with all DPSUs at the level of Joint Secretary (DIP)/Addl. 
Secretary (DP)/Secretary (DP)/Defence Secretary with the objective of enhancing defence 
exports of indigenous Defence Platform. 
11. As per directions of Ministry of Defence (MoD), all DPSUs are having their separate Marketing 
departments dedicated for exploring the Global market for enhancing Defence exports.  
 
 
Further, Defence PUSs-wise effort to enhance Defence Export are as under: 
 
HAL: HAL has a dedicated Marketing Department, which looks after the all the export 
opportunities for realisation. 
The Exportable platforms of HAL, presently are as follows: 
a) Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) variants 
b) HAL Do-228 aircraft 
c) Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) 
d) Light Combat Helicopter (LCH) 
HAL during the current FY 2021-22 concluded supply contracts with Mauritius Police Force 
for supply of one Passenger Variant Do-228 (PVD) aircraft and one ALH Mk.III wheel variant 
helicopter under GoI supported EXIM Bank Line of Credit. Further, HAL has already delivered 
this Do-228 PVD for Mauritius within a record time six months of contract conclusion, way ahead 
of contractual delivery commitment.  

82 
 
HAL is aggressively & proactively participating in the Global Tenders offering HAL platforms 
to Friendly Foreign Countries (FFCs). Towards this, HAL has offered indigenously designed, 
developed Light Combat Helicopter (LCH) to Countries namely, Australia, Philippines etc.  
Similarly, the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) as Lead in Fighter Trainer (LIFT) configuration 
has been offered to countries namely, Malaysia, Australia, Philippines, Argentina etc., and LCA in 
Naval twin seat trainer configuration was offered to US-Navy in response to their global RFI for 
Undergraduate Jet Training System which requires a land based jet trainer aircraft for carrier 
landing practice and carrier touch-and-go event.  
Early induction of HAL built platform by Indian Defence Forces and exploitation/operation in 
field environment will lead to greater awareness and acceptance by foreign customers. 
Additionally following actions have been initiated to improve the export order position of the 
HAL: 
(i) Friendly Countries operating Sukhoi aircraft: 
 HAL has supplied indigenised spares to M/s ATSC Malaysia through HAL-Nasik. Further we 
have submitted quotations for indigenised spares and being followed up for order acquisition. 
 Proposal w.r.t Spares / ROH of Su30 Series aircraft has been submitted to Malaysia, Indonesia & 
Vietnam.  
 
(ii) Discussion with HAL Authorised Agents and Defence Attache :  
 Discussion and regular interaction with HAL Authorised Agents (13 countries) for Business 
association with HAL. Capability of HAL shared with authorized agent. 
 HAL’s Capability list shared also with Defence Attache of Countries operating Su30 / MiG-21 
aircraft for supply of HAL range of product and services. 
 
(iii) Mirage-2000 LRUs servicing: 
HAL has signed LoA as IOP with Dassault Aviation (DA). HAL has also signed an NDA with DA. 
A Technical proposal of HAL capabilities for Mirage-2000 LRUs servicing was forwarded to DA. 
Further, DA has forwarded an audit questionnaire to access the HAL capabilities. HAL Response 
to DA audit questionnaire has been submitted to DA. Under discussion through corporate office. 
 
(iv) HAL is regularly interacting with existing customer such as (IAI, Mauritius AF, Namibian AF, 
Suriname AF, etc.) either directly or Through Platform division for service related requirement i.e. 
accessories pertaining to our supply range for ROH / Float requirement. 
 
BEL: With regard to development of state-of-the-art equipment, BEL has been preparing long 
term Strategic Growth Plans aligning with Perspective Plans (like Technology Perspective 
Capability Roadmap-TPCR) of Indian Defence Forces/DRDO labs. BEL operates on 3 year R&D 
Plan and Technology Roadmaps have been drawn aligning to TPCR with the objective of 
developing futuristic products/systems that are best in class comparable to international 
standards.  
Quality: BEL has set stringent quality norms to eliminate equipment faults during the 
manufacturing phase itself. The product is tested at different stages as per the approved Test 
Specification provided by the customer and are subjected to various quality assurance tests like 
Bump & Vibration, Rain Test, Salt Spray Test, Mould growth, EMI/EMC, Altitude Test, 
Environmental Test, Climatic Test etc. The products/systems are tested in presence of the 
resident customers who are positioned in the company by the Quality wings of the Armed Forces 

83 
 
before dispatch to customers. This process ensures supply of reliable/quality products. The 
complaints related to post-delivery, if any, are being handled on top priority through structured 
product support mechanism. 
On-time Delivery: Meeting the delivery requirements of our customers, primarily the Indian Armed 
Forces is of paramount importance to BEL. With the usage of state-of-the-art Project 
Management tools, all efforts are made to ensure timely delivery to customers as per contract. As 
part of our continuous improvement of on-time delivery, the root cause for delay in delivery of 
some of the projects is analyzed and necessary corrective/preventive measures are taken to 
minimize/zero down the same. The On-time delivery during last 5 years is around 80%. However, 
it is re-iterated that though BEL provides thrust on timely delivery, it is inevitable that some of the 
large complex projects get delayed due to Concurrent Engineering, accord of Bulk Production 
Clearance, Change in user requirement, Specifications to incorporate additional features, 
Site/platform Readiness etc. All these measures and improvement processes are expected to 
further enhance the on-time delivery. 
BEML: BEML has received a formal Purchase Order from M/s BrahMos Aerospace Pvt. Ltd. 
(BAPL) towards the supply of 15 Nos of HMV. BEML will supply the above HMV equipment to 
BAPL Hyderabad. BEML is part of the subject export deal and advance efforts are being made to 
meet the delivery requirements of M/s. BrahMos. On export front, BEML’s International Business 
Division at New Delhi, is coordinating for all the requirements pertaining to Defence exports. 
Accordingly, the division coordinates with the R&D division and manufacturing units for timely 
completion and delivery of quality products. 
BDL: BDL has established an export cell in the Business Development Division for exploring the 
export potential of its product, identifying the potential markets & pursue for export obtaining 
leads for the export. The products offered by BDL are state-of-the-art products, fully indigenous in 
design, competitive in pricing and which are not dependent significantly on any foreign OEMs. 
BDL is already ready to meet the export demands in addition to the domestic market requirement 
with its existing facility available. The company has leads from various countries for export of its 
product like Akash Weapon System, ATGMs, Refurbishment of vintage missiles, Air to Air Missile 
(Astra) etc. which are being actively pursued. 
 
MIDHANI: MIDHANI has taken various pro-active measures by creating a dedicative export team 
to promote exports. Further new equipments like wide plate mill, 8 Ton Vacuum Melting Furnace 
and New Titanium Facility, Heavy weight Titanium casting facilities are under commissioning. 
These initiatives are expected to increase the export sales in the coming years. 
 
MDL: In order to be globally competitive, MDL is actively involved in developing innovative 
technologies through R&D for development of technologically advanced designs with suitable 
collaborations to cater for the market demand for environmentally friendly ships, unmanned 
surface vessels, unmanned underwater vehicles, hybrid propulsion and incorporation of digital 
twin concepts for manufacturing and improved life cycle maintenance with improved prediction for 
breakdown maintenance. These measures, if instituted, are likely, to not only make the 
commercial shipbuilding industry more competitive, but also create strategically beneficial options 
for meeting India’s defence requirements. 
MDL is also participating in various Defence Exhibitions like Defexpo, Aero India etc. for 
marketing the products constructed by MDL for exploring the opportunities to increase the 
exports. In addition, MDL is also working on diversification of products which would enhance 

84 
 
exports. A dedicated section has also been formed in the Submarine Division for business 
development and providing private competitive bids to customers. 
GRSE: Business Development and Marketing department of GRSE is primarily associated in 
export promotion. The Department is headed by one General Manger who reports to Director 
(Personnel). GRSE’s recent achievements with respect to export are indicated below-  
The Company is pursuing various leads from SAARC, ASEAN, African & Latin American 
countries for exporting ships. 
The company continues to regularly supply Bailey Bridges and its components to the 
Neighbouring countries such as Nepal & Bhutan. Efforts are on to further enhance the export of 
Bailey Bridges & their components to other friendly foreign countries including Bangladesh 
(Through DLoC route) as well. 
GSL: 
(i) In line with the GoI/MoD thrust on exports, GSL has been consistently seeking export 
opportunities globally. All out efforts are being put in by GSL for export of its products and 
services to countries in South East Asia, Middle East, Africa and Latin America. Strategies 
adopted to promote and enhance GSL’s export business include brand building & visibility 
through participation in exhibitions, conferences etc., contacting potential clients overseas, 
seeking assistance from Indian Embassies / High Commissions for promoting GSL products and 
exploring export opportunities, appointing Marketing Reps in overseas countries, utilising EXIM 
Bank opportunities through LoC, etc. 
 
(ii) GSL has pro-actively taken up the development of specialized vessels for export such as Multi-
purpose Vessels, High Value Weapon Intensive Vessels, Hydrographic Survey Vessels, Landing 
Ship Tanks, Diving Vessels and Interceptor Crafts and is pursuing the prospects of supplying its 
range of products to friendly countries. Products of GSL are cost competitive in comparison to the 
product in the same segment worldwide. Besides this, GSL is known for its quality products and 
meeting contractual delivery schedules, which has been proved in the earlier exports to countries 
such as Sri Lanka, Mauritius, Myanmar, etc.  
 
(iii) A separate section is established in GSL which is entrusted with the job of exploring overseas 
business opportunities and promotion of its products in other countries to facilitate exports.  
HSL: 
An exclusive Business Development department (BDD) has been formed in HSL for market 
survey and submission of bids in competitive tenders. As a result of this, HSL has turned around 
in securing orders in the competitive bidding process. During the past few years, HSL has 
emerged as the lowest bidder (L1) for the shipbuilding projects viz. construction of 2 Nos Diving 
Support Vessels, 04 Nos 50 Ton Bollard Pull Tugs and 1 No Semi-submersible pontoons for 
Indian Navy. All these contracts have been secured amidst stiff competition from sister public 
sector shipyards and Private shipyards. 
 
Indigenization efforts and self-reliance in Defence Sector  
 
Recommendation (Para No.28) 
 
The Committee note various steps being taken for realization of goal of self-reliance in 
Defence sector. These inter alia include notification of two Positive lists of indigenization of 

85 
 
weapons and platforms, preference to ‘Buy Indian Indigenously Designed Developed and 
Manufactured (IDDM)’ in procurement and launching of SRIJAN portal for facilitation of private 
industry to become part of indigenization drive. Further, process has been initiated for 
identification of major Line Replaceable Units (LRUs) and Subsystems for industry led- design 
and development. The Committee appreciate that various measures are being taken for major 
transformation in the entire Defence ecosystem so as to encourage maximum indigenization and 
visible results are also being seen in this regard, for instance, pursuant to notification of positive 
lists of indigenization of DPSUs of assemblies/sub-assemblies, 2500 items have already been 
indigenized and 351 items are to be indigenized in 3 years, resulting in expected savings of 
Rs3000 crore per year. The Committee find that some of the critical components are not being 
produced in the country and this resulted in decrease in the indigenous content in various 
equipment /platforms made by the DPSUs. The Committee, in order to gauge the contribution of 
the DPSUs in indigenization efforts, desire that a detailed note on the indigenous content vis-a-
vis import content being used in manufacturing and production by the DPSUs may be furnished. 
The note should also contain the critical components which are not indigenously produced and 
the efforts being made by the Ministry and the DPSUs for local production of the same. The 
Committee, while understanding the need for import content, which is unavoidable in some cases 
so as to cater to various critical requirements of our Armed Forces, recommend that stringent and 
synergized efforts be taken by all stakeholders i.e. Ministry, DPSUs, Research and Development 
Institutions, academia etc; for realization of objective of ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ in Defence sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Synergised efforts are being taken for realization of objective of ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ in 
Defence Sectors which have already been informed to the Committee. In addition, recent efforts 
undertaken are as under:- 
 
(a)  The Department of Defence Production has notified ‘Policy for Indigenization of 
components and spares used in Defence platforms for DPSUs on 08th March, 2019. The 
objective of the Policy is “to create an industry ecosystem which is able to indigenize the 
imported components (including alloys & special materials) and sub-assemblies for defence 
equipment and platform manufactured in India and to leverage the said capability to create export 
market. 
(b)   SRIJAN portal (srijandefence.gov.in) to promote indigenization was launched on 14 Aug 
2020. As on date i.e 07.04.2022, 19595 items, which were earlier imported by DPSUs/SHOs, 
have been displayed on the portal. The Indian industry has shown interest for 4162 displayed 
items so far. DPSUs/SHQs are interacting with these industries for indigenization of the items as 
per extant procedures.  
 
(c)  In continuous pursuit of self-reliance in defence manufacturing under ‘Aatmanirbhar 
Bharat Abhiyan’ and to minimize import by DPSUs, Ministry of Defence has notified a Positive 
Indigenisation list of sub-systems/ assemblies/ sub-assemblies/ components on 27th Dec 2021. 
The list contains 2500 items, which are already indigenized, and another 351 items which will be 
procured from Indian Industry after the timelines indicated in the list.  
 

86 
 
(d) On 28th March 2022, Ministry of Defence has notified 2nd Positive Indigenisation list of 107 
Line Replacement Units (LRUs)/ sub-systems for indigenisation of Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings (DPSUs), for which there would be an embargo on the import beyond the timelines 
indicated against them.  
 
(e) In a significant boost to Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision on ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan’, and 
in sync with the announcement in the Union Budget 2022-23 that allocated 25% of Defence R & 
D Budget for industry led R & D, 18 major platforms have been announced by the Ministry of 
Defence on 11th March 2022, for industry led Design & Development under various routes. 
 
(f) Make-II category (Industry funded), introduced in DPP 2016 to encourage indigenous 
development and manufacture of defence equipment has number of industry friendly provisions 
such as relaxation of eligibility criterion, minimal docuemntaiton, provision for considering 
proposals suggested by industry/individual etc. So far 72 projects relating to Army, Navy & Air 
Force, have been accorded ’Approval in Principle’, valuing about Rs 30,000 Crores. 
 
(g) In order to promote Indigenous manufacturing, though not designed / developed 
indigenously, import substitution for product support of weapon system/equipment held in the 
inventory of the services, a new ‘Make-III’ procedure have been introduced in DAP 2020 so that 
Indian firms may manufacture these either in collaboration or with ToT from foreign OEMs. 
(h) An innovation ecosystem for Defence titled Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) has 
been launched in April, 2018. iDEX is aimed at creation of an ecosystem to foster innovation and 
technology development in Defence and Aerospace by engaging Industries including MSMEs, 
Start-ups, Individual Innovators, R&D institutes and Academia and provide them grants/funding 
and other support to carry out R&D which has potential for future adoption for Indian defence and 
aerospace needs. The procurement of the final product will be processed under the ‘Buy (Indian-
IDDM)’ category. So far, 130+ Start-ups have been engaged and 71 contracts have been signed. 
One procurement order has been placed by Navy. 
(i) To give a major boost to development of innovative defence technologies and support the 
growing Start-up base in the country, Ministry of Defence has also approved a new scheme worth 
Rs 498.80 Crores during 2021-22, which would support about 300 new Start-ups and 20 
incubators during the next 05 years.  
 
(j) DAC has recently cleared the procurement of 14 items worth Rs 380.43 Crore from the 
innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) startups/MSMEs. The DAC also has approved the 
new simplified procedure for procurement from iDEX startups/MSMEs. This would fast-track the 
procurement from the startups/MSMEs. The procurement cycle for iDEX from the AoN to contract 
signing will be around 22 weeks as per the new procedure and similar provisions are included for 
Make-II Procedure and time taken from issue of PSO to signing of contracts has been reduced 
from existing 122-180 weeks to 101-119 weeks. The fund disbursement under iDEX has been 
recently further liberalised so that it does not become an impediment for startups who are 
technically progressing well for prototype development. 
 
(k) Government of India has established Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme 
under ‘Make in India’ initiative to create an eco-system for enhancing cutting edge technology 
capability by inculcating R&D culture in Industry for building indigenous state-of-art systems for 

87 
 
defence applications and import substitution. The scheme has been established to promote self-
reliance in Defence Technology as part of the ‘Make in India’ initiative by encouraging 
participation of public / private industries especially MSMEs including Start-ups. The procurement 
will be made under the ‘Buy(Indian-IDDM)’ Category. 
 
(m)  Reforms in Offset policy have been included in DAP 2020, with thrust on attracting 
investment and Transfer of Technology for Defence manufacturing. Higher multipliers have been 
assigned to offset discharge in case of development of MSMEs, manufacturing in India, Transfer 
of Technology etc. Value of Offset discharge so far is worth 3565 Million USD. 
 
(n) Government has notified the ‘Strategic Partnership (SP)’ Model in May 2017, which 
envisages establishment of long-term strategic partnerships with Indian entities through a 
transparent and competitive process, wherein they would tie up with global Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) to seek technology transfers to set up domestic manufacturing 
infrastructure and supply chains. 
 
2. Indigenous Content viz-a-viz import content being used in manufacturing and production 
with respect to Value of Production (VoP)” received from DPSUs/OFB (Now Department of 
Ordnance (C&S) and Seven Defence Companies for last three years are as under. 
 
(Value in Rs. Crore) 
Year Import Material  Indigenous Material Total (VoP) 
2018-19 8459.79 (22.43%) 29263.86 (77.57%) 37723.65 
2019-20 14551.51(25.81%) 41830.78 (74.19%) 56382.29 
2020-21 13534.96 (23.83%) 43267.52 (76.17%) 56802.48 
 
3. Data of Controller General of Defence Accounts (CGDA) on procurement of defence 
equipment by the three Services (Army, Navy and Air Force) in the last three years, brings out 
that increasing reliance has been laid on procurement from domestic sources and the 
expenditure on procurement from foreign sources has shown significant reduction in percentage 
terms. 
 
 
Year Expenditure on 
Procurement (both capital 
and revenue) from 
Domestic sources 
Expenditure on 
Procurement (both capital 
and revenue) from Foreign 
sources 
Total expenditure on 
Procurement (both 
capital and revenue) 
 Value (In Rs. 
Crore) 
Percentage Value (In Rs. 
Crore) 
Percentag
e 
Value (In 
Rs. Crore) 
2018-
19 
50500 54.0 42974 46.0 93474 
2019-
20 
63722 58.8 44618 41.2 108340 
2020-
21 
88631 63.6 50709 36.4 139340 
 

88 
 
 4. The details of FDI/JV proposals which have been approved in the Defence sector in the 
past five calendar years is as below:- 
 
Name of JV Activity  
2017 
M/s Ideaforge 
Technology Pvt Ltd 
Manufacture of unmanned aerial systems used in Defence 
sector. 
 
M/s Alpha-Elsec 
Defence and 
Aerospace Systems 
Pvt Ltd 
Manufacture of optical goods and equipment and optical 
instruments. 
2018 
Indo Russian 
Helicopters Ltd 
To manufacture, supply, maintain and service Helicopters to 
the Indian Defence Forces. 
2019 
M/s Indo Russian 
Rifles Pvt Ltd 
Design, Development and Production of Kalashnikov Series 
Rifle. 
2020 
M/s Omnidyne 
Systems Pvt Ltd 
Research, Development and Manufacturing of advanced, state of 
the art, unmanned vehicle systems and related technologies.  
M/s Elbit 
Systems Ltd 
Primarily undertaking research and development in the defence 
sector in India, executing design and development programs and 
also for engaging in upcoming defence programs in the Indian 
defence sector as well as in the international market by providing 
services as a sub-contractor in compliance with applicable law 
including Defence Procurement Procedure issued by the 
Government of India, as amended from time to time. Further, the 
applicant has stated that it will undertake research and development 
in the Indian defence sector, execute design and development 
programs, as well as undertake manufacturing of products that do 
not require industrial license.  
2021 
M/s Everchem 
Asia Pvt Ltd 
Engage exclusively in holding indirect investment in M/s Calimara 
Matters Pvt Ltd, subject to 74% acquisition of M/s Calimara Matter 
Ltd by M/s Calibre Chemicals. 
5. There are some critical components that are not indigenously produced for various 
unavoidable reasons such as uncertainty that the indigenised items would be used in designated 
shipbuilding projects during construction & operational life of the ship/platform, lack of volume of 
order for the developer/indigenising vendor, unavailability of qualifying technical documents from 
the collaborator is considered for indigenisation under various routes. Further few major platforms 
have been identified by the Ministry of Defence for Industry led design & development under 

89 
 
various routes which is in sync with the announcement in the Union Budget 2022-23 that 
allocates 25% of Defence R&D Budget for Industry led R&D. The list is as follows:- 
Ser No. Equipment Description 
 Make-I  
 
1 Hypersonic Glide Vehicle 
2 Directed Energy Weapons (300 KW and more) [High Powered 
Electromagnetic Devices and High Powered Laser Devices] 
3 Naval Ship Borne Unmanned Aerial System (NSUAS) 
4 Light Weight Tank 
5 Self-Healing  Mine Fields  
6 Unmanned Autonomous AI Based Land Robot 
7 127 mm Naval Gun 
8 127 mm Guided Projectile 
9 Electric Propulsion(Engines) for Ships 
10 Standoff Airborne Jammer 
11 Li-ion Cells/Li-Sulphur Cells [Portable High Capacity Energy Systems 
replacing the Conventional Hydrocarbons] 
12 Communication System (AFNET System Switches, routers, Encryptors& 
VOIP phones) 
13 Electro Optical (EO) Pod (with subsequent upgrade to EO/IR) with high 
resolution sensing  
14 ‘Plug and Play’ Housing/Infrastructure for soldiers posted at extreme 
altitudes. 
 Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) Model  
 
15 Long Range Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)[ High Altitude Long 
Endurance (HALE)} 
16 Indian Multi Role Helicopter (IMRH) 
 iDEX  
 
17 Low Orbit Pseudo Satellites 
 Make-II  
 
18 Anti-Jamming Systems for Multiple Platforms 
6.  Efforts are also being made to take up indigenisation of equipment for future projects 
under ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ and ‘Make in India’ programs. A separate indigenisation cell in 
DPSUs have also been constituted to give thrust to indigenisation of equipment/item at DPSUs 
level. These items are planned to be indigenised in-house Make-I, Make-II and DRDO route. 
Further, DPSUs have been able to successfully indigenise some of the critical equipment/items 
required for warships and submarines. The list is attached as Annexure I. 
7. DPSUs are also outsourcing some of the activities like hull fabrication and equipment 
outfitting to domestic vendors to encourage public/private partnership in indigenous warship 
building. The list is attached as Annexure II.  
8. “Offset portal” has been created in May 2019 to ensure Greater transparency, efficiency 
and accountability in the process. Reforms in Offset policy have been included in DAP 2020, with 

90 
 
thrust on attracting investment and Technology for Defence manufacturing. The new Offset 
Policy is expected to encourage investment for Transfer of Technology /   Critical Technologies to 
Indian Industry in Defence Sector. Higher preference has given for purchase of defence products 
as compared to components, as under: 
 
 (a) Multiplier: 
 
(i) For products / systems (x 1.0) 
(ii) For components (x 0.5) 
(iii) For MSME (x 1.5) 
 
 (b) Investments incentivized through higher multipliers: 
 
 (i) In Defence Manufacturing (x 1.5) 
 (ii) In Defence Industrial Corridors (x 2.0) 
 (iii) For Transfer of Technology to Indian Enterprises (x 2.0) 
 (iv) For Transfer of Technology to OFB / DPSUs (x 3.0) 
 (v) Higher Multiplier for Critical Technology (x 4.0) 
 
  

91 
 
Annexure I 
 
CRITICAL COMPONENTS WHICH ARE BEING IMPORTED AND EFFORTS BEING MADE TO 
LOCALLY PRODUCE THEM 
S. 
No. 
Nomenclature Methodology 
1 BLOCK PL PSO issued to 3 firms in Jan’21 & Mar’21. 
One of the firms has supplied the sample 
and the same is under evaluation 
2 MOTOR DPR PSO issued to 1 firm on 04/01/2021. Firm 
has supplied the sample, which is under 
evaluation. 
3 TRANSFORMER AL5.720.031 PSO issued to 1 firm on 04/01/2021. Firm 
has supplied the sample, which is under 
evaluation. 
4 TRANSFORMER 
IUMK6.71121.007 
PSO issued to 1 firm on 17/02/2021. 
5 GYRO STABILIZER PSO issued to 3 firms on 21/01/2022. 
Samples yet to be received. 
6 AIMING DEVICE PSO issued to 5 firms on 21/01/2022. 
Samples yet to be received. 
7 POSITION SENSOR PSO issued to 2 firms in Feb’21 & Mar’21. 
8 HEAD UNIT PSO issued to 3 firms on 18/03/2021.  One 
of the firms has supplied the sample. The 
sample has been evaluated and 
modifications needed are being carried out. 
9 GUN POSITION SENDING 
UNIT 
PSO issued to 4 firms on 04/01/2021. One 
of the firms has supplied the sample. 
10 CONTROL MECHANISM PSO issued to 5 firms on 21/01/2022. 
Samples yet to be received. 
11 LASER UNIT PSO issued to 3 firms on 21/01/2022. 
Samples yet to be received. 
12 GYRO CHASSIS PSO issued to 3 firms on 21/01/2022. 
Samples yet to be received. 
13 05 PCBs OF BG29  PSO issued to 2 firms on 17/02/2021. One 
of the firms has supplied the samples of all 
5 PCBs and has been found to be 
functionally OK as per ATP. Remaining 
tests are being carried out. 
14 Ballistic Computer of 1A-43 
system of Tank T90 
India Optel Limited (IOL) has undertaken 
an R&D project for development of Ballistic 
Computer. In this regards CARS project 
has been sanctioned to IIT Kanpur. 
Preliminary design has been completed 
and prototyping is under progress. 

92 
 
 
  
15 Micro Electric Detonator (Filled) EoI under Evaluation 
16 30 mm Proximity Fuze (Empty) EoI under Evaluation 
17 155 mm Proximity Fuze EoI to be issued 
18 VT Fuze for Pinaka EoI to be issued 
19 Chaff Pay Load for MRCR EoI under Evaluation 
20 Chaff Pay Load for SRCR EoI under Evaluation 
21 Chaff Pay Load for LRCR EoI under Evaluation 
22 HE Grenade VOG25 Ammn Order Placed  
23 Semi Combustible Cartridge 
Case for 125mm 
Indigenization under Srijan 
24 Shell / Warhead Filled for 84mm 
HEDP 
25 Shell Filled for 84 mm HEAT 751 
26 Rocket Motor Charge for 84 mm 
HEAT 751 
27 Double Base Propellant for 
125mm Tank ammn. 
28 Penetrator Assembly for 125 
mm FSAPDS Mango 
29 Shell Filled for 84 mm Smoke 
30 Single Base Propellant for 125 
mm Tank ammn. 
31 PN 300 High Pressure Globe 
Valve 
PN 300 High Pressure Check 
Valve 
PN 300 High Pressure Safety 
Relief Valve 
PN 300 High Pressure Reducing 
Valves 
Import Substitution 
32 Pneumatic Quick Closing Valves Import Substitution 
33 Hydrostatic Level Transmitters 
Float Level Switches 
Smoke/Heat/Flame Detectors 
Make-II 
34 Stern gear polymer bearings 
At sea, Fuel replenishment and 
transfer Hoses with probes 
Make-I 
35 Cargo transfer pumps of 
different capacities for 
replenishment at sea 
Make-I 
35 Magazine Fire Fighting System 
(MFFS) 
Supply Order placed and indigenisation 
under progress 
36 Degaussing System Supply Order placed and indigenisation 
under progress 

93 
 
Annexure II 
SUCCESSFULLY INDIGENISED EQUIPMENT 
 
Ser No. Equipment Description 
 
1 Battery Loading Trolley 
2 Air Conditioning Plants 
3 Sacrificial Zinc Anode flanges 
4 Non-HLES Electrode & filler Wire 
5 Self-Adhesive E-Glass Fibre Cloth 
6 NBR O-Ring 
7 Annealed Copper Gasket 
8 Sonar Dome  
9 SICADS 
10 Bridge Window Glass 
11 MCT-Glands 
12 Remote Controlled Valves 
13 Helo Landing Grid 
14 Honeycomb filters 
15 Pressure Reducing Station 
16 NBC filters 
17 High Temperature Gasket 
18 Flame/Control/Smoke Dampers for HVAC System 
19 Chladon Gas for Magazine Fire Fighting System (MFFS) for Ships 
20 Asbestos Free Gaskets 
21 Ventilation Valves 
22 MFFS(Magazine Fire Fighting System) 
23 Multi Cable transit without EMI/EMC 
24 2W Control Panel for MCPS 
25 Ring laser Gyro  
26 Hydraulic filters 
27 Anti-Fouling Paints 
28 Oil filter element 
29 CO2 fixed fire fighting equipment (4 Nos) 
30 2MW Diesel Alternator Set (6 Nos) 
31 3MW Diesel Alternator Set (4 Nos) 
32 RO Plant 2 x 25 TPD 
33 5.2 MW Gear Box 
34 High Pressure reducing Valve 200 Bar 
35 High Pressure globe Valve PN 200 
36 High Pressure Check Valve PN 200 
37 High Pressure Safety relief valve PN 200 
38 Marine Incinerator  
39 HVAC 
40 WT/GT Fire class door 

94 
 
41 Flight Data recorder 
42 STP 
43 CAP 437 Heli Deck 
  

95 
 
Recommendation (Para No.29) 
 
The Committee note that with a view to support the growth of the Defence sector and 
enhance their manufacturing capacity, the Government has set up two Defence Industrial 
Corridors in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. They also note that against the targeted investment 
of ₹ 10.000 crore by 2024-25 in both the Defence Industrial Corridors (DIC), the investment, as 
on date, in UP and Tamil Nadu DIC stood at ₹ 1553 crore and ₹ 2252 crore, respectively. 
Further, 62 Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) worth ₹ 8639 crore have been signed in 
respect of UP DIC. Similarly, an investment of ₹ 1153 crore is anticipated in Tamil Nadu DIC 
through 40 industries by way of MoUs and other arrangements. While expressing their 
satisfaction over the progress being achieved in establishment of the two Defence Industrial 
Corridors, the committee at this stage recommend that alongwith Defence infrastructure, 
development of allied infrastructure such as proper road/rail/air connectivity may be ensured 
wherever required. Further, regular interactions with all the stakeholders such as the DPSUs, 
private investors etc. may be held to remove the bottlenecks, if any, being faced in timely 
completion of the projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In Uttar Pradesh Defence Industrial Corridor (UPDIC) and Tamil Nadu Defence Industrial 
Corridor (TNDIC), Infrastructure like Roads, Electricity, Water supply and sewage system is being 
provided by respective State Governments. Defence Industrial Corridors (DICs) are integral part 
of the Prime Minister’s “Gati Shakti”, the National Master Plan (NMP) to improve connectivity and 
make Indian businesses more competitive. To attract private investment in the defence 
manufacturing sector particularly in Defence Industrial Corridors, Government of Uttar Pradesh 
and Tamil Nadu has come up with Aerospace and Defence Policy. 
 
In State of Uttar Pradesh, the Uttar Pradesh Defence and Aerospace Units and 
Employment Promotion Policy is promoting Defence & Aerospace Parks, Incentives on purchase 
of land in the notified area, Rebate on Transportation Charges, Subsidy for setting up Effluent 
Treatment Plant (ETP), setting up R&D and testing facility in the notified areas, mobilisation of 
the Start-up Fund created under UP Start up Policy 2017, providing  promotional incentive 
exemption for the establishment of a Common Facility Centre, Single Window system for all 
desired approvals and clearances, Infrastructure facilities like 132 KVA level power supply 
system, Provision of Water Supply, Road connectivity and land demarcation by pillars in each 
node, and providing safe and fear-free industrial environment by deployment of dedicated police 
force in the industrial cluster / area. 
 
In Tamil Nadu Aerospace and Defence Industrial Policy, there is provision to create an 
end-to-end ecosystem for Aerospace and Defence manufacturing. The policy is promoting 
establishment of Aerospace and Defence (A&D) parks, support for building partnership and 
marketing through summits, exhibitions and meetings, facilitate in setting up A&D research 
facilities, providing financial support to A&D industries to obtain necessary certification, providing 
various subsidies like subsidies to big ticket investments, Skill development, land allotment, 
Aircraft maintenance, repair and overhaul (MRO)  facilities, Environment protection infrastructure, 
Special funding in the form of equity for Joint venture to manufacture and assembly of 

96 
 
civil/military aircrafts, Main battle tanks and other platforms, Single window clearance 
mechanism. 
 
Regular interaction with all stakeholders such as DPSUs and Private investors is being 
carried out by respective State and Union Government to understand the challenges and address 
issues of the investors. 
 
CANTEEN STORES DEPARTMENT (CSD) 
 
Budgetary Allocations 
 
Recommendation (Para No.30) 
 
 The Committee understand that Canteen Stores Department (CSD), attached office of the 
Ministry of Defence, is committed to the welfare of troops of the Army, Navy and Air Force and 
their families, through easy access to quality Products of daily use at less than market prices.  
The Committee note that as against the projected amount of Rs. 26,868.55 crore in Budget 
Estimates 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 19,802.09 crore has been allocated to CSD, resulting in a 
shortfall of Rs. 7,066.46, crore.  The Committee also note that the next phase of implementation 
of E-commerce platform of CSD for home delivery of the non-Against Firm Demand (AFD) items 
(groceries, general stores etc.) to the beneficiaries is under progress.  Thus, admittedly, 
increased budgetary support is needed not only for liquidation of past committed liabilities and 
contractual but also for modernization of existing warehouses, hiring/outsourcing of technically 
qualified manpower, smooth operation of AFD portal and commencement of e-commerce 
platform for non-AFD items.  Further, the Committee have been given to understand that 
Canteen Trade Surplus earned at the end of the financial year is distributed equally between 
Government and the Service Headquarters for welfare of troops as per the MoD guidelines.  The 
Committee are of the commencement view that modernization of CSD proper working of AFD 
portal and commencement of e-commerce activities, alongwith betterment of the services for the 
beneficiaries would greatly enhance the trade surplus of the Government which in turn would 
lead to additional revenue generation for the Department.  In light of these facts, the Committee 
recommend that funds allocated to Canteen Stores Department may suitably be enhanced at the 
Revised Estimates/Modified Appropriations Stage and the Committee be apprised consequently. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry submits the requirement projected by the Departments, including Canteen 
Stores Department, to Ministry of Finance for favorable consideration. The Expenditure ceiling in 
r/o CSD is provided/fixed by Ministry of Finance.  While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance 
analyses past absorption capacity of the Canteen Stores Department, pace of expenditure in the 
current Financial Year, overall resource envelope available and pressing demands from other 
quarters etc. 
2. The committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional funds 
projected by Canteen Stores Department at Supplementary/RE stage under Revenue and 
Capital head.  Further, the allocated funds will be optimally utilized towards meeting the goals of 
Canteen Stores Department. 
 
 

97 
 
Provision of combat uniforms for the Forces through CSD  
 
Recommendation (Para No.31) 
 
The Committee learn that the new stitched combat uniforms for officers in the Army is 
planned to be provided/supplied through the Canteen Stores Department (CSD). During 
deliberations on this issue, the Quarter Master General, Army submitted that the new combat 
uniform will be supplied only through CSD so that it cannot be sold in the open market. As the 
matter is intimately connected with security of the country and dignity and stature of our Forces, 
the Committee recommend that proactive and foolproof measures are needed to be put in place 
by the Ministry for mitigation of risk of misuse of the Forces’ uniform. The Committee also desire 
that while ensuring the availability of uniforms, their quality and proper fitting should also be 
ensured so that it would not affect the smart turnout and dignified appearance of the Armed 
Forces personnel. The action taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee within one 
month of the presentation of this Report to Parliament.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Classified 
 
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen (ESW) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.32) 
 
 The Committee note that for the Welfare of Ex-Servicemen as against the sum of Rs. 
486.79 crore projected in 2021-22, Rs. 420 crore was allocated at RE stage. Out of this only Rs. 
97.80 crore could be utilized by 19 January, 2022, which means more than three-fourths of the 
allocated funds are yet to be utilized within less than a quarter of the financial year 2021-2022. 
The Committee express their serious concern over the utilization of funds for the Welfare of Ex-
Servicemen in the last quarter. As there are lots of Schemes and programmes running under the 
Department of Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to take 
concerted steps to fully utilize the allocated funds in 2021-22. They would like to be apprised 
about the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 Only Rs.100 Crore was initially allotted in Budget Estimates (BE) in April 2021.  Out of 
which, a sum of Rs. 97.80 Crore was expended till 19.01.2022.  Nominal balance was left to meet 
unforeseen emergent expenses.  An additional amount of Rs. 320 Crores was allotted at Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage on 17.01.2022 from DSE budget towards AFFDF (Armed Forces Flag Day 
Fund).  The total allocated budget of Rs. 420.00 Crore has been fully spent during the FY 2021-
22. 
Recommendation (Para No.33) 
 
 The Committee note from the information supplied to them that reservations do exist for 
Ex-Servicemen in Central Govt (10% in Group ‘C’ posts), PSUs/Banks (14.5% in Group ‘C’ & 

98 
 
24.5% in Group ‘D’ including 4.5% for disabled ESM/ dependents of servicemen killed in action), 
Central Police Organization/Para Military Forces (10% upto the rank of Astt Comdt., Defence 
Security Corps (DSC) - 100%) and also in some Corporate / Private Organizations.  However, the 
reservation facility has not been properly implemented for Ex-Servicemen, due to which number 
of posts are stated to be unfilled and vacancies were reported to exist in several Government 
Organizations. The Committee note that under project ‘Punh Sthaapan’, MoUs have been signed 
between MoD and Ministry of Skill Development for employment of ESM. While appreciating this 
initiative, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should address the issue of filling up the 
vacancies earmarked for ESM with utmost seriousness and take appropriate steps in 
Government PSBs etc. in coordination with Government/ banks for sensitizing retiring 
Servicemen regarding availability of Government and private jobs, providing training for getting 
recruitment for the posts available for the Ex-Servicemen. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government is taking several initiatives to ensure that the vacancies earmarked for 
Ex-Servicemen (ESM) are filled and has taken the following steps: 
 
(a) DOP&T vide OM No. 36034/2/2017-Estt (Res) dated 31st Dec 2021 has issued guidelines 
on responsibilities of the Liaison Officer (LO) for ESM reservation. Approx 50 
Ministries/Department have nominated their Liaison Officers and other are in-process for doing 
the same.  
 
(b) First meeting with LOs was conducted under the chairmanship of Secretary, ESW on 02nd 
March, 2022. During the meeting the main emphasis was on filling-up the reservation quota 
prescribed by the Govt. The matter is being reviewed regularly in Monthly Meetings. 
 
(c) Further, DGR has compiled a Compendium Brochure on ESM reservation and the same 
has been uploaded on DGR website.  
 
 (d) DGR is in receipt of reports of ESM appointments in CCS&Ps on Half-yearly basis. These 
reports are compiled and scrutinized, so that effective measures can be taken to enhance the 
employability of ESM in Govt sector. 
 
 (e) During the FY 2021-22, a total of 10,871 jobs to freshly retired ESM’s have been given by 
DGR with the following break up:- 
 
   (i) Security Agencies   - 5678 
   (ii) PSU/Banks/State Govt.  - 4529 
   (iii) Self Employment Schemes -   631  
   (iv) Corporate Sector   -     33  
 
  
Recommendation (Para No.34) 
 
 The Committee note that due to merger of Group ‘D’ and ‘C’ posts as well as ‘B’ non-
gazetted posts, the vacancies reserved for ESM have remained unfilled. In this regard, the 

99 
 
Committee understand that the initiatives taken by Uttar Pradesh Government can help the 
Ministry in finding a solution to the problem. The Committee, therefore, advise the Ministry to 
initiate talks with the Department of Welfare of Ex-Servicemen of Uttar Pradesh Government so 
as to expeditiously resolve the issue. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 Due to merger of Gp ‘C’ & ‘D’ posts in CCS&Ps, a major portion of reservation (20% of 
Group ‘D’) was done away with. This Department, therefore, forwarded a proposal to DOP&T 
requesting that ESM be provided 10% reservation in Group ‘B’ posts and 20% reservation in 
Group ‘C’ posts for vacancies in the posts to be filled by direct recruitment in any year.  The 
matter was examined by DOP&T, who vide communication dated 02.08.2019 informed that after 
careful consideration of the proposal in consultation with other Ministries/Department, DOP&T is 
of the view that the proposal regarding providing 10% reservation in Group ‘B’ posts and 20% 
reservation in Group ‘C’ posts to Ex-Servicemen for vacancies in the posts to be filled by direct 
recruitment, if agreed to, will not serve the desired purpose.  
 
 As regards the implementation of initiatives taken by Uttar Pradesh Govt to fill-up the ESM 
vacancies the same is under consideration in DGR and it will be analyzed in detail to implement 
later. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.35) 
 
 The Committee find that there is a total lack of uniformity regarding ex-gratia monetary 
benefits/compensation to the martyrs in the country, which ranges from State to State. In some of 
the States, Rs. 5 lakh is given to martyr’s family, and in some states, Rs. 5 crore and a 
permanent job to a family member.  The Committee are of the view that the services provided by 
the soldiers are common in nature and therefore recommend that the Ministry should make 
efforts to remove disparity in the amount of compensation. The committee desire that Department 
of Welfare of Ex-Servicemen should take up this issue with utmost priority and make concerted 
efforts to recommend uniformity in the amount of ex-gratia monetary benefits as well as in 
employment to the families of the martyrs in all the States of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 Ex-gratia payment to next of Kin / family members are being paid by respective State/UT 
Govts. The amount varies from State to State. The issue regarding uniformity in payments of Ex-
gratia amount to the dependents of Martyrs has already been raised and discussed in several 
meetings of Directors/ Zonal and Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) meeting.  The State Govts have 
not adopted a uniform method to provide Ex-gratia amount to the dependents of Martyrs.  It is 
pertinent to mention that domiciliary restrictions and Ex-Gratia amount to the dependents of 
Martyrs are inter related matter.   
 
 Most of the States/UTs provide compassionate appointment to the dependents of Armed 
Forces personnel killed in action or disabled in action as per their education and qualification.  

100 
 
Recommendation (Para No.36) 
 
  It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that no exemption has been given to 
serving Defence personnel from payment of toll tax at various toll plazas in the country and they 
are required to pay tax despite their work stations located in the vicinity of toll plazas. Since 
Defence personnel have to pass through toll plazas for commuting to their work stations, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry of Defence to take up the matter with Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways so that relief/exemption is provided to serving Defence personnel from 
payment, particularly at those toll plazas which fall between Defence work station and their 
places of residence. It is suggested that free passes or free pasage on production of identity 
proof may be allowed to the service personnel at these toll plazas. The Committee would like to 
be apprised about the steps initiated in this regard at the time of submission of action taken 
replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Classified 
 
DEFENCE PENSION 
 
Recommendation (Para No.37) 
 
 The Committee note that Defence Pensions, under the Ministry of Defence provides for 
Pensionary charges in respect of retired Defence personnel (including Defence civilian 
employees) of the three services viz. Army, Navy and Air Force. It covers payment of Service 
pension, gratuity, family pension, disability pension, commuted value of pension, leave 
encashment amongst others. The Committee are informed that as on 01.04.2021, the total 
number of Defence pensioners in the country stood at 32,94,181 including 6,14,536 Defence 
Civilian Pensioners and 26,79,645 Armed Forces Pensioners.  The Committee further learn that 
out of the total budget of Rs. 5,25,166.15 crore allocated to the Ministry of Defence in Budget 
Estimates (BE) 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 1,19,696 crore i.e. 23 percent of the entire Defence 
Budget has been  earmarked for Defence Pensions. The Committee have been given to 
understand that additional requirement of Rs. 3846 crore for BE 2022-23 (Rs. 1,19,696 crore) 
over BE 2021-22 (Rs. 1,15,850 crore) is due to normal growth in pension and impact of dearness 
relief.  The Committee, while expressing the hope that the funds allocated to the Ministry under 
Defence Pension Head for Budget Estimates 2022-23 would be sufficient to cover the pensionary 
requirements of Ex-Servicemen, and nevertheless, recommend that, after due assessment of 
escalation in pension amount on account of increase in number of pensioners and revised 
Dearness Relief, additional funds, if required, may be sought at the Revised Estimates stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 Budget Estimates for the financial year 2021-22 was approved to Rs. 1,15,850.00 crore. 
Taking into the account the trend of current year expenditure and normal growth in pension, a 
Revised Estimates 2021-22 for a sum of Rs. 1,16,878.00 crore was projected by PCDA(P), 
Prayagraj during the month of September-October of the current financial year under Grant No. 

101 
 
22-Defence Pension. A ceiling of Rs. 1,16,878.00 crore was also intimated for RE-2021-22 under 
Grant No. 22-Defence Pension. As per the ceiling limit of RE 2021-22, booking of expenditure is 
monitored. Taking into account the trend of expenditure at the end of Feb 2022, a proposal for re-
appropriation was furnished during the month of March 2022 under Grant No. 22-Defence 
Pension.  Based on the trend of current year expenditure and projected amount of RE 2021-22, 
Budget Estimates for the financial year 2022-23 was also projected by PCDA(P) for a sum of Rs. 
1,11,19,696.00 crore and the a ceiling of Rs. 1,19,696.00 crore for BE 2022-23has been 
intimated for booking of Defence Pension Expenditure for the next financial year i.e. 2022-23 has 
been. However, the above ceiling limit of BE 2022-23 may also be revised at RE stage during the 
month of September- October 2022, if required. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.38) 
 
SPARSH –SYSTEM FOR PENSION ADMINISTRATION (RAKSHA) 
 
The Committee were informed that a web based interactive pension disbursement system 
namely ‘SPARSH’ has been rolled out for Army, Navy, Air Force as well as 41 Defence Civilian 
organizations. It is stated to be the largest pension platform in Government covering 33 lakh 
pensioners with around 85,000 pensioners getting added each year. Under SPARSH, a total of 
49,073 claims have been initiated and 36,556 sanctions have been issued till date. Migration of 
legacy pensioners pertaining to 7th Central Pay Commission (CPC) retirees has been done for 
4,84,650 pensioners from various Pension Disbursing Agencies (PDAs). Further, migration of 
remaining pensioners from existing banks is also in process. The Committee note that benefits 
such as centralized sanction and disbursement of pension, paper less processing, verification of 
pensioners’ data even before sanction of pension, dedicated portal accounts for each pensioner, 
digital processing of pensioner identification, removing requirement of multiple visits by 
pensioners, budget management and control through real-time expenditure tracking have been 
accrued/envisaged consequent to the implementation of SPARSH. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under SPARSH, a total of 69,730 claims have been initiated and 46,264 sanctions have 
been issued till date. Migration of legacy pensioners pertaining to 7th Central Pay Commission 
(CPC) retirees has been done for 4, 47,369 pensioners from various Pension Disbursing 
Agencies (PDAs). 
 
Recommendation (Para No 39) 
 
The Committee appreciate the mammoth task being undertaken in implementation of 
SPARSH for Defence Pensioners by the Ministry of Defence as it will give further impetus in 
accomplishing the mission of ‘Digital India’. Further, SPARSH being single application software 
for pension sanction, disbursement, revision, budgeting and audit, will definitely lead to reduction 
in the number of Pension Disbursing Agencies (PDAs) and other authorities and streamline the 
whole pensionary exercise in addition to saving of precious resources and time. The Committee 
note, from the submission made by the representatives of the Ministry, that the work regarding 

102 
 
migration of legacy pensioners from existing PDAs is going on in a phased manner. The 
Committee recommend that task of migration of the remaining pensioners should be 
accomplished at the earliest and inputs/feedback from the users of SPARSH be taken 
periodically to refine and upgrade the system. The Committee are not oblivious to the fact that a 
sizeable number of Defence pensioners and their Next of Kin (NoK) reside in rural and difficult 
terrains and do not have easy access to technological amenities. They, therefore, recommend 
that urgent and concrete steps be taken by the Ministry to aid such veterans and their families in 
migration to SPARSH and utmost care should be taken to ensure that such pensioners and their 
families do not suffer any financial loss due to want of technological awareness and ready access 
to digital facilities. Further, the feasibility of introduction of SPARSH as a mobile application may 
also be explored by the Ministry to enable the pensioners and their families to avail various 
services provided by SPARSH at their fingertips.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to ensure last mile connectivity   with the defence pensioners who are non 
tech-savvy, approx 4.5 Lakhs CSC_SPV SPARSH Service Centres, 476 SBI Service Centres, 
375 PNB Service Centres, 36 DIAV Service Centres, 14 Kotak Mahindra Bank Service Centres, 
pan India have been made functional. These SPARSH service Centres act as interface between 
pensioners and web based Comprehensive Pension Package for all activities relating to 
updation/continuance of pension/family pension and also work as information dissemination 
system for those pensioners who are not able to utilize the e-services of SPARSH through portal. 
A mobile app for SPARSH is also a part of the project and is under development by the system 
integrator viz.TCS.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.40) 
 
 The Committee note that One Rank One Pension (OROP) implies that uniform pension be 
paid to the Defence Forces Personnel retiring in the same rank with the same length of service, 
regardless of their date of retirement, which implies bridging  the gap between the rates of 
pension of current and past pensioners at periodic intervals.  OROP was implemented w.e.f. 
01.07.2014 vide MoD order dated 07.11.2015. The Committee further note that approximately 
Rs. 50,000 crore have been spent @ Rs. 7,123 crore per year for over seven years on 
implementation of OROP and 20,60,220 Defence Forces Pensioners/ Family Pensioners have 
been benefitted under this scheme. The Report of the Internal Committee to examine the 
recommendations of One Man Judicial Committee (OMJC) on OROP is under examination in the 
Ministry. The Committee have also been apprised that a plea has been filled in the Court of law 
by a group of Ex-Servicemen contending against periodic equalization of pension every five 
years and a few other issues. In this regard, the Committee learn that the Supreme Court has 
reserved their judgement in the petition pertaining to OROP. In light of these developments, the 
Committee desire that judgement of the Supreme Court in the matter of OROP and the Ministry’s 
corresponding course of action may be intimated to the Committee at the earliest but definitely at 
the time of submitting of Action Taken Replies. They also recommend that the examination of the 
report of the Internal Committee on OROP may be expedited and the Ministry take tangible and 
concerted steps to remove the anomalies in the pensions of the Armed forces Personnel. It is 

103 
 
needless to mention that the Ministry should address all justified concerns of all the stakeholders 
under intimation to the Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 A Writ Petition(Civil) No. 419/2016 on One Rank One Pension (OROP) policy was filed by 
Indian Ex-Servicemen League & Others in the Hon’ble Supreme Court challenging the principles 
adopted in MoD policy letter dated 7.11.2015. 
 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the WP(C) No. 419/2016 vide order dated 16.3.2022 has, inter-
alia, mentioned that “we find no constitutional infirmity in the OROP principle as defined by the 
communication dated 7 November 2015” and further directed that “a re-fixation exercise shall be 
carried out from 1 July 2019, upon the expiry of five years. Arrears payable to all eligible 
pensioners of the Armed Forces shall be computed and paid over accordingly within a period of 
three months”. As per Hon’ble Supreme Court direction, next revision of pension under OROP 
Scheme w.e.f. 1.7.2019 is under process.  
 
 The One Member Judicial Committee (OMJC) submitted its Report to the Government on 
26.10.2016. The issues involved in the recommendations of OMJC are quite complex and 
required detailed analysis. Therefore, an Internal Committee has been constituted for examining 
the recommendations of OMJC with regard to assessing the feasibility, impact of 
recommendations on other existing provisions and financial aspects in implementation of the 
recommendations. The Internal Committee submitted its report to this Department which is under 
process. 
  
Military Service Pay (MSP)  
Recommendation (Para No.41) 
 
The Committee, during deliberations on Demands for Grants, have been informed that the 
Defence Forces personnel, in addition to their pay, are entitled to the financial benefits pertaining 
to Military Service Pay (MSP) for all ranks up to and inclusive of Brigadiers and their equivalent 
officers. MSP is also reckoned as Basic Pay for purposes of computation of Dearness Allowance 
and pension. The Committee note from the deposition of the Secretary, Department of Ex-
Servicemen Welfare that MSP has led to some anomalies due to which junior ranks got paid 
more than senior ranks. The Committee further note that the matter is being discussed with 
Comptroller General of Defence Accounts (CGDA) and efforts are on to resolve this issue within 
the timeline given by the Court. As the matter is linked with the morale of the Forces and principle 
of protection of rights on the basis of seniority, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
adhere to the timeline given by the Court for resolution of the matter at the earliest and apprise 
the Committee accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Classified 
 
 
 

104 
 
Recommendation (Para No.42) 
 
Welfare of the cadets boarded out of Defence Training Academies/ Institutions on Medical 
Grounds 
 
The Committee regret to note that in response to their written query in regard to the 
number cadets who have been declared unfit to continue in military service due to injuries during 
training in various defence Training academies/ Institutions such as NDA, IMA, Air Force, Naval 
Academies etc. and whether disability pension or any other financial support is extended to such 
cadets, the Ministry has submitted ‘NIL’ information. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
detailed information as sought by them should be furnished to them for their perusal. In the event 
of non-maintenance of such information, the Committee recommend that the Ministry undertake 
such exercise and intimate the Committee accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The number of cadets injured during training in defence academies and invalidated out on 
medical grounds is attached as Annexure-I. 
Disability Pension:  As ex-cadets do not meet the mandatory twin criteria of being ex-servicemen 
and pensioners through defence estimates thus, it is not feasible to award disability pension to 
the ex-cadets. 
However, the following benefits to Ex-cadets are awarded on disablement/ death who are 
invalided out of training on medical ground due to disability attributable to or aggravated by 
service with assessment of disability @20% or more:- 
(a) Monthly Ex-gratia amount of ₹ 9,000/- per month plus Dearness Allowance. 
(b) Ex-gratia disability award @ ₹ 16,200/- per month for 100% disability. For less disability 
this amount will be proportionately reduced. 
(c) Constant Attendance Allowance (CAA) of ₹ 6750/- per month for 100% disability on the 
recommendation of Invalidating Medical Board. No dearness on CAA. 
 d) In cases of death Ex-gratia amount of ₹ 12.5 lakhs. 
AGIF Benefits.   AGIF Insurance is provided to the cadets at NDA injured & disabled due to 
training as per AGI letter No. A/5627/R/AG/Ins(Coord) dated 24th March, 2020 (Annexure-II), 
AGIF benefits for cadets at NDA are as under:- 
(i) Insurance Cover. Rs 15 Lakhs. 
(ii) Disability Benefit. Rs 15 Lakhs for 100% disability, proportionately reduced upto 20% disability. 
(iii) Ex-gratia for less than 20% disability. Rs 50,000 for cadets invalided out in first two years of 
training &Rs. 1 Lakh if invalided out during last year of training. 
 
 
 
  
 

105 
 
Annexure-I 
Indian Army: 
The academy wise summary of cadets invalidated since 2017 
Sl. 
No. 
Academy Number of Cadets Invalidated out 
Attributable Not Attributable 
1. Indian Military Academy 
(IMA), Dehradun 
06 02 
2. Officers Training 
Academy (OTA), Chennai 
11 08 
3. OTA, Gaya 05 01 
4. Cadet Training Wings 
(CTW) CME, Pune 
08 - 
5. CTW MCTE, Mhow 01 04 
6. CTW MCEME, 
Secunderabad 
03 04 
 
Number of Cadets invalidated out during training for the period 2017-21 
S.No. Academy Year Number of cadets Invalidated Out 
Attributable Not Attributable 
1  
 
NDA 
2017 05 - 
2 2018 07 - 
3 2019 07 - 
4 2020 11 - 
5 2021 11 - 
 
Indian Air Force: 
The total number of cadets boarded out from training in the Indian Air Force since 1986 is 35. 
Indian Navy: 
Number of INA cadets boarded out of service since 2017 
Sl. No. Year  No. of Cases  
1 2017 01 
2 2018 02 
3 2019 01 
4 2020 03 
5 2021 02 
6 2022 01 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.43) 
 
The Committee have been informed that during the last few years, on an average, 
approximately 11 to 12 cadets have been boarded out because of disabilities due to training 
attributable issues and accidents etc. The Ex-gratia benefits granted to the cadets on being 
medically boarded out include Ex-Gratia Disability Award (for 100% disability, reduced 
proportionately) of ₹ 16,200 per month plus Dearness Relief, monthly Ex-Gratia of ₹ 9000 plus 
Dearness Relief and Constant Attendance Allowance (for 100% disability only) of ₹ 6,750/- per 

106 
 
month. In addition, Army Group Insurance Fund (AGIF) provides certain insurance coverage for 
death. The Committee have been informed that proposal to increase the insurance coverage 
under AGIF is under examination of the Ministry. The Committee are of the considered view that 
non providing of adequate financial benefits and other avenues for settlement/ rehabilitation of 
such disabled cadets/ corps would not only discourage the youth from joining the Forces but 
would also add to the already existing numbers of vacancies in the Armed Forces. Exhorting the 
need for having a humanitarian approach towards such cadets who decided to serve the country 
by joining the Armed Forces but unfortunately were medically boarded out due to certain 
reasons, the Committee recommended that facilities of Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme (ECHS) and Canteen Stores Department (CSD) may also be extended to such cadets. 
The Committee also recommended that periodic review of ex-gratia amounts to the medically 
boarded-out cadets based on the extant cost of living and inflation should be undertaken by the 
Ministry and the financial aid to such cadets be enhanced suitably. Based on the degree of 
disability, all out efforts should be made and all avenues be looked into by the Government in 
providing any kind of employment including civil jobs to such candidates who had taken risks and 
were inadvertently injured/ harmed during training period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ex-gratia benefits granted to the cadets on being medically boarded out due to their 
disability attributable to or aggravated by military service include Ex-Gratia Disability Award (for 
100% disability, reduced proportionately) of Rs. 16,200/- per month plus Dearness Relief, 
monthly Ex-Gratia of Rs. 9000/- plus Dearness Relief and Constant Attendance Allowance (for 
100% disability only) or Rs. 6750/- per month.  
CSD Facilities to Medically Boarded Out Cadets 
Cadets who have been boarded out and are in receipt of disability award are already entitled to 
Canteen facilities through Canteen Stores Department (CSD) excluding Against Firm Demand 
Category-I (AFD-I) items. 
In the past three years, 49 such cadets have applied for and have been issued with Canteen 
Smart Cards to avail the facility through Unit Run Canteens (URCs). 
As per MoD (DoESW) letter 12/1/2005/D(Res) dated 05 Sep 2011, it has been clarified that the 
“the proposal for granting Ex-Servicemen status to ex-cadets who were boarded out on medical 
grounds has been examined. The Competent Authority has not approved the proposal to grant 
Ex-Serviceman Status to disabled cadets.” 
ECHS facilities  
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) is not entitled to ex-cadets since they do not 
meet the mandatory twin criteria of being ex-servicemen and pensioners through defence 
estimates. 
 

107 
 
CHAPTER – III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies received from the Government 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
Maintenance of airports controlled by Defence Forces 
 
 During the Committee deliberations, the Committee’s attention was brought to the issue of 
certain shortcomings in the airports controlled by the Defence Forces in the country. The 
Committee desire that details of Defence airports across the country, budget allocated and 
expenditure towards maintenance of these airports for the last five years, additional sources of 
revenue being accrued to the Ministry of Defence from such airports and steps instituted/ being 
contemplated for maintenance and improvement of airport infrastructure be furnished to them so 
as to enable them to have a proper appraisal of the functioning of these Airports. The requisite 
information may be furnished within one month of the presentation of this Report. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
1. The maintenance of airports is sub-divided into three major heads viz maintenance of 
Airport infrastructure, maintenance of Nav Aids and maintenance of Airport Support Vehicles 
(ASVs). 
 
2. Additional revenue is generated to the Govt. from these airports as landing/ housing 
charges whenever civil aircraft operations are undertaken. At present 39 IAF airports and nine 
ALGs have been opened up for joint use by civil and military aircraft. 
 
3. Towards maintenance and improvement of infrastructure following steps are being 
undertaken:- 
 
(a) Special repair as and when required. 
 
(b) Runway resurfacing as Special Project depending on the quality of runway and ability to 
undertake operations. 
 
(c) Routine airfield, nav-aids and airport support vehicle maintenance activities for day to day 
upkeep and maintenance of the airports. 
 
(d) Infrastructure upgrade at IAF airfields as part of project MAFI is being executed in two 
phases. MAFI Phase-I has been implemented at 30 IAF airfields. Phase-II of the project is 
currently under execution in 37 airports (24 IAF airports, nine Navy airports, two ARC airports 
and two ICG airports). 
 

108 
 
4. The details of budget allocation and expenditure towards maintenance of IAF 
Airfields/Runways (CH 760/04 of MH 111-Revenue Works) are given below:- 
 
FY MA Sanctioned 
(in Rs/Crores) 
Actuals (CGDA Expenditure Data) 
(in Rs./Crores) 
16-17 58.91 57.24 
17-18 56.00 55.93 
18-19 57.79 55.91 
19-20 60.74 59.53 
20-21 61.03 59.31 
21-22 60.18 48.36 (as on 28.02.22)  
 
5. Regular maintenance of Airfields is being carried out under maintenance of IAF Airfields/ 
Runway (CH 760/04 of MH 111-Revenue Works). 
 
6. A total of Rs. 2281.71 Cr was allotted towards maintenance of various equipment installed 
at Defence Airfields. The details of expenditure are as follows:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Period Capital/ 
Revenue 
Code 
Head 
Fund 
Allotted 
Expenditure 
(a) Cost incurred 
for 
modernization 
of Airfield 
infrastructure 
2016-
2019 
Capital 02/919/36 Rs.1220 Cr  Rs.1220 Cr 
(b) Expenditure 
incurred 
towards 
Follow on 
Support for 
Maintenance 
of Airfield 
Infrastructure 
(18 months) 
Aug 
2019- 
Feb 
2021 
Revenue 741/18 Rs.24.84 Cr Rs.24.84 Cr 
(c) Expenditure 
incurred 
towards 
Airfield 
Lighting 
System 
May 
2017- 
Dec 
2021 
Revenue 742/21 Rs.8.66 Cr Rs.8.66 Cr 
(d) Procurement 
of MAFI 
spares 
2020-
2022  
Revenue 742/21 Rs.135.99 
Cr 
Rs.135.99 Cr 
(e) AMC of CADF 2018- Revenue 741/18 Rs.16.34 Cr Rs.16.34 Cr 

109 
 
System Qty-
36 
2021 
(f) SRE AMC 
(2013-2019) 
2017- 
2019 
Revenue 741/18 Rs.544.02 
Cr 
Rs.544.02 Cr 
(g) SRE AMC 
(2019-2024) 
2019- 
2022 
Revenue 741/18 Rs.331.86 
Cr 
Rs.331.86 Cr 
 Total Rs.2281.71 
Cr 
Rs.2281.71 
Cr 
 

110 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

111 
 
CHAPTER – V  
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished interim 
replies/replies awaited 
 
Expenditure on Research & Development 
  
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
         
 The Committee note that Capital segment of the MoD (Civil) Budget has seen a jump of 
55.60 percent from Rs. 5,173.41 crore in FY 2021-22 to Rs. 8049.99 crore in FY 2022-23. 
However, the Committee, on scrutiny of the documents provided by the Ministry of Defence in 
connection with examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2022-23, find that the 
expenditure on Defence Research & Development (R&D) has been dwindling over the past few 
years. This is evident from the fact that the expenditure on R&D in 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-
22 (upto December 2021) stood at Rs. 17,779.24 crore, Rs. 16,075.07 crore and Rs. 11,668.79 
crore, respectively. Surprisingly, the actual expenditure has been even lesser that BE allocation 
since 2019-20 pointing to underutilization of funds under this head. The Committee are of the 
considered view that alongwith enhancement in Capital segment of the budget, requisite 
allocation and expenditure on Defence Research and Development is the key for realizing the 
Defence modernization plans of the Indian Armed Forces and many initiatives under ‘Make in 
India’. Therefore, keeping in view the need to equip our Armed Forces with state-of-the-art 
equipment/platforms/weapons and enable them to respond to evolving threat perception and 
global security scenario, the Committee recommend that urgent steps be taken to ensure full and 
prudent utilization of the funds allocated for Defence Research & Development. They also desire 
that the figures regarding allocated amount at Revised Estimates stage and actual expenditure 
incurred on R&D for Financial Year 2021-22 may be intimated to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The total Budget sanctioned to the Deptt of Defence R&D at different Budgetary stages for three 
years along with the actual expenditure is as under: 
           (Rs. in cr) 
Year BE  
Approved 
RE  
Approved 
MA  
Approved 
Actuals 
2019-20 19021.02 17730.78 17730.78 17375.13 
2020-21 19327.35 16466.29 16145.74 15706.98 
2021-22 20457.44 18337.44 18520.44 Under 
compilation 
 
 
 
 

112 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23)  
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2022-23) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 9th August, 2023 from 930 hrs. to 1000 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director 
2. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
3. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
4. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
5. Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
6. Kunwar Danish Ali 
7. Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
8. Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
10. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
11. Shri Prathap Simha  
12. Shri Brijendra Singh  
13. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 Rajya Sabha 
14. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
15. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
16. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
17. Smt. P.T. Usha 
18. Shri G.K. Vasan 
19. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

113 
 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration the 
following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
i. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of Standing Committee on Defence on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2022-23 on ‘General 
Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates 
Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, 
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’; and 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence  on 
the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to War Widows/Families in 
Armed Forces’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.  
 
4. *****Does not pertain to the Report****** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
  

114 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF 
DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2022-23 ON ‘GENERAL DEFENCE BUDGET, BORDER ROADS 
ORGANISATION, INDIAN COAST GUARD, DEFENCE ESTATES ORGANISATION, DEFENCE 
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS, CANTEEN STORES DEPARTMENT, WELFARE OF EX-
SERVICEMEN AND DEFENCE PENSION (DEMAND NOS. 19 AND 22)’ 
1.  Total number of recommendations                                                                                  43 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government (please see 
Chapter II): 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1,2,3,5,6,7,8,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22, 
23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33, 34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42 and 43 
Total : 41 
Percentage: 95% 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
Recommendation Para No. 9                                             
Total : 1 
Percentage: 2.5 % 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee, which require reiteration and commented upon (please see 
Chapter IV): 
-Nil- 
Total : 0 
Percentage: 0 % 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished interim 
replies/replies awaited (please see Chapter V): 
Recommendation Para No. 4                                             
Total : 1 
Percentage: 2.5 % 
 