 
9 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 
'Proxy and Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections an
Evaluation’] 
February
 
i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 
Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections an
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
------ 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
  
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 
Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections an 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
(
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 
'Proxy and Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elec
Evaluation’] 
  
Presented
Laid
 
February
 
ii 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2020-21) 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 
Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elec
Presented to Lok Sabha on  12.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   12.02.2021 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
--------- 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
  
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 
Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections an 

iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
            
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21).……………………….....…...........   
(iv) 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…..................       
(vi) 
 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………….......      1 
 
CHAPTER II a) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government ………………………………...   13 
 
 b) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon.............  21 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the  
 Government ..        25 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon …………………...  26 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
 awaited………………………........................................................    28 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I      Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                  Defence (2020-21) held on 09.02.2021………….…...........    30 
 
  II     Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
         Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third 
   Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  
   Defence (2019-20).............................................................     33 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21)  
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
  
2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari  
3. Kunwar Danish Ali 
4. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
5. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
6. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
7. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
9. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
10. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
11. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick  
12. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar  
13. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil  
14. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
17. Shri Prathap Simha  
18. Shri Brijendra Singh  
19. Shri Mahabali Singh  
20. Shri Kotagiri Sridhar  
21. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
24. Shri Sharad Pawar  
25. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Shri Rajeev Satav  
28. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi  
29. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
31. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Sharma - Director 
3.        Shri Rahul Singh   - Deputy Secretary 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2020-21), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Ninth Report of the Committee on 
'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 
‘Proxy and Postal voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections an 
Evaluation’. 
2.  The Twenty-Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.12.2016. The Report contained 47 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all 
the Observations/Recommendations in March, 2019. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 09.02.2021. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi Jual Oram 
09 February, 2021 Chairperson,  
20 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
 This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Third (23rd) Report of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 'Proxy and 
Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections an Evaluation' 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 8 December, 2016. 
 
2. The Committee's Twenty-Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained 47 
Observations/recommendations on the following aspects:- 
 
 
Para No.  Subject 
1 Need to consider the Spouse of Service Personnel as General 
Voters 
2-6 Criteria for Voting by Service Voters at the place of posting 
7-13 Proxy Voting 
14-18 Need to utilize the services of uniformed Service Personnel in 
conducting elections in difficult and forward areas 
19-22 Need to study the best practices of other countries 
23-24 Non - maintenance of Records of Service Voters (Armed Forces) 
25-27 Enrolment of Service Voters 
28-31 Educating the Service Voters 
32-33 Canvassing inside the Cantonments 
34-35 Cases filed in Supreme Court 
36-39  Counting of Postal Votes 
40-47 Electronic Voting System 
 
 
  
  

2 
 
 
3.   Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of  
the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been 
examined and categorised as follows:-  
 
(i) (a)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
 Government: 
 
 Para Nos. 1,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,23,24,25,26,27,29, 
  30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37, 38 and 39 
(29 Recommendations) 
 
 These are included in Chapter II (a) of the Report. 
 
 
 (b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
 Government and are commented upon: 
 
 Para Nos.  2,3,4,5,40,41,42,43,44,45,46 and 47 
  
(12 Recommendations) 
 
 These are included in Chapter II (b) of the Report. 
 
 
(ii)   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
 Para No.  Nil  
   (Nil Recommendation) 
 These are included in Chapter III of the Report. 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration and to be commented upon: 
   
 Para Nos.  19, 20, 21 and 22 
    (04 Recommendations) 
 These are included in Chapter IV of the Report. 
 
  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
 
 Paras Nos.  6 and 28 
       (02 Recommendations) 
 These are included in Chapter V of the Report. 
 
  

3 
 
 
4. After gleaning through the replies submitted by the Ministry, the 
Committee have found that the Action Taken Notes/Replies of the Ministry are 
silent on paragraph no. 6 of Part-II, Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 23 Report (16th Lok Sabha).  For the ease of 
reference of the Committee, this paragraph is reproduced hereinafter:- 
 
 “Further, it has been informed that the Election Commission of India 
was of the opinion that this matter is required to be considered by 
several Ministries of Government of India, including the Ministries of 
Defence, Home Affairs, North Eastern Affairs and Law and Justice, etc.  
Considering the importance of the matter, the Committee would like to 
see that the issue is resolved at the earliest, especially in the light of the 
decision/ruling by the Hon’ble Supreme Court and introduction of e-
postal voting.” 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons as to why this 
particular para has not merited any response from the Ministry.  Coming back 
to the recommendation itself, the Committee are of the opinion that it is 
imperative for the Ministry to undertake efforts to observe and remove 
bottlenecks and gather and concretise the views of other Ministries of 
Government of India such as Ministry of Home Affairs, Development of North 
Eastern Region, Law and Justice, etc.   In the light of the information provided 
by the concerned Ministries and the decision/ruling of Hon’ble Supreme Court, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the stance of the Government with 
regard to introduction of e-postal voting.  
 
A. Criteria for Voting by Service Voters at the place of posting 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2-5) 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
'The Committee note that the Armed Forces Personnel can also be enrolled in 
their place of posting (in Peace Stations) as ordinary (general) electors 
provided they are not already enrolled as Service Voters. Otherwise, they 
have to vote in person in the polling station of the area concerned at the place 
of their posting. For the purpose, the Election Commission of India has laid 
down certain stipulations, which include, having a minimum tenure of posting 
of 3 years, residence with family, etc. As the stipulation of minimum tenure of 
3 years in particular, was not appropriate and suitable to the Armed Forces 
Personnel owing to their frequent transfers and deployment, the Ministry of 
Defence, in consultation with the three Service and Coast Guard had 
conveyed to the Election Commission of India in the year 2013 that Armed 
Forces Personnel should be allowed to register as 'general voters' at their 
place of posting without any conditionality. 
 
Subsequently, the ECI, however, vide their letter dated 17 October, 2013 
requested the Ministry of Defence to reconsider the matter in the light of the 
judgement dated 22.08.2013 of Hon'ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana in 
CWP No. 2775 of 2009 (Brig. Ghuman Vs UOI) wherein the concerns raised 
by Election Commission were found justified and conditions laid down by EC 

4 
 
for enrolment as local voters had been upheld by the Hon'ble High Court inter-
alia by citing possible change of demographic character of the constituencies 
which may affect the local populace and upset the electoral profile. The matter 
was, therefore, reconsidered in consultation with ECI and a request was made 
in the year 2014 for incorporating the following provisions in the rules: 
 
(i) Definition of the term 'residing with family' may be extended to include 
group residency in a unit/station in a common group accommodation 
for the purpose of registration as general voter at place of posting. 
 
(ii) The existing stipulation in the ECI instructions regarding minimum  
 period of tenure of posting of 3 years may be revised downwards to 
 at least 2 years. 
 
 Thereafter, the Election Commission of India took up the matter with the 
Cabinet Secretariat. The Cabinet Secretariat again sought the views of 
Ministry of Defence which in turn stated that reducing the period of tenure of 
posting from 3 years to 2 years and extending the term 'residing with family' 
to include 'common group residency' would, to a substantial extent, address 
the issue in peace areas. 
 
 The Committee note from the information supplied by the Ministry on latest 
developments in the Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein Interim 
Judgement/Ruling dated 8 March 2015 speaks about certain inherent 
deficiencies/restraints in voting by postal ballot, proxy voting or by voting in 
person in peace stations by members of Armed Forces and family members, 
which need to be addressed by Election Commission of India in consultation 
with all stakeholders; in far flung areas, serving personnel not to be deprived 
of their right to vote on the grounds of small civilian population and largest 
population of service personnel; Union of India to examine whether it is 
possible to ensure that postal ballots where such option is to be exercised 
by an intending voter, can be reached and retrieved within the window 
period or if some other mechanism like e-voting can be introduced for this 
category of voters; UoI to consider feasibility of permitting registration of 
service voter in a peace station by waiving or reducing the period of three 
years of residence; to file suggestions after an objective examination of the 
entire gamut of the issues arising and involved in the form of a report 
supported by an affidavit within a period of three months from the date of 
pronouncement of the judgment. 
 
In the Interim Judgment dated 15 July, 2016, heard by the three judge 
Bench based on the submission made by UoI (Ministry of Law and Justice), 
the Apex court granted four months time to UoI to take a decision on the 
issue and submit its report in the next date of hearing which is likely to be in 
November, 2016. 
The Committee desire that they may be apprised of the progress of the case 
periodically.' 

5 
 
 
6. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
'Person having service qualification can get enrolled as 'service voter' at his 
native place even though he actually may be residing at a different place (of 
posting). He has, however, an option to get himself enrolled as general 
elector at the place of his posting if that is a 'Peace Station'.' 
Comments of the Committee 
  
7. The Committee find the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry inconclusive 
as on an earlier occasion, the Ministry has apprised the Committee that  the 
Armed Forces Personnel can also be enrolled in their place of posting (in 
Peace Stations) as ordinary (general) electors provided they are not already 
enrolled as Service Voters. Otherwise, they have to vote in person in the 
polling station of the area concerned at the place of their posting. However, for 
the purpose, the Election Commission of India has laid down certain 
stipulations, which include, having a minimum tenure of posting of 3 years, 
residence with family, etc. As the stipulation of minimum tenure of 3 years in 
particular, was not appropriate and suitable to the Armed Forces Personnel 
owing to their frequent transfers and deployment, the Ministry of Defence, in 
consultation with the three Service and Coast Guard had conveyed to the 
Election Commission of India in the year 2013 that Armed Forces Personnel 
should be allowed to register  as 'general voters' at their place of posting 
without any conditionality. After subsequent developments as mentioned 
earlier, the matter was pending in the Supreme Court and the Committee had 
desired that they may be apprised of the progress of the case periodically, 
which has not been done in the instant case. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that Ministry should furnish a reply clearly stating whether 
"person having service qualification can get enrolled as 'service voter' at his 
native place even though he actually may be residing at a different place (of 
posting) and have an option to get himself enrolled as general elector at the 
place of his posting if that is a 'Peace Station'', is the outcome of the Supreme 
Court Judgment or not and whether it has any conditionality or not.  
  

6 
 
 
B.  NEED TO STUDY THE BEST PRACTICES OF OTHER COUNTRIES 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 19-22) 
8.  The Committee had recommended as under: 
'The intention of the various stakeholders including the Services, the 
Ministry of Law and Justice and the Election Commission of India is for 
giving the Services Personnel a fair and full opportunity to exercise their 
franchise. However, postal delays as well as the elaborate procedural 
aspects prescribed for postal voting make the exercise of right to adult 
suffrage in respect of Service Voters as also the officials on election duty 
very difficult. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Election Commission 
of India should take concrete measures towards resolving the problems 
inter-alia by way of using advanced technology as a means of ensuring that 
notes reach back the Returning Officers in minimum possible time.' 
 
 
'India has made significant strides in terms of technological advancement. 
The Mangal Yan reaching the destination in the first attempt itself without 
much money spent on the expedition can be cited as an apt example in this 
regard. The Committee, therefore, feel that developing and implementing a 
foolproof and reliable system to help Service Voters in exercising their 
franchise should be an easy, and definitely not a difficult task.' 
 
 
 'The Committee find it surprising that the Ministry of Defence and Election 
Commission of India have not undertaken any exercise to learn about the 
practices prevalent in developed nations in particular, for enabling the 
soldiers, who are not at their usual place of residence, to exercise their 
franchise. On a later date, however, the Adjutant General admitted that 
some understanding has been developed in this regard.' 
 
 
'The Committee desire that the Election Commission of India and the 
Ministry of Defence together should undertake a study of the electoral 
practices prevalent in countries where 'internet voting' or chip based 
'identity card voting system' exists viz. Australia, Brazil, Canada, Estonia, 
France, Netherlands, UK, USA, Switzerland, Venezuela, etc. The best 
practices followed in this regard need to be identified and developed to suit 
the requirements of Indian election process.' 
 
9. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:  
              'No such study has been taken up by the Election Commission of India.' 
 

7 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee are surprised over the fact that instead of identifying and 
conducting any study of the electoral practices prevalent in countries where 
'internet voting' or chip based 'identity card voting system' exists, the Ministry/ 
Election Commission of India simply denied of conducting any study. The 
Committee are of the view that 'internet voting' may increase the people's 
participation in electoral process as many Forces personnel are not able to 
vote due to their physical limitation.  This is true for the persons including 
service voters, who are away from their usual place of residence due to 
personal or official obligations. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation to undertake a study of the electoral practices prevalent in 
countries where 'internet voting' or chip based 'identity card voting system' 
exists viz. Australia, Brazil, Canada, Estonia, France, Netherlands, UK, USA, 
Switzerland, Venezuela, etc. and the best practices/systems followed in this 
regard be identified and ameliorated to suit the requirements of Indian election 
process.  It is needless to state at this point that best practices whether they 
be in the field modernized voting rights to Defence Services personnel or any 
other related issues are ever evolving which India should emulate with pride. 
  
 
C.  EDUCATING THE SERVICE VOTER 
Recommendations (Para No.  28) 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee note that a large number of 'Service Votes' get invalidated 
mainly due to lack of basic awareness amongst the Personnel about the 
procedure of enrolment and voting pattern. The Committee, in this regard 
appreciate the fact that the ECI has launched a de novo exercise, termed 
Systematic Voters' Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP). As part of 
SVEEP, special programs have been rolled out for ensuring that modalities 
with regard to enrolment as well as voting pattern get conveyed to the Service 
Personnel. Through this program, the issue of invalidation of Service votes 
would be addressed to a substantial extent. Further, ECI has issued 
instructions to the effect that declaring a vote as invalid should be a matter of 
last resort. The Committee also note in this regard that issues such as the 
signature and office stamp being in the right place, etc. are not being 
emphasized upon much and the ECI is only keen on ensuring that the 
signatory is an authorised one. In this way, the percentage of invalidation 
would definitely come down. The Committee also desire that a short 
educational film depicting all the aspects concerned with registration and E-
Postal Ballot System may be produced and screened in each and every unit 

8 
 
of the Services so that Service Voters become well aware and their votes are 
not invalidated due to lack of procedural knowledge. 
 
The Committee are of the view that periodic computer based training 
programme should be conducted for educating the Service voters as well as 
officers deployed in the Record offices. The Committee also desire that such 
programmes/screening of educational film should be made part of the training 
curriculum of Officers and Jawans." 
 
12. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
 
 "Necessary modalities are being worked out by the Services HQ in 
consultation with the Election Commission of India in this regard." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee treat the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry on this 
recommendation as interim in nature.  Notwithstanding the fact that 
Committee had taken note of the initiatives launched by ECI in the form of an 
exercise termed ‘Systemic Voters Education & Electoral Participation 
(SWEEP)’, the Committee have not been apprised of the real benefits which 
have accrued  or would be accrued to Service voters in future.   The reply of 
the Ministry is also silent on other measures recommended by the Committee 
such as production of a short educational film for the purpose; whether it was 
screened in each and every Unit for awareness of Service Voters, etc.  In the 
opinion of the Committee, when their recommendations were pin-pointed, they 
expect that the reply of the Ministry should also be comprehensive throwing 
light on all the operable parts of the recommendation.  At least now, they 
desire that the progress made in this regard or the tangible results achieved 
on all the points, including imparting of computer-based training for educating 
Service voters etc. be intimated to the Committee.  It is obvious that Services 
Headquarters should consult the Election Commission of India before 
furnishing replies to the Ministry. 
 
  

9 
 
 
D.  ELECTRONIC VOTING SYSTEM 
 
Recommendations (Para No.  40-47) 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 'The Committee feel seriously concerned to note that approximately 90 per 
cent of the Service Personnel are denied the right to exercise their franchise 
owing to the inadequacies of the Postal Ballot system. This is mainly on 
account of the 14 day time stipulation for dispatching and returning the ballot 
papers, i.e., the time period between the last date for withdrawal of 
candidature and the date of election. In most cases, the Service Personnel do 
not receive the Postal Ballot papers on time, or even if they receive them, the 
completed ballot papers do not reach back the R.O. on time, thereby 
impacting the exercise of franchise. Therefore, the Committee strongly feel 
that reforming the Postal Ballot system is an immediate necessity. 
 
Logically, the solution to the inadequacies  of Postal Balloting would come 
through an e-technology enable means, i.e. an e–Portal, which can do away 
with multiple layers of papers being printed, forwarded, receipted, collated and 
sent back to the Returning Officer. The Defence Secretary too, while 
tendering evidence opined that in the era of rapid advances in information 
technology, a solution can surely be found through a combination of 
technology and procedural changes in the law. In short, the means for 
overcoming the limitations and challenges posed by Postal Balloting would be 
in switching over to 'e-ballot papers' and 'e-voting'. 
 
 'The Committee have also been apprised by the representatives of the ECI 
that they had initiated work on developing 'e-Postal Ballot' as the first step or 
prelude to the switch-over to, or initiation of 'e-voting'. The software and tools 
for facilitating transmission and receipt back of Postal Ballots electronically 
was being developed under the supervision of a Committee. As informed, the 
Commission would be ready to roll out the system in a few months time 
following the amendments to the rules.' 
 
 'The Committee have also been informed that the Services preferred a system 
whereby the Postal Ballots could be, instead of being transmitted directly to 
the Service Member, transferred in bulk to the unit officers, who would 
download them. The Unit Officers (UOs) could be designated as the AROs 
(Assistant Returning Officers) and be responsible for issuing the downloaded 
ballot papers to the individual Service member, who would, in turn, transmit 
them back to the RO concerned by  speed post.  The technology to enable 
this bulk transfer, downloading and transmission is being developed by C-
DAC. As informed, the process of testing and developing the system, 
including the field trials would take a few months to be completed. The plan is 
to try out and test the system in a couple of by-elections before rolling it out as 

10 
 
a practice in all the elections. It is, however, essential to have the rules 
amended before trying out the system. As for the current stage of developing 
the system, as per the information furnished, the Commission was in the 
process of examining whether or not the UO could be appointed as an 
Assistant Returning Officer.' 
 
 'As regards the issue of amendments needed in the electoral laws/rules, for 
facilitating 'e-voting', as informed, the Commission had moved a proposal to 
this effect with the Ministry of Law and Justice. On the current status of the 
matter, as informed by the Ministry of Law and Justice, a Cabinet note has 
been readied and an advance copy thereof sent to the PMO. However, the 
PMO has, in turn, suggested that domestic migrant laborers too needed to be 
extended the facility of 'e-voting'. For the purpose of assessing the matter, a 
Committee of Ministers had been appointed.' 
 
 'The Committee felt anguished over the merger of the issue of Service Voters 
with that of the migrant workers. The Committee were of the unanimous view 
on the need for urgently introducing the 'e-balloting system' to the 'Service' 
personnel without associating the matter with other issues. During the oral 
evidence of the representatives of Election Commission of India, Ministry of 
Defence and Ministry of Law & Justice, the Committee were apprised that on 
29 September, 2016, a decision was taken to de-link the issue of Migrant 
Labourers and 'Service' personnel. The Committee persistently took up the 
issue to bring out an executive order to this effect. 
 
 As a consequence, the necessary amendment was made to the Conduct of 
Election Rules, 1961 and notified in the Gazette of India on 21st October, 
2016. Finally, the core issue of introducing e-postal ballot system has been 
addressed.' 
 
 The Committee note that the following areas, issues need to be sorted out at 
present by the Ministry of Defence in consultation with the Election 
Commission of India (ECI). 
 
(a) To reduce the size of e-postal ballot files by the Election Commission of 
India to permit easy downloading even where internet data transfer 
speeds are marginal. 
 
(b) To finalise the Standing Operating Procedure (SOP) for on-line 
registration and one way e-movement of postal ballot for effective 
implementation of the System. 
 
(c) To devise and promulgation of unique service numbers for service voters, 
so as to provide these unique numbers to voters after successful 
registration'. 
 
 

11 
 
 
 'The Committee desire that immediate steps should be taken to remove the 
above bottlenecks and they may be informed accordingly.' 
 
'The E-Postal balloting was implemented in the bye-election held in 
Nelithope Assembly (Puducherry) on 19th November, 2016. The Committee 
welcome this historic step. However, they desire to be informed about the 
number of Service Voters in the constituency, number of E-ballot papers 
transmitted to the Unit, time taken to download the ballot papers, time taken in 
the return journey from the Unit office to the RO concerned, actual number of 
votes cast, actual number of valid/invalid votes and the reasons for the 
invalidation of votes etc.'  
 
15. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:  
 
"Instructions regarding electronically transmission of postal ballot system 
 have been issued from the commission. Further, the size of postal ballot has 
 been minimized to maximum level. 
  
So far allotment of unique number to service voters is concerned, on request 
 of services, forces, the Commission is agree to use them unique no. in place 
 of service no./ buckle no." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee in their earlier Report had welcomed the historic step of 
implementation of e-postal balloting system in the bi-election held in Nelithope 
Assembly (Puducherry) in 19 November 2016. They further desired to be 
informed about the number of Service Voters in the constituency, the number 
of e-ballot papers transmitted to the Unit, time taken to download the ballot 
papers, time taken in the return journey from the Unit Office to the concerned 
Returning Officer, actual number of votes cast, actual number of valid/in-valid 
votes and the reasons for the invalidation of votes if any. 
 In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry has simply stated that 
'instructions regarding electronically transmission of Postal Ballot System 
have been issued from the Commission. Further the size of Postal Ballot has 
been minimized to maximum level'. The Ministry has not furnished the desired 
information as stated in the preceding para. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to furnish the desired information in their Action 
Taken Statement. 

12 
 
 The Committee may also like to know about the difficulties faced by the 
Ministry or Election Commission of India in achieving the desired results in the 
General Elections for 17th Lok Sabha. 
 The Committee may also be apprised about the status of using unique 
number in place of Service number. 
  

13 
 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
(A) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 
Need to consider the Spouse of Service Personnel as General Voters 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 The Committee note that there are special provisions for personnel of the 
Armed and Para-Military Forces etc., to vote. As per Section 20(3) of Representation 
of Peoples Act, 1950, Armed Forces Personnel may register their names in the 
electoral roll of their native place, whether or not they are ordinarily residing there. 
The Committee further note that apart from Armed Forces Personnel, this category 
(called the 'Service Voters') includes (i) personnel belonging to Para-Military Forces, 
(ii) State Armed Police Force serving outside the State, and (iii) officials employed 
under Government of India in a post outside India. The wife of any such Service 
Voter is also eligible to be enrolled (in this last part of the electoral roll), if she is 
ordinarily residing with her husband at the place of his posting. However, the 
Committee find that it is not the other way round. Therefore, the Committee are of 
the view that in cases where the husband of a lady officer is staying at the place of 
posting, he may also be treated as Service Voter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above point are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 
Proxy Voting 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7-13) 
 
 
 The Armed Forces and Para Military Forces personnel enrolled as electors in 
their native place have the option of appointing a Proxy of their choice for voting on 
their behalf. In such cases, the Proxy will vote at the local polling station. Others, 
who do not want to vote through Proxy, will be sent a Postal Ballot by the Returning 
Officer of the constituency. 
 
 The Committee note that the facility of appointing a Proxy for exercising the 
franchise on behalf of the defence personnel (Service Voters belonging to Armed 
Forces and Para Military Forces) was introduced by way of amending of Section 60 
of the Representation of People Act, 1951, through the Election Laws and Other 
Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2003. To be appointed as Proxy, a person has to 
be ordinarily resident in the constituency concerned and of not less than 18 years of 
age. While it is not necessary that the Proxy is also registered as an elector in the 
roll, at the same time, he must not be disqualified to be registered. 
 

14 
 
 The Committee further note that the process of appointing a Proxy involves, 
inter-alia, filling an application in the statutorily prescribed format (Form 13F), which 
is appended to the 1961 rules. Both the Service Voter appointing the Proxy and the 
Proxy so appointed have to put their signatures on the Form and  have  it  attested 
by the Commanding Officer/Notary public or First Class Magistrate. As per the 
procedure laid down, the Service Voter has to get his signature attested by the 
Commanding Officer of the Unit and send it to the Proxy being nominated by him. 
The Proxy, on receipt of the form, can sign and get the attestation from a Notary/First 
Class Magistrate, It is only after completing the process, as prescribed under the 
rules, that Form 13F can be delivered to the Returning Officer concerned. 
 
 The Committee find from the information furnished that the procedure 
involved in voting through Proxy can be daunting, both for the Service Voter 
appointing the Proxy as well as the Proxy. The process can also be taxing for the 
Returning Officer (RO) as he is required to maintain a record of the Service voters 
who have appointed Proxies. The Proxies will vote on behalf of the Service voter as 
any other general voter in the polling station covering the place of residence of the 
Service Voter concerned. The RO is required to send a polling station wise list of 
Proxies appointed by Service Voters, based on which, the Presiding Officer will 
permit the Proxy to cast the vote. 
 
 As evident from the depositions made, the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence and the Services too find the process of voting through Proxy cumbersome. 
The process involves adhering to a variety of formalities which include, verifying 
signatures of the individual and the Proxy through First Class Magistrate, Notary and 
the Commanding Officer of the Unit concerned. The elaborate procedures, coupled 
with inherent issues relating to 'confidentiality of the choice of the Service Voter' 
discourage the individual voters from casting their vote through Proxy. Therefore, the 
process is not popular among the Service voters. 
 
 
 The Committee note that the intention behind introducing the facility of Proxy 
Voting was to help the Service Personnel in casting their vote. Nevertheless, 
considering the stringent procedure the Service Armed Forces Personnel have to 
follow in appointing the Proxy; the processes the Proxy has to, in turn, follow for 
voting; as well as the intrinsic nature of Proxy Voting – which can compromise 
aspects of confidentiality – the Committee are of the view that serious efforts need to 
be made towards developing an alternative to the system of Proxy Voting. A better 
method for enabling the Service Personnel to exercise their franchise is a necessity. 
 
 The Committee feel that this move will also contribute in easing the burden on 
the Returning Officers as well as the Presiding Officers. Presenting, these officials 
have to channelize their time and energy on keeping track of Service Voters opting 
for Proxy Voting and as well as the Proxies appointed. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above points are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 

15 
 
Need to utilize the services of uniformed Service Personnel in conducting 
elections in difficult and forward areas: 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14-18) 
 
 As per the stipulations prescribed by the Election Commission, the ROs are to 
dispatch the Postal Ballot papers for Service voters within 48 hours following the 
finalisation of the list of contesting candidates. The period between the date of 
dispatch of Postal Ballots and the date of counting would ordinarily be about 14-17 
days. The representatives of the Commission admitted that this period is insufficient, 
and more so, in the case of personnel posted in far away/border areas. In the 
process of Postal Voting, the RO sends the Postal Ballots (in sealed envelopes 
addressed to individual Service Personnel) to the Record Offices concerned. The 
Record Offices, in turn, send the Postal Ballots to the personnel at their place of 
posting. Once the Postal Ballot paper and the accompanying papers reach the 
Service Personnel, they have to follow the procedure prescribed in returning the 
papers back to the RO. 
 
 The Committee also note that with a view to cutting down the delay in the 
onward transmission of Postal Ballots, the Commission has directed that the 
dispatch should be made from a centralised location under the supervision of the 
District Election Officer (DEO) and in the presence of the Election Observer. The 
postal authorities are called to the dispatch location and the envelopes are handed 
over under acknowledgement. 
 
 The Committee also note that the process of issuing Postal Ballot papers to 
Service Voters has to be completed within a pre-scheduled time-frame. The DEO is, 
therefore, required to depute a team of officers with one of the Assistant Returning 
Officers alongwith an updated copy of last part of the electoral roll and other papers 
prescribed well in advance. For enabling completion of the process within time, the 
printing of the Postal Ballot papers alongwith the counterfoils has to be completed 
within 24 hours following the finalisation of the list of contesting candidates. Any 
delay in adhering to the schedule will make the entire process of using Postal Ballot 
papers by Service Voters nugatory and thereby deprive them of prescribed and 
connected papers. Besides this, as per the standing instructions, the senior most 
observer posted in the district headquarters concerned by the Commission is 
required personally to monitor the entire process. Also, the process of dispatch of 
Postal Ballot papers has to be video-graphed. 
 
 The Committee understand that conducting the General Elections is an 
onerous task for the Election Commission of India. To fulfill the task, manpower is 
acquired from different Central and State Government departments. The manpower 
so acquired is also to be trained for ensuring smooth conduct of elections. The 
uniformed Service Personnel being a disciplined lot, the Committee feel that the 
Services of these personnel can be utilized to conduct the elections, in a fair and 
transparent manner for Service Voters, particularly in the difficult and forward areas. 
 
 The Committee recommend that ECI should appoint some Service Officers as 
Honorary Election commission Officer and entrust them with the duty of conducting 
the elections. This step would also facilitate in ensuring maximum participation of 
Service Voters in future. 
 
 
 

16 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above points are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 
Non-maintenance of Records of Service Voters (Armed Forces) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23-24) 
 
 It came as a surprise to the Committee that details of the number of Armed 
Forces Personnel not having cast their vote in the elections; and the reasons 
therefor have not been maintained, either by the Election Commission of India or the 
Services. 
 
 The Committee also note from the information furnished by the Election 
Commission of India that a separate record of dispatch of Postal Ballots to Service 
Voters is maintained. When it comes to the issue of counting however, the Postal 
Ballots as a whole, which may include the Postal Ballots of the staff on election duty 
are taken up together. The Committee desire that a mechanism be devised so as to 
enable in knowing the number of Service Votes received, counted, invalidated and 
the reasons for the invalidation of votes. Such a measure would act as an aid in 
enabling the Services as well as the Election Commission of India to take remedial 
measures for ensuring maximum participation of the Forces in the electoral process. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above points are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 
Enrolment of Service Voters 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 The Committee note that in order to ensure effective participation of Service 
Personnel in the electoral process, enrolment of all Personnel needs to be ensured. 
The Committee were apprised in this regard that ECI had recently, i.e. on 1 January, 
2015 launched a de novo exercise for intensive revision of a large part of the 
electoral rolls relating to Service Personnel. The programme, inter alia envisages the 
Election Commission of India to start registering of troops in coordination with the 
Armed Forces HQs and use local units Commanders List of service men/women as 
electoral list. Every unit is to designate one office as Unit Regimental Officer (URO) 
whose job would be to ensure that fresh enumeration is carried out. It is also to be 
ensured that there is adequate awareness regarding voting methods and also about 
online voting. The Committee, while appreciating the steps taken by the Election 
Commission of India desire to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above point are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
 Now Amendments to the electoral Rules have been carried out and the aim of 
E-postal Ballot System is to ensure effective participation by the Service Voters in all 
the elections, it is imperative to use the existing database of the Service Votes built 
over decades by scrutinising and reviewing the same.  There should be periodic 
updation of Service Voters to ensure updated voters list in every six months. The 
Committee also desire that issues related to large database, internet connectivity in 
far flung areas to the Server, physical connectivity between the unit and the election 
form should be addressed at the earliest in a time bound manner for smoother 
updation of Service Voters list. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above point are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
 The Committee are also of the view that while the Internet is a necessity for 
turning e-voting into reality, it is also essential that the information regarding the units 
in the Indian Army or the Air Force or the Navy is not shared. Thus, there has to be a 
'de-link' between the Election Commission and the Units/Establishments of the 
Services. The Committee would emphasise on ensuring that confidentiality is 
maintained when the internet is used for facilitating the electoral process. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 For the purpose of ensuring confidentiality, necessary air gap is being 
maintained between databases within the Armed Forces and the interface with the 
Election Commission of India servers on the internet.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that reforms being carried out in the Postal 
Ballot system for maximizing participation of Service Voters. However, in the light of 
the fact that Service Personnel are constantly on the move and deployed at several 
places, an element of doubt creeps in on the authenticity or accuracy with which 
electoral rolls are maintained/prepared. Therefore, there is a need on the part of the 
Ministry of Defence as well as ECI to ensure that the electoral rolls of every 
constituency in the country truly represent the voters of the Armed Forces. They 

18 
 
further desire that these issues should be sorted out in a time-bound manner, and 
well before the next General Election. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Services HQ are in close coordination with the Election Commission of India 
in order to revise the last part of electoral rolls in a time bound manner. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
 The Committee feel it to be necessary that every voter – be it a General Voter 
or a Service Voter – be linked with his Aadhar Number. This could enable in 
authentication of the Service Voters by means of measures such as One Time 
Passwords (OTPs) as done by banks in the case of financial transactions. This 
general idea, which can prove to be reliable and less time consuming can be worked 
upon and developed by the IT experts/Election Commission of India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above point are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
 The Committee appreciate the efforts being made by the ECI in regard to 
developing 'e-balloting' and 'e-voting'. Nevertheless, the Committee cannot help 
being skeptical on whether the technology would work in the remote and forward 
areas. For addressing the matter, the Committee are of the strong view that the ECI 
needs to explore the possibility of designating some uniformed Servicemen as 
honorary ECI officials for the specific purpose of proceeding to the posts for 
attending to the work of printing of forms and conducting the elections. These 
uniformed officials could be taken on oath by the ECI to conduct the elections in a 
free and fair manner in the forward units. 
 
In this regard, it would be worthwhile to note that the Adjutant-General too 
admitted before the Committee that if a man is not accessible to the HQs of the 
battalion itself, a via media, which is an improvement over the existing system has to 
be worked out as an ad hoc measure till such time a final solution which could be, by 
and large, electronic oriented is evolved. Therefore, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry of Defence as well the Services to work out a viable solution at the earliest 
and apprise the Committee of the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above points are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 

19 
 
 
Canvassing inside the Cantonments 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32-33) 
 
 The Committee also considered the issue of allowing canvassing to take 
place inside Cantonments. The Committee note in this regard that for canvassing, 
A2 and B4 lands are permitted to be used on the basis of requisition of the District 
Magistrate concerned. However, A1 and analogous lands are not permitted to be 
used for canvassing. 
 
 The Committee are convinced that there may be issues relating to security 
and many such other concerns pertaining to service life in the Cantonments. 
Therefore, the Services may be allowed to retain the kind of modicum of security that 
the Services want in the Cantonments as far as possible. The Committee also desire 
that appropriate guidelines be issued to all concerned, so that permission for 
canvassing inside the Cantonments is not dependant on the sole decision of Station 
Commander. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Existing rules and regulations do not allow Armed Forces Personnel from 
being member/canvassing for a political party. Their structure, activities and working 
environment do not allow them to interact with any political parties. There is a 
general consensus among Armed Forces that the defence area should not be used 
for political parties to canvas for votes. Since no political rallies are permitted in the 
Cantonments/Military Stations, canvassing of political parties/candidates with Armed 
Forces personnel is prohibited. As such, adequate checks and balances are already 
in place to insulate defence personnel from political influences.  
 
 
Cases filed in Supreme Court 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34-35) 
 
 The Committee note that cases have been filed in the Supreme Court on 
issues relating to registration of Service Personnel as voters in the place of posting 
and creating an effective mechanism for the Armed Forces Personnel and their 
families to exercise their right to adult suffrage easily and effectively. 
 
 The Committee also note that the Ministry has issued requisite directions to 
the Services and the Coast Guard on complying with the Supreme Court's decision 
for making Postal Ballot effective. The Committee are not in favour of the idea of 
people having to approach the courts for correcting the systems and processes. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the view that once the attention of the Ministry is drawn 
to an issue or a problem that merits consideration, top most priority should be given 
to address the grievance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Defence have always been taking up the issues with Election 
Commission of India as and when the problems/issues crop up. However, the 
concern expressed by the Committee has been noted by the Ministry for future 
guidance. 

20 
 
 
Counting of Postal Votes 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36-39) 
 
 The Committee note that as per the Election Commission's Rules, counting of 
votes commences with the Postal Ballots taken up at first, i.e., at 8 O'clock. The 
entire lot of ballot papers received upto to 8 A.M. are taken up for counting at first. 
The Postal Ballots received thereafter are kept separately and are not counted. As 
per the present system under the Rules which came into force from the year 1952, 
the votes contained in the EVMs will be counted after completion of the counting of 
the postal votes. 
 
 The aspect of a large number of Postal Ballots not reaching the Returning 
Officer (RO) in time because of postal delays as well as delays in rail and road 
transport systems has already been highlighted. These delays, coupled with the 
unjustified Rule, i.e. not permitting counting of postal votes that reach after 8 A.M. 
results in declaring the votes cast as invalid and thereby deprives the Service voters 
in participating in the democratic process. 
 
 Questioned on the justification for taking up counting of Postal Ballots at first, 
the representatives of Election Commission of India informed that this was perhaps 
being a small number, it may have been felt in the beginning to be appropriate to 
take up this task at first. However, as there has been an upward rise of trend in the 
number of Postal Ballots, it is now taking a substantial time. It has also been 
admitted that the Rules can be amended to provide for simultaneous counting of the 
postal and the general ballots; and that the ECI would make a recommendation to 
the Law Ministry for carrying out necessary amendments to this effect in the Rules. 
 
 The Committee find it to be intriguing that although there has been a manifold 
increase in the number of Servicemen, in the last 34 years, i.e. since 1952, the Rule 
providing for counting of postal votes of the Servicemen at first – which lacks sound 
reason or rationale – has not been amended. On the other hand, in countries like 
United States of America, the Postal Ballots are accepted upto 15 days after the 
completion of voting, and the votes cast are counted. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly urge upon the ECI and Law Commission to bring in necessary changes in 
the Rules at the earliest do away with the stipulation of taking up Postal Ballots for 
counting at first. And enable for simultaneous counting of Postal Ballots and general 
votes. The Committee also feel that there is a need for bringing in an element of 
flexibility in the 'time bar' presently applicable for receipt of Postal Ballots. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above points are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 
  

21 
 
 
(B) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
 Government and are commented upon 
 
Criteria for Voting by Service Voters at the place of posting 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2-5) 
 
 The Committee note that the Armed Forces Personnel can also be enrolled in 
their place of posting (in Peace Stations) as ordinary (general) electors provided they 
are not already enrolled as Service Voters. Otherwise, they have to vote in person in 
the polling station of the area concerned at the place of their posting. For the 
purpose, the Election Commission of India has laid down certain stipulations, which 
include, having a minimum tenure of posting of 3 years, residence with family, etc. 
As the stipulation of minimum tenure of 3 years in particular, was not appropriate and 
suitable to the Armed Forces Personnel owing to their frequent transfers and 
deployment, the Ministry of Defence, in consultation with the three Service and 
Coast Guard had conveyed to the Election Commission of India in the year 2013 that 
Armed Forces Personnel should be allowed to register as 'general voters' at their 
place of posting without any conditionality. 
 
 Subsequently, the ECI, however, vide their letter dated 17 October, 2013 
requested the Ministry of Defence to reconsider the matter in the light of the 
judgement dated 22.08.2013 of Hon'ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana in CWP No. 
2775 of 2009 (Brig. Ghuman Vs UOI) wherein the concerns raised by Election 
Commission were found justified and conditions laid down by EC for enrolment as 
local voters had been upheld by the Hon'ble High Court inter-alia by citing possible 
change of demographic character of the constituencies which may affect the local 
populace and upset the electoral profile. The matter was, therefore, reconsidered in 
consultation with ECI and a request was made in the year 2014 for incorporating the 
following provisions in the rules: 
 
(i) Definition of the term 'residing with family' may be extended to include 
group residency in a unit/station in a common group accommodation for 
the purpose of registration as general voter at place of posting. 
 
(ii) The existing stipulation in the ECI instructions regarding minimum period 
of tenure of posting of 3 years may be revised downwards to atleast 2 
years. 
 
 Thereafter, the Election Commission of India took up the matter with the 
Cabinet Secretariat. The Cabinet Secretariat again sought the views of Ministry of 
Defence which in turn stated that reducing the period of tenure of posting from 3 
years to 2 years and extending the term 'residing with family' to include 'common 
group residency' would, to a substantial extent, address the issue in peace areas. 
 
  
 The Committee note from the information supplied by the Ministry on latest 
developments in the Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein Interim Judgement/Ruling 
dated 8 March 2015 speaks about certain inherent deficiencies/restraints in voting by 
postal ballot, proxy voting or by voting in person in peace stations by members of 
Armed Forces and family members, which need to be addressed by Election 
Commission of India in consultation with all stakeholders; in far flung areas, serving 
personnel not to be deprived of their right to vote on the grounds of small civilian 

22 
 
population and largest population of service personnel; Union of India to examine 
whether it is possible to ensure that postal ballots where such option is to be 
exercised by an intending voter, can be reached and retrieved within the window 
period or if some other mechanism like e-voting can be introduced for this category 
of voters; UoI to consider feasibility of permitting registration of service voter in a 
peace station by waiving or reducing the period of three years of residence; to file 
suggestions after an objective examination of the entire gamut of the issues arising 
and involved in the form of a report supported by an affidavit within a period of three 
months from the date of pronouncement of the judgement. 
 
 In the Interim Judgement dated 15 July, 2016, heard by the three judge Bench 
based on the submission made by UoI (Ministry of Law and Justice), the Apex court 
granted four months time to UoI to take a decision on the issue and submit its report 
in the next date of hearing which is likely to be in November, 2016 
 
 The Committee desire that they may be apprised of the progress of the case 
periodically. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above points are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 
Electronic Voting System 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 40-47) 
 
 The Committee feel seriously concerned to note that approximately 90 per 
cent of the Service Personnel are denied the right to exercise their franchise owing 
to the inadequacies of the Postal Ballot system. This is mainly on account of the 14 
day time stipulation for dispatching and returning the ballot papers, i.e., the time 
period between the last date for withdrawal of candidature and the date of election. 
In most cases, the Service Personnel do not receive the Postal Ballot papers on 
time, or even if they receive them, the completed ballot papers do not reach back the 
R.O. on time, thereby impacting the exercise of franchise. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly feel that reforming the Postal Ballot system is an immediate necessity. 
 
 Logically, the solution to the inadequacies  of Postal Balloting would come 
through an e-technology enable means, i.e. an e–Portal, which can do away with 
multiple layers of papers being printed, forwarded, receipted, collated and sent back 
to the Returning Officer. The Defence Secretary too, while tendering evidence 
opined that in the era of rapid advances in information technology, a solution can 
surely be found through a combination of technology and procedural changes in the 
law. In short, the means for overcoming the limitations and challenges posed by 
Postal Balloting would be in switching over to 'e-ballot papers' and 'e-voting'. 
 
 The Committee have also been apprised by the representatives of the ECI 
that they had initiated work on developing 'e-Postal Ballot' as the first step or prelude 
to the switch-over to, or initiation of 'e-voting'. The software and tools for facilitating 
transmission and receipt back of Postal Ballots electronically was being developed 

23 
 
under the supervision of a Committee. As informed, the Commission would be ready 
to roll out the system in a few months time following the amendments to the rules. 
 
 The Committee have also been informed that the Services preferred a system 
whereby the Postal Ballots could be, instead of being transmitted directly to the 
Service Member, transferred in bulk to the unit officers, who would download them. 
The Unit Officers (UOs) could be designated as the AROs (Assistant Returning 
Officers) and be responsible for issuing the downloaded ballot papers to the 
individual Service member, who would, in turn, transmit them back to the RO 
concerned by  speed post.  The technology to enable this bulk transfer, downloading 
and transmission is being developed by C-DAC. As informed, the process of testing 
and developing the system, including the field trials would take a few months to be 
completed. The plan is to try out and test the system in a couple of by-elections 
before rolling it out as a practice in all the elections. It is, however, essential to have 
the rules amended before trying out the system. As for the current stage of 
developing the system, as per the information furnished, the Commission was in the 
process of examining whether or not the UO could be appointed as an Assistant 
Returning Officer. 
 
 
 As regards the issue of amendments needed in the electoral laws/rules, for 
facilitating 'e-voting', as informed, the Commission had moved a proposal to this 
effect with the Ministry of Law and Justice. On the current status of the matter, as 
informed by the Ministry of Law and Justice, a Cabinet note has been readied and an 
advance copy thereof sent to the PMO. However, the PMO has, in turn, suggested 
that domestic migrant laborers too needed to be extended the facility of 'e-voting'. 
For the purpose of assessing the matter, a Committee of Ministers had been 
appointed. 
 
 The Committee felt anguished over the merger of the issue of Service Voters 
with that of the migrant workers. The Committee were of the unanimous view on the 
need for urgently introducing the 'e-balloting system' to the 'Service' personnel 
without associating the matter with other issues. During the  oral evidence of the 
representatives of Election Commission of India, Ministry of Defence and Ministry of 
Law & Justice, the Committee were apprised that on 29 September, 2016, a decision 
was taken to de-link the issue of Migrant Labourers and 'Service' personnel. The 
Committee persistently took up the issue to bring out an executive order to this 
effect. 
 
 As a consequence, the necessary amendment was made to the Conduct of 
Election Rules, 1961 and notified in the Gazette of India on 21st October, 2016. 
Finally, the core issue of introducing e-postal ballot system has been addressed. 
 
 The Committee note that the following areas, issues need to be sorted out at 
present by the Ministry of Defence in consultation with the Election Commission of 
India (ECI). 
 
a) To reduce the size of e-postal ballot files by the Election Commission of India 
to permit easy downloading even where internet data transfer speeds are 
marginal. 
 
b) To finalise the Standing Operating Procedure (SOP) for on-line registration 
and one way e-movement of postal ballot for effective implementation of the 
System. 

24 
 
 
c) To devise and promulgation of unique service numbers for service voters, so 
as to provide these unique numbers to voters after successful registration'. 
 
 The Committee desire that immediate steps should be taken to remove the 
above bottlenecks and they may be informed accordingly. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Action/comments on the above points are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee. 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration and to 
be commented upon 
 
Need to study the best practices of other countries 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 The intention of the various stakeholders including the Services, the Ministry 
of Law and Justice and the Election Commission of India is for giving the Services 
Personnel a fair and full opportunity to exercise their franchise. However, postal 
delays as well as the elaborate procedural aspects prescribed for postal voting make 
the exercise of right to adult suffrage in respect of Service Voters as also the officials 
on election duty very difficult. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Election 
Commission of India should take concrete measures towards resolving the problems 
inter-alia by way of using advanced technology as a means of ensuring that notes 
reach back the Returning Officers in minimum possible time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Action/comments on the above point are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20-22) 
 
 India has made significant strides in terms of technological advancement. The 
Mangal Yan reaching the destination in the first attempt itself without much money 
spent on the expedition can be cited as an apt example in this regard. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that developing and implementing a foolproof and reliable 
system to help Service Voters in exercising their franchise should be an easy, and 
definitely not a difficult task. 
 
 The Committee find it surprising that the Ministry of Defence and Election 
Commission of India have not undertaken any exercise to learn about the practices 
prevalent in developed nations in particular, for enabling the soldiers, who are not at 
their usual place of residence, to exercise their franchise. On a later date, however, 
the Adjutant General admitted that some understanding has been developed in this 
regard. 
 
 The Committee desire that the Election Commission of India and the Ministry 
of Defence together should undertake a study of the electoral practices prevalent in 
countries where 'internet voting' or chip based 'identity card voting system' exists viz. 
Australia, Brazil, Canada, Estonia, France, Netherlands, UK, USA, Switzerland, 
Venezuela, etc. The best practices followed in this regard need to be identified and 
developed to suit the requirements of Indian election process. 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action/comments on the above points are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee.  
 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 Further, it has been informed that the Election Commission of India was of the 
opinion that this matter is required to be considered by several Ministries of 
Government of India including the Ministries of Defence, Home Affairs, North 
Eastern Affairs and Law & Justice etc. Considering the importance of the matter, the 
Committee would like to see that the issue is resolved at the earliest especially in the 
light of the decision/ruling by Hon'ble Supreme Court and introduction of e-postal 
voting. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Action/comments on the above point are required to be furnished by the 
Election Commission of India (ECI). The same is awaited from them. The Ministry is 
constantly following up the matter. As soon as the reply of the ECI is received, the 
same will be forwarded to the Committee. 
 
 
Educating the Service Voter 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
 The Committee note that a large number of 'Service Votes' get invalidated 
mainly due to lack of basic awareness amongst the Personnel about the procedure 
of enrolment and voting pattern. The Committee, in this regard appreciate the fact 
that the ECI has launched a de novo exercise, termed Systematic Voters' Education 
and Electoral Participation (SVEEP). As part of SVEEP, special programs have been 
rolled out for ensuring that modalities with regard to enrolment as well as voting 
pattern get conveyed to the Service Personnel. Through this program, the issue of 
invalidation of Service votes would be addressed to a substantial extent. Further, 
ECI has issued instructions to the effect that declaring a vote as invalid should be a 
matter of last resort. The Committee also note in this regard that issues such as the 
signature and office stamp being in the right place, etc. are not being emphasized 
upon much and the ECI is only keen on ensuring that the signatory is an authorised 
one. In this way, the percentage of invalidation would definitely come down. The 
Committee also desire that a short educational film depicting  all the aspects 
concerned with registration and E-Postal Ballot System may be produced and 
screened in each and every unit of the Services so that Service Voters become well 
aware and their votes are not invalidated due to lack of procedural knowledge. 
 
The Committee are of the view that periodic computer based training programme 
should be conducted for educating the Service voters as well as officers deployed in 
the Record offices. The Committee also desire that such programmes/screening of 
educational film should be made part of the training curriculum of Officers and 
Jawans. 
 
  

29 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Necessary modalities are being worked out by the Services HQ in 
consultation with the Election Commission of India in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Jual Oram 
09 February, 2021 Chairperson,  
20 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence 
  

30 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21)  
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th February, 2021 from 1530 hrs. to 
1600 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Block A, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Additional Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
5. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
7. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick 
8. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
9. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
10 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
11. Shri Prathap Simha 
12. Shri Brijendra Singh  
13. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
15. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
16. Shri Sanjay Raut 
17. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
19. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

31 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
i. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-third Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 'Proxy 
and Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections 
an Evaluation'; 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report (16th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject 
‘Provision of all weather road connectivity under Border Roads 
Organisation (BRO) and other agencies up to International Borders as 
well as the strategic areas including approach roads-an appraisal’; 
iii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the First Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on 
‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast 
Guard, Military Engineer Services, Directorate General Defence 
Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 
Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 18 
and 21)’; 
iv. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2019-20 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 
19 and 20)'; 
v. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2019-20 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation, Directorate General of Quality Assurance 
and National Cadet Corps (Demand No. 19 and 20)’; 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2020-21 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads 
Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, 
Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, 
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, 
Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 18, 19, 20 and 21)’; 

32 
 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2020-21 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 
19 and 20)’; and  
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on 
‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development 
Organisation, Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National 
Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without 
any modifications. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
5. ******Does not pertain to the Reports****** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
  

33 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY THIRD 
(23RD) REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE ON THE 
SUBJECT 'PROXY AND POSTAL VOTING BY DEFENCE SERVICES 
PERSONNEL IN GENERAL ELECTIONS AN EVALUATION' 
 
1. Total number of recommendations                       47 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
 Government (please see Chapter II) 
 
Para Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,10, 23,24,25,26, 27, 
29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45 46 and 47 
 
 
Total :      41  
Percentage:  87.23%    
 
3 Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies(please see Chapter III) 
 
Para No.  Nil  
Total :      Nil 
Percentage:   00% 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration and to be commented upon(please see Chapter IV) 
 Para Nos.  19, 20, 21 and 22 
Total :        04 
Percentage: 8.51 % 
 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies(please see Chapter V) 
 Para No.  6 and 28 
 
Total :       02 
Percentage:    4.25% 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
34 
  
  


 
 
 
35 
 
