 
46 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-eighth Report of
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023
Ordnance (Coordination and Services)
Development Organisation and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’
December
i 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023
Ordnance (Coordination and Services)–New DPSUs, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’
 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023-24 on ‘Directorate of New DPSUs, Defence Research and Development Organisation and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’]   

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-eighth Report of
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023
Ordnance (Coordination and Services)
Development Organisation and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’
 
 
 
Presented
 
December
ii 
 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023
ordination and Services)–New DPSUs, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’
Presented to Lok Sabha on  20.12.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2023 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) 
 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023-24 on ‘Directorate of New DPSUs, Defence Research and Development Organisation and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’] 
   

iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24)……………………………………………… 
 
iv 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………………... 
 
vi 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II  Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
7 
Chapter III Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
22 
Chapter IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration and to be commented upon 
 
23 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
awaited 
 
24 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2023-24) HELD ON 18.12.2023. 
  
25 
II ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (17TH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF 
THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2023-24 ON 
‘DIRECTORATE OF ORDNANCE (COORDINATION AND 
SERVICES)–NEW DPSUS, DEFENCE RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION AND NATIONAL CADET CORPS 
(DEMAND NOS. 20 AND 21)’. 
28 
 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2023-24)  
SHRI JUAL ORAM  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy ceased to be member of the Standing Committee on Defence w.e.f. 8th December, 2023 vide 
Lok Sabha Secretariat notification no 21/1(3)/2023/T(B) dated 8th December, 2023. 
 
@ Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy ceased to be member of the Standing Committee on Defence w.e.f. 13th December, 
2023 vide Lok Sabha Secretariat notification no 21/1(5)/2023/T(B) dated 13th December, 2023. 
2 Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
3 Kunwar Danish Ali 
4 Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
5 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
6 Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
7 Shri Devaragunda Venkappa Sadananda Gowda 
8 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
9 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
10 Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
11 Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
12 Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
13 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
14 Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
15 Shri Prathap Simha  
16 Dr. Amar Singh 
17 Shri Brijendra Singh  
18 Shri Mahabali Singh  
19 Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 Vacant* 
 Vacant@ 
Rajya Sabha 
20 Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
21 Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
22 Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
23 Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi 
24 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
25 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
26 Smt. P.T. Usha 
27 Shri G.K. Vasan 
28 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
29 Shri K.C. Venugopal 

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Rajesh Kumar  - Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2023-24), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Forty-sixth Report (17th lok Sabha) of the Committee 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty-eighth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha)  on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2023-24 on ‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination 
and Services)–New DPSUs, Defence Research and Development Organisation and National 
Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’.  
2.  The Thirty-eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2023. The Report contained 32 Observations/ Recommendations. 
The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in July, 2023. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 18th December, 2023. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence is 
given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
18  December, 2023 Chairperson 
27 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-eighth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2023-24 on ‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New 
DPSUs, Defence Research and Development Organisation and National Cadet Corps 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 21.03.2022 
 2.        The Thirty-eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 33 
observations/ recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No. Subject 
 
Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs 
 
1 Budget 
2-3 Budget for modernisation  
4-7 Order Book Position 
8 Research and Development Expenditure  
9-10 Indigenisation 
11-12 Export 
Defence Research and Development Organisation 
13-15 Budget  
16-18 DRDO collaboration with private industries 
19-20 Delay of projects 
21 Self-reliance and indigenization 
22-23 Protection against Nuclear, Biological and Chemical(NBC) attacks 
 
National Cadet Corps 
 
24-25 Budget 
26-27 Lack of infrastructure 
28-29 Waitlisted institutions and Trainers for the training of NCC Cadets 
30-31 Low Selection rate of NCC Cadets in Armed Forces 
32-33 Job Avenue available for NCC cadets 
   
3.        The complete Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the 33 observations/recommendations contained in the Report on 14 July 
2023. Replies to Recommendation nos. 19 and 20 are of classified nature and have 
been categorized as accepted. Replies to rest of the recommendations have been 
examined and categorized as follows: 
 

2 
 
 
(i)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
Para Nos.   1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23, 
24,25,26, 27,28,29,31 and 32 
  
              (Total - 31) 
 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
Para Nos. 30 
(Total - 01)  
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
            Para Nos.    -Nil- 
(Total - 00) 
(iv)  Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
                                                      (Total - Nil) 
 
4.        The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not 
later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
  
 
 
5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the observations/recommendations made in the Thirty-eighth Report of the 
Committee in the succeeding Paragraphs.  
 
 
Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs 
A.        Budget 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
  
6.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
“During the visit of the Standing Committee on Defence to Production Units of the 
newly formed seven DPSUs, the Committee also felt that there is need for 
delegation of Financial Powers to the Boards of these new seven DPSUs for 

3 
 
utilization of these funds so that modernization efforts are taken forward in 
meaningful ways”. 
7.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“The Boards of these DPSUs are using financial powers as available to them 
vide various Department of Public Enterprise (DPE) Orders. Further, in order to 
facilitate the timely implementation of various Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) 
projects under planning/processing stage at these seven new DPSUs, the 
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) has approved the delegation of financial 
powers of Rs 250 crore to the Boards of these seven DPSUs for the period of 
three years, which is at present available with the Mini-Ratna category-II 
CPSEs”.  
8.    The Committee note that in consonance with the recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry have informed that   the Empowered Group of Ministers 
(EGoM) has approved the delegation of financial powers of Rs. 250 crore to the 
Boards of these seven DPSUs for the period of three years. The intention of the 
Committee, while recommending the delegation of financial power, was to 
strengthen the DPSUs which have just come out of the protective environment of 
Government control where loss and profit do not matter much. To make 
themselves competitive in the market, there is a need to give financial 
strength/autonomy to these DPSUs so they can accelerate modernization efforts 
in a concerted and time-bound manner. The Committee also desire that no 
projects related to the modernization of DPSUs get inordinately delayed owing 
to lack of timely approvals due to inadequate delegation of financial powers to 
the Boards of the seven DPSUs. The Committee also urge upon the Ministry to 
furnish a break up of the amount given to each DPSU, which was not furnished at 
the time of forwarding  the Action Taken Replies.  
B.        Order Book Position 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4, 5 and 6) 
  
9.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
“From the information furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the Order Book 
position for the newly created DPSUs for the next five years it is found that there 
is a steep decline in the order book position in, AWEIL, TCL and IOL. There is 
‘NIL’ order book position registered for TCL from 2026-2028. The same position 
exists for MIL during this period. GIL also has ‘Nil’ orders for 2027-28. YIL is 
primarily meant for supplying intermittent products/ raw materials/ Components to 
other New DPSUs. The contracts with other New DPSUs are being concluded on 
a year-to-year basis, as per requirement. However, Order Book Position for the 
next 05 years with services, in this case, is not available.  
In the case of YIL, which registered no orders from 2024-25, during oral evidence 
of the Committee, CMD, YIL further informed that since this PSU does not supply 
to the Services, therefore, no deemed contract was given to it. As the PSU starts 

4 
 
from scratch, in this case raw material, it made a loss of Rs 523 crore in the last 
year. However, the bright side is that this loss is in the shrinking mode.  
 
The Committee understand that new DPSUs are designed and dedicated for the 
special purpose of fulfilling the requirements of Indian Defence Forces especially 
the Army and also that these DPSUs plays a vital role during wartime scenario. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department of Defence 
Production should start promoting these PSUs outside the country through 
Defence Attaché or Ambassadors/High Commissioners so that adequate export 
orders besides domestic demand are assured from time to time so that the 
manufacturing skills of new DPSUs are retained and their capacity is fully 
utilized”.  
 
10.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“The new DPSUs are pursuing product diversification and exploring new markets 
to expand their demand base and increase in their order book. DPSUs are also 
taking measures for developing new products in-house as well as through 
collaborative efforts with reputed Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs). The 
DPSUs are participating in different bids being issued by the Services, MHA and 
other domestic customers. Also, they are exploring export opportunities in new 
countries through interaction with Defence Attaches posted at various Indian 
Embassies and Missions abroad. So far DPSUs have been successful in getting 
the export orders of approximately Rs. 4,200 crores”.   
11.   While expressing their concern regarding the steep decline in the Order 
Book position for the newly created DPSUs viz. AWEIL, TCL and IOL,  the 
Committee had observed that there was ‘NIL’ order book position registered for 
TCL from 2026-2028 and the same position existed for MIL during the said period. 
The Committee also found that GIL had ‘Nil’ orders for 2027-28.  
The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry have not given any 
comment with respect to the dismal Order Book position with regard to AWEIL, 
TCL, IOL and GIL and they seem to be tacit on this issue.  The Committee would 
like to reiterate their concern at the steep decline in the Order Book position for 
the newly created DPSUs and desire the Ministry to treat this issue with utmost 
seriousness.   The Committee feel that the sustenance and profitability of the 
newly created DPSUs are primarily dependent on a healthy order book 
position.  The Committee, therefore, desire that ameliorative measures may be 
taken by all concerned to revive the order book position, which is an imperative 
need  for the growth of these nascent organisations. 
C.        Export  
Recommendation (Para Nos. 11 and 12) 
  
12.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
“The Committee after gleaning through the given data note that exports by new 
DPSUs are shrinking year by year. During the year 2019-20, the value of export 

5 
 
was Rs. 140.94 crore, it declined to Rs. 94.61 crore during the year 2020-21 and 
in the year 2021-22, the export stood at only Rs. 81.08 crore. During 
deliberations on Demands on Grants 2023-24, representatives of these DPSUs 
also apprised the Committee about the various initiatives taken by the DPSUs. 
The Committee understand that primarily the DPSUs are to supply arms and 
ammunition to the Indian Armed Forces but exports give the country not only the 
name but precious foreign exchange too. Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that more emphasizes should be given to increase the exports.  
As stated earlier in the report, the Committee desire that the Ministry of External 
Affairs should be requested to pitch in and provide a platform in international 
exhibitions to display the products for civil and military use manufactured by 
these DPSUs”. 
13.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“To focus on exports and business development, regular review meetings are 
being held at the highest level in the Ministry. Defence attaché posted are being 
contacted for assistance in boosting exports. DPSUs are participating in 
international exhibitions to promote their products in foreign countries.  
  
Separate Business Development Divisions have been created by the new 
DPSUs for widening their customer base and better coordination of export 
activities and interaction with prospective organizations/customers. The new 
DPSUs have shown commendable progress in exports, as compared to erstwhile 
OFB and orders have been received from new Countries for the first time. The 
new DPSUs have obtained export orders of value more than INR 4,200 Crores, 
since inception”. 
  
14.      The Committee appreciate the various measures being taken by the 
Ministry to help bolster exports and promote business development resulting in 
Rs. 4200 crore worth of exports since inception.  However, the fact remains that 
the exports by new DPSUs have shown a steady decline from the year 2019-20 to 
2021-22.  The Committee, desire that all out efforts be made to accentuate 
the export orders  in an effective and time-bound manner which will help  improve 
the physical and financial growth of  these new DPSUs and help meet their 
desired targets. 
   
NATIONAL CADET CORPS(NCC) 
  
  
D.        Budget 
Recommendation (Para No 25 ) 
  
15.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
“This year (2023-24) the projections made by NCC in Revenue Segment was Rs. 
2763.12 Crore and in Capital Rs. 13.00 Crore. The Committee note that 

6 
 
allocations are matched to a rupee this year and the Ministry has allocated Rs. 
2776.12 Crore. Apparently, it seems an improvement in the budget of the NCC 
but on closer scrutiny of the data, the Committee note that it is Revenue Budget 
which is rising every year and on the contrary, Capital Budget is decreasing 
every year or remains static. The Capital expenditure of NCC has declined from 
Rs. 22.40 Crore in 2018-19 to Rs. 13 Crore in 2023-24, therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Capital Budget allocations should also be incremental as 
Capital Budget of NCC caters for long term assets like Micro light aircraft, 
simulators and other state of the art platforms etc., which are not only essential 
training equipments but would impart a training which matches the contemporary 
requirements in dynamic fields”. 
  
16.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
“The funds are allocated to the Services, including NCC, after analyzing 
projections made and allocations received from M/o Finance. The funds are 
projected by the Services under Capital Head depending on various factors 
including pending Committed Liabilities, status of new project proposals, likely 
expenditure on ongoing works etc. In FY 2023-24, NCC had projected 13 Crore 
under Capital Head and the same has been allocated. If NCC seeks additional 
funds during the course of the year, the same will be sought at 
Supplementary/RE stage”. 
  
17.      While observing declining Capital allocations from Rs. 22.40 core in the 
year 2018-19 to 13 crore in the year 2023-24, the Committee had recommended 
that Capital Budget should have incremental allocations as it caters to the long-
term assets like Microlight aircraft, simulators and other state of the art platforms 
etc. The Committee have no doubt on the assurance given by the Ministry that it 
would provide additional funds, if sought during the course of year. However, the 
Committee would like to reiterate that Capital Head which caters to creation of 
long term assets need to be given due weightage by the Ministry and efforts may 
be made to recognize/register the use of modern equipment and technology by 
the projection and allocation of enhanced funds under this Head.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Ministry to undertake extensive review of its Capital 
budget requirements to give a boost to modernization efforts and adoption of 
new technology for better training results. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

7 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs - Budget  
Recommendation No.1: 
The Committee note that consequent to the corporatization of OFB, the 
Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & Services) has been constituted under 
Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence w.e.f.1.10.2021. The 
Committee note from the budget grants for previous years and find that in 2022-23, i.e. 
post- corporatization OFB, an amount of Rs. 4212.00 crore was allocated in RE to the 
Directorate of Ordnance. Out of which an expenditure of Rs. 2845.71 crore has been 
incurred upto December, 2022. This means an amount of Rs. 1366.29 crore remained 
unutilized in financial year 2022-23. Meanwhile, a projection of Rs.1310 crore has been 
made by the Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) for the year 2023-24. 
During oral evidence, a representative of the Ministry also apprised that Rs 2,500 crore 
have been kept as Emergency Authorization Fund in RE 2020-21 and RE 2021-22. The 
Committee desire that the amount being allocated should be prudently distributed on 
accrued liabilities and the modernization plan of newly created DPSUs. In this regard, 
the Committee wish to be informed about Modified Allocation (MA) at the time of 
submitting Action Taken Replies. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken steps to handhold and support these new DPSUs in 
starting their business as corporate entities. In this regard, financial assistance has 
been provided in form of Emergency Authorization Fund of Rs. 2500 crore each in FY 
2021-22 & 2022-23 to these DPSUs to meet the accrued committed liabilities and 
operational requirement. During previous two financial years Rs. 2,953 Crore have been 
provided for modernisation/capital expenditure to the new DPSUs. Further, in the 
current FY 2023-24, Rs. 1,310 crore has also been provided towards capital 
expenditure.  
 
Budget for modernisation: 
Recommendations Nos. 2-3: 
 During the oral evidence, the representatives of the new DPSUs apprised the 
Committee about various measures being taken i.e. renewal, reconditioning and 
acquisition of high value/heavy duty Plant and Machinery (P&M), creating/developing 
infrastructure etc to keep pace with contemporary manufacturing technologies and to 
modernize manufacturing Units under them. While going through the budget given for 
modernisation new DPSUs, the Committee find that during the financial year 2021-22, 
Rs. 1643 crore were given to these DPSUs. In the next financial year 2022-23, Rs. 1310 
crore was given for modernisation to DPSUs. The same amount is given in the current 
financial year 2023-24 also. The Committee can concur from the data that 

8 
 
modernisation budget is on the decline if inflation is also taken into consideration. It is a 
well-known fact that before becoming independent PSUs, these Ordnance Factories 
were largely dependent on the Government orders/supplies only. Therefore, in the 
nascent years, it is the duty of the Ministry of Defence to support these units till they 
become self-reliant. The Committee desire that their sentiments should also be 
conveyed to the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) so the group can enhance the 
financial assistance given to DPSUs for undertaking modernization plans.  
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry is providing financial and non-financial support to these DPSUs so that 
they do not face any problem during their initial stage. Following support has been 
provided by the Government to these DPSUs: 
a. During the initial few years of their operation, these DPSUs will not have 
sufficient reserves to support their modernization activities. Considering this, 
EGoM has approved to provide financial assistance of Rs. 8745 crore to these 
DPSUs for Capital Expenditure towards modernization of their production 
facilities and research & development activities during FY 2021-22 to 2026-27. In 
this connection, during 2021-22 and 2022-23,Rs. 2,953 crore has been provided 
in form of equity. During the current year, Rs. 1,310 crore has been provided 
towards capital expenditure.  
b. EGoM has also approved to provide financial assistance in form of Emergency 
Authorization Fund to these DPSUs to meet the accrued committed liabilities 
prior to the corporatization and to meet their operational requirement. 
Government has provided Rs. 2500 crore each in FY 2021-22 & 2022-23. 
c. To support the new DPSUs, at the time of corporatization, provision of 60% 
mobilization advance of the annual sales target was also made in the deemed 
contracts, to meet the working capital requirement of new DPSUs. 
d. To meet up the requirement of fund for CAPEX and operational need, provision 
of 7.5% profit element on the prices of items under deemed contracts has also 
been approved.  
 
Recommendation No.3: 
 
 During the visit of the Standing Committee on Defence to Production Units of the 
newly formed seven DPSUs, the Committee also felt that there is need for delegation of 
Financial Powers to the Boards of these new seven DPSUs for utilization of these funds 
so that modernization efforts are taken forward in meaningful ways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Boards of these DPSUs are using financial powers as available to them vide 
various Department of Public Enterprise (DPE) Orders. Further, in order to facilitate the 
timely implementation of various Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) projects under 
planning/processing stage at these seven new DPSUs, the Empowered Group of 
Ministers (EGoM) has approved the delegation of financial powers of Rs 250 crore to 

9 
 
the Boards of these seven DPSUs for the period of three years, which is at present 
available with the Mini-Ratna category-II CPSEs.  
 
Order Book Position  
Recommendations Nos. 4-7: 
 
 From the information furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the Order Book 
position for the newly created DPSUs for the next five years it is found that there is a 
steep decline in the order book position in, AWEIL, TCL and IOL. There is ‘NIL’ order 
book position registered for TCL from 2026-2028. The same position exists for MIL 
during this period. GIL also has ‘Nil’ orders for 2027-28. YIL is primarily meant for 
supplying intermittent products/ raw materials/ Components to other New DPSUs. The 
contracts with other New DPSUs are being concluded on a year-to-year basis, as per 
requirement. However, Order Book Position for the next 05 years with services, in this 
case, is not available.  
Recommendation No.5: 
 
 In the case of YIL, which registered no orders from 2024-25, during oral evidence 
of the Committee, CMD, YIL further informed that since this PSU does not supply to the 
Services, therefore, no deemed contract was given to it. As the PSU starts from scratch, 
in this case raw material, it made a loss of Rs 523 crore in the last year. However, the 
bright side is that this loss is in the shrinking mode.  
Recommendation No.6: 
 
 ‘The Committee understand that new DPSUs are designed and dedicated for the 
special purpose of fulfilling the requirements of Indian Defence Forces especially the 
Army and also that these DPSUs plays a vital role during wartime scenario. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that the Department of Defence Production should start 
promoting these PSUs outside the country through Defence Attaché or 
Ambassadors/High Commissioners so that adequate export orders besides domestic 
demand are assured from time to time so that the manufacturing skills of new DPSUs 
are retained and their capacity is fully utilized’.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The new DPSUs are pursuing product diversification and exploring new markets 
to expand their demand base and increase in their order book. DPSUs are also taking 
measures for developing new products in-house as well as through collaborative efforts 
with reputed Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs). The DPSUs are participating in 
different bids being issued by the Services, MHA and other domestic customers. Also, 
they are exploring export opportunities in new countries through interaction with 
Defence Attaches posted at various Indian Embassies and Missions abroad. So far 
DPSUs have been successful in getting the export orders of approximately Rs. 4,200 
crores.   

10 
 
Recommendation No.7: 
 
 The Committee note that as a part of Grandfathering of Indents placed on the 
erstwhile OFB prior to corporatization, Deemed Contracts have been placed by 
Services on new DPSUs with yearly increase of @ 6% per annum in the Issue Prices. 
However, no provision for Profit element has been made in the Deemed Contracts 
signed with these new DPSUs. Therefore, the Committee desire that for long term 
sustainable growth and ensuring commercial viability of these new entities, it shall be 
desirable to include a reasonable profit element which is the express opinion of the 
Committee must be around 7% in the Deemed Contracts since the same is already 
being made available to earlier existing nine DPSUs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Vide MOD Order No. 4(8)/2022/NDCD dated 21.03.2023, Ministry has ordered 
for inclusion of profit element of 7.5% in the Deemed Contracts with these new DPSUs 
w.e.f. 01.10.2021.This order combined with functional & financial autonomy provided to 
these DPSUs is aimed at making them profitable and sustainable.  
 
Research and Development Expenditure  
 
Recommendation No.8: 
 
 The Committee note that the manufacturing units under new DPSUs take up in-
house Research and Development (R&D) projects for design, development & product 
upgrade of armament, ammunition and equipment. Ordnance Development Centres 
(ODCs) in the DPSUs are working in specific technological areas to carry out R&D. 
These units also take up collaborative R&D projects in association with academic 
institutions, Govt. owned laboratories and other indigenous private manufacturers. The 
major products being developed are: drone-assisted delivery Ammunition terminal 
guided munitions, guided bomb, 70mm Rocket, Indigenization of Nuclear Radiation cum 
Chemical Warfare Agent Detector for Tank T-90, development of Automatic Gear 
Shifter for T-90 Bhishma Tank, development/ production of Electronic Point Detonation 
(PD Mode) Fuze for Artillery Ammunition, Parachute Tactical Assault Gajtaj-2 system 
(PTA G-2), Area Denial Munitions (DPICM Pinaka), Military Combat Parachute System 
(MCPS) etc. From the data supplied by the Ministry, the Committee is happy to note 
that the R&D expenditure of all the new DPSUs has increased from 2021-22 to the year 
2022-23. The Committee recommend that this trend should be continued in future also 
and efforts should be made toward ensuring patent rights for the designs and prototype 
developed internally by DPSUs. This will be beneficial in enhancing the value of new 
DPSUs and also boost revenue generation for the country. 
Reply of the Government 
DPSUs have already taken up R&D on different projects. They have also taken 
up collaborative development projects for new technologies under the umbrella of 
Make-II and iDEX. The products developed as outcome of R&D are registered as 

11 
 
Intellectual property. DPSUs are filling Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs), against these 
outcomes. 
 
Indigenisation  
 
Recommendations Nos. 9-10: 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that indigenization percentage of new DPSUs 
ranges from 100 per cent in the case of Troop Comforts Limited and Yantra India Ltd to 
94 per cent in case of Advanced Weapons & Equipment India Limited. Munitions India 
Ltd also has 95 per cent indigenized content. IOL has also developed import substituted 
products and is in the process of 100 per cent indigenization. During oral evidence also, 
the Committee were informed about the initiatives taken by the DPSUs to achieve 
indigenization. 
Recommendation No.10: 
 The Committee hope that intensive efforts of DPSUs leading to 100 per cent 
indigenisation in near future will make the country proud. In this respect, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry should provide necessary assistance to them to achieve their 
desired goal. 
Reply of the Government 
In continuous pursuit to achieve 100 per cent indigenisation and to minimise 
imports, DPSUs have adopted various flagship programmes of the Government such 
as: 
 Make-II  
 iDEX 
 Srijan Defence Portal 
 In-house research and development projects focusing on import substitution by 
indigenization of critical technologies 
 Memorandum of Understandings/tie-ups with domestic defence industries for 
development and supply of indigenous items. 
 
In this regard, a ‘Dashboard’ has been developed to monitor the status of progress 
of indigenisation. This dashboard enables real-time end-to-end updates of various 
activities being taken up by the respective DPSUs during the process of indigenisation.  
 
Export  
Recommendation No.11: 
 
 The Committee after gleaning through the given data note that exports by new 
DPSUs are shrinking year by year. During the year 2019-20, the value of export was 
Rs. 140.94 crore, it declined to Rs. 94.61 crore during the year 2020-21 and in the year 
2021-22, the export stood at only Rs. 81.08 crore. During deliberations on Demands on 
Grants 2023-24, representatives of these DPSUs also apprised the Committee about 

12 
 
the various initiatives taken by the DPSUs. The Committee understand that primarily the 
DPSUs are to supply arms and ammunition to the Indian Armed Forces but exports give 
the country not only the name but precious foreign exchange too. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that more emphasizes should be given to increase the exports.  
Recommendation No.12: 
 As stated earlier in the report, the Committee desire that the Ministry of External 
Affairs should be requested to pitch in and provide a platform in international exhibitions 
to display the products for civil and military use manufactured by these DPSUs. 
Reply of the Government 
 
To focus on exports and business development, regular review meetings are 
being held at the highest level in the Ministry. Defence attaché posted are being 
contacted for assistance in boosting exports. DPSUs are participating in international 
exhibitions to promote their products in foreign countries.  
 
Separate Business Development Divisions have been created by the new 
DPSUs for widening their customer base and better coordination of export activities and 
interaction with prospective organizations/customers. The new DPSUs have shown 
commendable progress in exports, as compared to erstwhile OFB and orders have 
been received from new Countries for the first time. The new DPSUs have obtained 
export orders of value more than INR 4,200 Crores, since inception. 
 
Defence research and Development Organisation: Budget  
 
Recommendations Nos.  13-15 
 The Committee take note of the budgetary provision made to the Department of 
Defence, R&D during the last five years. The data reveals that there has always been a 
decrease in the Budget estimate proposed and Budget estimate approved or allocated. In 
the year 2019-20, the projected amount was Rs. 22,953.95 Crore while the allocated 
amount was Rs. 19021.02 Crore which was Rs 3932.93 Crore less than the projection. In 
the year 2020-21, the projected amount was Rs. 23,457.40 Crore while the allocated was 
Rs. 19,327.35 Crore which was Rs 4130.05 Crore less than the projection. In the year 2021-
22, the projected amount was Rs. 23,460 and allocated amount was Rs. 20,457.44 Crore 
which was Rs 3002.56 less than the projection. Likewise, in the year 2022-23, the projected 
amount was Rs. 22,990 Crore and the allocated amount stood at Rs. 21,330.20 Crore which 
was Rs 1659.80 Crore less than the projection. During the financial year 2023-24, the 
projected amount was Rs. 23,790 Crore and the allocated amount is Rs. 23,263.89 Crore. 
The Committee note that for the first time, the difference is marginal and stands at Rs. 
526.11 Crore. The Committee understand that proposals are made after carrying out a very 
well thought exercise envisaging R&D activities in a year, therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should undertake all out efforts in future and ensure that no cut 
is made in the budget while allocating the amount.  
 

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Efforts will be made to 
allocate funds projected by DRDO. If required, additional funds will be sought at 
Supplementary/RE stage during the course of the year. 
 
Recommendation No. 14: 
 
 Further, in respect of the Budgetary grants, the Committee find a drop in DRDO 
expenditure as a percentage of total GDP over the past few years. From the data provided 
by the Ministry of Defence, the Committee find that the percentage share of the Defence 
R&D budget to total GDP has come down to 0.078% in 2021-22 from 0.088 per cent in 
2017-18. The mandate for DRDO is to develop cutting-edge technologies and eventually 
through the transfer of such technologies to equip our Services with internationally 
competitive systems and platforms. Although the DRDO has proven its competence to 
produce state-of-the-art strategic and tactical military hardware and related technologies in 
diverse disciplines such as Aeronautics, Armaments, Combat Vehicles, Combat 
Engineering, Electronics, Missiles, Life Sciences, Materials and Naval Systems but when 
the allocations are consistently going down, it would be difficult for DRDO to attain 
developmental goals, and to attain an edge over adversaries. The Committee opine that 
budget grants of DRDO should be suitably enhanced for the growth of Defence 
technologies. Therefore, the Committee wish that DRDO projects should be given due 
consideration and adequate budgetary support.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2023-24, DRDO has been allocated an amount of Rs. 23,263.89 Crore which is an 
increase of Rs. 2,133.69 Crore over BE 2022-23 allocations. The Committee may be 
assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional funds projected by DRDO at 
Supplementary/RE stage. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it will be ensured that no 
projects of DRDO are withheld due to paucity of funds.  
 
 
Recommendation No. 15: 
 
 The Committee were further informed that in the current year, DRDO projected Rs. 
23,263.89 Crore at the Budget Estimate stage, which is 5.1% of the Defence Budget. As per 
the Ministry, the exclusive Research and Development budget is Rs. 5,000 Crore only, out 
of this 25% i.e. around Rs. 1300 Crore is earmarked for the private sector. Hence it can be 
very well understood that the amount actually left for DRDO projects is under constraints. 
The Committee observe that R&D is a pre-requisite for robust modern Defence mechanism 
and the Government has to take care of funds for in-house projects of DRDO along with 
outsourcing defence R&D. The Committee, therefore recommend that during 2023- 24 
adequate funds should be channelized to DRDO at subsequent stage i.e. RE for its ongoing 
and future projects. 
 

14 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional funds 
projected by DRDO at Supplementary/RE stage. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it 
will be ensured that no projects of DRDO are withheld due to paucity of funds.  
 
DRDO collaboration with private industries  
Recommendations Nos.16-18: 
 The Committee note that DRDO has made rapid progress with the infusion of 
private sector involvement in the research-related activities of DRDO. The Committee 
appreciate the large number of steps taken in this direction like the opening of world-
class test facilities, MOUs with leading industry chambers, help rendered to the private 
Industry by transfer of technology, providing patent to the private Industry free of cost 
and Technology Development Fund(TDF) raised to 50 crore from 10 crore. The 
Committee are of the considered view that active private sector participation is the way 
forward and can act as a major impetus for the improvement of research-related 
activities. 
Recommendation No.17: 
 
 In this connection, the Committee recommend that efforts must be intensified to 
ensure better collaboration between the public and private sector for improved results 
and given the sensitive nature of this work, due monitoring mechanism needs to be 
developed and put in place to ensure that no leakage of data takes place regarding 
products being developed. 
 
Recommendation No.18: 
 The Committee came to learn about various policies formulated by the 
government to involve the private sector in Defence R&D. The Committee appreciate 
that private sector involvement in Defence production would enhance the technological 
development of Defence production line. However, at the same time, Committee 
recommend that appropriate measures need to be taken to ensure that our cutting-edge 
technologies are not slipped into the hands of our adversaries by methodologies such 
as reverse engineering etc. The Committee wish that the Ministry of Defence furnish a 
detailed note on procedures laid down to ensure our technologies related to Defence 
are fully secured.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 DRDO has introduced a policy on selection of the Development cum Production 
Partner (DcPP) for DRDO developed systems, which ensures involvement of industries 
(both Public and/or private Sector) from the beginning of development cycle, thus 
enabling the industries and facilitating hand-holding throughout the development phase. 
DcPP will absorb the technology during the development phase itself resulting in 
concurrent ToT. 

15 
 
 Technology Development Fund Scheme is a program of MoD (Ministry of 
Defence) executed by DRDO under Make in India initiative. The Government has 
approved TDF Scheme to encourage industries especially MSMEs and Startups for the 
development of defence and dual use technologies that are currently not available with 
the Indian defence Industry. Through this scheme, Startups and MSMEs are engaged 
and awarded projects for development of the defence technologies. Appropriate 
measures are adapted to safe-guard the confidentiality and secrecy of the projects 
being developed through private Indian industries under TDF Scheme. Towards this, an 
NDA (Non-Disclosure Agreement) is signed with development partner, when, the 
developed technology is of confidential in nature. Also, a comprehensive agreement is 
signed for each project with the private industry, binding the industries to maintain the 
confidentiality and secrecy of the project being developed. 
 DRDO has launched long term Directed Research Policy in Oct 2021 for the 
engagement of academia, start-ups/industry for directed research and technology 
development to meet future technology requirements of defence and national security. 
DRDO has established 15 nos. of DIA-CoEs at various IITs, IISc and Central 
Universities across the country. DRDO will be collaborating with start-ups/ industry 
through DIA-CoEs which will help in accelerated technology product development. 
 
Delay of Projects  
Recommendation No. 19-20: 
  
 The Committee find that out of 178 mission mode projects, 119 which is two thirds 
have been delayed and original time schedules are not adhered to. The Committee also 
note that there have been time and cost overruns in the completion of projects and there are 
cases of closure of projects declaring them successful despite the non-achievement of one 
or more key objectives. The Committee observe that delay in the completion of projects has 
become frequent. However, despite the prescribed mechanism in place, inordinate delays 
are occurring which not only place a burden of unnecessary cost implications but also 
deprive the Services of critical capabilities. The Committee feel that the money of taxpayers 
has to be judiciously and verily utilized by all departments. It is, therefore, recommended 
that all out efforts shall be made to complete projects within the stipulated time frame. 53 No 
stone shall be left unturned in ensuring that all the milestones, short-term and long-term are 
achieved for all projects.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
‘classified’. 
 
Recommendation No. 20: 
 
 Till the finalization of the Report, the requisite information as promised to be furnished 
by the DRDO has not yet been received. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
detailed information regarding the number of projects, time and cost overruns/reasons on 
each project including, inter alia all other relevant details may be furnished within three 
months. 
 

16 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
‘classified’. 
 
Self-reliance and Indigenization 
 
Recommendation No. 21: 
 
 The Committee observe that the country has taken a quantum jump in the 
procurement of defence items from indigenous sources. Notwithstanding this fact the 
Committee are aware that even today the country is heavily dependent on imports to meet 
its critical defence requirements. Given the fact that technologically advanced countries are 
reluctant to part with their advanced technologies with developing countries like India, it 
becomes all the more essential for our laboratories to develop each system, sub-systems, 
components etc. either independently or in collaboration with private industry/OEMs. While 
acknowledging the fact that undertaking original research is a lengthy and time-consuming 
process, DRDO may also think of developing products through other available means and 
short term processes. The Committee, here recommend that the Ministry of Finance should 
be persuaded to provide adequate budgetary support for all kind of modules related to 
research purposes so that the indigenization of R&D activities can be undertaken by DRDO 
on a war footing.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry submits the requirements projected by the Services/ Organisations to Ministry of 
Finance for favourable consideration. In the pre-budget meeting discussions with M/o 
Finance, broad reasons for requirements projected by the Services are justified/ elaborated. 
While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption capacity of the Services/ 
Organisations, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall resource envelope 
available and pressing demands from other quarters etc. Based on the overall ceilings 
conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates funds among the Services and 
Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-Services priorities, pace of expenditure, 
pending committed liabilities etc. If required, additional funds are sought at 
Supplementary/RE stage. Further, the allocated funds are optimally utilized towards 
operational preparedness of the Services. If required, the schemes are reprioritized to ensure 
that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational 
preparedness. 
 
DRDO works in close association and collaboration with industries for development of 
its defence weapon systems and technologies. DRDO is developing products through 
other available means and short term processes as under:- 
 
a) Defence R&D has been opened up for industry, start-ups and academia with 25% of 
defence R&D budget earmarked to be implemented through various existing schemes 
and new schemes have been proposed. 
 
b) Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme executed by DRDO supports 
indigenous development of components, products, systems and technologies by 

17 
 
MSMEs and Start-ups. Funding under TDF scheme is Rs 50 Cr per Project, which is in 
line with the Budget Announcement. 
 
c)DRDO-Industry Academia Centres of Excellence (DIA-CoE) has been established to 
support industry & academia to carry out directed research in critical and futuristic areas 
related to Defence applications. 6 DIA-CoEs have been established in current year (IIT 
Roorkee, IIT Kanpur, IIT BHU, IIT Jodhpur, IIT Kharagpur, IIT Hyderabad) bringing the 
total number to 15. 
 
 
Protection against Nuclear, Biological and Chemical (NBC) attacks 
Recommendations Nos. 22-23 
 
 The Committee are aware of the ever-increasing threat of nuclear, biological and 
chemical attacks in the current scenario of the world. The Committee are apprised of 
the competence developed by DRDO Laboratories to provide protection against NBC. 
The Committee appreciate the R&D efforts of DRDO which has enabled the 
development of several products for NBC detection, protection, decontamination and 
medical management. The Committee would like to see more proactive efforts towards 
high scientific developments in the field of NBC warfare capabilities by DRDO as they 
feel that future warfare will be more and more NBC based. 
 
Recommendation No. 23: 
 
 
  In this connection, the Committee would like to recommend that sufficient budgetary 
allocations should be provisioned for the R&D efforts of DRDO in the field of NBC warfare 
so that the country is not caught off guard in a critical situation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
DRDO has developed several products under CCS Programme on ‘NBC Defence 
Technologies’  
 DRDO is continuing its effort in NBC defence R&D to enhance indigenization 
level and save valuable foreign exchange. Sufficient budget has been allocated for 
development of State-of-the-Art technologies and products to make country self-reliant 
in the field of NBC warfare. 
 
NATIONAL CADET CORPS - Budget 
 
Recommendation No. 24-25: 
 
The Committee after gleaning through the information and data provided by the 
Ministry pertaining to the last five years find that during the year 2018-19, the total 
allocation including Revenue and Capital was Rs. 1584.21 crore while expenditure was 
Rs. 1435.75 crore. Similarly, during the year 2019-20 as against an allocation of Rs. 

18 
 
1631.92 crore, the expenditure incurred was Rs. 1595.87 crore. The Committee note 
with glee that during the year 2021-22, the trend is reversed and NCC has spent Rs. 
1685.63 crore, which is approximately Rs. 35 crore more than the allocation of Rs. 
1650.76 crore. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Observations of the Committee are noted. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 25: 
 
 This year (2023-24) the projections made by NCC in Revenue Segment was Rs. 
2763.12 Crore and in Capital Rs. 13.00 Crore. The Committee note that allocations are 
matched to a rupee this year and the Ministry has allocated Rs. 2776.12 Crore. Apparently, 
it seems an improvement in the budget of the NCC but on closer scrutiny of the data, the 
Committee note that it is Revenue Budget which is rising every year and on the contrary, 
Capital Budget is decreasing every year or remains static. The Capital expenditure of NCC 
has declined from Rs. 22.40 Crore in 2018-19 to Rs. 13 Crore in 2023-24, therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Capital Budget allocations should also be incremental as 
Capital Budget of NCC caters for long term assets like Micro light aircraft, simulators and 
other state of the art platforms etc., which are not only essential training equipments but 
would impart a training which matches the contemporary requirements in dynamic fields. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The funds are allocated to the Services, including NCC, after analyzing projections 
made and allocations received from M/o Finance. The funds are projected by the Services 
under Capital Head depending on various factors including pending Committed Liabilities, 
status of new project proposals, likely expenditure on ongoing works etc. In FY 2023-24, 
NCC had projected 13 Crore under Capital Head and the same has been allocated. If NCC 
seeks additional funds during the course of the year, the same will be sought at 
Supplementary/RE stage. 
 
Lack of infrastructure 
 
Recommendation No. 26-27: 
 
 The Committee note that the NCC Directorate is taking the issue of training NCC 
cadets seriously and with the help of 825 NCC units it is training close to 15 lakh cadets 
all over the country. The Committee understand that training 15 lakh cadets requires a 
lot of manpower and infrastructure. In their earlier reports also, the Committee has 
raised the issue of lack of training institutes exclusively for NCC, forcing it to use the 
facilities developed for Army, Navy and Air Force. During deliberations this year also, 
the issue of upgrading infrastructure and purchase of new equipment appeared again 
before the Committee. In this respect, the Committee desired that the NCC Directorate 
may approach local Member of Parliament to share expenditure from the MPLADs Fund 

19 
 
for the development of infrastructure and purchasing of new equipment if its budgetary 
demands are not catered for by the Ministry in the coming years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
 
Recommendation No. 27: 
 
 In regard to imparting new fields of training which would make the cadets 
versatile, in the opinion of the Committee, it is high time that the training module be 
expanded/modified to include cyber/computer expertise, laser expertise and space 
science. The Committee are aware that cybercrimes are increasing in large proportions 
every year and such trained cadets can be used for training the elderly and cyber 
illiterate population for the proper use of the cyber applications such as banking 
transactions etc. The IT skills should also include specific training on Drone applications 
which is the need of the hour. It would not be out of place to recommend that if required, 
the NCC Cadets should be attached with expert Institutions to train them on all the new 
forms of training as stated above. At the time of furnishing Action Taken Notes, the 
Committee would like to go through the specific project/proposal mooted out in this 
respect which may also include an exercise whereby additional funds would be required 
for accomplishing this recommendation from next year onwards. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Efforts are under way to coordinate with Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre 
(I4C) of MHA to conduct training for NCC cadets to strengthen the training component 
for youth against cyber-crimes and online frauds. 
 
 
Waitlisted institutions and Trainers for the training of NCC Cadets 
 
Recommendations Nos. 28-29: 
 
 The Committee in their previous reports had appreciated that in order to reduce 
the waiting list, the Government has introduced Fully Self Financing Scheme (FSFS) 
under which an Educational institution willing to bear the cost of running NCC training 
under the guidance of the nearest NCC unit can apply for NCC. However, on the 
perusal of data supplied by the Ministry, the Committee noted that despite the FSFS, 
the gap is rising continuously. In the year 2021, there were 9247 institutions were 
waitlisted, which rose to 9795 in 2023. In this respect, the Committee, while recognizing 
the contribution of NCC in developing character, camaraderie, discipline and selfless 
service amongst young citizens as well as opening a gateway for them to join the 
Armed Forces, the Committee recommend that a concerted exercise maybe undertaken 
and no avenue should be left untouched in order to clear the backlog of waitlisted 
institutions. The Committee would like a specific proposal to meet the above objective 
which may be provided to them while furnishing the Action Taken Notes. 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As on 31-3-2023, total number of educational institutions covered by NCC is 
20,390 and 9,795 are in the waiting list. There is gradual increase in the number of 
institutions covered by NCC and fresh applications for allotment of NCC are being 
continuously received. 
 
The Government has also introduced the Fully Self Financing Scheme (FSFS) 
for Senior and Junior Divisions with 2 lakh vacancies thus giving the option to the 
institutions in the waiting list to avail this benefit. The scheme of expansion of NCC in 
Border /Coastal Talukas with 1 lakh vacancies has also been introduced. 
 
Further, expansion of NCC is also being deliberated upon. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 29: 
 
 The Committee also understand that about one lakh vacancies have been 
approved for Senior Division/Senior Wing cadets by Ministry of Defence for allotment to 
private colleges under FSFS. During the examination of Demands for Grants 2023-24, 
the hiring of Ex-servicemen and Ex-NCC cadets as instructors by NCC also figured. In 
this regard, the Committee recommend that to overcome the shortage of trainers in 
NCC, the Ministry should think of institutionalising the system of hiring trainers from Ex-
Servicemen and non-profit organisation like Exchange Participants Association (EXPA) 
which consists of volunteers and NCC cadets. This would definitely bring down the 
training cost of NCC Cadets and resources so saved would be used in other 
developmental activities. The Committee desire that while granting the permission to do 
so, the quality of training is strictly maintained and proper monitoring mechanism to 
oversee the training process should be put in place.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Recommendations of the Committee are noted. All efforts are being made to 
impart training to the cadets as per the curriculum without compromising on the quality 
of training.  
 
 
Low Selection rate of NCC Cadets in Armed Forces 
 
 
Recommendation No.31: 
 
 Therefore, the Committee, here, recommend that the Ministry should re-visit the 
training strategy and introduce revised curriculum/practical training so the cadets get 
selected through Services Selection Board(SSB) Direct entry route. 
 
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To increase the induction of NCC cadets in the armed forces, rigorous screening 
of cadets is done for imparting SSB coaching.  Emphasis is being given on training of 
ANOs to enable them to guide and motivate the cadets.  The efforts are showing 
encouraging results.   
 
Job Avenue Available for NCC cadets 
 
Recommendations Nos. 32-33: 
 
 The Committee note from the data supplied by the Ministry that reservation of 
seats in Army, Short Service Commission, Navy and Air Force, ranges from45 per batch 
in Army to 03 per batch in Air Force. The Committee also noted that Bonus marks have 
also been provided to NCC ‘C’ Certificate holder in CAPF and Assam Rifles as well as 
UG & PG programmes in Indian Maritime University. 
 
Recommendation No. 33: 
 
 In this respect, the Committee desire that for the recruitment in CAPF, bonus 
marks should be increased to a reasonable level so there will be more weightage to 
NCC cadets and on the other hand these forces will get more disciplined, trained youth 
in their services. This will also instil a sense of security in NCC Cadets. The Committee 
may also be supplied with the exact figures in regard to number of cadets who 
consequent to acquiring ‘C’ Certificate’ during the last three years joined other 
uniformed services such as Coast Guard / Para Military Forces including Assam Rifles, 
SSB, ITBP, CISF etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Recommendations of the Committee are noted and will be shared with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA).The data regarding recruitment of NCC ‘C’ certificate 
holders in Para Military Forces is not held with this ministry. MHA has been requested to 
share this data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
 
 Low Selection rate of NCC Cadets in Armed Forces 
 
Recommendation No. 30: 
 
 From the data furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that the selection 
rate of NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders through the Services Selection Board (SSB) in the 
Armed Forces has gone up only marginally during all these years, it is not satisfactory 
for the Committee to note these low figures of intake. The induction of NCC Cadets from 
2018 to 2022 was only 473 as against the available vacancies of 889 which is barely 
53.20 in terms of percentile. The Committee note that despite the shortage of officers in 
the three Forces, NCC has not given due weightage to train their cadets to become 
officers in the Army, Navy and Air Force.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To increase the induction of NCC cadets in the armed forces, rigorous screening 
of cadets is done for imparting SSB coaching.  Emphasis is being given on training of 
ANOs to enable them to guide and motivate the cadets.  The efforts are showing 
encouraging results.   
 
  
  

23 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
-Nil- 
 
  

24 
 
 CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
18  December, 2023 Chairperson 
27 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Defence 

25 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2023-24) 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2023-24) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th December, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
    1.     Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary  
     2.     Shri Tirthankar Das - Director 
 
 
2 Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
3 Kunwar Danish Ali 
4 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
5 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
6 Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7 Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
8 Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
9 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
10 Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
11 Shri Prathap Simha  
12 Shri Brijendra Singh  
Rajya Sabha 
13 Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
14 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
15 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
16 Smt. P.T. Usha 
17 Shri G.K. Vasan 
18 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

26 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Reports:- 
i) Draft Report on the subject ‘A review of working of Defence 
Research and Development Organisation(DRDO)’; 
 
ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence 
for the year 2023-24 on General Defence Budget, Border Roads 
Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’; 
 
iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2023-24 on Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, 
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik Schools 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’;   
 
iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh 
Report on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2023-24 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’; and  
 
v) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-eighth 
Report on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2023-24 on Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and 
Services)–New DPSUs, Defence Research and Development 
Organisation and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.  
 
 

27 
 
4. *****Does not pertain to the Report****** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

28 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-EIGHTH 
REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2023-
24 ON ‘DIRECTORATE OF ORDANCE (COORDINATION AND SERVICES) – NEW 
DPSUS, DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION AND 
NATIONAL CADET CORPS (DEMAND NOS. 20 AND 21). 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             32 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
  
 Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19, 
 20, 21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,31 and 32         
   Total  : 31 
 
Percentage:97% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
          
   Recommendation Para Nos. 30 
 
Total : 01 
Percentage:3 % 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
     
 -Nil- Total : 0 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
             
  -Nil-  
                                                      Total : 0 
Percentage:0% 