i 
 
 
28 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
Contained in the Twenty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Defence          
(18th Lok Sabha) on the Subject ‘Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian 
Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’] 
 
 
 
TWENTY-EIGHT REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2026 / Sravana 1948 (Saka) 
  


ii 
 
TWENTY-EIGHT REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
Contained in the Twenty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Defence          
(18th Lok Sabha) on the Subject ‘Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian 
Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2026 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2026 / Sravana 1948 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) ……………………....…. iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….….........                 vi 
  
 
CHAPTER  I Report…………………………………………………………….. 1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted                10 
by the Government 
   
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not              27 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government  
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which                            28 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
   
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final                      29 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26) held    30 
 on 04.08.2026. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of Sainik 
Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military 
Schools’. 
 
33 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
*Smt. Darshana Singh, Dr. Santrupt Misra and Shri Parth Ajit Pawar have been nominated to the Standing Committee on 
Defence (2025-26) w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 5267 dated 04.06.2026 
@ Shri Pawan Khera nominated to the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26) w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 
5724 dated 24.07.2026 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
24 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
25 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
26 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
27 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
28 Smt. Darshana Singh* 
29 Dr. Santrupt Misra* 
30 Shri Parth Ajit Pawar* 
31 Shri Pawan Khera@ 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mallick   - Joint Secretary 
2.        Shri Amrish Kumar   - Director 
3.  Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad   - Deputy Secretary 
4.         Shri Anjorem Kerketta                   -         Under Secretary 
 

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Eighth Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha)  on the subject ‘Review of Sainik Schools, 
Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’.  
2.  The Twenty-Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 18th March, 2026. The Report contained 14 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in May, 2026. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 4th August, 2026. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
  04  August, 2026 Chairperson 
 13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence  

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of Sainik 
Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’, 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 March, 2026.  
  
2. The Twenty-Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 14 
observations/ recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No.  Subject  
1 Background of Sainik Schools 
2 Budget allocation for functioning of Sainik Schools  
3 Performance/comparison of Sainik Schools with Rashtriya 
Military School, Rashtriya Indian Military College 
4 Training for teaching staff  
5 Scholarships and Incentives 
6 Grant-in-aid  
7 Inclusive education for students of economically weaker 
sections 
8 Fee structure of Sainik Schools 
9 Opening of new Sainik Schools under PPP mode 
10 Review of Criteria/Parameters for opening of new Sainik 
Schools 
11 Upgradation of infrastructure for girl students 
12 Facilities for Girls Cadets in RIMC  
13 Periodical review and updation of Curriculum in RIMC and RMS 
14 Minimizing Dropout rate in Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military 
School and Rashtriya Indian Military College 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 14 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  The replies have been 
examined and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government (Chapter II): 
 
  Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14  
 
 (Total - 14) 
 

2 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
(Chapter III): 
 
Para Nos.  -NIL-              (Total -
0) 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. -NIL-             (Total - 
0) 
  
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
 
  Para Nos.  -NIL- 
 (Total - 0) 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case 
not later than six months of the presentation of this report.  
 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendation/observations made in the Twenty-Third Report in the 
succeeding Paragraphs. 
 
 
 
A. Scholarships and Incentives 
 
Recommendation No. 5  
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
     “The Committee note that the State Governments provide scholarships based on 
the income slabs of parents of the cadets/marks scored by the students of Sainik 
Schools belonging to that State as per their own policy. The Committee observe 
that the Ministry of Defence also provides a part of scholarship as Central 
Assistance to those cadets who have been awarded State Government 
scholarship. The Committee further note that the Central Government also 
provides incentive to those cadets who are selected for National Defence 
Academy/Naval Academy. In this regard, all cadets of Sainik Schools who join the 
National Defence Academy/Naval Academy are given NDA incentive in the form of 
reimbursement of entire tuition fee paid for classes XI and XIl by such cadets. The 
Committee are of the view that substantial amount is being spent by the parents of 
the students/cadets in terms of payment of entire tuition fees during their course 

3 
 
study in Sainik Schools. Also, the students/cadets are coming from various 
economic and social backgrounds and different income groups. In this regard, the 
Committee while appreciating the new PPP scheme which envisages to provide 
Annual Fee Support of 50% of fee (subject to an upper limit of Rs 40,000 per 
annum) for 50% of the class strength (subject to an upper limit of 50% students 
per year) from class 6th to class 12th, on Merit-cum-Means basis are of the view 
that with respect to scholarship and incentives, more initiatives are required to 
motivate the students and retaining them within the ecosystem of Sainik Schools. 
The Committee desire the Ministry to ensure increased incentive towards merit, 
need, category and performance based scholarships and initiatives towards 
providing a holistic support. The Committee also recommend the Central 
Government to enhance their share/component within the scholarship/incentive 
schemes, wherever possible. Further, the Committee also desire that assistance 
with regard to admission and examination support, educational infrastructure 
support alongwith providing guidance for higher education towards specialized 
research areas be regularly provided. The Committee, with regard to special 
schemes for girl cadets, recommend that the Ministry should review its existing 
scholarship policy with a view to include special scholarship scheme for girl 
cadets, towards motivating and providing them with an opportunity to serve the 
nation. Further, with regard to class based incentives, the Committee desire that 
the reimbursement of entire tuition fee paid for classes XI and XIl as incentive may 
be extended to include classes IX to XII. The Committee strongly feel that such an 
increased amount as incentive would definitely motivate the cadets of Sainik 
Schools for joining National Defence Academy/Naval Academy and other defence 
related establishments thereby meeting the objectives of Sainik Schools.” 
 
 
7. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
   “The Sainik Schools being a Centre-State model, various 
scholarships/incentives are being provided by the MoD and respective State 
Govt as follows:- 
 
(i) The MoD is providing defence scholarships, sharing of burden, and 
central assistance as per eligibility criteria to the cadets of Sainik Schools. 
 
(ii) At present, the scholarships provided by State Governments are at non-
uniform rates of scholarships across states. In this regard it is submitted that 
the MoD has already issued requests to all States regarding implementing 
uniform rates of Scholarships (Annexure A). However, many states are 
providing varying rates depending on various criteria including merit, means-
cum-merit, dietary charges, uniform etc.” 
 
 
8. The Committee is pleased to note from the Action Taken reply that the 
Ministry of Defence is providing defence scholarships, Central assistance and  
sharing the burden as per eligibility criteria to the cadets of Sainik Schools. The 

4 
 
Committee in their original report had recommended for enhancement of their 
share/component within the scholarship/incentive schemes. However, the 
Ministry have not furnished any reply or comment for the same.  In this regard, 
the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Central 
Government may enhance their share/component within the 
scholarship/incentive schemes, wherever possible, so that, it will provide holistic 
support to the students of Sainik Schools.   
The Committee also note from the Action Taken reply that at present, the 
scholarships provided by State Governments are at non-uniform rates of 
scholarships across States. The Committee further note that in this regard 
Ministry has already issued requests to all States regarding implementing 
uniform rates of Scholarships which is again appreciable (Annexure A). However, 
the Committee as apprised by Ministry find that many States are providing 
varying rates depending on various criteria including merit, means-cum-merit, 
dietary charges, uniform, etc.  At this stage, the Committee appreciate the role 
played and efforts taken by States towards all-round development of Sainik 
Schools and also wish that the Ministry of Defence may sensitize and impress 
upon the States for implementation of uniform rates of Scholarships to the 
students studying in Sainik schools with a view to mitigate anomalies among the 
students in getting scholarships from various States.  
The Committee in their original report  had recommended for inclusion of 
special scholarship schemes for girl students.  However, the Ministry have not 
furnished any reply for the same.  At this stage, the Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation  that the Ministry should review its existing scholarship 
policy with a view to include special scholarship scheme for girl cadets, towards 
motivating and providing them with an opportunity to serve the nation.  
Further, in view of no reply or comment of Ministry regarding 
reimbursement of tuition fee, the Committee again emphasize upon their earlier 
recommendation that the reimbursement of entire tuition fee paid for classes XI 
and XIl as incentive may be extended to include classes IX to XII with a view to 
motivate the cadets of Sainik Schools for joining National Defence 

5 
 
Academy/Naval Academy and other defence related establishments and such a 
step on the other side certainly benefit in increasing the intake for NDA/NA.  
 
B. Inclusive education for students of economically weaker sections 
 
Recommendation No. 7  
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
     “The Committee are pleased to note that reservation in admission to Sainik 
School is being provided to students belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Backward Classes. In addition, certain State Governments 
provide merit-cum-means based scholarships to the students who are domicile of 
the States and admitted in the Sainik Schools. The Committee have also been 
informed that there is no proposal in Ministry of Defence for extending any other 
benefit apart from existing benefits to cadets of Sainik Schools. The Committee 
feel that students from economically weaker sections of the society irrespective of 
their social background should get an opportunity for admission in Sainik Schools 
by ways of extending inclusive education to them so that all the students should be 
benefitted by fostering empathy, social skills, understanding of diversity, thus 
boosting academic outcomes, confidence and real-world readiness through 
collaborative learning with peers from varied backgrounds. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry of Defence to review its existing Sainik Schools 
Society Rules & Regulations, 1997 (SSSR&R, 1997) for consideration of 
exemption and provisions for minimizing or subsidizing fees to the students 
belonging to economically weaker sections of the society for their admissions and 
studying in Sainik Schools so that they also get an opportunity to serve the nation.” 
 
 
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
   “At present, reservation is being extended during admissions for Class VI/IX 
for candidates belonging to SC, ST, OBC (Non-Creamy Layer), and certain 
seats are earmarked for defence wards. The present arrangement is 
considered satisfactory as there is no reservation for EWS in other schools 
under Central Government like KVS or NVS.” 
 
 
11. The Committee note from the Action Taken reply that at present the 
reservation is being extended during admissions for Class VI/IX for candidates 
belonging to SC, ST, OBC (Non-Creamy Layer), and certain seats are earmarked 
for defence wards.  The Committee also note that the present arrangement is 
considered satisfactory as there is no reservation for EWS in other schools under 
Central Government like KVS or NVS.  

6 
 
          The Committee while acknowledging the social background of the students 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Defence may review its 
existing Sainik Schools Society Rules & Regulations, 1997 (SSSR&R, 1997) for 
consideration of exemption and provisions for minimizing or subsidizing fees to 
the students belonging to economically weaker sections of the society for their 
admissions and studying in Sainik Schools which will certainly create a milestone 
by way of enabling desirous students  getting an opportunity to serve the nation. 
 
C. Opening of new Sainik Schools under PPP mode 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee note that the Central Government has approved the 
initiative of setting up of 100 new Sainik Schools in partnership with 
NGO's/Private Schools/State Governments in a graded manner class-wise, 
starting from class 6th onward. As on 5 August, 2025, Sainik Schools Society 
has approved 86 new Sainik Schools in partnership mode with NGO's/Private 
Schools/State Governments. Out of these, Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) 
has been signed with only 64 new Sainik Schools and Academic Session has 
already begun in 45 such schools. The Committee are constrained to note that 
the signing of MoA in respect of 22 newly approved Sainik Schools is pending 
for want of requisite documents from the entities as per the terms and 
conditions of the approval letter issued by Ministry of Defence to the approved 
New Sainik Schools. The Committee further note with concern that the process 
for evaluation of applications to approve 14 New Sainik schools is still not 
completed by Sainik Schools Society. The Committee desire that Sainik 
Schools Society should establish a dedicated mechanism and appropriate 
coordination, in a time bound manner with States/Union territories for speedy 
disposal of all pending application/requests, so that the target of setting up of 
100 New Sainik Schools could be achieved. For this, the Committee 
recommend setting up of High Powered Committee to phase out all roadblocks 
to ensure that the future of students is not compromised in any way for want of 
basic coordination between Centre and State Governments. The Committee 
also recommend that the Ministry of Defence and Sainik Schools Society should 
prepare a comprehensive action plan to sensitize and create awareness among 
the State Governments/Union territories, so that at least one new Sainik School 
under PPP mode is established in each State/Union territory.” 
 
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “Due to continuous efforts of Ministry, MoA has been signed with 80 New 
Sainik Schools as on date out of which 58 schools are already operational. 

7 
 
Further, applications under Phase IV of this scheme have been received from 
all parts of the country. These are under evaluation.” 
 
14. The Committee are pleased to note that due to continuous efforts of the 
Ministry, Memorandum of Agreement (MoA)  has been signed with 80 New Sainik 
Schools and out of which 58 schools are already operational.  The Committee are 
pleased to note the increased number of signings of MoA from 64 to 80 and 
operational schools from 45 to 58 which certainly reflects an encouraging 
progress towards achieving the goal for setting up of 100 new Sainik Schools in 
near future.  However, the Committee note that applications under Phase IV of 
this scheme have been received from all parts of the country which are under 
evaluation. At this stage, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that Sainik Schools Society should establish a dedicated mechanism and 
appropriate coordination, in a time bound manner with States/Union territories for 
speedy disposal of all pending application/requests and also furnish details of 
New Sainik Schools which have signed MoA. 
 
        Moreover, the Committee in their original report had recommended  for 
setting up of High Powered Committee to phase out roadblocks. However, the 
Ministry has not furnished any reply or comment on the same.  In this regard, the 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation for setting up of High Powered 
Committee to phase out all roadblocks to ensure that the future of students is not 
compromised in any way for want of basic coordination between Centre and State 
Governments. 
 
Further, the Committee observe that the Ministry in their Action Taken reply 
has not furnished any reply regarding preparation of a comprehensive action plan 
to sensitize and create awareness among the State Governments/Union territories 
for establishment of new Sainik School in each State/Union territory. At this 
stage, the Committee reiterate its earlier recommendation that the Ministry of 
Defence and Sainik Schools Society should prepare a comprehensive action plan 
to sensitize and create awareness among the State Governments/Union 
territories, so that at least one new Sainik School under PPP mode is established 
in each State/Union territory so that more students may get an opportunity to 

8 
 
enroll themselves and adapt the curriculum for preparation for NDA/NA without 
any delay. A status report containing the efforts made for action plan, if any and 
proposed timeline in this regard may be furnished at the time of submitting 
Action Taken Statement for the perusal of the Committee. 
 
D. Upgradation of infrastructure for girl students 
 
Recommendation No. 11  
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee are pleased to note that the admission of girl cadets in Sainik 
Schools has started from the academic year 2018 and at least ten girls are 
admitted every year in each school. The Committee note that as on 21st October 
2024, 1578 girl cadets were studying in 33 Sainik Schools. The Committee have 
learnt that the first batch of students in new Sainik Schools has started in 
Academic Year 2022-23. Further, the details of the girl students of new Sainik 
Schools who will qualify for NDA can be known only when these girls will be 
eligible to appear in NDA exam after appearing or passing out of class 12th. The 
Committee have been informed that in the academic year 2024-25, the number 
of girls in both the existing Sainik Schools and in the new Sainik Schools has 
crossed 2,000. Also, an amount of Rs. 3.3 crore per Sainik School was provided 
by the Ministry of Defence for construction of girls' hostels. The Committee have 
also been apprised that in view of the increase in the recruitment of girl cadets in 
Sainik Schools, proactive efforts are being made to provide favourable and 
hygienic residential facilities for girl cadets in each school. The Committee have 
been further apprised that approval for one of the all-girls’ school have been 
given at Mathura which is yet to be started alongwith some private trusts like 
Rani Chennamma Sainik School in Kittur where only the girl students are being 
trained. The Committee desire that the Ministry should take all necessary steps 
for upgradation of the existing infrastructure facilities with a view to provide best 
possible, favourable and hygienic facilities to girls cadets. The Committee while 
appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry towards girls education in Sainik 
Schools would also like the Ministry to take required steps to incrementally 
increase the number of all-girls Sainik Schools, which would surely pave the way 
for intake of more female officers in the NDA course alongwith other areas of 
defence related institutions/organisations.” 
 
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
     “With the entry of girl cadets in Sainik Schools, upgradation of infrastructure 
has been an ongoing process. In 2022, an amount of Rs 3.33 Crore was allotted 
to every School for construction of the Girls Hostel. In all, 21 Schools have such 
hostel facility, while efforts have been accelerated in nine Schools where the 
Girls Hostel construction work is in progress.” 
 

9 
 
 
17. The Committee note from the action taken reply that with the entry of girl 
cadets in Sainik Schools, upgradation of infrastructure has been an ongoing 
process. The Committee are further pleased to note that in 2022, an amount of Rs 
3.33 Crore was allotted to every School for construction of the Girls Hostel. The 
Committee also note that in all, 21 Schools have such hostel facility, while efforts 
have been accelerated in nine Schools where the Girls Hostel construction work 
is in progress. The Committee feel that in view of increase in the recruitment of 
girl cadets in Sainik Schools, proactive efforts should be made to provide 
favourable and hygienic residential facilities for girl cadets in each school.  In this 
regard, the Committee hope that the Ministry would take all out efforts to 
complete the construction work of Girls Hostel of nine schools in a time bound 
manner so that no girl cadet is deprived of favourable and hygienic facilities at 
any cost. The Committee may also be informed about the status of construction 
of nine Girls Hostel while furnishing Action Taken Statement. 
Further, the Committee observe that the Ministry in their Action Taken reply 
has not furnished any reply or comments regarding steps taken for incrementally 
increasing the number of all-girls Sainik Schools. In this regard, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation  that the Ministry should take required 
steps to incrementally increase the number of all-girls Sainik Schools, which 
would surely pave the way for intake of more female officers in the NDA course 
alongwith other areas of defence related institutions/organisations. The 
Committee may also be informed about the details of steps taken in this regard 
while furnishing Action Taken Statement. 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Background of Sainik Schools 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee note that Sainik Schools are set-up in 1961 and a jointly ruu by 
the Central and State Governments, under the overall governance of Sainik School 
Society, Ministry of Defence. The foremost objective of Sainik Schools is to prepare the 
cadets/students academically, physically and mentally and also instill qualities of 
leadership, patriotism and discipline in them for entry into the National Defence 
Academy (NDA) and the Indian Military Academy alongwith ensuring the removal of 
regional imbalances in the Officers cadre of the Armed Forces. Further, Sainik Schools 
play an important role to provide balanced education/training that includes academics, 
physical training and character development which helps the young cadets to become 
good and responsible citizens of the nation. The Committee observes that the ultimate 
objective is also to make accessible high quality education within the reach of the 
common man. The Committee, further note that prior to the scheme for establishment of 
Sainik Schools, there existed 5 Rashtriya Military Schools and 1 Rashtriya Indian 
Military College, with the same objectives as that of Sainik Schools. All of these 
institutions basically train and nurture cadets for entry into the coveted National Defence 
Academy or other defence institutions/sectors. The Committee in course of its 
examination of the issues, have commented upon the topics like allocation of funds, 
performance of Sainik Schools, training to teachers, scholarships for deserving 
students, provision of grants-in-aid for Sainik Schools infrastructure, opening of new 
Sainik Schools under PPP mode, proper infrastructure for girl students and timely 
updation of curriculum for best results. Further, the examination of the subject has 
revealed certain impediments in achieving the laid out objectives for which Sainik 
Schools were established alongwith their performance, which could be improved or 
taken care of to reach the expected levels. Some concerns have also surfaced on the 
issue of the opening of new Sainik Schools during the course of examination, whereas 
the expansion of Sainik Schools has proved to be a piecemeal process. Further, the 
States interested in opening of the new schools have also not been able to conclusively 
pursue their requests, especially when the financial obligation on the part of the State 
Governments was conveyed. The various recommendations/observations of the 
Committee emerging out of the detailed deliberations on the subject have been 
enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs of the report.  
 

11 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observations of Committee have been duly noted. 
Budget Allocation for functioning of Sainik Schools 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee note that at present there are 33 Sainik Schools under erstwhile 
pattern located in various parts of the country. The Committee further note that the 
Government has approved the initiative of setting up of 100 New Sainik Schools in 
partnership mode with NGO’s/Private Schools/State Governments in a graded manner 
class-wise, starting from class 6th onwards with a vision to create a system that 
combines academic vigour with a degree of discipline and increased focus on value-
based education. As per the latest information provided by the Ministry of Defence, 
Sainik Schools Society has approved 86 new Sainik Schools so far in partnership mode 
with NGO's/Private Schools/State Governments. The Committee observes that for the 
functioning of Sainik Schools, allocated funds are utilized in providing various grant-in-
aids, scholarships, incentives, special grants to Sainik Schools. In F.Y. 2023-24, out of 
the allocated budget of Rs. 175.87 crore, an amount of Rs. 152.43 crore was allocated 
for Sainik Schools. The balance amount of Rs. 23.44 crore was surrendered to 
Government account. Although the amount of Rs. 152.43 crore, as stated by the 
Ministry was adequate to fulfil the obligation of Ministry of Defence towards functioning 
of Sainik Schools, the Committee are of the view that surrendered amount of Rs. 23.44 
crore could have been gainfully utilized towards various other issues, especially those 
pertaining to lacking infrastructure of Sainik Schools. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry in future may ensure that all sanctioned amount is gainfully and effectively 
utilized and generally no surrender of funds should take place. Further, to cater to the 
additional requirement with regard to BE 2024-25, an amount of Rs. 670 crore was 
projected for Revised Estimates 2024-25, which was Rs. 494.13 crore more than the 
earlier allocated amount of Rs.175.87 crore. The Committee are of the considered view 
that sufficient funds should be allocated to Sainik Schools, wherever necessary, to meet 
the heads of grant-in-aids, scholarships, incentives and special grants in respect of 
erstwhile Sainik Schools and also in terms of annual fee support and training grant to 
new upcoming Sainik Schools. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
of Defence should make all out efforts to impress upon the Ministry of Finance for 
providing sufficient budgetary support or allocation for required infrastructure 
development, along with ensuring time bound modernization of 33 Sainik Schools, as 
well as the new upcoming schools, so as to ensure that Sainik Schools function 
smoothly towards playing the unique role of recruiting and training future leaders for the 
Armed Forces and other national service sectors. 
 
 

12 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Sainik Schools function under a Centre-State Joint Venture model 
where-in Schools are supported by the MoD and the respective State 
Governments in terms of grants-in-aid and other financial assistance. In this 
regard, the following is submitted. 
 
 (i) MoD Funds. To support the Schools, the MoD is providing a yearly 
 grant of Rs 1 Crore to each Sainik School for infrastructure-related works. In 
 addition, Rs 10 Lakh is being allotted to each School as Training Grant to 
 improve the Training facilities/ICT etc. In addition, an amount of Rs 3.33 Crore 
 was allotted to every School for construction of the Girls Hostel due to the 
 induction of girls in all Sainik Schools w.e.f academic session 2021-22. 
 Separately, 18 Schools have been allotted funds for building infrastructure for 
 One School One Sport scheme (nine Schools each in 2023-24 and 2024-25 
 respectively).     
 (ii) State Government Funds. Data with respect of share of budget 
 provided to Sainik Schools during FY 2023-24 and 2024-25 by state 
 governments is tabulated below:- 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
A net increase is seen in the cumulative allotment(s) done by the state 
governments towards Sainik Schools. However, few Schools need additional 
support for infrastructure and the Schools are in continuous liaison with the 
respective State Government authorities for enhanced allotment of funds for 
providing better maintenance and infrastructure of the School. Intervention of 
Local Boards of Administration is also being sought in the cases. 
 
 
Performance/comparison of Sainik Schools with Rashtriya Military School, 
Rashtriya Indian Military College 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
 The Committee note that Sainik Schools were established after the Rashtriya 
Military Schools and the Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC), with clearly defined 
Years 2023-
24 
2024-25 
State Government Share Rs 
156.8 
Cr 
Rs 273.1 Cr 

13 
 
aims and objectives i.e to prepare cadets for entry into NDA, and to rectify regional 
imbalance in the Officers cadre of Indian Armed Forces. These institutions were 
designed with a robust organizational structure extending from the Ministry of Defence 
at the apex level to Local Boards of Administration at the ground level. The importance 
accorded to Sainik Schools is evident from the fact that the Raksha Mantri serves as the 
Chairman of the Board of Governors. Further, to ensure efficient functioning and 
streamlined operations, Sainik Schools are staffed with serving Service Officers in key 
leadership positions such as Principal, Vice-Principal, and Administrative Officer, in 
addition to APTC/NCC instructors and other requisite skilled personnel. The Committee 
also observe that Sainik Schools are established on expansive campuses and are 
equipped with well-developed infrastructure and facilities to impart quality education and 
comprehensive training. These institutions are intended to develop cadets into capable 
individuals who can serve as officers in the Armed Forces in the future. Keeping in view 
the above moto of Sainik School, the Government should make all out efforts to 
increase the intake of the NDA cadets from Sainik School at par with RIMC. The 
Committee further note, based on submissions from the Ministry, that in recent years 
students have been increasingly exploring diverse career options, influenced by wider 
availability of opportunities and personal interests. In this context, the Committee are of 
the view that Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military Schools, and RIMC must adapt to 
evolving aspirations and advancements, particularly in relation to the range of career 
choices made available to students. While reaffirming the core objective of new Sainik 
Schools—namely, nurturing candidates for entry into the Armed Forces—the Committee 
emphasize that students should also be encouraged to pursue alternative career 
pathways aligned with their interests and aptitudes directly or indirectly related to 
national defence. The Committee are of the considered view that the time is opportune 
for students of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military Schools, and RIMC to be motivated to 
pursue careers not only in the Armed Forces but also in allied fields related to defence 
research, innovation, design, and medicine. Accordingly, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry, through these schools and colleges, adopt a multi-pronged approach 
to build awareness and instil a sense of purpose aligned with students’ interests from an 
early stage. Such an approach would ensure holistic development and enable students 
to emerge as responsible citizens and future leaders of the nation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Sainik Schools Society and Sainik Schools have been making sincere 
efforts to improve the intake rates at the National Defence Academy (NDA) and 
the Indian Naval Academy (INA). 
 
(i) As per data available for last five years w.r.t. the vacancies available at NDA/INA, 
the following are as below: - 
 
 

14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) As seen from the above, when data is viewed from the perspective of the number 
of vacancies available in NDA/INA, the average number of cadets from Sainik 
School in each course of NDA and INA is 20% and 22% respectively.  
 
(iii) Sainik Schools are imparting quality education to the cadets, and various initiatives 
have been undertaken by the Schools to enhance success rates including conduct 
of extra classes, mock tests, engagement of guest faculty etc to improve the intake 
rates at NDA/INA. With the implementation of the NEP-2020 and initiatives taken 
by CBSE to introduce subjects like Vocational Education/Skill Subjects, 
Computational Thinking & AI, are being introduced in Sainik Schools which would 
help the cadets to explore diverse career choices.  
 
 
Date 
NDA 
Cour
se 
All 
SS 
Total Vac at 
NDA (Men) % 
Jul-20 144 105 370 28.378 
Jan-21 145 57 370 15.405 
Jul-21 146 84 370 22.703 
Jan-22 147 75 370 20.270 
Jul-22 148 55 351 15.670 
Jan-23 149 53 351 15.100 
Jul-23 150 76 351 21.652 
Jan-24 151 55 351 15.670 
Jul-24 152 97 342 28.363 
Jan-25 153 69 348 19.828 
    726  3574 20.313 
Date 
INA 
Cours
e 
All SS 
Total Vac 
at INA 
(Men) 
% 
Jul-20 106 12 45 26.667 
Jan-21 107 9 48 18.750 
Jul-21 108 6 43 13.953 
Jan-22 109 7 30 23.333 
Jul-22 110 8 30 26.667 
Jan-23 111 9 30 30.000 
Jul-23 112 10 30 33.333 
Jan-24 113 6 25 24.000 
Jul-24 114 4 18 22.222 
Jan-25 115 2 21 9.524 
    73  320 22.813 

15 
 
Rashtriya Military Schools (RMS) 
 While retaining the core objective of preparing cadets for entry into the Armed 
Forces, RMS have undertaken to prepare cadets for diverse career options: 
(a) Introduction of structured career counselling and guidance sessions to apprise 
cadets of diverse career opportunities. 
(b) Enhanced exposure to emerging and defence related fields such as technology, 
cyber security and research & development. 
(c) Co-curricular focus on activities like horse riding, archery club, shooting and 
various adventurous activities to support varied aptitudes and interests of cadets. 
 These measures aim to ensure that cadets are equipped to pursue both defence 
services and alternative career pathways aligned with national interests.  
 
Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) 
RIMC serves as a premier feeder institution for NDA/ NA, with its primary mission 
focused on grooming young cadets for leadership in the Armed Forces. While the 
core curriculum is designed to produce military officers, the RIMC experience is 
defined by a comprehensive immersion into the defense ecosystem. Throughout 
their tenure, cadets are provided with direct exposure to high-level defense tactical 
field exercises and visits to operational establishments via hikes, educational visits 
during each term. This rigorous environment ensures that they understand the 
practical and strategic demands of national security from a young age. 
Furthermore, the academy broadens its scope by introducing cadets to parallel 
career paths indirectly linked to national defense. This ensures that even those 
who do not ultimately secure a seat at the service academies are equipped to 
leverage their exposure and discipline to pursue careers in allied sectors. 
 
Training for teaching staff  
 
Recommendation No. 4. 
 
The Committee note that most of the Sainik Schools have the required number of 
Service Officers, APTCs and NCC staff. Across the 33 Sainik Schools, there are 
approximately 800 teachers, and significant emphasis is being placed on their training 
and professional development. The Committee note that the Ministry has entered into 
an MoU with IITE, Gandhinagar, under which training has already commenced.  The 
programme comprises three phases, and every teacher is required to undergo each 
phase, beginning from the induction stage. The Committee observe that a detailed 
training pattern has been decided with the Gandhinagar Institute which is available for 

16 
 
all Sainik Schools including the schools under PPP mode. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that, particularly in the context of the PPP mode, training should place 
greater emphasis on instilling discipline, fostering national values, integrating modern 
technological advancements, including the use of AI and adopting contemporary 
pedagogical strategies. The Committee further recommend that the teachers should be 
systematically and periodically trained to deliver quality education, build-awareness of 
defence culture and expectations, while aligning with the latest curriculum in force 
alongwith cultivating leadership values, discipline and patriotism. The outcome of the 
training imparted to the teachers should also be quantified, especially in terms of the 
increased academic performance of students and number of selection of cadets in NDA. 
The Committee, further desire that the Ministry should make concerted efforts by 
exercising the requisite due diligence, so that the number of cadets selected for NDA 
and other defence related domains invariably goes up. The Committee while 
appreciating the efforts of the Ministry towards training of teaching staff also urge the 
Ministry to take assistance from various institutes of repute by conducting a proper 
study on the performance of teaching staff alongwith the requirement of additional 
teachers training institutes, in order to ensure that the objective of setting up of the 
Sainik Schools are fully met and results achieved as per the expectations.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Sainik Schools are undertaking continuous teacher capacity-building 
through structured initiatives, including collaboration with Indian Institute of 
Teacher Education (Gandhinagar), as well as training aligned with NCERT/CBSE 
frameworks. Teachers also regularly participate in Capacity Building 
Programmes (CBPs) conducted at local/regional level to enhance pedagogical 
and mentoring skills. 
 
(i) Through the five-year MoU between SS Society and IITE Gandhinagar 
(2021), around 800 teachers from Sainik Schools have been trained under this 
partnership. The key training modules include courses which have pedagogy 
aligned with NEP 2020, student mentoring in a boarding environment, handling 
emotional/behavioural issues, lesson planning and assessment strategies, and 
preparation support for NDA/UPSC-oriented pathways. This initiative also focuses 
on Indian ethos and values. 
 
(ii) The workshops at IITE Gandhinagar has also been extended to the 
teachers of New Sainik Schools. In addition, a separate programme is also being 
planned for the Principals/Administrators of the New Sainik Schools. 
 
(iii) Teachers from Sainik Schools also attend CBP workshops hosted by other 
institutions, gaining exposure to best practices. 
 

17 
 
 
Scholarships and Incentives  
 
Recommendation No. 5. 
 
 The Committee note that the State Governments provide scholarships based on 
the income slabs of parents of the cadets/marks scored by the students of Sainik 
Schools belonging to that State as per their own policy. The Committee observe that the 
Ministry of Defence also provides a part of scholarship as Central Assistance to those 
cadets who have been awarded State Government scholarship. The Committee further 
note that the Central Government also provides incentive to those cadets who are 
selected for National Defence Academy/Naval Academy. In this regard, all cadets of 
Sainik Schools who join the National Defence Academy/Naval Academy are given NDA 
incentive in the form of reimbursement of entire tuition fee paid for classes XI and XIl by 
such cadets. The Committee are of the view that substantial amount is being spent by 
the parents of the students/cadets in terms of payment of entire tuition fees during their 
course study in Sainik Schools. Also, the students/cadets are coming from various 
economic and social backgrounds and different income groups. In this regard, the 
Committee while appreciating the new PPP scheme which envisages to provide Annual 
Fee Support of 50% of fee (subject to an upper limit of Rs 40,000 per annum) for 50% 
of the class strength (subject to an upper limit of 50% students per year) from class 6th 
to class 12th, on Merit-cum-Means basis are of the view that with respect to scholarship 
and incentives, more initiatives are required to motivate the students and retaining them 
within the ecosystem of Sainik Schools. The Committee desire the Ministry to ensure 
increased incentive towards merit, need, category and performance based scholarships 
and initiatives towards providing a holistic support. The Committee also recommend the 
Central Government to enhance their share/component within the scholarship/incentive 
schemes, wherever possible. Further, the Committee also desire that assistance with 
regard to admission and examination support, educational infrastructure support 
alongwith providing guidance for higher education towards specialized research areas 
be regularly provided. The Committee, with regard to special schemes for girl cadets, 
recommend that the Ministry should review its existing scholarship policy with a view to 
include special scholarship scheme for girl cadets, towards motivating and providing 
them with an opportunity to serve the nation. Further, with regard to class based 
incentives, the Committee desire that the reimbursement of entire tuition fee paid for 
classes XI and XIl as incentive may be extended to include classes IX to XII. The 
Committee strongly feel that such an increased amount as incentive would definitely 
motivate the cadets of Sainik Schools for joining National Defence Academy/Naval 
Academy and other defence related establishments thereby meeting the objectives of 
Sainik Schools. 
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Sainik Schools being a Centre-State model, various 
scholarships/incentives are being provided by the MoD and respective State Govt 
as follows:- 
 
(i) The MoD is providing defence scholarships, sharing of burden, and central 
assistance as per eligibility criteria to the cadets of Sainik Schools. 
 
(ii) At present, the scholarships provided by State Governments are at non-
uniform rates of scholarships across states. In this regard it is submitted that the 
MoD has already issued requests to all States regarding implementing uniform 
rates of Scholarships (Annexure A). However, many states are providing varying 
rates depending on various criteria including merit, means-cum-merit, dietary 
charges, uniform etc. 
 
Grant-in-aid  
Recommendation No. 6. 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence provides training grant to the 
tune of Rs. 10 lakh to each Sainik School every year for meeting expenditure related to 
NDA training of cadets as well as in-service training of teachers. The Grant-in-aid for 
infrastructure development to the tune of Rs. 1 crore is also provided to each Sainik 
School every year based on their proposals. The Committee observe that the main 
reason for non-allotment of infrastructure grant to some of the Sainik Schools was due 
to non-submission of requisite documents for availing the said grant including non-
submission of vetted Utilization Certificates of the last availed grants. The Committee 
recommend that all required formalities like submission of required documents, 
utilization certificates, etc. to ensure timely allotment of grants should be amicably 
resolved well in advance to avoid any delay in disbursement of the grant. As regards, 
submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs) which is a pre-requisite for further 
grants/release of funds, the Committee desire that a timeline be drawn for submission of 
UCs so that further release of funds/grants are not delayed due to non-submission of 
UCs. The Committee have also been informed that Sainik Schools are being upgraded 
with world-class infrastructure suitable for residential purposes with continuous support 
from the State Governments and Central Government. The Committee appreciate the 
role being played by Central and State Governments towards providing grants-in-aid for 
training and infrastructure development of Sainik Schools.  In this regard, the 
Committee desires that the ongoing efforts to develop world-class infrastructure in 
Sainik Schools be sustained as a continuous process, with timely provision of additional 
grant-in-aid whenever required. Further, regarding infrastructure development the 

19 
 
requisite criteria of changing paradigm and advancement of the training modules should 
be given top priority. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i)  Necessary steps are being taken in this regard by the Sainik Schools 
Society so that funds can be disbursed timely. A timeline for forwarding proposals 
with complete financial implications and necessary documentation {including 
submission of Utilisation Certificates (UC)} is intimated to all Sainik Schools in the 
beginning of the financial year and necessary follow up is done (Annexure B). 
 
(ii) All efforts are being made to develop infrastructure and required training 
facilities in all Sainik Schools. 
 
Inclusive education for students of economically weaker section  
 
Recommendation No. 7. 
 
The Committee are pleased to note that reservation in admission to Sainik 
School is being provided to students belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and Other Backward Classes. In addition, certain State Governments provide merit-
cum-means based scholarships to the students who are domicile of the States and 
admitted in the Sainik Schools. The Committee have also been informed that there is no 
proposal in Ministry of Defence for extending any other benefit apart from existing 
benefits to cadets of Sainik Schools. The Committee feel that students from 
economically weaker sections of the society irrespective of their social background 
should get an opportunity for admission in Sainik Schools by ways of extending 
inclusive education to them so that all the students should be benefitted by fostering 
empathy, social skills, understanding of diversity, thus boosting academic outcomes, 
confidence and real-world readiness through collaborative learning with peers from 
varied backgrounds. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Defence to review 
its existing Sainik Schools Society Rules & Regulations, 1997 (SSSR&R, 1997) for 
consideration of exemption and provisions for minimizing or subsidizing fees to the 
students belonging to economically weaker sections of the society for their admissions 
and studying in Sainik Schools so that they also get an opportunity to serve the nation. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At present, reservation is being extended during admissions for Class VI/IX 
for candidates belonging to SC, ST, OBC (Non-Creamy Layer), and certain seats 
are earmarked for defence wards. The present arrangement is considered 

20 
 
satisfactory as there is no reservation for EWS in other schools under Central 
Government like KVS or NVS. 
 
Fee structure of Sainik Schools  
Recommendation No. 8. 
 
 The Committee note that Sainik School are created on a Centre-State 
partnership model. The State Government provides the land infrastructure, ongoing 
maintenance and in many cases also the pension liabilities and terminal benefits of 
Sainik School employees. The Committee have been informed that the Central 
Government through the Ministry of Defence provides the Principal, the Vice Principal, 
the Admin Officer, the NCC and physical training core component to Sainik Schools. As 
per the standing directives of Board of Governors, Sainik School Society, Ministry of 
Defence, the school fee will be increased by 10 percent annually (Annexure IV). The 
scheme for Sainik School under PPP mode envisages to provide Annual Fee Support of 
50% of fee (subject to an upper limit of Rs. 40,000 per annum) for 50% of the class 
strength (subject to an upper limit of 50 students per year) from class 6th to class 12th on 
Merit-cum-means basis. It is also proposed to incentivize the approved schools with an 
amount of Rs. 10 Lakh, as training grant to each such approved school annually based 
on annual academic performance of the students in class 12th. The Committee also note 
that the running costs of the school including salaries to academic and supporting staff 
are paid from the tuition fees collected from the students, and hence, the escalation in 
fees for cadet may not be avoided. The Committee observe that the high annual fee for 
admission in Sainik Schools which generally include tuition fee, food, uniform, sports, 
text book, annual charges, transportation charges is creating significant burdens upon 
the middle-class families with their meagre income. Further, the parents have also to 
bear annual 10% increase of tuition fee as per rules of Sainik Schools Society 
throughout the study of their ward. Although scholarships are available based on 
parental income, however, the scholarship is not available to all students. The 
Committee are of the view that the annual fee hike of 10 per cent poses barrier for many 
deserving students from low-income, middle-class, and lower middle-class families. 
Such increases deprive meritorious candidates from gaining admission to Sainik 
Schools, thereby limiting their access to quality education and opportunities to serve the 
nation. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry of Defence to address the 
issue of high annual fee on priority basis and take necessary steps in this regard like 
creation of Fund to grant financial assistance or special concession to wards particularly 
belonging to middle-class and lower middle-class/low income families so that after 
selection for admission their dream to study in Sainik School may come true and is in no 
way shattered due for non-affordable high fee structure. 
 
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The present fee structure is necessitated to sustain the School finances (especially 
in terms of salaries of staff). 
 
Opening of new Sainik Schools under PPP mode  
 
Recommendation No. 9. 
 
 The Committee note that the Central Government has approved the initiative of 
setting up of 100 new Sainik Schools in partnership with NGO's/Private Schools/State 
Governments in a graded manner class-wise, starting from class 6th onward. As on 5 
August, 2025, Sainik Schools Society has approved 86 new Sainik Schools in 
partnership mode with NGO's/Private Schools/State Governments. Out of these, 
Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) has been signed with only 64 new Sainik Schools 
and Academic Session has already begun in 45 such schools. The Committee are 
constrained to note that the signing of MoA in respect of 22 newly approved Sainik 
Schools is pending for want of requisite documents from the entities as per the terms 
and conditions of the approval letter issued by Ministry of Defence to the approved New 
Sainik Schools. The Committee further note with concern that the process for evaluation 
of applications to approve 14 New Sainik schools is still not completed by Sainik 
Schools Society. The Committee desire that Sainik Schools Society should establish a 
dedicated mechanism and appropriate coordination, in a time bound manner with 
States/Union territories for speedy disposal of all pending application/requests, so that 
the target of setting up of 100 New Sainik Schools could be achieved. For this, the 
Committee recommend setting up of High Powered Committee to phase out all 
roadblocks to ensure that the future of students is not compromised in any way for want 
of basic coordination between Centre and State Governments. The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry of Defence and Sainik Schools Society should prepare a 
comprehensive action plan to sensitize and create awareness among the State 
Governments/Union territories, so that at least one new Sainik School under PPP mode 
is established in each State/Union territory. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Due to continuous efforts of Ministry, MoA has been signed with 80 New 
Sainik Schools as on date out of which 58 schools are already operational. 
Further, applications under Phase IV of this scheme have been received from all 
parts of the country. These are under evaluation. 
 
 
 

22 
 
Review of Criteria/Parameters for opening of new Sainik Schools  
 
Recommendation No. 10. 
 
 The Committee note that the main criteria and parameters for approval of new 
Sainik Schools comprises land availability i.e. 6 acres land for day school and 8 acres 
land for residential schools alongwith other conditions i.e. adequate academic and 
administrative infrastructure, sufficient and qualified academic and administrative Staff, 
affiliation with board of education (CBSE/State), transparent fee structure, sound 
financial health of school, signing of Memorandum of Agreement  (MoA)  and  
recommendation  of  the  School  Evaluation Committee. The Committee have been 
informed that a well laid down policy and criteria is followed for establishment of new 
Sainik Schools. Further, necessary documentation and on-ground verification is carried 
out before setting up of new Sainik Schools in accordance with the existing Rules & 
Regulations for new Sainik Schools. The Committee are of the considered view that 
most of the smaller north-eastern States and hilly States like Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and Union territory of Ladakh have limited amount of suitable land due to 
their peculiar geographical condition which renders distribution of land for various other 
purposes equally important. The Committee are of the opinion that such States/areas 
which are bound by such unavoidable hindrances should be positively backed by the 
Government, so that they are not left behind. The Committee would also like to reiterate 
that contribution of such States/areas to the armed forces is well known and therefore, 
they urges the Government to ease up the conditions and requirements both in terms of 
land, infrastructure and financial obligations, which is required for establishment of new 
Sainik Schools. In this regard, the Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should review/revisit its existing policy, particularly relating to land criteria required for 
establishment of new Sainik Schools. Further, the Government should also consider 
granting approval to such States/Union territories on priority which lack suitable land for 
setting up of new Sainik Schools as a special case to achieve the desired objectives. 
The Committee also desire that sincere efforts should be made to utilise the 
unutilized/surplus land available in cantonment areas if feasible for new Sainik Schools, 
without compromising the requirement of defence.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All out efforts are taken by the Ministry for setting up of New Sainik 
Schools across the country. Due to continuous efforts of Ministry, Memorandum 
of Agreement has been signed with 80 New Sainik Schools as on date out of 
which 58 schools are already operational. 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
Upgradation of infrastructure for girl students  
 
Recommendation No. 11. 
 
The Committee are pleased to note that the admission of girl cadets in Sainik 
Schools has started from the academic year 2018 and at least ten girls are admitted 
every year in each school. The Committee note that as on 21st October 2024, 1578 girl 
cadets were studying in 33 Sainik Schools. The Committee have learnt that the first 
batch of students in new Sainik Schools has started in Academic Year 2022-23. Further, 
the details of the girl students of new Sainik Schools who will qualify for NDA can be 
known only when these girls will be eligible to appear in NDA exam after appearing or 
passing out of class 12th. The Committee have been informed that in the academic year 
2024-25, the number of girls in both the existing Sainik Schools and in the new Sainik 
Schools has crossed 2,000. Also, an amount of Rs. 3.3 crore per Sainik School was 
provided by the Ministry of Defence for construction of girls' hostels. The Committee 
have also been apprised that in view of the increase in the recruitment of girl cadets in 
Sainik Schools, proactive efforts are being made to provide favourable and hygienic 
residential facilities for girl cadets in each school. The Committee have been further 
apprised that approval for one of the all-girls’ school have been given at Mathura which 
is yet to be started alongwith some private trusts like Rani Chennamma Sainik School in 
Kittur where only the girl students are being trained. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should take all necessary steps for upgradation of the existing infrastructure 
facilities with a view to provide best possible, favourable and hygienic facilities to girls 
cadets. The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry towards girls 
education in Sainik Schools would also like the Ministry to take required steps to 
incrementally increase the number of all-girls Sainik Schools, which would surely pave 
the way for intake of more female officers in the NDA course alongwith other areas of 
defence related institutions/organisations.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  With the entry of girl cadets in Sainik Schools, upgradation of 
infrastructure has been an ongoing process. In 2022, an amount of Rs 3.33 Crore 
was allotted to every School for construction of the Girls Hostel. In all, 21 Schools 
have such hostel facility, while efforts have been accelerated in nine Schools 
where the Girls Hostel construction work is in progress. 
 
Facilities for Girls Cadets in RIMC 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee note that the maximum strength of RIMC is 250. The Committee 
have been given to understand that the intake of RIMC starts from 8th Class, when the 
child’s age is between eleven and thirteen years. Further, RIMC admits about 25 boys 

24 
 
and 5 girls in the Eighth grade in each admission process. The Committee have also 
been apprised that the number of girl students will increase from five to ten in each 
batch from July, 2025. The Committee further note that the induction plan of RIMC is to 
increase the strength of girls to about 100 by the year 2028, for which the creation of 
necessary infrastructure is currently underway. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to reinforce its commitment and take all necessary step in a time bound manner 
for providing requisite infrastructure including administrative infrastructure, dormitories 
and related facilitates for girl cadets in RIMC. The Committee would also like the 
Ministry of Defence to share a status report on the same within three months of the 
presentation of the report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
RIMC has successfully initiated the induction of female cadets, maintaining 
a current intake of 10 girl cadets per batch, with a total of 47 female cadets 
presently in residence. To support this transition, two existing buildings have been 
re-appropriated on a ‘no-cost’ basis as Other Than Married (OTM) 
accommodation. Concurrently, Low Budget Works (LBW) and revenue works have 
been executed to provide gender specific amenities, including washrooms, 
bespoke furniture, inclusive of facilities in cadets hospital, a security monitoring 
room, a laundry plant and gymnasium facilities. To accommodate the increasing 
strength, a Special Work LBW project for 20 additional living unit was 
commissioned in 2026. Furthermore, a project under the Annual Major Works 
Programme for comprehensive living accommodation and ancillaries, alongside 
further LBW provisions for 20 cadets is being projected to meet future 
requirements. Additionally, financial cases for the procurement of sanitary pad 
dispensers, incinerators, rope gallows and specialized sports infrastructure like 
pickleball, badminton etc. are currently under process. 
 
Periodical review and updation of Curriculum in RIMC and RMS 
Recommendation No.  13 
The Committee observe that the elements of strategic thinking, information 
technology, modern technology used in warfare and associated scientific principles are 
embedded across various subjects taught in RIMC and RMS. The Committee desire 
that the curriculum related to modern technology and warfare such as the concepts 
associated with AI, cyber and space warfare, autonomous systems (e.g drone warfare), 
defence related directed energy and quantum technology, geopolitics of energy related 
concepts, etc. should be included and required to be reviewed periodically so that 
cadets of RIMC and RMS are in sync with the latest information and development in 
those fields. The Committee also recommend for inclusion of student and faculty 
exchange programmes for increased exposure with defence schools and universities of 

25 
 
friendly countries so that the students are aware of the best practices in defence related 
education and curriculum. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) 
RIMC facilitates consistent engagement with defence veterans and serving 
personnel through formal lectures, motivational addresses, and patriotic 
storytelling. In line with modern requirements, a dedicated AI and Cybersecurity 
workshop, ‘Innovate and Automate,’ has been introduced to address the 
complexities of cyber systems. Additionally, an AR/VR laboratory is being 
established to provide cadets with hands-on exposure to emerging technologies. 
Cadets also regularly participate in military tactical exercises, educational visits, 
and symposiums designed to enhance their knowledge of quantum technology, 
geopolitics, drone warfare, and cyber awareness. As the college adheres to the 
CBSE curriculum, these advanced subject matters are introduced through 
structured workshops and specialized visits conducted at regular intervals.   
 
Rashtriya Military Schools (RMS) 
 To further strengthen curriculum content in emerging domains of modern warfare 
and enhance exposure of cadets to global best practices, RMS have undertaken 
the following measures: - 
(a) Existing curriculum is being progressively updated to incorporate emerging 
areas such as Artificial Intelligence, cyber security, space and drone warfare in 
alignment with NCERT and CBSE frameworks.  
(b) Elements of strategic studies and contemporary warfare technologies are being 
integrated across relevant subjects and co-curricular modules. 
(c) Regular guest lectures and interactive sessions with defence experts and 
scientists are being institutionalized to provide exposure to evolving trends in 
warfare and technology. 
(d) Teachers are being trained through targeted programmes to effectively deliver 
content related to emerging technologies and modern defence concepts. 
Minimizing Dropout rate in Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military School and 
Rashtriya Indian Military College 
 
Recommendation No. 14. 
 
 The Committee note that the average dropout rate during the last five years in 
the Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military School and Rashtriya Indian Military College is 

26 
 
6.93 per cent, 6.96 per cent and 7.1 per cent, respectively. The Committee feel that the 
seats which fall vacant after the cadets leave these institutions midway remain vacant 
until the next entrance examination is held. This has a rippling effect as on one side the 
precious resources of the Government go waste due to idling of seats, on the other side 
it curtails the opportunities of candidates who intends to join the NDA course. The 
Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry to address this dropout issue on priority 
basis.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been observed that most of the dropouts happen after Class X 
(possibly due to alternate career choices i.e. other than defence). Targeted 
interventions at the senior secondary stage is advised to all the Schools to mitigate 
the dropouts so that the students interested in alternate career choices like 
NEET/JEE are provided required support. The Schools also engage with the 
parent community in this regard to build trust and prevent drop out. 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

28 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 

29 
 
 CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
04 August, 2026 Chairperson 
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence  
 
 
  

30 
 
Confidential  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
The Committee held sitting on Tuesday, the 4th August, 2026 from 1530 hrs to 
1745 hrs in Committee Room No 3, Parliament House Annexe Extension, A Block, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta  
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Ms. S. Jothimani 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
11 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
12 Shri Virendra Singh 
13 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
14 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
15 Shri Naresh Bansal  
16 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
17 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
18 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
19 Smt. Darshana Singh  

31 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mallick              - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed Shri Pawan Khera, MP, Rajya Sabha  
to the sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  and upon nomination to this 
Parliamentary Committee.  Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and informed them about the agenda of the Sitting i.e. consideration and 
adoption of the Four (4) draft Action Taken Reports on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their 19th, 20th, 21st and 22nd  Reports on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 and one (1) draft 
Action Taken Report  i.e. 23rd  Report on the subject “Review of Sainik Schools, 
Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’ 
 
3. The Committee then took up the following five  draft Reports for consideration: 
 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2026-27 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian 
Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 
21)’; 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2026-27 on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
20 Dr. Santrupt Misra 
21 Shri Parth Ajit Pawar 
22 Shri Pawan Khera 

32 
 
Health Scheme and Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2026-27 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, 
Procurement Policy and Defence Pensions (Demand No. 21 and 22)’; and 
 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2026-27 on `Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Directorate of 
Ordnance (Coordination and Services)–New DPSUs, Directorate General of 
Quality Assurance, Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance 
and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
 
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian 
Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’. 
 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the Report Nos. 24th, 25th, 26th, 
and 27th without any modifications.  However, in the Report No. 28th, as 
suggested by some Members, status report with details of New Sainik 
Schools which have signed Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) under PPP 
Mode may also be furnished against Recommendation No. 9. The 
Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Report and present the same to the Parliament on a date convenient to him. 
 
5. ****Does not pertain to the report**** 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 

33 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-THIRD 
REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON 
‘REVIEW OF SAINIK SCHOOLS, RASHTRIYA INDIAN MILITARY COLLEGE (RIMC) 
AND RASHTRIYA MILITARY SCHOOLS’ 
 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             14 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
  
Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10, 11,12,13 and 14  
           
   Total  : 14 
 
Percentage:100% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
          
   Recommendation Para Nos.  -Nil- 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:00 % 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
     
  Recommendation Para Nos.   -Nil- 
 Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
             
Recommendation Para No.  -Nil-                                                      Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 