i 
 
26 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-First Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘Capital Outlay 
on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement Policy and Defence Pensions 
(Demand Nos. 21 and 22)’] 
 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2026 / Sravana 1948 (Saka) 
  


ii 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-First Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘Capital Outlay 
on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement Policy and Defence Pensions 
(Demand Nos. 21 and 22)’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2026 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2026 / Sravana 1948 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) ……………………....…. iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….….........                   vi 
  
 
CHAPTER  I Report…………………………………………………………….. 1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  12 
 by the Government 
   
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 29 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 30 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final  31 
  replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  32 
 (2025-26) held on 04.08.2026. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence 
Services, Defence Planning, Procurement Policy and Defence Pensions 
(Demand Nos. 21 and 22)’. 
 
 
  
35 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Smt. Darshana Singh, Dr. Santrupt Misra and Shri Parth Ajit Pawar have been nominated to the Standing Committee on Defence 
(2025-26) w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 5267 dated 04.06.2026 
@ Shri Pawan Khera nominated to the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26) w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 5724 
dated 24.07.2026 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
24 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
25 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
26 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
27 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
28 Smt. Darshana Singh* 
29 Dr. Santrupt Misra* 
30 Shri Parth Ajit Pawar* 
31 Shri Pawan Khera@ 

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mallick    - Joint Secretary 
2.        Shri Amrish Kumar    - Director 
3. Shri Vikas Kumar        - Under Secretary   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-First Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘Capital Outlay 
on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement Policy and Defence Pensions 
(Demand Nos. 21 and 22)’. 
2.  The Twenty-First Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 18th March, 2026. The Report contained 13 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in July, 2026. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 4th August, 2026. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
04 August, 2026 Chairperson 
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
the Twenty First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence 
Services, Defence Planning, Procurement Policy and Defence Pensions’. 
(Demand No. 21 and 22)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 18.03.2026.  
2.  The 21 st Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained              
13 observations/ recommendations on the following aspects:- 
Para No.Subject 
1 Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2026-27: An 
Overview  
Capital Outlay on Defence Services 2025-26 
2. Comparative Defence Capital Outlay: BE 2025–26 & BE 
2026-27 
3. Utilisation of Capital budget 
4. Ratio of Capital and Revenue Outlay for the Services 
5. Modernization of Defence Forces 
6. Defence Planning 
7. Defence Procurement Policy 
8 Ensuring Level Playing Field for Private Defence Industry 
9. Self Reliance and Make in India Initiatives 
10. Reduction in Dependence on Foreign Suppliers 
11. Foreign Direct Investment 
12. Defence Pensions 
13. Disability Pension 
 
The complete Action Taken Replies have been received from the 
Government in respect of all the 13 observations/recommendations contained in 
the Report on 04 June, 2025. Replies to all of the recommendations have been 
examined and categorized as follows: 

2 
 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government (Chapter II):  
Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 and 13  
(Total - 13) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government (Chapter III):   
 
Para Nos. –NIL-       
(Total - 00)   
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply 
of Government has not been accepted by the Committee 
(Chapter IV):  
Para Nos. –NIL-      
(Total - 00) 
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. –NIL-       
(Total - 00) 
4.  The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes in respect of 
comments contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest 
and in any case, not later than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
5.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the observations/recommendations made in the Twenty-First Report of 
the Committee in the succeeding Paragraphs. 

3 
 
A. Modernization of Defence Forces  
 
Recommendation No.5 
 
6. The Committee has recommended as under: 
The Committee after examination of available facts, learn that the 
Modernisation of Defence Forces is funded through Capital segment of the 
Defence budget. Modernisation involves the acquisition of new state-of-the art 
platforms, technologies and weapon systems to upgrade and augment defence 
capabilities. They feel that it is a continuous process based on threat 
perception, operational challenges and technological changes to keep the 
Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet the entire spectrum of security 
challenges. The Committee note that in 2026-27, out of the amount of 
₹2,19,306.47 crore allocated for Capital Outlay on Defence Services for the 
Services/Organisations covered under Defence Services Estimates, ₹ 
1,84,931.92 crore is allocated for Capital Acquisition /Modernisation Head. The 
Committee also find that the allocation for Modernisation Head of the Services 
has seen an increase of ₹ 36,209.12 crore from BE 2025-26. Service-wise 
allocation for 2026-27 shows an overall increase of 24.35% with respect to BE 
and 18.10% over RE of FY 2025-26 in case of three Services. An increase of 
than Rs. 73,000 crore from Rs. 1.11 lakh crore in 2021-22 to Rs. 1.85 lakh crore 
rupees in 2026-27, that is a growth rate of 10.66 per cent CAGR. Keeping in 
view the current geo-political situations and the need for maintaining credible 
war deterrence at all times, the Committee recommend for further enhanced 
budgetary allocation under Capital Head. 
 
7.  The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
As mentioned above, Capital Budget has already seen a significant increase in 
BE 2026-27 over previous year. Further, if required, additional funds will be 
sought at Supplementary/RE stage. 
 The Committee is assured that the allocated funds will be optimally 
utilized towards meeting modernization and infrastructure development work 
needs of the Defence Services. It may also be relevant to mention that 
Services, while projecting fund requirements, take into account various factors 
such as inflation, exchange rate variations, pending committed liabilities, new 

4 
 
schemes likely to be fructified etc. The funds projected by Services are 
examined and forwarded for favourable consideration of Ministry of Finance. 
 
8.  The Committee is pleased to note that allocation under the Capital 
Budget has been increased significantly in BE 2026-27 over the previous 
year and that, if required, additional funds will be sought at 
Supplementary/RE stage. The Ministry in their reply have also assured the 
Committee that the allocated fund would be, be optimally utilized towards 
meeting modernization and infrastructure development work needs of the 
Defence Services. However, the Committee would appreciate further, if a 
statement on the allocation sought at RE stage, if any, along with the 
utilization of the allocated fund received at BE stage is furnished at the 
time of submitting Final Action Taken Statement by the Ministry. 
  
B. Defence Procurement Policy  
 
Recommendation No.7 
 
9. The Committee has recommended as under: 
The Committee understand that Defence Acquisition Procedure governs the 
Capital Acquisition for Ministry of Defence. Since the Defence requirements are 
unique in nature, their acquisition procedures are also unique. Defence 
Acquisition Procedure aims to establish a specialized framework which 
simplifies a complex procedure and brings uniformity and standardization 
among Services. The procedure aligns with the National security imperatives 
and every purchase strengthens the national security infrastructure. It 
synthesizes operational needs, fiscal framework and Industrial capability which 
in long run ensures securing strategic autonomy.  It infuses contemporary 
technologies and addresses obsolescence in short lived technology cycle. The 
Committee find that policy for procurement of defence equipment for the Armed 
Forces aims to develop the capability of the armed forces and by meeting the 
security and operational needs. The thrust remain to buy contemporary 
armaments in a time bound manner. Simultaneously, it also envisages to make 
India self reliant in defence equipment production with the ultimate aim to 
develop India as a global defence manufacturing hub. The policy is 
implemented through the mechanism of Defence Procurement Procedure 
(DPP).   

5 
 
2. The Committee also find that the Defence Procurement Procedure, which 
has been now revised as Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2020, which is 
driven by the tenets of Defence Reforms announced as part of Atmanirbhar 
Bharat Abhiyan. The Committee have been informed that Capital procurement 
cases are taken up by MoD based on Annual Acquisition plans and is being 
processed as per delegation of financial powers. Three Joint Secretary cum 
Acquisition Managers are the nodal points for capital procurements for each 
Service respectively. Capital procurement cases upto to ₹300 Cr. are delegated 
to Services HQs and cases above ₹300 Cr are processed by Ministry of 
Defence. The Draft Defence Acquisition Procedure 2026, now in the public 
domain, introduces a refined strategic framework to further streamline our 
acquisition process.   
3. Though the Committee take cognizance of the fact that the requirements 
of each of the armed forces are very complex yet the Committee recommend 
that time bound and determined efforts must be made by all the stakeholders 
involved in the process of procurement such as the Ministry, DPSUs, the Armed 
Forces and private sector as timely procurement and delivery is vital and crucial 
for meeting operational needs of the defence forces and realization of the goal 
of self-reliance in Defence Sector. The Committee further opine that as the 
technology is changing very fast and so is the geo-political scenario, therefore 
keeping in view the high dynamism in the defence sector any procurement and 
acquisition procedure needs to have a timeline for delivery as any inordinate 
and long delay in procurement can result in technology and equipment 
becoming obsolete and redundant. The Committee also feel that defence 
procurement process and procedure should follow the transparency and 
accountability in the procurement and no compromise on this aspect needs to 
be ensured. 
10.  The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
In order to align the Defence Capital Acquisition Process with existing policies 
and initiatives like Atmanirbharta & Ease of Doing Business (EoDB) of 
Government of India and give a fillip to the Indian Defence Production 
ecosystem, the Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2020 is under revision. A 
DAP Review Committee comprising members of all relevant stakeholders 
including representatives from the defence industries, Academia, Think Tank 
etc. was constituted on 26.05.2025. The Committee has consulted the 

6 
 
bodies/associations in defence sector- both Indian and Foreign. Accordingly, 
Draft Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2026 and the Handbook on 
Guidelines and Annexures (along with the prescribed format) was prepared and 
uploaded on MoD website: https://mod.gov.in/ on 10.02.2026 inviting comments 
of all stakeholders and the general public. The revised DAP 2026 is scheduled 
to be finalized and released in a couple of months. 
 The revised DAP would focus on well informed categorization so as to 
ensure correct selection of strategies, procedure and vendors and meet desired 
timelines for each equipment. A detailed and comprehensive analysis of 
technology readiness as “Technology Readiness Levels” has been planned in 
the proposed DAP-2026 which will ensure right identification of equipment & 
timeline relation. Special categories of procurement for fast evolving 
technologies, and long term equipment have been planned to achieve desired 
timelines for delivery. 
As far as transparency and accountability in Defence procurement process and 
procedure is concerned, all measures instituted by the Government of India/ 
Ministry of Defence (MoD) to promote probity, public accountability and 
transparency are being adhered to diligently in letter and spirit. Any 
discrepancies/violations, if noticed, are handled as per existing provisions for 
the same. 
MoD had also promulgated ‘Guidelines for Penalties in Business Dealings with 
Entities’ in 2016 to maintain highest standards of propriety throughout the 
process of procurement of defence equipment. The existing guidelines are 
proposed to be amended in view of the dynamic nature of Acquisition 
Environment and keeping the same in consonance with guidelines of other 
Central Ministries, instructions of CVC etc. The amended guidelines is 
scheduled to be finalized and issued shortly. 
11. The Ministry through their action taken reply has informed the 
Committee that  Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2020 is under 
revision and  DAP Review Committee has consulted the the 
bodies/associations in defence sector- both Indian and Foreign, in this 
regard. Subsequently, Draft Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2026 
and the Handbook on Guidelines and Annexures (along with the 
prescribed format) was prepared and uploaded on Ministry of Defence 
website on 10.02.2026 inviting comments of all stakeholders and the 

7 
 
general public. The Committee is pleased to note that the revised DAP 
2026 is scheduled to be finalized and released in a couple of months. The 
Committee at this stage presume that aforementioned exercise would be 
completed expeditiously by the Ministry. The Committee would also like to 
be apprised of the final outcome of the said revision. 
 Further, while giving an overview of the Defence Capital Acquisition 
Process, the Committee was also informed that the existing ‘Guidelines 
for Penalties in Business Dealings with Entities’ to maintain highest 
standards of propriety throughout the process of procurement of defence 
equipment which was promulgated in 2016, is also proposed to be 
amended and amended guidelines is scheduled to be finalized and issued 
shortly. The Committee desire the Ministry to expedite the above 
mentioned amendment procedure and in this regard a status report may 
be furnished to the Committee while submitting the final Action Taken 
Statement by the Ministry. 
 
C. Self Reliance and Make in India Initiatives 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
12. The Committee has recommended as under: 
 
The Committee note that the many initiatives have been taken to promote 
‘Make in India’ in the Defence sector and achieve substitute self-reliance in 
design, development and manufacture of defence equipment/platform. The 
Committee have been apprised that 75% of the acquisition budget have been 
reserved for domestic industry which is a decisive push towards attaining self 
reliance and 25% of R&D budget  has been given for industries, StartUps and 
Academia for increased innovations in defence sector. Further, support to 
MSMEs and Start ups have been given through ADITI, iDEX and TDF schemes. 
The Committee have also been informed of the following measures being taken 
for institutionalization of self realizations viz., (a) Highest priority to buy Indian 
IDDM (Indigenously Designed, Developed and Manufactured). (b) Notification of 
Five Positive Indigenisation Lists (PILs), which is a big step to promote 
indigenisation in defence sector offering a great opportunity to the Indian 
defence industry to manufacture these items using their own design and 
development capabilities to meet the requirements of the Indian Armed Forces. 

8 
 
(c) Introduction of the ‘Make’ Procedure of capital procurement is for greater 
participation of Indian Defence Industry including private sector, through three 
procedures- i. ‘Make-I’ category (70%Government Funded), ii. ‘Make- 2’ 
Category Make-II’ category (Industry funded) - Design and development and 
innovative solutions by Indian vendor. iii. ‘Make- 3’- Make-III (Manufactured in 
India through ToT from FOEMs). (d) a portal named ‘SRIJAN’ to offer Defence 
items to industry for indigenization has been launched which has notified two 
lists of so far- i. 5th Positive Indigenisation List for DPSUs – 5012 items and ii). 
5th DMA Positive Indigenization List- 509 and (e) Minimum 50% indigenous 
content in all cases of procurement.   
 
2. The Committee have also been apprised that an innovation ecosystem for 
Defence titled Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) has been launched in 
April 2018. iDEX is aimed at creation of an ecosystem to foster innovation and 
technology development in Defence and Aerospace by engaging Industries 
including MSMEs, Start-ups, Individual Innovators, R&D institutes and 
Academia and provide them grants/funding and other support to carry out R&D 
which has potential for future adoption for Indian defence and aerospace needs. 
The Committee acclaim the progress being made towards promotion of Make in 
India and making India Atmanirbhar in defence sector and recommend that all 
above mentioned schemes must match their periodic deadlines and deliveries 
to ensure desired outcomes towards achieving self reliance in defence sector 
and making India a global hub of defence production.   
 
13.  The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
The Government has taken several policy initiatives and brought in reforms to 
encourage indigenous design, development and manufacture of defence 
equipment, thereby promoting self-reliance in defence manufacturing and 
technology in the country. These initiatives, inter-alia include the following: - 
 (a) DAP 2020 prioritizes procurement from domestic sources. 
 
(b) SRIJAN portal lists import-substitution items; more than 47,000 items 
listed, more than 15,500 indigenised (as of Mar 2026). 
 
(c)  Five Positive Indigenisation Lists (PILs) cover 5,012 items; 3,190 
indigenised 

9 
 
 
(d) Srijan DEEP platform connects industry capabilities with defence needs; 
includes 40,000+ companies, 17,000+ MSMEs, and 2.58 lakh 
products/services. 
 
(e)  ‘Make’ procedure boosts industry participation: 
 
(i) Make-I: Govt-funded (up to 70%); 37 projects approved. 
 
 (ii) Make-II : Industry-funded; 99 projects approved. 
 
(iii) Make-III: Manufacturing via ToT from foreign OEMs; 3 projects approved. 
(f) iDEX initiative (2018) supports innovation; ₹498.78 Cr allocated (2021–
26). 
(g) ADITI scheme: ₹750 Cr (2023–26), grants up to ₹25 Cr for advanced 
technologies. 
(h) Technology Development Fund (TDF) promotes R&D; funding increased 
to ₹50 Cr per project. 
(j) Defence Industrial Corridors in UP & Tamil Nadu: ₹71,006 Cr proposed, 
₹ 9,458 Cr invested. 
(k) MSME conclaves (13 annually) raise awareness and foster 
 collaboration. 
(l) National Defence Industries Conclave (NDIC) promotes  advanced 
manufacturing; 1,500+ participants. 
 
14. The Ministry in their reply have informed that the Government has 
taken several policy initiatives and brought in reforms to encourage 
indigenous design, development and manufacture of defence equipment, 
thereby promoting self-reliance in defence manufacturing and technology 
in the country which inter-alia include DAP 2020 prioritizing procurement 
from domestic sources;  SRIJAN portal lists import-substitution items; 
more than 47,000 items listed, more than 15,500 indigenised (as of Mar 
2026); Five Positive Indigenisation Lists (PILs) covering 5,012 items; 3,190 
indigenised; Srijan DEEP platform connecting industry capabilities with 
defence needs; including 40,000+ companies, 17,000+ MSMEs, and 2.58 
lakh products/services; iDEX initiative (2018) supporting innovation; 
₹498.78 Cr allocated for 2021–26; ADITI scheme: ₹750 Cr (2023–26), grants 
up to ₹25 Cr for advanced technologies;  Technology Development Fund 
(TDF) promoting R&D; funding increased to ₹50 Cr per project; Defence 

10 
 
Industrial Corridors in UP & Tamil Nadu: ₹71,006 Cr proposed, ₹ 9,458 
Cr invested. 
While appreciating these efforts of Minsitry towards achieving self 
reliance in defence production, the Committee would like to be apprised 
about the numbers of such MSMEs and Start ups who have been funded 
by the above schemes till now and the proportion of MSMEs out of total 
funds allocation. Similarly, the Committee would also like to be informed 
about the number and name of institutions who have been provided funds 
from Technology Development Fund(TDF). 
 Further, with regard to two defence industrial corridors each in UP 
and Tamil Nadu having been set up with a proposed allocation of Rs. 
71,000 Cr and Rs. 9458 Cr. investment, the Committee desire to have a 
break up of the investment for each of the industrial corridor. The 
Committee may also be apprised regarding the types of industries being 
set in each of these corridors and the extent of MSMEs participation in it. 
 
D. Disability Pensions 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
  
15. The Committee has recommended as under: 
 
During the examination of DFG 2026-27 the Committee was apprised about 
disability pension and bringing disability pension for the Armed Forces 
Personnel under the ambit of Income Tax which was hitherto nontaxable. The 
representatives of the Ministry took note of this sensitive matter. Although, the 
matter of taxation comes under jurisdiction of Ministry of Finance, however, the 
Committee would like to recommend that since the Ministry of Defence is one of 
the stake-holder in the matter, the Ministry may take this important issue up to 
an appropriate level to examine the proposal of bringing disability pension under 
the ambit of Income Tax.    
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
The matter of exemption of income tax on disability pension granted to Defence 
Forces Personnel comes under the purview of the Ministry of Finance. Note 12 
of the Finance Act 2026 notified by the Government states that the 

11 
 
amendments notified shall take effect on or after such date as may be notified 
by the Central Government in this behalf. Pending such notification, the entire 
disability pension, that is disability element and service element, of disabled 
officer of the Indian Armed Forces shall be exempt from Income Tax. 
 
17.  The Committee unanimously agree with the Ministry that the matter 
of exemption of income tax on disability pension granted to Defence 
Forces Personnel comes under the purview of the Ministry of Finance. 
The Committee, however, express its concern over the amendments 
involving exemption of Income Tax on Disability Pension granted to 
Armed Forces personnel. The Committee at this stage would like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Defence being a 
stake holder in the case make take up this matter with the Ministry of 
Finance at the appropriate level so that financial concerns of the Ex-
Service men, particularly the disabled personnel  are duly addressed in an 
upright manner. 
 
 
 

12 
 
CHAPTER -II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Defence Budget and Demand for Grants 2026-27: An Overview  
 
Capital Outlay on Defence Services 2025-26 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee are aware that the Defence Budget is categorized/grouped 
under four Demands for Grants viz. Demand No. 19 – Ministry of Defence 
(Civil), Demand No. 20– Defence Services (Revenue), Demand No. 21 – 
Capital Outlay on Defence Service and Demand No. 22 – Defence Pensions. 
Demand Nos. 19 and 22 come under Civil/Pension. Grant Number 21 caters to 
Capital expenditure which includes expenditure on land, construction works, 
plant and machinery, equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, Naval Vessels, 
Aircraft and Aero engines, Dockyards, etc. During the examination of Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 2026-27, the Committee learn that the 
total allocated budget for the Ministry of Defence for Financial Year 2026-27 is 
₹7,84,678.28 crore. Out of this amount, the largest share of 74.52%, i.e. ₹ 
5,84,785.45 crore has been allocated for Defence Services Estimates (Grant 
Number 20 and 21). Capital Budget has two segments i.e. Capital Acquisition 
Budget (Modernization Budget) & other than Capital Acquisition. The Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services (Grant number 21) has been allocated an amount 
of ₹2,19,306.47 crore. An amount of ₹3,65,478.98 crore has been allocated to 
Defence Services Revenue (Grant Number 20).The Committee express their  
satisfaction for enhanced allocation particularly for capital outlay for FY 2026-
27.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This is factual information and Ministry has no comments to offer.  
 
 

13 
 
Comparative Defence Capital Outlay: BE 2025-26 & BE 2026-27 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
 The Committee note that the capital budget of defence services is 
bifurcated into capital acquisition and other than capital acquisition with outlays 
of ₹1,84,931.92 crore and ₹34,374.55 crore respectively in BE 2026-27. The 
Committee take note of this fact with satisfaction that the total capital outlay of 
Defence services has registered an increase of 21.84 percent as compared to 
BE 2025-26. The capital acquisition expenditure which is also known as the 
modernization budget of the Defence Services – Army, Navy, Air Force and 
Joint Staff – reflects an increase of 18.10 percent in comparison with RE 2025-
26. Other than the Capital Acquisition segment, which consists of the land and 
works expenditure of the Armed Forces and the capital budget of DRDO, DGQA 
and Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & Services), has seen an increase 
of 15.10 percent when compared to RE 2025-26. Service-wise Allocation out of 
total Capital Budget reflects an overall increase in allocation of 21.84%.  And, 
22.58% and 18.29% with respect to BE and RE of FY 2025-26 respectively, in 
case of 3 Services.    
2. In the capital acquisition budget, the Service-wise allocation for 2026-27 
shows an overall increase of 24.35% with respect to BE and 18.10% over RE of 
FY 2025-26 in case of three Services. An increase of than Rs. 73,000 crore 
from Rs. 1.11 lakh crore in 2021-22 to Rs. 1.85 lakh crore rupees in 2026-27, 
that is a growth rate of 10.66 per cent CAGR. At this juncture, the Committee 
emphasizes that the enhanced allocations should continue in the coming years, 
thereby ensuring a sustained upward trajectory in capital budget provisions for 
Defence Services to effectively address the requirements of modern warfare.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 With respect to the allocations under Capital Head, the Committee is 
assured that this Ministry will continue to project Services requirements to 
Ministry of Finance for favourable allocation. Further, Ministry will make every 
possible effort to sustain the upward trajectory of Capital Budget Provision. 
 
 

14 
 
Utilisation of Capital Budget  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
 The Committee learn that the total allocation under Capital Head at 
Revised Estimates 2025-26 to Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Directorate of 
Ordnance (Coordination & Services) and R&D stood at ₹35,239.66 crore, 
₹67,761.86 crore, ₹64,811.68 crore, ₹1,689.16 crore, ₹1,583.02 crore and 
₹15,343.82 crore, respectively. The allocation and utilisation of capital budget 
during the year 2022-23 was ₹1,50,000.00 crores and ₹1,42,940.01 crores, 
during 2023-24 was ₹1,57,228.20 crores and ₹1,54,256.28 crores   and during 
2024-25 was ₹,159,500.00 crores and ₹1,59,768.40 crores, respectively . The 
Committee, on examination of the budgetary documents in connection with 
DFG 2026-27, find that as per expenditure upto December, 2025 whole 
allocated amount is yet to be fully utilized out of the funds allocated at RE 2025-
26 for Capital Budget. While noting that about Rs. 1,36,062.93 crores out of Rs. 
1,86,454.20 crores have been utilized till the completion of the third quarter of 
the Financial Year, the Committee would like to be apprised as to what are the 
plans/schemes/channels/trajectory in place for utilizing the remaining around 
27.03 percent until the time this FY 2025-26 draws to a close. The Committee 
observed that during the FYs 2022-23 and 2023-24 there was a saving of 
allotted capital budget. It is, therefore, recommended that the during the current 
financial year the capital budget must be utilized fully. The Committee, at this 
stage, also hope that the Ministry would undertake a pragmatic approach while 
seeking further allocations at RE stage for making a realistic assessment of the 
allocations sought. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee is apprised that to ensure optimal utilisation of the Capital 
Budget during FY 2025-26, this Ministry held continuous meetings with Services 
and monitored their expenditure, and as a result, the Capital expenditure stands 
at Rs. 1,86,451.43 crore (as per March Pre.) against the RE of Rs. 1,86,454.20 
crore (i.e. 99.99% of the allocation).  
 
2. Further, the Committee is apprised that this Ministry submits the 
requirements projected by the Services, to Ministry of Finance for favourable 

15 
 
consideration. While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance analyses past 
absorption capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial 
Year, overall resource envelope available and pressing demands from other 
quarters, etc. Based on the overall ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance; Ministry 
of Defence allocates funds among the Services and Organisations under MoD, 
including Army, taking into account Inter-Services priorities, pace of 
expenditure, pending committed liabilities, etc.  
 
Ratio of Capital and Revenue Outlay for the services 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
 During examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2026-27, the 
Committee note that as per data pertaining to the last five financial years i.e. 
2021-22 onwards, the 'Revenue' component of the total outlay for the three 
Services overshadows the 'Capital’ component significantly. The overall 
‘Revenue’ to ‘Capital Ratio’ of the budgetary allocation for the Services stands 
at 64:36, 65:35, 66:34 67:33, 63:37 and 67:33 for 2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24, 
2024-25 and 2025-26 respectively. For 2026-27, the  Revenue to Capital ratio 
stands at 65:35. The Committee are given to understand that Revenue 
expenditure (Demand No. 20) includes expenditure on pay & allowances, 
transportation, revenue stores (like ordnance stores, rations, petrol, oil and 
lubricants, spares, maintenance of various platforms/equipment etc.), revenue 
works (which include maintenance of buildings, water and electricity charges, 
rents, rates and taxes, etc) and other miscellaneous expenditure; Capital 
expenditure includes expenditure on land, construction works, plant and 
machinery, equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, Naval Vessels, Aircraft and 
Aero engines, Dockyards, etc. In the considered view of the Committee, both 
Revenue and Capital expenditure play significant roles in operational 
preparedness of our Forces. Therefore, the Committee hope that allocations 
under Capital head would be suitably matched to balance the ratio of Revenue 
and Capital outlay for the Services in near future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The higher allocation in the revenue expenditure of the Services is mainly 
attributable to the fact that Army is manpower intensive with a large portion of 

16 
 
its expenditure devoted to Salaries. This skews the revenue-capital ratio in 
favour of revenue expenditure in overall sense and for Army in particular. 
Maintaining ideal revenue/capital ratio will broadly depend on reduction of 
manpower, which can prove detrimental to security of nation. However, efforts 
are made to improve the revenue/capital ratio from ongoing pattern by 
increasing capital expenditure by higher percentage (i.e. 17.62% in BE 2026-27 
over RE 2025-56) vis-à-vis growth in Revenue Expenditure (i.e. 4.49% in BE 
2026-27 over RE 2025-26). 
 
2.  It may also be added that ceilings are received separately for Revenue 
(Salary and Non-Salary) and Capital, based on which funds are allocated to the 
Services. The procedure followed for allocation involves trend of expenditure, 
projections made by the Services, committed liabilities to be fulfilled, absorption 
capacity, etc. Therefore, it may not be possible to maintain a particular ratio in 
favour of Capital or Revenue. However, every effort is made to ensure that no 
project/proposal is impacted for want of funds. As and when required, additional 
funds are sought and requirements reprioritized ensuring optimum utilization of 
available resources.   
 
Modernization of Defence Force 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee after examination of available facts, learn that the 
Modernisation of Defence Forces is funded through Capital segment of the 
Defence budget. Modernisation involves the acquisition of new state-of-the art 
platforms, technologies and weapon systems to upgrade and augment defence 
capabilities. They feel that it is a continuous process based on threat 
perception, operational challenges and technological changes to keep the 
Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet the entire spectrum of security 
challenges. The Committee note that in 2026-27, out of the amount of ₹ 
2,19,306.47 crore allocated for Capital Outlay on Defence Services for the 
Services/Organisations covered under Defence Services Estimates, ₹ 
1,84,931.92 crore is allocated for Capital Acquisition /Modernisation Head. The 
Committee also find that the allocation for Modernisation Head of the Services 
has seen an increase of ₹ 36,209.12 crore from BE 2025-26. Service-wise 
allocation for 2026-27 shows an overall increase of 24.35% with respect to BE 

17 
 
and 18.10% over RE of FY 2025-26 in case of three Services. An increase of 
than Rs. 73,000 crore from Rs. 1.11 lakh crore in 2021-22 to Rs. 1.85 lakh crore 
rupees in 2026-27, that is a growth rate of 10.66 per cent CAGR. Keeping in 
view the current geo-political situations and the need for maintaining credible 
war deterrence at all times, the Committee recommend for further enhanced 
budgetary allocation under Capital Head. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
As mentioned above, Capital Budget has already seen a significant increase in 
BE 2026-27 over previous year. Further, if required, additional funds will be 
sought at Supplementary/RE stage.   
 
2. The Committee is assured that the allocated funds will be optimally 
utilized towards meeting modernization and infrastructure development work 
needs of the Defence Services. It may also be relevant to mention that 
Services, while projecting fund requirements, take into account various factors 
such as inflation, exchange rate variations, pending committed liabilities, new 
schemes likely to be fructified etc. The funds projected by Services are 
examined and forwarded for favourable consideration of Ministry of Finance. 
 
Defence Planning  
Recommendation No. 6 
 
 The Committee have been informed that defence planning is required for 
a robust military strength which is an essential pre-requisite for a safe and 
secure nation. The Committee have been informed that keeping in mind the 
diverse need of all the three services, Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff 
(HQ IDS) had been made as a single point contact to ensure a joint planning for 
all the three services. The Committee are happy to note that HQ IDS has 
developed Integrated Capability Development System (ICDS) which carries out 
the defence planning through an interactive process. The Committee have been 
informed that 10-year Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP) is the 
foundation of defence planning which will comprise two Five Year Defence 
Acquisition plan (DCAP) and Two-Year Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) with a 
focus on modernization of Armed Forces by creating a comprehensive eco 
system of war strategies, state of art equipments, defence R&D and industrial 

18 
 
production with adequate financial support. The Committee feel that planning 
under ICDP should be in tandem with changing nature of modern warfare which 
demands more focus on automation, latest advanced technologies, quick 
response, prompt coordination, velocity and application of Artificial 
Intelligence(AI). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As highlighted by the Committee, the outcome of a framework bound 
process (ICADS) will lead to an Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP) 
which caters for identification/acquisition of niche technologies (including AI and 
automation) to meet future threats and challenges. It will significantly enhance 
Tri-Services prioritisation and optimisation of the Capital Budget. Furthermore, 
to cater for longer horizon period upto and beyond 10 years, a Technology 
Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) is prepared which enunciates to 
the industry specific demands of technologies and exact nature of requirements 
with specific quantities required by the Services. 
 
 
Defence Procurement Policy 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
 The Committee understand that Defence Acquisition Procedure governs 
the Capital Acquisition for Ministry of Defence. Since the Defence requirements 
are unique in nature, their acquisition procedures are also unique. Defence 
Acquisition Procedure aims to establish a specialized framework which 
simplifies a complex procedure and brings uniformity and standardization 
among Services. The procedure aligns with the National security imperatives 
and every purchase strengthens the national security infrastructure. It 
synthesizes operational needs, fiscal framework and Industrial capability which 
in long run ensures securing strategic autonomy.  It infuses contemporary 
technologies and addresses obsolescence in short lived technology cycle. The 
Committee find that policy for procurement of defence equipment for the Armed 
Forces aims to develop the capability of the armed forces and by meeting the 
security and operational needs. The thrust remain to buy contemporary 
armaments in a time bound manner. Simultaneously, it also envisages to make 
India self reliant in defence equipment production with the ultimate aim to 

19 
 
develop India as a global defence manufacturing hub. The policy is 
implemented through the mechanism of Defence Procurement Procedure 
(DPP).   
 
2. The Committee also find that the Defence Procurement Procedure, which 
has been now revised as Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2020, which is 
driven by the tenets of Defence Reforms announced as part of Atmanirbhar 
Bharat Abhiyan. The Committee have been informed that Capital procurement 
cases are taken up by MoD based on Annual Acquisition plans and is being 
processed as per delegation of financial powers. Three Joint Secretary cum 
Acquisition Managers are the nodal points for capital procurements for each 
Service respectively. Capital procurement cases upto to ₹300 Cr. are delegated 
to Services HQs and cases above ₹300 Cr are processed by Ministry of 
Defence. The Draft Defence Acquisition Procedure 2026, now in the public 
domain, introduces a refined strategic framework to further streamline our 
acquisition process.   
 
3. Though the Committee take cognizance of the fact that the requirements 
of each of the armed forces are very complex yet the Committee recommend 
that time bound and determined efforts must be made by all the stakeholders 
involved in the process of procurement such as the Ministry, DPSUs, the Armed 
Forces and private sector as timely procurement and delivery is vital and crucial 
for meeting operational needs of the defence forces and realization of the goal 
of self-reliance in Defence Sector. The Committee further opine that as the 
technology is changing very fast and so is the geo-political scenario, therefore 
keeping in view the high dynamism in the defence sector any procurement and 
acquisition procedure needs to have a timeline for delivery as any inordinate 
and long delay in procurement can result in technology and equipment 
becoming obsolete and redundant. The Committee also feel that defence 
procurement process and procedure should follow the transparency and 
accountability in the procurement and no compromise on this aspect needs to 
be ensured. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to align the Defence Capital Acquisition Process with existing 
policies and initiatives like Atmanirbharta & Ease of Doing Business (EoDB) of 

20 
 
Government of India and give a fillip to the Indian Defence Production 
ecosystem, the Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2020 is under revision. A 
DAP Review Committee comprising members of all relevant stakeholders 
including representatives from the defence industries, Academia, Think Tank 
etc. was constituted on 26.05.2025. The Committee has consulted the 
bodies/associations in defence sector- both Indian and Foreign. Accordingly, 
Draft Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2026 and the Handbook on 
Guidelines and Annexures (along with the prescribed format) was prepared and 
uploaded on MoD website: https://mod.gov.in/ on 10.02.2026 inviting comments 
of all stakeholders and the general public. The revised DAP 2026 is scheduled 
to be finalized and released in a couple of months. 
 
2.  The revised DAP would focus on well informed categorization so as to 
ensure correct selection of strategies, procedure and vendors and meet desired 
timelines for each equipment. A detailed and comprehensive analysis of 
technology readiness as “Technology Readiness Levels” has been planned in 
the proposed DAP-2026 which will ensure right identification of equipment & 
timeline relation. Special categories of procurement for fast evolving 
technologies, and long term equipment have been planned to achieve desired 
timelines for delivery. 
 
3.  As far as transparency and accountability in Defence procurement 
process and procedure is concerned, all measures instituted by the 
Government of India/ Ministry of Defence (MoD) to promote probity, public 
accountability and transparency are being adhered to diligently in letter and 
spirit. Any discrepancies/violations, if noticed, are handled as per existing 
provisions for the same. 
 
4.  MoD had also promulgated ‘Guidelines for Penalties in Business Dealings 
with Entities’ in 2016 to maintain highest standards of propriety throughout the 
process of procurement of defence equipment. The existing guidelines are 
proposed to be amended in view of the dynamic nature of Acquisition 
Environment and keeping the same in consonance with guidelines of other 
Central Ministries, instructions of CVC etc. The amended guidelines is 
scheduled to be finalized and issued shortly. 
 
 

21 
 
Ensuring Level Playing Field for Private Defence Industry 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
 The Committee also note that in order to ensure level-playing field for 
private defence industry vis-à-vis the DPSUs, various measures like reserving 
75% of capital budget for domestic industry, allocating 25% Defence R&D 
budget for industry, Start- ups and Academia, setting up of defence industry 
corridors in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, notifying Positive Indigenisation list 
for DPSUs and Make-I, II and III procedure of procurements and simplifying 
Ease of Doing Business etc. The Committee applaud the initiatives taken to 
attract the private enterprisers in the defence sector but there is still a lot more 
to be done in this direction. For the private players in defence sector, the 
Committee would like to recommend that the Ministry should try to encourage 
indigenous private enterprises. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to 
enhance capital procurement and augment design and research assistance for 
indigenous players in order to create vibrant indigenous privatise defence 
manufacturing hub which is also the essence of the Atmanirbhar Bharat 
program.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the committee has been noted & it is further 
submitted that the Government has, in recent years, introduced a series of 
policy initiatives and reforms aimed at fostering indigenous design, 
development, and manufacturing of defence equipment. These efforts are 
intended to enhance the participation of domestic private players in the defence 
sector and to strengthen the country’s self-reliance in defence manufacturing 
and technology. Key initiatives, inter alia, include the following: - 
(a) Priority to procurement of capital items from domestic sources under 
Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP)-2020. 
(b) Five ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ comprising of total 5012 items have 
been notified by Department of Defence Production (DDP), MoD with timeline 
beyond which they will only be procured from domestic industry. As on 31st Mar 
2026, 3190 items have been indigenised. 

22 
 
(c) Launch of SRIJAN indigenization portal to facilitate indigenisation by 
Indian Industry including MSMEs. It gives access to the Indian Manufacturing 
Industry of the items which have been imported in the past or are likely to be 
imported in the future by DPSUs/SHQs. As on 31st Mar 2026, more than 47000 
items are available for Public View on SRIJAN portal out of which over 15500 
items have been indigenised. 
(d)  Launch of Make Projects for development of defence platforms/systems 
through Indian Industries. 
(e) Launch of Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) scheme. 
(f) Establishment of two Defence Industrial Corridors, one each in Uttar 
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. 
(g) Simplification of Industrial licensing process with longer validity period. 
(h) Liberalization of Foreign Direct Investment(FDI) policy allowing 74% FDI 
under automatic route. 
(j) Implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) 
Order 2017. 
(k) Opening up of Defence Research & Development (R&D) for industry, 
startups and academia. 
(l) Progressive increase in allocation of Defence Budget of military 
modernization for procurement from domestic sources, etc. 
 
 
Self Reliance and Make in India Initiatives  
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
 The Committee note that the many initiatives have been taken to promote 
‘Make in India’ in the Defence sector and achieve substitute self-reliance in 
design, development and manufacture of defence equipment/platform. The 
Committee have been apprised that 75% of the acquisition budget have been 
reserved for domestic industry which is a decisive push towards attaining self 
reliance and 25% of R&D budget  has been given for industries, StartUps and 
Academia for increased innovations in defence sector. Further, support to 
MSMEs and Start ups have been given through ADITI, iDEX and TDF schemes. 

23 
 
The Committee have also been informed of the following measures being taken 
for institutionalization of self realizations viz., (a) Highest priority to buy Indian 
IDDM (Indigenously Designed, Developed and Manufactured). (b) Notification of 
Five Positive Indigenisation Lists (PILs), which is a big step to promote 
indigenisation in defence sector offering a great opportunity to the Indian 
defence industry to manufacture these items using their own design and 
development capabilities to meet the requirements of the Indian Armed Forces. 
(c) Introduction of the ‘Make’ Procedure of capital procurement is for greater 
participation of Indian Defence Industry including private sector, through three 
procedures- i. ‘Make-I’ category (70%Government Funded), ii. ‘Make- 2’ 
Category Make-II’ category (Industry funded) - Design and development and 
innovative solutions by Indian vendor. iii. ‘Make- 3’- Make-III (Manufactured in 
India through ToT from FOEMs). (d) a portal named ‘SRIJAN’ to offer Defence 
items to industry for indigenization has been launched which has notified two 
lists of so far- i. 5th Positive Indigenisation List for DPSUs – 5012 items and ii). 
5th DMA Positive Indigenization List- 509 and (e) Minimum 50% indigenous 
content in all cases of procurement.   
 
2. The Committee have also been apprised that an innovation ecosystem for 
Defence titled Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) has been launched in 
April 2018. iDEX is aimed at creation of an ecosystem to foster innovation and 
technology development in Defence and Aerospace by engaging Industries 
including MSMEs, Start-ups, Individual Innovators, R&D institutes and 
Academia and provide them grants/funding and other support to carry out R&D 
which has potential for future adoption for Indian defence and aerospace needs. 
The Committee acclaim the progress being made towards promotion of Make in 
India and making India Atmanirbhar in defence sector and recommend that all 
above mentioned schemes must match their periodic deadlines and deliveries 
to ensure desired outcomes towards achieving self reliance in defence sector 
and making India a global hub of defence production.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government has taken several policy initiatives and brought in reforms to 
encourage indigenous design, development and manufacture of defence 
equipment, thereby promoting self-reliance in defence manufacturing and 
technology in the country. These initiatives, inter-alia include the following: - 

24 
 
 (a) DAP 2020 prioritizes procurement from domestic sources. 
 
(b) SRIJAN portal lists import-substitution items; more than 47,000 items 
listed, more than 15,500 indigenised (as of Mar 2026). 
 
(c)  Five Positive Indigenisation Lists (PILs) cover 5,012 items; 3,190 
indigenised 
 
(d) Srijan DEEP platform connects industry capabilities with defence needs; 
includes 40,000+ companies, 17,000+ MSMEs, and 2.58 lakh 
products/services. 
 
  (e)  ‘Make’ procedure boosts industry participation: 
    (i) Make-I : Govt-funded (up to 70%); 37 projects approved. 
 
    (ii) Make-II : Industry-funded; 99 projects approved. 
 
    (iii) Make-III: Manufacturing via ToT from foreign OEMs; 3 projects 
approved. 
 (f) iDEX initiative(2018) supports innovation; ₹498.78 Cr allocated 
(2021–26). 
 (g) ADITI scheme: ₹750 Cr (2023–26), grants up to ₹25 Cr for 
advanced technologies. 
(h) Technology Development Fund (TDF) promotes R&D; funding increased 
to ₹50 Cr per project. 
(j) Defence Industrial Corridors in UP & Tamil Nadu: ₹71,006 Cr proposed, ₹ 
9,458 Cr invested. 
(k) MSME conclaves (13 annually) raise awareness and foster 
 collaboration. 
(l) National Defence Industries Conclave (NDIC) promotes advanced 
manufacturing; 1,500+ participants. 
 
Reduction in Dependence on Foreign Suppliers  
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 The Committee was apprised that India’s dependence on foreign 
suppliers for military hardware has reduced significantly. This is mainly 

25 
 
attributed to policy initiative taken by the Ministry to promote Atmanirbhar 
Bharat and Make in India initiative and to ensure transparency, fair competition, 
level playing field and ease of doing business. Consequently, during the F.Y. 
2024-25, Ministry of Defence signed 124 contracts worth Rs 2 lakh Cr (approx.) 
and 86% of the same were signed with Indian vendors. In the same FY, out of 
the total capital acquisition expenditure of Rs. 1.33 lakh Cr (approx.), 88% was 
utilized for procurement from Indigenous sources. Further during the FY 2025-
26 out of total procurement of Rs. 1,27,329.74 procurement of Rs 37,047.32 
was done through foreign vendors which is just which is just 29.09% of the total 
procurement till 31.12.2025. In the FY 202425, our Domestic Defence 
Production reached Rs. 1.50 Lakh Cr marking a record high, with an impressive 
increase of 226% from Rs. 46,429 Cr in FY 2014-15. All these data show that 
dependence on foreign suppliers is decreasing substantially thus Committee is 
hopeful that India would soon become self-reliant in defence sector. The 
Committee recommend that all possible efforts be undertaken to reduce 
dependence on foreign defence supplier to not only achieve Atmanirbharta in 
defence sector rather making India a global defence manufacturing hub. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Aatmanirbharta is followed as a cornerstone policy in Defence Capital 
Acquisition cases. Various budget ring-fencing and contracts signed with 
domestic vendors are testimony of this fact. Make-I, Make-II, Make-III 
procedures, iDEX, ADITI along with SRIJANDEEP portal are powerful tools 
which are used alongwith Buy & Make Category of procurement to reduce 
dependence on foreign vendors. 
 
2. A rising private vendor base for defence manufacturing alongwith govt 
policies are now enabling the shift from foreign dependence to domestic 
ownership of defence equipment.  
 
 
Foreign Direct Investment  
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
 The Committee note that the Government has reviewed the Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) policy in Defence Sector in September 2020 thereby allowing 

26 
 
FDI under Automatic Route up to 74% and beyond 74% through Government 
Route wherever it is likely to result in access to Modern technology or for other 
reasons to be recorded. The Committee are of the considered view that the 
Ministry should ensure that despite raising the limits of FDI to as high as 74%, 
the purpose of self reliance should not be hampered. Furthermore, the 
Committee note that current FDI policy facilitate beyond 74 per cent by 
Government route wherever, it is likely to result in access to modern technology 
or for other reasons to be recorded. The Committee are apprehensive that 
increasing FDI in defence sector may also affect the boosting Indigenous 
Technological Capability discourage Local Design, and may also have negative 
impact on Strategic Autonomy and National Security Development. The 
Committee has been apprised that FDI in Defence sector was liberalized with 
the notification of revised policy by Department for Promotion of Industry & 
Internal Trade, Ministry' of Commerce & Industry vide Press Note no. 4(2020 
Series) dated 17.09.2020. Since, the notification of revised policy, there has 
been an inflow of over INR 2273.94 Cr. till December, 2025. The Committee is 
pleased to know the inflow of funds through FDI after revised policy but at the 
same time they express their concerns towards the impact if the FDI is further 
liberalised. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in addition to the 
measures taken for making FDI more attractive, focused efforts may be 
undertaken by the Ministry to strengthen indigenous R&D base of the country 
and increase coordination between the public and private sector within the 
country, so that the indigenous defence sector is encouraged to develop and 
manufacture technologies/systems/accessories independently which are 
presently being acquired through the FDI route. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) FDI in Defence sector has been liberalised in September, 2020 to attract 
foreign investment by allowing upto 74% FDI through automatic route and 
above 74% through Government route. 
(b) Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) has been abolished. Foreign 
Investment Facilitation Portal (FIFP) has been created under DPIIT. 
(c) The concerned Ministries/Department have been made Administrative 
Ministry/ Department to grant the Government approval for Foreign Investments 
to promote Ease of doing business. 

27 
 
(d) The cumulative FDI inflow value reported from opening of Defence Sector 
in May 2001 to March 2026 is Rs. 6670.59 Crores. The total FDI inflow in the 
period from April 2014 to March 2026 is Rs. 5282.16 Crores. 
 
Defence Pensions 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
 The Committee was informed that the budgetary projections and 
allocation for the year 2026-27 under Pensions & Other Retirement Benefits & 
Service Charges to Banks (SPARSH) have been Rs. 1,80,043.00 and Rs. 
1,71,338.22 respectively.   
 
2. The Committee observe that Defence Pensions, under the Ministry of 
Defence provides for pensionary charges in respect of retired defence 
personnel (including defence civilian employees) of the three services and 
employees of erstwhile ordnance factories etc. The Committee have been 
informed that the total number of defence personnel in the country is 34,51,013 
including 6,44,020 defence civilian pensioners and 28,06,993 armed force 
pensioners. The Committee note that the System for Pension Administration 
(Raksha) (SPARSH) is being implemented for making the pension sanction and 
disbursement for the armed forces. They are happy to note that a total of 31.76 
lakh defence pensioners have been migrated to SPARSH and a total of Rs. 
1,23,204.38 crore has been disbursed through SPARSH till 31.12.2025. While 
appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry in migrating a large number into 
SPARSH, the Committee, in this regard, recommend that migration of the 
remaining pensioners be expedited at an early date and prompt measures be 
undertaken to resolve any administrative/technical issues which come in way of 
migrating rest of the pensioners to SPARSH portal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Various constructive measures have been undertaken for updation and 
correction of data of migrated pensioners.  As a result, more than 6 lakhs cases 
of SPARSH have been updated during last one year and this process is likely to 
be completed soon. 
 

28 
 
2. The purification of data and the migration process for the balance legacy / 
non-migrated pensioners will be initiated after completion of data purification 
work to ensure correctness of data and to avoid hardship to pensioners. 
 
 
Disability Pension  
Recommendation No. 13 
 
 During the examination of DFG 2026-27 the Committee was apprised 
about disability pension and bringing disability pension for the Armed Forces 
Personnel under the ambit of Income Tax which was hitherto non taxable. The 
representatives of the Ministry took note of this sensitive matter. Although, the 
matter of taxation comes under jurisdiction of Ministry of Finance, however, the 
Committee would like to recommend that since the Ministry of Defence is one of 
the stake-holder in the matter, the Ministry may take this important issue up to 
an appropriate level to examine the proposal of bringing disability pension under 
the ambit of Income Tax.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter of exemption of income tax on disability pension granted to Defence 
Forces Personnel comes under the purview of the Ministry of Finance. Note 12 
of the Finance Act 2026 notified by the Government states that the 
amendments notified shall take effect on or after such date as may be notified 
by the Central Government in this behalf. Pending such notification, the entire 
disability pension, that is disability element and service element, of disabled 
officer of the Indian Armed Forces shall be exempt from Income Tax. 
 
 
 

29 
 
CHAPTER -III 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
 
 
–Nil- 
  

30 
 
 
CHAPTER -IV 
 
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
 
-Nil- 
  

31 
 
 
CHAPTER -V 
 
 
 Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
04 August, 2026 Chairperson 
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 

32 
 
 
Confidential  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
The Committee held sitting on Tuesday, the 4th August, 2026 from 1530 hrs to 1745 
hrs in Committee Room No 3, Parliament House Annexe Extension, A Block, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta  
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Ms. S. Jothimani 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
11 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
12 Shri Virendra Singh 
13 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
14 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
15 Shri Naresh Bansal  
16 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
17 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
18 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
19 Smt. Darshana Singh  
20 Dr. Santrupt Misra 

33 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mallick              - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed Shri Pawan Khera, MP, Rajya Sabha  to 
the sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  and upon nomination to this 
Parliamentary Committee.  Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and informed them about the agenda of the Sitting i.e. consideration and 
adoption of the Four (4) draft Action Taken Reports on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their 19th, 20th, 21st and 22nd  Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2026-27 and one (1) draft Action Taken Report  i.e. 23rd  Report on the 
subject “Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya 
Military Schools’ 
 
3. The Committee then took up the following five  draft Reports for consideration: 
 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 
on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, 
Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 21)’; 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 
on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme and Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services (Demand Nos. 
20 and 21)’; 
21 Shri Parth Ajit Pawar 
22 Shri Pawan Khera 

34 
 
 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 
on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement Policy 
and Defence Pensions (Demand No. 21 and 22)’; and 
 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2026-27 on `Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Directorate of Ordnance 
(Coordination and Services)–New DPSUs, Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance, Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance and 
National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
 
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military 
College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’. 
 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the Report Nos. 24th, 25th, 26th, and 
27th without any modifications.  However, in the Report No. 28th, as suggested by 
some Members, status report with details of New Sainik Schools which have 
signed Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) under PPP Mode may also be 
furnished against Recommendation No. 9. The Committee, then, authorised the 
Chairperson to finalise the above draft Report and present the same to the 
Parliament on a date convenient to him. 
 
5. ****Does not pertain to the report**** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 

35 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE         
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2026-27 ON ‘CAPITAL OUTLAY 
ON DEFENCE SERVICES, DEFENCE PLANNING, PROCUREMENT 
POLICY AND DEFENCE PENSIONS’ (DEMAND NO. 21 AND 22). 
 
1. Total No. of Recommendations            13 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
 Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 and 13.         
   Total  : 13 
Percentage:100% 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government (Chapter III):  
       -Nil- 
Total : 00 
Percentage:0 % 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):
  
            -Nil- 
Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited (Chapter V)   
        -Nil- 
                                         Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
 