 
5 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Forty
Committee on Defence
Defence Research and D
 
December
 
i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
Forty-Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence  on the subject ‘A Review of the Working of the 
nd Development Organisation (DRDO).’]
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations Lok Sabha) of the Standing he Working of the ]  

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Forty
Committee on Defence
Defence Research and D
 
 
Presented
 
December
 
ii 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
Forty-Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence  on the subject ‘A Review Of The Working of the 
nd Development Organisation (DRDO)’] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2024 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2024 /Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
 
  
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations Lok Sabha) of the Standing A Review Of The Working of the  
 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
Chapter I Report  
 
1 
Chapter II  Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
11 
Chapter III Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
29 
Chapter IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration and to be commented upon 
 
30 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/replies awaited 
 
31 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2024-25) HELD ON 12.12.2024 
 
32 
II ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT  ON 
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN 
THE FORTY SECOND REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON THE SUBJECT  
‘A REVIEW OF THE WORKING OF THE DEFENCE 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO)’ 
 
35 
   
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25)  
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Adhikari Deepak Dev 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Shri Lumba Ram 
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri N. Chandrasegharan 
24 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
25 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
26 Shri Naveen Jain 
27 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
28 Shri Praful Patel 
29 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
30 Shri Sanjay Singh 
31 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das     - Director 
3. Smt. Preeti Negi  - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Forty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘A Review of the Working of the Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (DRDO)’.  
2.  The Forty-Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2023. The Report contained 16 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in July, 2024. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 12 December, 2024. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
17  December, 2024 Chairperson 
26  Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                 Standing Committee on Defence 

1 
 
REPORT 
  
CHAPTER – I 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-second 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject ‘A review of 
working of Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)’, which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 December, 2023.  
 
  
2.      The Forty-second Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 16 
Observations/ Recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Recommendation 
Para No. 
            Subject 
 1 DRDO : An Accomplished Research & Development 
Organisation 
2 Sphere of Activities 
3 The Technology Cluster Laboratories 
4 Budget and Expenditure 
5 Human Resource Management 
6 Training of Personnel 
7 Working of DRDO 
8 Status of Ongoing Projects 
9 Participation with Academia and Industry 
10 Ongoing Major Programmes/Projects/Systems 
11 Drone / Anti Drone Capabilities 
12 Delay in the Projects / closed projects 
13 Self Reliance and Indigenisation 
14 Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme 
15 The Kalam Vision: Dare to Dream Scheme 
16 Technology Demonstration (TD) projects 
  
  

2 
 
 
3.        The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 16 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-second Report (17th Lok Sabha) in July 
2024.  Replies to these Obesrvations/Recommendations have been examined and categorized 
as follows:- 
  
(i)        Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
  
Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15 and 16 
  
 (Total - 16) 
  
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
  
Para No.   Nil 
(Total -0) 
  
 
 
(iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration and to be 
commented upon (Chapter IV): 
  
            Para No. Nil 
(Total - 0) 
  
(iv)      Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
  
                        Para No.  Nil 
 (Total - 0) 
  
   
4.        The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments of the 
Committee contained in Chapter I of the Report should be furnished to them at the 
earliest and in any case, not later than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
  
  
5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations made in the Forty-second Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) in the succeeding paragraphs. 
   

3 
 
 
  
A.        THE TECHNOLOGY CLUSTER LABORATORIES 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
  
6.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
“The Committee note with satisfaction that DRDO’s 
laboratories/establishments, regional centres, field stations etc. spread all over 
the country from Jodhpur to Tejpur and from Leh to Kochi. The Committee 
understand that there are seven Technology Clusters headed by Cluster DGs 
located all over the country: Naval Systems & Materials at Vishakhapatnam; 
Armaments & Combat Engineering Systems at Pune; Electronics & 
Communication Systems and Aeronautical Systems, both at Bengaluru; 
Missiles and Strategic Systems at Hyderabad; Microelectronic Devices & 
Computational Systems and Life Sciences, both at New Delhi. 
  
The Committee also understand that DRDO has touched every aspect of 
Defence Research and development of technology concerning the country’s 
critical defence needs though their technology cluster laboratories. However, 
they would like to urge the DRDO to focus more on new and emerging areas of 
technology applications such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Robotics for 
furthering their research-base and also exploring the possibility of AI’s 
application in various systems & sub-systems developed by them. They are 
also of the opinion that DRDO should establish their research laboratories in 
premier institutes of technologies such as the IITs and IIC, Bengaluru so that 
students having interest in defence & military technology can be motivated to 
undertake further research in the area. This, the Committee feel, will enable 
DRDO to tap young scientists at an early stage.” 
  
  
7.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “DRDO has instituted various DRDO Industry Academia- Centre of Excellence 
(DIA-COE) in various IITs, IISC and Central Universities across the country for 
research engagement with academia & industries.” 
  
  
      Comments of the Committee  
8. The Committee recall that they had, in their Forty- second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha), opined that Defence Research and Development 

4 
 
Organisation (DRDO) should establish their research laboratories in premier 
institutes of technologies such as the IITs and IISc, Bengaluru so that students 
having interest in defence & military technology can be motivated to undertake 
further research in the area. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted that in 
response to the recommendation of the Committee, DRDO has instituted 
various DRDO Industry Academia- Centre of Excellence (DIA- COE) in various 
IITs, IISC and Central Universities across the country for research engagement 
with academia & industries. The Committee express their satisfaction at the 
extant mechanism in DRDO for research engagement with academia 
& industries. 
The Committee in their Original Report had also urged DRDO to focus 
more on new and emerging areas of technology applications such as Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and Robotics for furthering their research-base and also 
exploring the possibility of AI’s application in various systems & sub-systems 
developed by them. Further, the Committee feel that the ongoing conflict in the 
international arena has revealed, to a great extent, the hazards of a hybrid 
warfare, with both kinetic and non-kinetic operations. Keeping in view such 
drastic transformation in the warfare technology, the Committee feel that there 
is a need for fervid focus on Research and Development in the field of hybrid 
warfare, especially kinetic and non-kinetic warfare. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that DRDO, in collaboration with academia and industries, should 
further broad-base their R&D efforts to include areas such as hybrid, kinetic 
and non-kinetic warfare as well as anti-drone capabilities including sea drones 
and interceptive drones by according highest priorities in order to enhance our 
combat readiness against any non conventional warfare and security threats. 
 
 
 
B.        BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
  
9.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  

5 
 
 “The Committee note that the Department of Defence R&D was allocated Rs. 
3.14 crore in 1961-62 out of the total budget allocation of Rs. 313.00 crore to 
Ministry of Defence, which was about one per cent of Defence Budget. Over 
the years, this allocation has enhanced and touched Rs. 23,263.89 crore for 
the Financial Year 2023-24, which is 5.38 percent of the total Defence Budget 
with a corresponding increase in the number of projects/ programmes. 
Presently, DRDO is spending approximately 36 percent of its Annual Budget 
on the development of strategic systems required by the country and many 
strategic systems developed by DRDO have been inducted into Services. 
 
The Committee while looking at the budgetary provision made to the 
Department of Defence, R&D during the last two years, note that there has 
been a decrease in the Budget estimation and the Budget approved or 
allocated. In the year 2021-22, the projected amount was Rs. 23,460 crore and 
the allocated amount was Rs. 20,457.44 crore which was Rs 3002.56 crore 
less than the projection. Later, at the stage of Revised Estimate, the allocation 
was reduced to Rs 18,337.44 crore. Likewise, in the year 2022-23, the 
projected amount was Rs. 22,990 crore and the allocated amount stood at Rs. 
21,330.20 crore which was Rs. 1659.80 crore less than the projection. Since 
providing a budget to an organization is a conscientious exercise envisaging 
R&D activities in a year, making a cut at the last stage will have an adverse 
impact on the performance of the organization. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should undertake all out efforts and impress upon 
the Ministry of Finance to provide sufficient budgetary support as near as 
possible to the projections of DRDO. They also recommend that in future it 
should be ensured that no cuts are made in the Defence Budget pertaining to 
DRDO while allocating the finances. 
 
In respect of the Defence Expenditure of the Country comparing with Defence 
R&D Expenditure, the Committee learn that a trend is emerging which is 
registering a continuous decline in DRDO expenditure percentage-wise. To be 
precise, they would like to point out that the Defence R&D Expenditure as a 
percentage of Defence Expenditure was 6.59 per cent in the year 2010-11, 
which was reduced to 5.79 percent in the year 2011-12. It was again reduced 
to 5.39 percent in the year 2012-13 and this percentage further declined to 
5.34 percent in 2013-14. The share had slightly improved to 6.6 percentage in 
2014 -15 but was again reduced to 5.89 percentage during 2015-16. In the 
year 2019-20, the percentage share enhanced and stood to 6.23 per cent of 
the Defence Expenditure but after that, it had an incessant decline and in the 
last three financial years 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023- 24, the share was 
merely 5.89, 5.53 and 5.38 percent respectively. The Committee also learned 
from the data supplied to them that the exclusive Research and Development 
budget is Rs. 5,000 crore only, out of which 25% i.e. around Rs. 1300 crore is 

6 
 
earmarked for the private sector. Hence, it is inferred without any doubt that 
the amount actually left for DRDO is under constraints. The Committee 
observe that R&D is a prerequisite for a robust modern Defence mechanism 
and the Government has to take care of funds for in-house projects of DRDO 
along with outsourcing defence R&D. The Committee, therefore recommend 
that adequate funds for R&D activities should be provided to DRDO for its 
ongoing and future projects. 
 
Drawing a comparative analysis of the budgetary spending on R&D in India with 
that of developed countries, the Committee take note that with the current 
percentage of funding, our country can only aspire to become atmanirbhar and 
protect ourselves. However, to have aspirations to become a global leader, this 
percentage will not be sufficient. Keeping this objective in the mind the 
Committee desire that R&D expenditure with respect to the percentage of 
defence budget should be increased in subsequent years so that DRDO can 
achieve and accomplish their well defined objectives and render technical 
deliverance through their ongoing projects. 
 
The Committee find that 8 to 10 per cent of the total DRDO budget is being spent 
on fundamental research. The Committee have reservations about the existing 
state of affairs regarding the utilization of fund for existing R&D activities in 
DRDO. The Committee, while noting that DPSUs and erstwhile Ordnance 
Factories approach DRDO for requisite upgrades, in their Ninth Report (14th Lok 
Sabha), have emphasized that Defence Public Sector Undertakings and 
Ordnance Factories should have their in-house R&D centers for such purposes. 
At the same time, the Committee expect from DRDO to extend all possible 
assistance to 16 DPSUs including newly formed DPSUs in setting up necessary 
infrastructure and technical know-how to strengthen their R&D Centres in 
advisory capacity. 
 
The Committee understand that the mandate of DRDO is to develop cutting-
edge technologies and to equip Services with internationally competitive 
systems and platforms through the transfer of such technologies. They also 
find that DRDO has proven its competence to produce state-of-the-art strategic 
and tactical military hardware and related technologies in diverse disciplines 
such as Aeronautics, Armaments, Combat Vehicles, Combat Engineering, 
Electronics, Missiles, Life Sciences, Materials and Naval Systems. Reckoning 
the fact that when the budgetary allocations are consistently going down, it 
would be difficult for DRDO to attain developmental goals, and to attain an 
edge over adversaries. The Committee, in this regard feel it onerous duty to 
recommend that budgetary grants of DRDO should be suitably enhanced so 
that India could become a global leader in the field of armament and new tech 
weapon systems and DRDO also be able to make first-of-its-kind products. 
Keeping this in mind the Committee can state with certitude that the time 
would not be far when India would become a major exporter of arms and 

7 
 
ammunitions and would also indulge in technology export to our friendly 
nations/countries.” 
  
  
 
10.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
  
“Details of projections and allocations of DRDO (including both Revenue and 
Capital Heads) at Budget Estimates (BE) stage from FY 2019-20 are as under: 
(₹ in Crore) 
Financial Year Projections (A) BE (B) Projection-BE (A-B) 
2019-20 23,704.63 19,021.02 4,683.61 
2020-21 24,040.82 19,327.35 4,713.47 
2021-22 23,951.67 20,457.44 3,494.23 
2022-23 22,990.00 21,330.20 1,659.80 
2023-24 23,790.00 23,263.89 526.11 
2024-25 24,508.00 23,855.61 652.39 
Note:- BE figure for FY 2024-25 is subject to approval of the Parliament.  
 It may be seen from the above that there is a gradual decrease in the 
deficit between the projections of DRDO and the allocations thereof during the 
last three financial years. In addition to this, it is also evident from the table that 
there is continuous increase in budgetary allocation to DRDO and during current 
financial year, BE 2024-25, an amount of ₹ 23,855.61 Crore has been allocated 
to DRDO i.e. an increase of ₹591.72 Crore over BE 2023-24. Further, the 
Committee may be apprised that Budgetary allocations to Defence Services, 
including DRDO, are made during the beginning of the FY based on projections 
made by the Services, expenditure pattern during previous years, absorption 
capacity, committed liabilities & pre-budget discussions held with MoF. The 
allocations and pace of expenditure are reviewed at regular intervals by FADS, 
Defence Secretary & Hon’ble RM and re-appropriation of funds is done if needed 
with/without consultation of MoF as per the rules on this subject. At RE stage, 
based on overall analysis of expenditure and future requirements, projections are 
made which are considered by MoF. If required, additional funds are sought in 
consultation with MoF at an appropriate time during the Financial Year. The 
resource allocations are made on need basis and duly considering the other 
priorities of the country. Further, it may be affirmed that rationalization of the 
allocation and expenditure is the prime objective of the Government which may 
get compromised if a certain percentage of Defence Budget is fixed for DRDO. It 
is also added that there is no shortage of funds for the Defence Forces, including 
DRDO, and as and when fund is required the same is met in consultation with 
Ministry of Finance either through seeking additional funds or through re-
appropriation/reprioritization. Constant review of the budget is done throughout 
the year and suitable decisions are taken at an appropriate time.” 
Comments of the Committee 

8 
 
    
11.      The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended that 
adequate funds for R&D activities should be provided to DRDO for its ongoing 
and future projects. The 
Committee learn from the budget documents that in Budget Estimates 2024-25, 
the budgetary allocation to DRDO has been increased to Rs. 23,855.61 crore in 
FY 2024-25 from Rs 23,263.89 crore in FY 2023-24. Out of this allocation, a 
share of Rs. 13,208 crore is allocated for capital expenditure for FY 2024-25. 
The Committee, during examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2024-25, will examine the matter of budget allocation to 
DRDO in detail. At this stage, the Committee express their satisfaction that the 
gap between projection and allocation of funds to DRDO at Budget Estimates 
stage has been significantly reduced from previous years. The Committee 
would also like be apprised of the funds earmarked exclusively for R&D 
activities out of the amount of Rs. 23,855.61 crore allocated to DRDO in FY 
2024- 25. 
 
  
C.        WORKING OF DRDO 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
  
12.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee’s examination has revealed that DRDO undertakes various 
types of major projects. One of the types of such project is Mission Mode (MM) 
Project which include Medium Range Surface to Air Missile (MRSAM) system for 
Indian Air Force, LCA Mk-II, LRSAM, Quantum Communication for Metropolitan 
Cities (QMAN), Airborne Early Warning & Control System Mk – II (AEW&C Mk-II) 
for IAF and Advanced Light Weight Torpedo (ALWT). Besides MM Projects, 
there are Technology Demonstration (TD) Projects, encompass Active 
Electronically Scanned Array (AESA) Radar, New Generation Anti-Radiation 
Missile (NGARM), Supersonic Missile Assisted Release of Torpedo (SMART), 
Beam Combined Fiber Laser Source (BCFL) and Digital Fuel Flow Controller 
amongst the others.  
 
The Committee further note that another category of project, i.e. Science & 
Technology (S&T) Project, which is undertaken for basic or applied research 
activities i.e. Enhanced Blast Polymer Bonded Explosive Formulations, Pulsed 
Fiber Laser Sources, Double walled single crystal parts from advanced super 
alloy, Advanced Warhead Technologies, Enhanced Efficiency of Thermoelectric 

9 
 
Generator and Peltier Cooler (EETG) and Technology development for SiC Fiber 
(TDSiCF). Few more categories in regard to Infrastructure & Facilities (IF) 
Development Projects are National Open-Air Range (NOAR), Mission System 
Integration Rig (MSyIR), Advanced HILS facility, Multi Petaflops Computing 
System, Creation of Automotive and Weapon Systems Testing Center (AWTC) 
and Infrastructure for Testing of Expendable Turbo Propulsion System (IT-ET).  
 
User trials (UT) Projects are yet another category that has come to the notice of 
the Committee. Major projects in this category are development of 5.56 mm Joint 
Venture Protective Carbine, Modification of Six Aircraft (Su-30 MKI) for Astra, 
Quick Reaction Surface to Air Missile - (QRSAM-UT), Air Defence Fire Control 
Radar, ASTRA Mk – I and Multi Influence Ground Mines.  
 
The Committee also note that DRDO not only develop systems but also provides 
product support for its major systems and to efficiently support the same, it has 
Product Support (PS) Projects and the major projects in this category are Post 
Development Support of AEW&C System (PDSAS), Product Support for Arjun 
MBT, Upgraded Digital Flight Control Computer (DFCC) for LCA Mk-1A, Product 
Support & Product Upgrade for Akash Weapon System and Akash-Prime and 
Astra Product Support. 
 
The Committee earnestly feel that diversified projects that are undertaken by the 
DRDO have enabled India to achieve competitive technological and military edge 
vis-à-vis our immediate neighbours. The Committee appreciate the mammoth 
work undertaken in the field of development of critical and strategic systems by 
DRDO. While commending the role played by the Organisation in the last 65 
years in the areas of scientific, technological and armament development, they 
desire that DRDO should be encouraged to further expand the existing research-
base and venture into new areas of development keeping in view the country’s 
future military needs. They hope that Govt. will extend all out support to enable 
DRDO to withstand any kind of eventualities in future.” 
  
13.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 “DRDO plan to expand its research activities in the areas of Quantum 
Technologies, Artificial intelligence, Cognitive Technologies, Smart materials, 
Asymmetric Technologies, Terahertz, Directed Energy Systems, High Power 
Electromagnets etc.DRDO established a network of DRDO Industry 
Academia-Centres of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) for collaborative directed 
research in developing critical and futuristic technologies for defence and 
security applications. So far 15 DIA-CoEs have been established at various 
IITs, IISc, Central and State Universities.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
14.      The Committee recall that while commending the role played by DRDO in 
the last 65 years in the areas of scientific, technological and armament 

10 
 
development, they had desired that DRDO should be encouraged to further 
expand the existing research-base and venture into new areas of development 
keeping in view the country’s future military needs. From the Action Taken 
Replies of the Ministry, the Committee note that DRDO plans to expand its 
research activities in the areas of Quantum Technologies, Artificial intelligence, 
Cognitive Technologies, Smart materials, Asymmetric Technologies, Terahertz, 
Directed Energy Systems, High Power Electromagnets etc. DRDO established a 
network of DRDO Industry Academia- Centres of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) for 
collaborative directed research in developing critical and futuristic technologies 
for 
defence and security applications.  
The Committee have been given to understand that the Armed Forces 
personnel face certain difficulties in the remote and far-flung border areas owing 
to their dependence on conventional sources of energy only. The Committee feel 
that DRDO, being one of the most advanced research organisation, should 
explore avenues for tapping new and renewable sources of energy such as solar 
and wind in those far-flung areas to ensure energy security for the Armed Forces 
personnel deployed in the remotest border areas for meeting their obvious daily 
needs. The Committee would like to be informed of the measures undertaken in 
this regard. 
 
 
  
  

11 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 DRDO : An Accomplished Research & Development Organisation 
 
Recommendation No. 1: 
 
 The Committee note that the DRDO as the premier agency under the Department 
of Defence Research and Development in the Ministry of Defence in the Govt. of India is 
charged with the Military’s research and development. Though DRDO primarily takes 
projects based on the specific requirements in Long Term Integrated Projects (LTIP) or 
their immediate requirements, it also undertakes certain small value projects to enhance 
science and technology base to support future projects, which will be required by Armed 
Forces. The Committee have been informed that since the technologically advanced 
countries do not share their critical technologies to developing countries and offer only 
‘Buy’ category of systems to India, therefore, it became imperative for DRDO to develop 
not only each system, sub-systems and components, but also infrastructures and testing 
facilities at their respective laboratories. The Committee, while appreciating DRDO’s 
endeavor in this direction also hope that through their ongoing research and development 
drive, they will enable India to acquire the cutting edge technology and expand their 
research-base to be not only parallel but ahead with the emerging trends in the field of 
science and technology development. Here, it goes without saying that Government 
should provide all facilities required for our scientists in their research and development 
initiatives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to provide research support, DRDO has undertaken many infrastructure 
initiatives with the due approval of Government. Some of them are as follows: 
 Creation of five DRDO Young Scientists Lab (DYSLs) to provide R&D 
environment in emerging engineering fields and advanced technologies  
 Setting up of  Defence Technology & Test Centre (DTTC), Lucknow,  
 Creation of Integrated Simulator Complex (ISC) ‘Dhruv’, Kochi  
 Creation of Submersible Platform for Acoustic Characterisation and 
Evaluation (SPACE), Idukki, Kerala. 
 

12 
 
As a part of HR initiatives, Government has also provided many monetary as 
well as non-monetary benefits to DRDO Scientists. Some of them are as 
follows: 
 Professional update Allowance (PUDA)  
 Merit based Flexible Complementing Scheme (FCS) is provided for 
promotions of scientists in DRDO. 
 Sponsored for higher studies viz. M.E., M.Tech. &Ph.D Programme at 
premium Institutes likes IITs and IISc. 
 
   
 
 
Sphere of Activities 
Recommendation No. 2: 
 
 
Sphere of activities of DRDO is yet another milestone, which came to the notice of 
the Committee during examination. The Committee find that while on the one hand, the 
DRDO render advice to Raksha Mantri and the three Services and inter-services 
organizations on all scientific aspects of weaponry, weapon platform, military operations, 
surveillance, support and logistics, on the other hand, they apprise, assess and advise him 
on the influence on National Security of the emerging developments in science and 
technology. They also note that DRDO inter-alia functions as the nodal coordinating 
agency of the Ministry of Defence on all matters relating to Instruments of Accord with 
foreign Governments relating to the acquisition of technologies where Export to India is the 
subject of their national security related controls of foreign Governments. They also deal 
with matters relating to relations with Research Organisations of other countries and with 
inter-governmental agencies particularly those relating to scientific and technological 
aspects of national security. Committee’s examination also revealed that the DRDO also 
overseas arrangements with Universities, educational and research-oriented institutions to 
provide for foreign scholarships and the training of Indian scientists and technocrats under 
the administrative control of the Department. The Committee have been given to 
understand that because of the wide gamut of activities, the clients-base of the 
organization is also very wide. Ministry of Defence (MoD), Ministry of External Affairs 
(MEA), Ministry of Home (MHA), Army, Navy, Air Force, R&D Centres of other Govt. 
Departments, Public and Private Sectors, Academic Institutions, Ordinance Factories, 
Public Sector Undertakings and Industrial Partners, Citizens of the country and other 
Ministries which have been identified as stakeholders/clients of the DRDO in varying 
degrees. The Committee also understand that a wider organizational set up of DRDO 
provides the 45 administrative, infrastructure and academic back-up in pursuance with its 
multifarious activities. The Committee reiterate in expressing their deep sense of 
appreciation for the wide gamut of activities that are being undertaken by the DRDO, being 
the premier R&D Wing of the Ministry of Defence with a vision to empower India. The 
Committee while specifically appreciating DRDO’s arrangements with foreign Universities 
& Research Institutions recommend that DRDO should also enter into MoUs with these 

13 
 
Universities/Research institutions on a long-term basis so that more number of Indian 
scientists will get the opportunity to get acquainted with latest development in science and 
technologies on a regular basis, which will ultimately benefit the country. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the actions taken in this regard. In addition to the existing 
sphere of activities of the organization, the Committee are of the view that in view of the 
problems created by Climate Change and Green House effect and their impact on 
environment, DRDO may also branch out its research wing to focus on environment 
pollution so that the health hazards created by such eventualities can be curbed. 
Reply of the Government 
In this regard, it is humbly submitted that subject Climate Change, Green House 
effects and their impact on environment etc. are not mandated to DRDO. 
 
 
The Technology Cluster Laboratories: 
 
Recommendation No. 3: 
The Committee note with satisfaction that DRDO’s laboratories/establishments, 
regional centres, field stations etc. spread all over the country from Jodhpur to Tejpur and 
from Leh to Kochi. The Committee note with satisfaction that DRDO’s 
laboratories/establishments, regional centres, field stations etc. spread all over the country 
from Jodhpur to Tejpur and from Leh to Kochi. The Committee understand that there are 
seven Technology Clusters headed by Cluster DGs located all over the country: Naval 
Systems & Materials at Vishakhapatnam; Armaments & Combat Engineering Systems at 
Pune; Electronics & Communication Systems and Aeronautical Systems, both at 
Bengaluru; Missiles and Strategic Systems at Hyderabad; Microelectronic Devices & 
Computational Systems and Life Sciences, both at New Delhi. The Committee also 
understand that DRDO has touched every aspect of Defence Research and development 
of technology concerning the country’s critical defence needs though their technology 
cluster laboratories. However, they would like to urge the DRDO to focus more on new and 
emerging areas of technology applications such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Robotics 
for furthering their research-base and also exploring the possibility of AI’s application in 
various systems & sub-systems developed by them. They are also of the opinion that 
DRDO should establish their research laboratories in premier institutes of technologies 
such as the IITs and IIC, Bengaluru so that students having interest in defence & military 
technology can be motivated to undertake further research in the area. This, the 
Committee feel, will enable DRDO to tap young scientists at an early stage.. 
 Reply of the Government 
DRDO has instituted various DRDO Industry Academia- Centre of Excellence (DIA-
COE) in various IITs, IISC and Central Universities across the country for research 
engagement with academia & industries. 

14 
 
 
Budget and Expenditure 
Recommendation No. 4: 
 The Committee note that the Department of Defence R&D was allocated Rs 3.14 
Crore in 1961-62 out of the total budget allocation of Rs 313.00 Crore to Ministry of 
Defence, which was about one per cent of Defence Budget. Over the years, this allocation 
has enhanced and touched Rs 23263.89 Crore for the Financial Year 2023-24, which is 
5.38 percent of the total Defence Budget with a corresponding increase in the number of 
projects/ programmes. Presently, DRDO is spending approximately 36 per cent of its 
Annual Budget on the development of strategic systems required by the country and many 
strategic systems developed by DRDO have been inducted into Services. The Committee 
while looking at the budgetary provision made to the Department of Defence, R&D during 
the last two years, note that there has been a decrease in the Budget estimation and the 
Budget approved or allocated. In the year 2021-22, the projected amount was Rs. 23,460 
and the allocated amount was Rs. 20,457.44 crore which was Rs 3002.56 less than the 
projection. Later, at the 47 stage of Revised Estimate, the allocation was reduced to Rs 
18,337.44 crore. Likewise, in the year 2022-23, the projected amount was Rs. 22,990 
crore and the allocated amount stood at Rs. 21,330.20 crore which was Rs 1659.80 crore 
less than the projection. Since providing a budget to an organization is a conscientious 
exercise envisaging R&D activities in a year, making a cut at the last stage will have an 
adverse impact on the performance of the organization. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should undertake all out efforts and impress upon the Ministry 
of Finance to provide sufficient budgetary support as near as possible to the projections of 
DRDO. They also recommend that in future it should be ensured that no cuts are made in 
the Defence Budget pertaining to DRDO while allocating the finances. In respect of the 
Defence Expenditure of the Country comparing with Defence R&D Expenditure, the 
Committee learn that a trend is emerging which is registering a continuous decline in 
DRDO expenditure percentage-wise. To be precise, they would like to point out that the 
Defence R&D Expenditure as a percentage of Defence Expenditure was 6.59 per cent in 
the year 2010-11, which was reduced to 5.79 per cent in the year 2011-12. It was again 
reduced to 5.39 in the year 2012-13 and this percentage further declined to 5.34 percent in 
2013-14. The share had slightly improved to 6.6% in 2014 -15 but was again reduced to 
5.89% during 2015-16. In the year 2019-20, the percentage share enhanced and stood to 
6.23 per cent of the Defence Expenditure but after that, it had an incessant decline and in 
the last three financial years 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023 24, the share merely 5.89, 5.53 
and 5.38 per cent respectively. The Committee also learned from the data supplied to 
them that the exclusive Research and Development budget is Rs. 5,000 crore only, out of 
which 25% i.e. around Rs. 1300 crore is earmarked for the private sector. Hence, it is 
inferred without any doubt that the amount actually left for DRDO is under constraints. The 
Committee 48 observe that R&D is a prerequisite for a robust modern Defence mechanism 
and the Government has to take care of funds for in-house projects of DRDO along with 

15 
 
outsourcing defence R&D. The Committee, therefore recommend that adequate funds for 
R&D activities should be provided to DRDO for its ongoing and future projects. Drawing a 
comparative analysis of the budgetary spending on R&D in India with that of developed 
countries, the Committee take note that with the current percentage of funding, our country 
can only aspire to become atmanirbhar and protect ourselves. However, to have 
aspirations to become a global leader, this percentage will not be sufficient. Keeping this 
objective in the mind the Committee desire that R&D expenditure with respect to the 
percentage of defence budget should be increased in subsequent years so that DRDO can 
achieve and accomplish their well defined objectives and render technical deliverance 
through their ongoing projects. The Committee find that 8 to 10 per cent of the total DRDO 
budget is being spent on fundamental research. The Committee have reservations about 
the existing state of affairs regarding the utilization of fund for existing R&D activities in 
DRDO. The Committee, while noting that DPSUs and erstwhile Ordnance Factories 
approach DRDO for requisite upgrades, have in their Ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha), 
emphasized that Defence Public Sector Undertakings and ordnance factories should have 
their in-house R&D centers for such purposes. At the same time, the Committee expect 
from DRDO to extend all possible assistance to 16 DPSUs including newly formed DPSUs 
in setting up necessary infrastructure and technical know-how to strengthen their R&D 
Centres in advisory capacity. 49 The Committee understand that the mandate of DRDO is 
to develop cutting-edge technologies and to equip Services with internationally competitive 
systems and platforms through the transfer of such technologies. They also find that 
DRDO has proven its competence to produce state-of-the-art strategic and tactical military 
hardware and related technologies in diverse disciplines such as Aeronautics, Armaments, 
Combat Vehicles, Combat Engineering, Electronics, Missiles, Life Sciences, Materials and 
Naval Systems. Reckoning the fact that when the budgetary allocations are consistently 
going down, it would be difficult for DRDO to attain developmental goals, and to attain an 
edge over adversaries. The Committee, in this regard feel it onerous duty to recommend 
that budgetary grants of DRDO should be suitably enhanced so that India could become a 
global leader in the field of armament and new tech weapon systems and DRDO also be 
able to make first-of-its-kind products. Keeping this in mind the Committee can state with 
certitude that the time would not be far when India would become a major exporter of arms 
and ammunitions and would also indulge in technology export to our friendly 
nations/countries. 
Reply of the Government 
Details of projections and allocations of DRDO (including both Revenue and 
Capital Heads) at Budget Estimates (BE) stage from FY 2019-20 are as under: 
(₹ in Crore) 
Financial Year Projections (A) BE (B) Projection-BE 
(A-B) 
2019-20 23,704.63 19,021.02 4,683.61 
2020-21 24,040.82 19,327.35 4,713.47 

16 
 
2021-22 23,951.67 20,457.44 3,494.23 
2022-23 22,990.00 21,330.20 1,659.80 
2023-24 23,790.00 23,263.89 526.11 
2024-25 24,508.00 23,855.61 652.39 
Note:- BE figure for FY 2024-25 is subject to approval of the Parliament.  
It may be seen from the above that there is a gradual decrease in the deficit 
between the projections of DRDO and the allocations thereof during the last three 
financial years. In addition to this, it is also evident from the table that there is 
continuous increase in budgetary allocation to DRDO and during current financial year, 
BE 2024-25, an amount of ₹23,855.61 Crore has been allocated to DRDO i.e. an 
increase of ₹591.72 Crore over BE 2023-24. Further, the Committee may be apprised 
that Budgetary allocations to Defence Services, including DRDO, are made during the 
beginning of the FY based on projections made by the Services, expenditure pattern 
during previous years, absorption capacity, committed liabilities & pre-budget 
discussions held with MoF. The allocations and pace of expenditure are reviewed at 
regular intervals by FADS, Defence Secretary & Hon’ble RM and re-appropriation of 
funds is done if needed with/without consultation of MoF as per the rules on this subject. 
At RE stage, based on overall analysis of expenditure and future requirements, 
projections are made which are considered by MoF. If required, additional funds are 
sought in consultation with MoF at an appropriate time during the Financial Year. The 
resource allocations are made on need basis and duly considering the other priorities of 
the country. Further, it may be affirmed that rationalization of the allocation and 
expenditure is the prime objective of the Government which may get compromised if a 
certain percentage of Defence Budget is fixed for DRDO. It is also added that there is 
no shortage of funds for the Defence Forces, including DRDO, and as and when fund is 
required the same is met in consultation with Ministry of Finance either through seeking 
additional funds or through re-appropriation/reprioritization. Constant review of the 
budget is done throughout the year and suitable decisions are taken at an appropriate 
time. 
 
From the table mentioned in reply to para no. 4(i) above, it is evident that 
Budgetary allocation to DRDO at BE stage has been consistently increasing in absolute 
terms for the last five financial years and there is a gradual decrease in the deficit 
between projections made by DRDO and allocations made to DRDO. Further, it may be 
stated that this Ministry submits the requirements projected by Services to Ministry of 
Finance for favourable consideration and while allocating funds Ministry of Finance also 
analyses past absorption capacity of the Services and the pace of expenditure in the 
current Financial Year. In addition to this, based on the overall ceilings conveyed by 
MoF, Ministry of Defence allocates funds among the Services, including DRDO, based 
on Inter-Services priorities, committed liabilities, allocation/earmarking for critical 
projects etc. On the basis of additional requirement, funds are sought at 
Supplementary/RE stage. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it is ensured that 
urgent and critical capabilities are acquired. Further, it is added that DRDO supports all 

17 
 
industries (both Public and Private) on level playing field in all endeavours of industries 
towards Atmanirbhar Bharat and provides technologies, hand holding support, technical 
consultancy, test facilities, etc to them. The Committee may also be assured that all 
efforts are made to ensure optimum utilization of available resources without any 
compromise to developmental goals of DRDO. 
 
Human Resource Managemen 
Recommendation No. 5: 
 The Committee note that DRDO being a premier Defence R&D Organization follows 
a dynamic system of manpower management which is issued by way of authorized 
Regular Establishment (RE). The RE is reviewed every two years to meet the contingent 
requirements on account of workload and new projects undertaken by the laboratories. 
The Organization optimally utilizes manpower through dynamic manpower management 
system. In order to keep the Organization young and energetic and also to fill deficiencies 
created on account of retirement and superannuation, approximately 100 fresh scientists 
are recruited by Recruitment and Assessment Centre (RAC), DRDO every year as per 
functional requirements of the laboratories. The Committee are happy to 50 learn that this 
year under the aegis of Mission Mode Recruitment 2023 (MMR-23) more than 850 over 
2200 Group ‘A’ posts (Scientists) are under recruitment by RAC and vacancies of Group 
‘B’ & Group ‘C’ posts (Technical Cadre and Admin & Allied Cadres) are under recruitment 
by Centre For Personnel, Talent Management (CEPTAM), DRDO. The Committee 
recommend that the above recruitment process should be completed at the earliest but 
essentially within the prescribed time lines under intimation to the Committee. As technical 
manpower availability is backbone of any research institution specifically for an 
establishment like DRDO, top level management should continuously monitor the 
vacancies which needs to be filled, in near future. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
It is kindly submitted that selection process for around 3500 vacancies has been 
accomplished. 
 
Training of Personnel 
Recommendation No. 6: 
 The Committee also note that DRDO is continuously incorporating new training 
modules to enhance the organizational effectiveness by augmenting its resources and 
capabilities through training of personnel in R&D and Engineering skills, exposure to 
allied technologies and focus on strategic planning and leadership. DRDO ensures 

18 
 
training to all cadres of personnel through training institutes like Defence Institute of 
Advance Technology (DIAT), Pune (for technical courses); Information Technology and 
Management (ITM), Mussoorie (for techno-managerial programmes); and Training 
Institute, Jodhpur (for technical, administrative and allied cadres) so that they are 
professionally equipped to take further responsibilities. They have also been informed 
that every year some scientists are deputed to undergo ME/M.Tech & PhD at IITs, IISc 
Bengaluru and other reputed universities under the sponsorship programme. Targeted 
Training Centre (TTC) has been set up at Dr. Raja Ramanna Complex, Bengaluru 
which is used to plan and conduct Targeted Training for DRDO Scientists/Technologists 
to keep pace with the rapid advancement of technology and develop competence in 
state-of-the-art –cutting-edge technologies. 51 The Committee are of the considered 
view that since training helps in expanding the knowledge-base and acquaints oneself 
with the emerging trends in research and technology, DRDO should look into all 
available possibilities to tie up with various Universities, Institutions and Workplaces for 
its officers to undergo training and experience at regular intervals for expanding the 
knowledge-base and acquainting themselves with emerging and new technological 
knowhow. The Committee would like to be apprised of the tangible developments in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
DRDO deputes all cadres of personnel to various technical, techno-managerial 
and administrative trainings regularly. Every year new institutes/universities are 
identified for training & qualification upgradation of DRDO personnel [viz. IITs, for 
course on Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning (AI&ML); new IITs & NITs for M. 
Tech; new IIMs (IIM Amritsar & IIM Kashipur) for management trainings]. 
 
Working of DRDO 
Recommendation No. 7: 
 The Committee’s examination has revealed that DRDO undertakes various types 
of major projects. One of the types of such project is Mission Mode (MM) Project which 
include Medium Range Surface to Air Missile (MRSAM) system for Indian Air Force, 
LCA Mk-II, LRSAM, Quantum Communication for Metropolitan Cities (QMAN), Airborne 
Early Warning & Control System Mk – II (AEW&C Mk-II) for IAF and Advanced Light 
Weight Torpedo (ALWT). Besides MM Projects, there are Technology Demonstration 
(TD) Projects, encompass Active Electronically Scanned Array (AESA) Radar, New 
Generation Anti-Radiation Missile (NGARM), Supersonic Missile Assisted Release of 
Torpedo (SMART), Beam Combined Fiber Laser Source (BCFL) and Digital Fuel Flow 
Controller amongst the others. The Committee further note that another category of 
project, i.e. Science & Technology (S&T) Project, which is undertaken for basic or 
applied research activities i.e. Enhanced Blast Polymer Bonded Explosive Formulations, 
Pulsed Fiber Laser Sources, Double walled single crystal parts from advanced super 

19 
 
alloy, Advanced Warhead Technologies, Enhanced Efficiency of Thermoelectric 
Generator and Peltier Cooler (EETG) and Technology development for SiC Fiber 
(TDSiCF). Few more categories in regard to Infrastructure & Facilities (IF) 52 
Development Projects are National Open-Air Range (NOAR), Mission System 
Integration Rig (MSyIR), Advanced HILS facility, Multi Petaflops Computing System, 
Creation of Automotive and Weapon Systems Testing Center (AWTC) and 
Infrastructure for Testing of Expendable Turbo Propulsion System (IT-ET). User trials 
(UT) Projects are yet another category that has come to the notice of the Committee. 
Major projects in this category are development of 5.56 mm Joint Venture Protective 
Carbine, Modification of Six Aircraft (Su-30 MKI) for Astra, Quick Reaction Surface to 
Air Missile - (QRSAM-UT), Air Defence Fire Control Radar, ASTRA Mk – I and Multi 
Influence Ground Mines. The Committee also note that DRDO not only develop 
systems but also provides product support for its major systems and to efficiently 
support the same, it has Product Support (PS) Projects and the major projects in this 
category are Post Development Support of AEW&C System (PDSAS), Product Support 
for Arjun MBT, Upgraded Digital Flight Control Computer (DFCC) for LCA Mk-1A, 
Product Support & Product Upgrade for Akash Weapon System, Akash-Prime and Astra 
Product Support. The Committee earnestly feel that diversified projects that are 
undertaken by the DRDO have enabled India to achieve competitive technological and 
military edge vis-à-vis our immediate neighbours. The Committee appreciate the 
mammoth work undertaken in the field of development of critical and strategic systems 
by DRDO. While commending the role played by the Organisation in the last 65 years in 
the areas of scientific, technological and armament development, they desire that 
DRDO should be encouraged to further expand the existing research-base and venture 
into new areas of development keeping in view the country’s future military needs. They 
hope that Govt. will extend all out support to enable DRDO to withstand any kind of 
eventualities in future. 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO plan to expand its research activities in the areas of Quantum 
Technologies, Artificial intelligence, Cognitive Technologies, Smart materials, 
Asymmetric Technologies, Terahertz, Directed Energy Systems, High Power 
Electromagnets etc.DRDO established a network of DRDO Industry Academia-Centres 
of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) for collaborative directed research in developing critical and 
futuristic technologies for defence and security applications. So far 15 DIA-CoEs have 
been established at various IITs, IISc, Central and State Universities. 
 
 
Status of Ongoing Projects  
 
Recommendation No.8: 
 
 

20 
 
The Committee also note that DRDO currently has 328 ongoing projects 
(excluding strategic projects) amounting to approximately Rs.99,898 Cr (including User 
share) out of which 55 projects are Mission Mode, 197 Technology Demonstration (TD), 
34 are Infrastructure & Facilities (IP), 19 are Science & Technology (S&T), 20 Product 
Support (PS) and 3 User Trial (UT) projects. The Committee has every reason to 
believe that the category-wise details of the ongoing projects eloquently speak of the 
success story of the Organisation. The Committee further note that DRDO has already 
handed over to the users various systems such as High Strength Steel for ‘INS Vikrant’, 
Main Battle Tank (MBT) ‘Arjun’ Mk-1A’, Shakti : Electronic Warfare System, Light 
Combat Aircraft (LCA) ‘Tejas Mk – 1A’, Medium Range Surface-to-Air Missile (MRSAM) 
for IAF, Medium Range Surface-to-Air Missile (MRSAM) for Navy, Satellite guided 
Smart Anti Airfield Weapon (SAT-SAAW), Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile 
‘Astra’, Multi-Mode Hand Grenade (MMHG), Bund Blasting Device (BBD) Mk-II, Drone, 
Detect, Deter and Destroy (D4 System), Chaff Technology for Indian Navy, 46m Military 
Load Class (MLC-70) Modular Bridge, Fire Fighting Suit, Helmet and pressure breathing 
Mask and Indigenous Filters for P-75 Submarines. The Committee’s attention was also 
drawn towards major systems which were inducted/being inducted into Services. They 
include Akash Prime, 18Anti-Tank Guided Missile (NAG), Arjun Armoured Repair & 
Recovery Vehicle (Arjun ARRV), Armoured Engineer Reconnaissance Vehicle (AERV), 
Short Span Bridging System-10m, 120mm Tandem warhead system for anti tank 
application, 81 mm anti-thermal, anti-laser smoke grenade, Joint Venture Protective 
Carbine (JVPC), Light Machine Gun (7.62X51 mm - LMG), Trawl Assembly for T-72/T-
90 Tanks, Qualification and Certification of DMR249 and 54 DMR301 Grade Steels, 
Plates, Bulb Bars and Weld Consumables, Digital Radar Warning Receiver (Dhruti), 
Nayan, Software Defined Radio (SDR), High Data Rate HD-VLF-HF Receiver, Laser 
Ordnance Disposal System (LORDS – N), Chaff Technologies for Indian Air Force, 
Magazine Fire Fighting System, ARNAV Naval Wargaming and NBC Haversack Mk-II. 
The Committee are happy to note about the efforts undertaken by DRDO in establishing 
high technology infrastructure facilities. Most of these facilities have been established 
with the active participation of Indian Industries. These facilities have become National 
Assets and have also proved beneficial in accelerating subsequent developments 
undertaken by DRDO. The Committee appreciate that DRDO has made these Test 
Facilities available to the Industries, which would definitely result in future development 
of weaponry at a faster pace. The Committee appreciate the hard work put forth by 
DRDO in the development of armaments, critical and strategic systems, Extreme 
Weather clothing and equipment, food items for High Altitude Terrain and other 
innovations during its journey which started in the year 1958 with an objective to build 
up science-based capability towards making improvements in existing weapon systems 
including imported equipment. DRDO has come a long way since then and has 
developed many import substitution products besides innovating superior weapon 
systems for the forces. The Committee at this juncture can only recommend that DRDO 
should put in place the arrangements to tie up with a consortium of Industries for 
creating widespread infrastructure so that the systems created by the organization can 
become future-ready. The initiatives taken in this regard and the road map/timeline 
drawn to accomplish the same must be intimated to the 55 Committee at the earliest but 
definitely at the time of furnishing the Action Taken Notes. 
 
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
DRDO supports all industries (both Public and Private) on level playing field in all 
endeavours of industries towards Atmanirbhar Bharat. DRDO provides and will continue 
to support them by offering technologies, hand holding support, technical consultancy, 
test facilities etc. 
 
Participation with Academia and Industry  
Recommendation No. 9: 
 
The Committee are happy to note that DRDO has been exploring the knowledge 
and expertise that exist within the country in various academic institutions and research 
organizations by providing research grants for faculty driven projects through External 
Research & Intellectual Property Right (ER&IPR) and various Research Boards, 
namely, Aeronautic Research & Development Board (AR&DB), Armament Research 
Board (ARMREB), Life Science Research Board (LSRB), Naval Research Board (NRB) 
etc. The Committee have also come to learn that the objective of these grants has been 
to foster knowledge-based growth in science and advanced technologies, catalyze 
cross-fertilization of ideas and experience between DRDO and academic experts. The 
Committee note that during the last five years, DRDO has given impetus to 
collaboration with academia for DRDO requirement-driven research in the identified 
futuristic technology thrust areas. The Directed research is managed by the Directorate 
of Futuristic Technology Management (DFTM) and DRDO has established eight 
Advanced Technology Centers (ATCs) at the premier institutes for carrying out research 
in the niche technology areas related to defence & security. The ATCs conduct steers 
the basic & applied research to offer solutions for technological or engineering 
challenges to raise the technology readiness level. The Committee feel that DRDO’s 
research collaboration with 155 institutes and the present IPR portfolio speak eloquently 
of its own success stories. The Committee hope that this will surely help in making India 
self-reliant in real sense of the term. Here, the Committee would like to recommend the 
DRDO to further encourage and support Research and Development in private industry 
by 56 identifying systems and sub-systems to be developed by the private industries. 
They would also recommend to expand their outreach to include and associate with 
more and new upcoming industries by way of adopting inclusive approach. This, the 
Committee feel, will help achieve the goal of ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’. 
 
Reply of the Government 
DRDO conducted series of sessions on AnusandhanChintanShivir during May- 
July 2023. The sessions were attended by participants from Industry, Academia and 
Armed Forces. Subsequent to ChintanShivir event, 1295 development tasks 
identified to be pursued by academia were uploaded on DRDO website. 

22 
 
During Director Conclave in Jul 2023, Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) released the 
2nd list of 75 items with the objective of capitalizing the capabilities of Indian Industry for 
design, development of Defence system, in addition to the previous list of 108 
system/subsystem which will not be taken up for design and development by DRDO.  
In year 2023, 150 LAToTs were handed over to the Indian industries. Till date 
around 1800 LAToTs have been handed over to industries.  
During 2023-24, 140 Grant-in-Aid projects costing ₹139.184 Cr were sanctioned 
to 121 institutions across the country through ER & Research Boards. 113 patents 
were also filed during the financial year 2023-2024. 
113 Industry partners (25 Development cum Production Partners (DcPPs) and 
88 Production Agencies (PAs)) have been identified for the development and/or 
production of DRDO designed systems. 
Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) for 04 systems worth over ₹14,694 Cr has been 
accorded for induction during the year 2024 (till date). 
The Production value of DRDO developed systems, both inducted and approved 
for induction, today stands at over ₹5.1 Lakh Cr.  
Complementing and integrating the strong technological foundation of DRDO 
with solid geo-political foundation of Think-Tank institutions on strategic issues, DRDO 
has been organizing regular engagements with various reputed think-tank institutions. 
MoUs between DRDO and think-tanks such as CENJOWS, ISpA and USI is signed in 
year 2023. 
 
 
Ongoing Major Programmes/Projects/Systems 
Recommendation No.10: 
 The Committee note that the major Systems Undergoing User Evaluation 
include Quick Reaction Surface-to-Air Missile (QRSAM), Third Generation Helicopter 
Launch Anti-Tank Guided Missile (‘HeliNa’/Dhruvastra), Medium Range Surface – to - 
Air Missile (MRSAM) for IA, Advanced Towed Artillery Gun System (ATAGS), Pinaka 
Mk-I (Enhanced Range) Rocket System, 125mm Fin Stabilized Armour Piercing 
Discarding Sabot (FSAPDS), Multi Influence Ground Mine (MIGM), Advanced Light 
Weight Torpedo (ALWT),s Portable Diver Detection Sonar (PDDS), Air Independent 
Propulsion (AIP) System for Submarines, Air Defence Fire Control Radar (ADFCR), Air 
Defence Fire Control Radar (ADFCR) – Atulya, GaN Technology Development, Tele-
operated Dozer, Oxygenated Shelter and Extreme Cold Weather Clothing System 
(ECWCS). DRDO has also provided information on Major Systems Undergoing 
Developmental Trials, which include BrahMos, Stealth Wing Flying Testbed (SWiFT), 
Very Short Range Air Defence System (VSHORADS), Vertical Launch Short Range 
Surface to Air Missile (VL-SRSAM), Solid Fuel Ducted Ramjet (SFDR) Technology for 
Air Launched Tactical Missiles, Akash New Generation (Akash NG) and Man-Portable 
Anti-Tank Guided Missile (MPATGM). The Committee are of the opinion that DRDO 
being a premier development agency for conduct of all types of research, has the onus 

23 
 
of responsibility for creating credible deterrence capabilities for the Indian Armed Forces 
by developing technologically superior weapon systems. The Committee in this 57 
regard recommend that DRDO should leave no stone unturned and concentrate by 
focusing on augmenting the level of research and technological output to superior strata 
in order to be at par with the other developed countries. The Committee also desire that 
DRDO may explore the idea of having joint venture/collaboration with foreign partners to 
attain the capability to design and develop state-of-the-art future-centric weapon 
systems which can later be passed on to Indian Industry for manufacturing. 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Support to DPSUs:  DRDO through Directorate of Technology Development 
Fund is mandated to indigenize the defence technology requirements from DPSUs as 
one of the stakeholders through TDF scheme. Currently, TDF is pursuing 5 project 
requirements of indigenization from BDL. All DPSUs through DDP have been informed 
to submit more project requirements for indigenization of components, sub-assembly, 
sub-systems level for improving supply chain for bigger platforms and systems. 
(ii) Collaboration with foreign partners:  DRDO has entered into a Bilateral 
Innovation Agreement (BIA) with Department of Defence, Israel and TDF is engaging 
with DoD, Israel for identification of projects by engaging startups/industries for 
development of technologies for defence and dual use. It has also been proposed to 
enter into such bilateral innovation agreements with other friendly foreign nations. 
(iii) DTDF status:As on date, TDF has sanctioned 70 projects worth ₹290 Crore for 
indigenization of various components, LRUs and subassemblies against project 
requirements from various tri-services, DPSUs and DRDO Labs including ADA and 
futuristic requirements too. Currently, total 14 technologies and products have been 
developed successfully. TDF is constantly striving to make endeavours to support 
industries and mentoring and providing necessary technical handholding for realizing 
defence technologies. Seeing the potential of the scheme, Hon’ble RM has enhanced 
the project cost from INR 10 Crore to INR 50 Crore per project. 
 
Drone / Anti Drone Capabilities  
The Committee understand that drones are increasingly becoming very important 
in warfare, as is evidenced in the recent ongoing wars. The Committee have been given 
to understand that DRDO is developing drone based systems and anti-drone systems 
based on the requirements of User Agencies. DRDO has developed a comprehensive 
integrated Anti-Drone System which comprises of detection, identification and 
neutralization of a drone. After developing the technologies, the Committee can see that 
in the fitness of things and as a natural course of event that these are handed over to 
established Private industries as well as the budding ventures coming up under the new 
start ups umbrella under the Transfer of Technology (ToT) vertical. Three services (IA, 
IAF & IN) have already placed 23 orders on M/s BEL for DRDO developed technology. 
While developing the drone/anti drone capabilities the Committee would also 

24 
 
recommend that DRDO must look into all the pragmatic angles of developing 
“Interceptive Drone” and Sea Drone capability. The Committee have been informed that 
the older generation of drones were using Ni Cad and Silver Zinc batteries which were 
available in India. Notwithstanding the fact, the Committee find that owing to 
advancement in battery technology, Lithium Ion chemistry is now being used, which is 
not hitherto available in India. Although ISRO and DRDO are working on Lithium Ion 58 
59 Cell, yet the activity is still in nascent stage of development. The Committee have 
further been informed that ADE, DRDO has proposed to work with FFC on the 
development of Lithium Phosphate cells with its Battery Management System. They, 
therefore, recommend that DRDO should take up this as a mission mode project to 
develop the required battery cells so that the new generation of Drones and Anti-drones 
be developed in a time bound manner to cater to the needs of our military capabilities. 
 
Li-ion battery technology developed by DRDO is transferred to M/s HBL Power 
Systems, Hyderabad and M/s BEL, Pune. Batteries are being manufactured and 
supplied to DRDO by these industries for usage in underwater systems. 
Development of Li-ion battery based on Lithium Iron Phosphate cells with battery 
management system for Drone applications will be undertaken by DRDO through these 
industries. Development of these batteries for Drone applications is being processed 
under “Future Energy Storage Technology (FEST)” project proposal. 
 
Delay in the Projects / closed projects 
Recommendation No. 12: 
 
 The Committee note with concern that out of 55 projects, 23 were not completed 
within the stipulated time. Although, 571 projects worth Rs 34161.58 Cr have been 
successfully completed and closed during the last 10 years (01 Jan 2012 - Till date), 
with respect to projects which were partially successful or unsuccessful, 8 such projects 
worth Rs 770.31 Cr were stage closed during this period. On an earlier occasion also, 
the Committee observed that scores of projects with DRDO were plagued by time and 
cost overruns and several projects were short closed due to change in the General Staff 
Qualitative Requirements (GSQRs) by the user or due to technological obsolescence. In 
the instant case, the reasons put forth by DRDO for closure of projects are, 
unanticipated technical complexities, technological denials and price inflations in capital 
equipment to be sourced from foreign Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) and 
related feasibility issues etc. The Committee also note that project proposals are 
extensively reviewed by Peer Review Committees and Design Review Committees to 
identify possible risks and to draw risk mitigation plans accordingly. The Committee are 
surprised to find that despite the projects being reviewed by peer review and design 
review committees at various stages, certain projects have been stage closed due to 
the above mentioned risk factors. Keeping in view the above facts the Committee are of 

25 
 
the firm opinion and therefore in consonance recommend that all review mechanisms 
must be revisited by DRDO as they themselves may be the cause of delays in some 
cases. The Committee are also of the opinion that review mechanism should be 
inclusive of technical personnel (if not in place already) which can effectively guide the 
research projects towards their timely accomplishment. This can be staffed by senior 
scientists from different research/educational organisations who have experience and 
expertise in the relevant fields. Even the retired scientists from ISRO and Atomic Energy 
Commission etc. can also be associated with the review committees. The Committee 
also recommend that the reviews should have standard yardsticks so that when there is 
a deviation from it, corrective measures can be taken at the earliest and unnecessary 
delay/cost overrun can be avoided. 
 
Reply of the Government 
A heterogenous composition of technical experts drawn within DRDO, other scientific 
organizations, academia &industries are involved during Peer Review Committee, 
Preliminary Design Review, Detailed Design Review & Critical Design Review 
Committees. 
Time Estimation Committee: A composition of technical experts drawn within DRDO, 
other scientific organizations, academia & industries are involved. 
Senior Officers of User Services and Director General and senior scientists from DRDO 
are involved in the Apex Board, Executive Board and Project Monitoring & Review 
Committee. Status and milestones are reviewed in all the three tier monitoring 
committees. 
Self Reliance and Indigenisation  
Recommendation No.13: 
The Committee are happy to note that DRDO is contributing immensely in taking 
the country towards self-reliance and indigenization. The Committee have also been 
informed that DPSUs are one of the major Industry partners involved in the production 
of DRDO-designed and developed systems/platforms/equipment. Contracts for D&D 
projects are entered with DPSUs for the development of systems/platforms/equipment. 
Under the Development cum Production Partner (DcPP) policy for DRDO developed 
systems, industries including both public sector entities (DPSUs, erstwhile OFBs etc.) 
and private sector entities, as the case may be, are involved from the beginning of the 
development cycle, thus facilitating hand-holding throughout the development phase 
which in turn helps them in achieving the goal of self-reliance. The Committee 
appreciate the measures taken by DRDO for helping DPSUs and Ordnance Factories in 
achieving the goal of self-reliance i.e. Licensing 60 Agreement for Transfer of 
Technology (LATOT), Test Facility support to Industries, Technology Development 
Fund (TDF), Export Support etc. The Committee are happy to note that DRDO takes up 

26 
 
activities and projects for development of new technologies and systems based on the 
evolving threat perception and other inputs from the environment. However, the 
Committee are concerned to note that the country is still dependent on foreign countries 
with respect to military platforms. The Committee have been informed that with the 
current rate of indigenization, DRDO is hopeful that the country may achieve 80 to 90 
percent indigenization in the next 10 years. The Committee are of the considered view 
that long and continued dependence on imported weapon systems may act as a 
discouraging phenomenon to our renewed saga of ‘Make in India’ initiative. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that there should be greater professionalism in integrated 
defence capability planning, management of Research and Development and priority 
should be given to self-reliance, thereby nurturing the nation’s industrial capability in 
defence sector. 
Reply of the Government 
The planning in DRDO is managed through long term Roadmap which is 
reviewed on periodic basis for obsolescence and addition of new projects. 
 
Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme  
Recommendation No.14: 
 
The Committee learn that Government of India has set up the ‘Technology 
Development Fund (TDF)’ scheme under Make in India initiative to create an eco 
system for enhancing cutting edge technology capability by inculcating R&D culture in 
Industry for building indigenous state-of-the-art systems for defence applications. 
Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme aims for the development of defence 
and dual use technologies that are currently not available with the Indian defence 
industry, or have not been developed so far. The Committee have been informed that 
the funding is provided through provision of grants to public and private sector industry 
especially MSMEs & 61 Startups that may work in collaboration with the academia or 
research institutions to carry out innovation, research and development with a limit of Rs 
10 Crore per project. While appreciating the spectacular achievements of awarding 18 
projects under the TDF scheme, the Committee desire that DRDO should ensure that 
the funding so provided must focus on development of technologies that will form the 
components which, in turn, will be used to develop defence equipment/systems/sub-
systems/platforms. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As on date, TDF has sanctioned 70 projects worth ₹290 Crore for indigenization 
of various components, LRUs and subassemblies against project requirements from 
various triservices, DPSUs and DRDO Labs including ADA and futuristic requirements 

27 
 
too. Currently, total 14 technologies and products have been developed successfully. 
TDF is constantly striving to make endeavours to support industries and mentoring and 
monitoring and providing necessary technical handholding for realizing defence 
technologies.  Seeing the potential of the scheme, Hon’ble RM has enhanced the 
project cost from INR 10 Crore to INR 50 Crore per project. 
 
The Kalam Vision: Dare to Dream Scheme  
Recommendation No.15: 
The Committee note with appreciation the Kalam Vision: The Dare to Dream 
Scheme, which aim at creation of an ecosystem to foster innovation and technology 
development in Defence and Aerospace by engaging Start-ups and individual 
innovators and engage them to carry out R&D development which has good potential 
for future adoption for Indian defence and aerospace needs. The Committee have been 
informed that the core objectives of setting up the The Kalam Vision: Dare to Dream 
Scheme are to facilitate rapid development of new, indigenized, and innovative 
technologies from ideation to production for the Indian defence and aerospace sector, to 
meet needs for these sectors in shorter timelines and create a culture of engagement 
with individual innovators, innovative startups, to encourage co-creation for defence and 
aerospace sectors. The Committee feel that this also empowers a culture of technology 
co-creation and co-innovation within the defence and aerospace sectors. The 
Committee are of the view that this is certainly a step forward in achieving the prime 
objective of ‘Make in India’ initiative and furthering the goal of ‘Atmanirbhar ‘Bharat’. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Govt. should encourage and promote potential 
start-ups and prototypes coming for innovators where, they are sure that such ventures 
have utility and impact on the Indian defence and aerospace set up. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government has taken various steps to promote innovation for defence 
purpose. Two such initiatives are enumerated below:- 
 Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme:- Technology Development 
Fund Scheme is a program of MoD (Ministry of Defence) executed by DRDO 
under Make in India initiative. The Government has approved TDF Scheme 
to encourage industries especially MSMEs and Startups to design and 
develop various Defence technologies. A green propulsion system developed 
under TDF scheme was successfully demonstrated in orbit functionality on a 
payload launched by the PSLV C-58 mission on 01 February 2024. At 
present there are 39 ongoing projects under the scheme & 2 successfully 
completed for Indian Navy and Indian Air Force. 
 Dare to Dream Pan India Innovation contest:- Dare to Dream is a Pan 
India Innovation Contest to support start-ups &innovators to contribute in 
defence ecosystem. Through this contest, DRDO invites innovative ideas and 

28 
 
best ideas are selected and awarded. Three versions of Dare to Dream 
(D2D) Contest have already been successfully conducted. Dare to Dream 
(D2D) 4.0 is at present going on. 
Technology Demonstration (TD) projects 
Recommendation No. 16 
  The Committee note that during the last 03 years (since January, 2020), 122 TD 
Projects worth Rs.8946.39 Cr were sanctioned. During this period, 84 TD Projects worth 
Rs.2743.36 Cr, which were sanctioned in earlier years, were successfully completed. It 
is understood that post successful development, DRDO transfers the technology to 
industries by signing the Licensing Agreement for Transfer of Technology (LATOT). 
DRDO has entered into 1532 Licensing Agreement for Transfer of Technology (LATOT) 
with industries for mass production. Out of which, 106 LATOTs have been signed with 
DPSUs. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by DRDO in executing the 
Licensing Agreement for Transfer of Technology for mass production. They also 
appreciate DRDO for 106 LATOTs that have been signed only with DPSUs, which, they 
feel, will certainly empower the industries, albeit the DPSUs in enhancing production 
and galvanizing their efforts towards achieving greater self-reliance. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the updated status in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Till date, DRDO has entered into 1700 Licencing Agreement for Transfer of 
Technology (LATOT) with industries for mass production. Out of which, 122 LATOTs 
have been signed with DPSUs. 
Key recommendations of the Committee are as follows: 
 Bifurcation of the Post of Secretary DD(R&D) & Chairman DRDO 
 Creation of Defence Technology Council (DTC) 
 Apex DRDO Board consisting of CTO, CFO, CAO and CAFO 
 Reorganisation of Laboratories and their functions. 
 DRDO to focus on Fundamental Research and Futuristic and emerging 
technologies  
 Financial Framework to Encourage Risk taking in research  
 Digitization of DRDO 
 Making DRDO attractive to the Brightest and the Best Talent (New 
Recruitment Mechanisms)  
 Laboratory Partnerships with External ecosystem – Green, Amber & red 
zones (opening up Labs to Industries) 
 Evaluating projects and Scientists 
 Stimulating Critical Research in ‘Deep Tech’ Areas and ISR 
 Maximise Industry, MSME and Academia participation in Defence 
Technologies. 

29 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
-Nil- 

31 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/REPLIES AWAITED 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          NEW DELHI;                                               RADHA MOHAN SINGH, 
17 December, 2024                                                            Chairperson, 
26  Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Defence. 
 

32 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25)  
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 12th December, 2024 from 1500 hrs. to 
1515 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘53’, Samvidhan Sadan , New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
5 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
6 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
7 Ms. S. Jothimani 
8 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Shri Lumba Ram 
11 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
12 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
13 Shri Virendra Singh 
14 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
15 Com. Selvaraj V. 
16 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
17 Shri Naresh Bansal  
18 Shri N. Chandrasegharan 

33 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das  - Director   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Reports:- 
(i) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 
on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian 
Coast Guard, Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public 
Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence 
Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’; 
(ii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 
on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff and Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(iii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 
on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and 
Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’;  
(iv) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 
on ‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services–New 
DPSUs) and Defence Research and Development Organisation 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘A Review of the Working of the Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)’; and 
(vi) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-Seventh 
Report (17th Lok Sabha)  on the subject ‘A Review of Functioning of 
Zila Sainik Boards in the Country’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications.  
 
19 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
20 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
21 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

34 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament on a date convenient to 
him.  
5. ***Does not pertain to the Report*** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

35 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-SECOND 
REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (17TH LOK SABHA) ON THE 
SUBJECT ‘A REVIEW OF WORKING OF DEFENCE RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO)’ 
 
1.  Total number of Observations/Recommendations                                                       
16 
               
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(please see Chapter II): 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1,2,3,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16. 
Total : 16 
Percentage: 100% 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
Recommendation Para No. –Nil-                                           
Total : 0 
Percentage: 00 % 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee, which require reiteration and 
commented upon (please see Chapter IV):  
Recommendation Para No. –Nil-                                    
Total : 0 
Percentage: 00% 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies/replies awaited (please see Chapter V): 
Recommendation Para No. –Nil-                                    
Total : 0 
Percentage: 00 % 