i 
 
24 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on 
‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, 
Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Research 
and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 21)’] 
 
 
  
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2026 / Sravana 1948 (Saka) 
  


ii 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on 
‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, 
Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Research 
and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 21)’] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2026 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2026 / Sravana 1948 (Saka)  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)……………………....…. iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... vi 
  
 
CHAPTER  I Report…………………………………………………………….. 1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  20 
 by the Government 
   
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 57 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 58 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final  59 
  replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26) held      60 
on 04.08.2026.   
  
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on `General Defence Budget, 
Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates 
Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 21)’. 
  
63 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
*Smt. Darshana Singh, Dr. Santrupt Misra and Shri Parth Ajit Pawar have been nominated to the Standing Committee on 
Defence (2025-26) w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 5267 dated 04.06.2026 
@ Shri Pawan Khera nominated to the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26) w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 5724 
dated 24.07.2026 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes  7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
24 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
25 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
26 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
27 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
28 Smt. Darshana Singh* 
29 Dr. Santrupt Misra* 
30 Shri Parth Ajit Pawar* 
31 Shri Pawan Khera@ 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mallick    - Joint Secretary 
2.        Shri Amrish Kumar    - Director 
3. Smt. Neelam Bhave    - Under Secretary   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2026-27 on `General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, 
Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 21)’ 
2.  The Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 18th March, 2026. The Report contained 27 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in July,  2026. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 4th August, 2026. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
 04 August, 2026 Chairperson 
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence  

1 
 
REPORT 
  
CHAPTER – I 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border 
Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-
Servicemen and Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 
20 and 21)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16th  March, 
2026.  
  
2.        The Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 27 
Observations/ Recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No.             Subject 
General Defence Budget 
1 Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence 
2 Defence Budget 2026-27 
3 Utilization of Defence Budget 2025-26 
4 Modernisation budget for the Defence Services 
5 Modern warfare 
Border Roads Organisation 
6 Budgetary Allocation to BRO 
7 Employment generation to Local Labours 
8 Modern and Latest Technologies for Border Infrastructure Development 
Indian Coast Guard 
9 Budget 2026-27 
10 Strengthening Maritime Security 
Defence Estates Organisation 
11 Budgetary provision 
12 Excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and their merger with 
adjoining municipalities 
13 Civic and welfare  facilities  in the Cantonment Area 
14 ‘Bhoomi Raksha’ Module 
15  Safeguarding  Defence Lands from Encroachment 
16. Defence Land Litigations 
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen 
17 Budget 
18 Welfare of ESM 
19 Ex-Servicemen Employment & Welfare 
20 Huge pending Litigations of ECHS 

2 
 
Defence Research and Development Organisation 
21 Budget 2026-27 
22 Enhancement of Defence and R&D Budget 
23 Benchmarking of R&D Projects by DRDO 
24 Encourging Collaboration with Industry/Private Sector and Academia 
25 Critical and Latest Technology 
26 Women Empowerment in DRDO 
27 Grievance Redressal 
  
3.        The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 
all  Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on 16th July, 2026. Replies to these Observations/Recommendations have been 
examined and categorized as follows:- 
  
(i)        Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government (Chapter II): 
  
Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23, 
24,25,26 and 27  
  
 (Total - 27) 
  
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
(Chapter III): 
  
Para No.   -Nil- 
(Total -0) 
  
(iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration (Chapter IV): 
  
Para No. -Nil- 
(Total - 0) 
  
(iv)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
  
                        Para No.  -Nil- 
 (Total - 0) 
  
  

3 
 
4.        The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
of the Committee contained in Chapter I of the Report should be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case, not later than six months of the presentation 
of this Report.   
  
 5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations made in the Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 A. EMPLOYMENT GENERATION TO LOCAL LABOURS  
Recommendation No. 7 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
The Border Roads Organisation (BRO) plays an important role in developing 
infrastructure in remote border areas of India. Through its various projects, BRO 
deploys around 70,000 labourers, creating many job opportunities, especially for local 
people. It also supports local businesses by purchasing construction materials from 
nearby suppliers and contractors. By building and maintaining roads, bridges, tunnels, 
and airfields in difficult terrains, BRO improves connectivity in these regions. Better 
infrastructure not only makes travel and transportation easier but also supports local 
development, boosts market opportunities, and promotes tourism in these far-flung 
border areas.   
The Committee feel that need for the Government is to strengthen the role of the 
Border Roads Organisation in border infrastructure development in a more concerted 
manner, as its projects are not only improving strategic connectivity but also creating 
significant employment opportunities for local population. While around 70,000 labourer 
are currently engaged in various projects, continued emphasis on giving preference to 
local residents during recruitment ought to be encouraged. This policy should be 
institutionalized across all projects so that the population living in the remote border tail 
end regions are able to derive benefit of job opportunities and skill development. 
Greater participation of local suppliers/vendors and contractors in procurement of 
construction material should be promoted to enhance indirect 
 The Committee suggest the Ministry further to consider expanding investment in 
improving roads, bridges, tunnels, and airfields in remote border areas to improve all-
weather connectivity. Such infrastructure development will enhance ease of living, 
improve access to markets, and promote economic growth in these regions. Improved 
connectivity will also facilitate tourism development and faster movement of people and 
goods, thereby contributing to overall regional development. Strengthening 
infrastructure in border areas will not only support national security objectives but also 
ensure inclusive growth and better livelihood opportunities for the local population 
7. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 

4 
 
 
The BRO remains committed to the policy of giving preference for employment to 
local labourers during recruitment for infrastructural development works. In case 
sufficient workforce as per requirement for execution of works is not available in local 
areas then labourers from outside / other states are engaged. 
 
    Comments of the Committee 
 
8. The Committee are pleased to note from the Ministry reply that BRO  
remains committed to the existing policy of giving preference to local labourers 
for employment in BRO projects and engaging labourers from outside only when 
adequate local manpower is not available. However, the reply does not indicate 
the extent to which local employment has actually been generated through BRO 
projects, nor does it furnish any data regarding the number or proportion of local 
labourers engaged. Further, the Committee observe that no reply or comments 
have been  furnished by the Ministry on its earlier recommendation to 
institutionalize the policy of preferential employment for local residents across all 
projects, promote greater participation of local suppliers and contractors, and 
expand infrastructure investment in remote border areas. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation  in this regard and impress upon 
the Ministry to furnish the measures taken to institutionalize preference for local 
labour, the participation of local vendors and contractors in the projects  and the 
action taken to strengthen border infrastructure for promoting inclusive socio-
economic development in border regions.  The Committee may be informed about 
the same while furnishing Action Taken Statements. 
    
B. EXCISION OF CIVIL AREAS OF SELECT CANTONMENTS AND THEIR 
MERGER WITH ADJOINING MUNCIPALITIES  
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
The Committee, during examination of Demands for Grants for 2026-27, were 
informed that in order to move away from the Cantonment concept and bring uniformity 
in municipal laws governing civil areas of Cantonments and adjoining State Municipal 
areas, it was decided to consider excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and 

5 
 
merge them with adjoining municipalities. The Committee learnt that subsequently 
Cantonment-wise committees in respect of 36 Cantonments have been constituted by 
the Ministry of Defence to look into the details of proposed modalities in terms of 
transfer/retention of assets and liabilities, Cantonment Board employees, pensioners 
and other related issues. Also, notifications have been issued inviting 
objections/suggestions concerning de-notification or excision of civil areas as the case 
may be, in respect of 61 Cantonment Boards namely Ajmer, Babina, Deolali, Nasirabad, 
Clement Town, Dehradun, Fatehgarh, Mathura, Ramgarh & Shahjanpur. The views / 
comments from the State Governments are still awaited.   
The Committee understand that excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and 
their merger with adjoining municipalities is a complex process involving many 
stakeholders such as military authorities, employees of Cantonment Boards civilians, 
State Governments etc, In this regard, the Committee recommend that priority may be 
accorded to accomplish this task at the earliest so that challenges faced by civilians in 
Cantonment Boards are resolved to a large extent.   
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
MoD has shared broad modalities for excision of civil areas of Cantonments with 
the concerned State Governments for their views/comments. MoD has further 
constituted Cantonment-wise committees in respect of 38 Cantonments to look into the 
details of proposed modalities in terms of transfer/retention of assets and liabilities, 
Cantonment Board employees, pensioners and other issues for excision of civil areas of 
Cantonments and their merger with adjoining State Municipalities. Out of these, detailed 
proposals in respect of 37 Cantonments have already been sent to the respective State 
Governments for their concurrence. 
 Notifications have been issued inviting objections/suggestions concerning de-
notification or excision of civil areas as the case may be, in respect of 10 Cantonment 
Boards namely Ajmer, Babina, Deolali, Nasirabad, Clement Town, Dehardun, 
Fatehgarh, Mathura, Ramgarh & Shahjahanpur. The formal concurrence from the State 
Governments is still awaited.  
 The issues pertaining to excision are being addressed by Cantonment Boards 
through ongoing consultations with all stakeholders.  
Comments of the Committee 
  
11. The Committee appreciate the  action taken by the Ministry in 
constituting Cantonment-wise Committees, forwarding detailed proposals to the 
respective State Governments, and issuing notifications inviting 
objections/suggestions in respect of the identified Cantonment Boards. While 


6 
 
these steps indicate progress, the Committee however observe that the 
proposed policy of excision of civil areas of Cantonments and their merger with 
adjoining State Municipalities remains a long-pending issue affecting a large 
number of civilian residents. The Committee are of the view that prolonged 
pendency of this  critical reform defeats the very objective of ensuring uniform 
municipal governance and addressing the civic difficulties faced by residents of 
Cantonment areas. 
 Further, the Committee also note that the Ministry has not indicated any 
tentative timeline for completion of the consultation process with the State 
Governments or for implementation of the proposed excision. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry may  pursue the matter proactively with the 
concerned State Governments and other stakeholders so that the remaining 
procedural formalities are completed expeditiously. In this regard, a tentative 
time frame for completion of the excision process, along with the present status 
of proposals pending with the State Governments and the major issues causing 
delay may be worked out and furnished to the Committee. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in resolving this long-pending policy at 
the time of furnishing  Action Taken Statements.  
 
C. WELFARE OF  EX-SERVICEMEN 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 The Committee find that the Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) Secretariat is the apex 
body responsible for the welfare of war widows, disabled soldiers, Ex-Servicemen and 
their dependents. The Committee further observe that financial assistance is provided to 
States/UTs through KSB towards establishment expenses of Rajya Sainik Boards 
(RSBs) and Zila Sainik Boards (ZSBs). The funding pattern is 75:25 for special category 
States/UTs such as Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand, and 60:40 for other States/UTs, with the balance expenditure borne by the 
respective State Governments/UT Administrations. The Government of India also 
shares 50% of the cost for construction of Sainik Rest Houses (SRHs) from the Defence 
Services Estimates, while their maintenance is the responsibility of the States/UTs. The 
Committee also learn that KSB is assisted by 34 Rajya Sainik Boards and 434 Zila 
Sainik Boards functioning under the administrative control of the respective State 

7 
 
Governments/UT Administrations. During FY 2024–25, an amount of ₹179.84 crore (till 
31 March 2025) has been disbursed to the States as Central share for welfare related 
activities.  
The Committee applaud the role played by KSB, RSBs and ZSBs in 
implementing welfare measures for Ex-Servicemen and their dependents across the 
country. However, considering the increasing number of beneficiaries and the growing 
requirements for welfare support at the grassroots level, the Committee recommend 
that the Government may consider enhancing financial assistance and strengthening 
the functioning of RSBs and ZSBs, including support for infrastructure such as Sainik 
Rest Houses. The Committee are of the view that adequate and timely allocation of 
funds will further improve the delivery of welfare services and ensure better support to 
Ex-Servicemen, war widows and their families.  
  The Committee have also been apprised that Ministry undertakes review of 
various welfare schemes to enhance the grant amount and also launch new initiatives 
based on the feedback and inputs from Ex-Servicemen. The Committee desire that a 
comprehensive study may be taken by the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare in 
consultation with other stakeholders to increase avenues for welfare of 
children/wards/widows of Armed Forces Personnel such as exploring feasibility of 
increasing reservation for children/wards of Defence Personnel in Professional Colleges 
in the country. 
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
A number of welfare schemes are being implemented through the Kendriya 
Sainik Board in the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, Ministry of Defence for the 
benefit of the ex-servicemen. Further, the Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
and the Directorate General Resettlement also implement various welfare schemes for 
providing medical services and resettlement opportunities to ex-servicemen. 
  
 The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, Ministry of Defence, and Kendriya 
Sainik Board remain responsive to the welfare needs of the ex-servicemen community 
by holding regular interactions, consultations, and meetings with all stakeholders. These 
include outreach programmes, grievance redressal camps, and other forums for direct 
interaction with ex-servicemen across the country. Consultations are also undertaken 
with State/UT Governments through meetings of the Rajya Sainik Boards and the State 
Government Amalgamated Fund Management Committees, in which ex-servicemen 
representatives also participate. At the national level, events such as the Armed Forces 
Veterans Day and the National Conclave of Sainik Boards are organized to facilitate 
interaction and feedback amongst stakeholders. 
 The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare organized the National Conclave of 
Sainik Boards in September 2025. This received participation from the Kendriya Sainik 
Board, Directorate General Resettlement, the Ex-servicemen Contributory Health 

8 
 
Scheme, the Controller General of Defence Accounts, Service Headquarters, Record 
Offices, officials of Rajya Sainik Boards of all States/UTs, representatives of 
organizations such as National Legal Services Authority, the Ministry of Electronics & 
Information Technology, as well as members from the ex-servicemen community. These 
interactions and consultations provide a platform for deliberations on issues concerning 
ex-servicemen welfare and have contributed towards a better understanding of issues 
pertaining to welfare of ex-servicemen and their dependents, including widows and 
wards. 
 Some recent welfare initiatives/enhancements are as under: - 
(i) Financial assistance given to children/wards/widows of ex-servicemen 
through the Kendriya Sainik Board for children’s education, daughter’s/widow’s 
marriage and penury grants have been doubled from 1st November 2025. 
 
Type of Grant Financial Assistance 
prior to Nov 2025 (Rs) 
Financial Assistance 
prior to Nov 2025 (Rs) 
Penury Grant  4,000/- per month 8,000/- per month 
Marriage Grant 50,000/- 1,00,000/- 
Education Grant 1,000/- per month  
per child 
2,000/- per month  
per child 
 
(ii) States were advised to set-up Common Service Centres in Zila Sainik 
Board  premises to assist in providing digital services to ex-servicemen wanting to 
avail various Government Schemes. To support this initiative, the Directorate 
General Resettlement has started a scheme for training of ex-servicemen in 
becoming Village Level Entrepreneurs who can then set up these Common 
Service Centres. 
 
(iii) States/UTs have been requested to facilitate the provision of free legal 
services  to ex-servicemen and their dependents, including widows and 
children under the Veer Parivaar Sahayata Yojna, being implemented under the 
aegis of National, State and District Legal Services Authorities. As on 31 Mar 
2026, 438 Legal Services Clinics have been established at Rajya and Zila Sainik 
Boards with 1,123 Legal Aid workforce providing legal aid. Till 31 Mar 2026, 
2,366, Legal Aid awareness activities have been conducted and 14,929 
beneficiaries assisted under the Yojna.  
 
(iv) For the convenience of the ex-servicemen and their dependents, the 
Department has introduced policy provisions  enabling States to set-up 
Integrated Sainik Complexes in districts wherein the services of the Zila Sainik 
Board office, the CSD Canteens, Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 

9 
 
Polyclinics and Sainik Rest Houses are co-located in the same 
compound/building. Several States have started taking advantage of this scheme 
and have set up Integrated Sainik Complexes. 
  
 These regular interactions by the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare and the 
Kendriya Sainik Board with stake holders has enabled a responsive and evolving 
welfare environment for the ex-servicemen. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
14. The Committee note from the Ministry reply that  various welfare 
measures and initiatives  have been undertaken by the Department of Ex-
Servicemen Welfare for the benefit of Ex-servicemen and their dependents, 
including enhancement of financial assistance, strengthening of legal aid, 
establishment of Integrated Sainik Complexes and regular consultations with 
stakeholders. These initiatives are  indeed commendable and reflect the 
Ministry's commitment and continued efforts towards improving the welfare 
ecosystem for the ex-servicemen community. 
 However, the Committee observe that the Ministry has not specifically 
responded to the Committee's recommendation regarding undertaking a 
comprehensive study, in consultation with all stakeholders, to explore additional 
avenues for the welfare of children, wards and widows of Armed Forces 
personnel.  The Ministry’s reply is, therefore, silent on this important aspect of 
the recommendation. 
 The Committee, in this regard, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
desire that the Ministry may undertake the proposed comprehensive study in 
consultation with the Ministry of Education, State Governments, professional 
regulatory bodies and other concerned stakeholders to examine the feasibility of 
expanding educational opportunities, including enhancement of reservation and 
other suitable support measures for children/wards of Armed Forces personnel, 
particularly the feasibility of enhancing reservation for children/wards of Defence 
personnel in professional colleges across the country.  The Committee further 
desire that the progress in this regard, together with the action taken thereon 
and the Ministry's considered views may  be furnished to the Committee at the 
earliest. 
 

10 
 
D. HUGE  PENDING LITIGATIONS OF ECHS 
 
Recommendation   No. 20 
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 The Committee note that with respect to settlement of bills and ECHS facilities 
and coverage issues there are a large no. of litigations in Courts by ESW. The 
Committee observes that consultations with other stakeholder Ministries are still in 
progress, as many of them are also facing litigation on the issue. The Committee also 
note that such litigations arise when Government policies are alleged to have been 
contravened or require clarification.  Several individuals have also approached courts 
seeking changes in the existing provisions. The Committee have been apprised that the 
matter is under examination and that stakeholder Ministries are in the process of 
harmonizing their views. The Committee are of the firm opinion that recurring litigation 
and policy ambiguities necessitate a more coordinated, time-bound, and transparent 
institutional response.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should establish a 
structured inter-Ministerial coordination mechanism to expeditiously resolve policy 
inconsistencies, minimize avoidable litigation, and ensure uniform implementation 
across all Departments. Further, while acknowledging that the present database of ex-
servicemen is operational and functional, the Committee strongly urges the creation of a 
unified, centralized, and standardized digital platform integrating all State and District 
Sainik Boards under a single national software architecture, with mandatory registration 
protocols, real-time updating, and seamless interoperability, so as to ensure efficient 
delivery of benefits, improved employment outreach, enhanced transparency, and 
robust data-driven policy planning for the welfare of veterans across. 
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 Coordination Committee exist at the level of Department of Ex-Servicemen 
Welfare comprising of Secretary (ESW), Adjutant General, Chief of Personnel, Air 
Officer Incharge Administration, Director General Armed Forces Medical Services and 
Managing Director Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme. Last meeting held on 
22 Dec 2025. 
 

11 
 
 The data pertaining to operations of Ex-servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme was residing in physical servers. In line with Government Guidelines, it was 
decided to migrate the data to National Government Cloud in August 2025. National 
Government Cloud offers infrastructure and services like Compute, Storage, 
Kubernetes, Database and Network in a Secured Data Centre under the aegis of 
National Informatics Centre. It will result in seamless Ex-servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme services to our esteemed veterans and their dependents. The 
migration of Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme applications to National 
Government Cloud shall be completed after the mandatory cyber security audits. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
17. The Committee note the Ministry's reply regarding the existence of a 
Coordination Committee under the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare and 
the ongoing migration of the Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) 
data and applications to the National Government Cloud. The Committee also 
note that the last meeting of the Coordination Committee was held on 22 
December 2025 and that the migration process is subject to completion of 
mandatory cyber security audits. 
 However, the Committee observe that the Ministry has not specifically 
addressed the Committee's recommendation regarding the establishment of a 
structured and time-bound inter-Ministerial coordination mechanism for 
resolving policy inconsistencies and minimizing recurring litigation relating to 
ECHS facilities, settlement of bills and other welfare issues. The reply finds no 
mention about the measures proposed to ensure uniform implementation of 
policies across the concerned Ministries and Departments. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the Ministry to 
institutionalize a comprehensive inter-Ministerial coordination mechanism with 
clearly defined responsibilities and periodic review to facilitate expeditious 
resolution of policy issues and reduction of avoidable litigation. 
 Further, while the migration of ECHS applications to the National 
Government Cloud is a welcome initiative, the Committee would like to be 
apprised whether it will suitably address the need for developing a unified, 
centralized and standardized digital platform integrating all Rajya and Zila Sainik 

12 
 
Boards under a single national software architecture with mandatory 
registration, real-time updation and seamless interoperability. 
   The Committee, further desire that the Ministry may prepare a time-
bound roadmap for completion of the National Government Cloud migration, 
integration of stakeholders and operationalization of the unified platform. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
E. ENHANCEMENT OF DEFENCE AND R&D BUDGET  
 
Recommendation  No. 22 
18. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 The Committee note from the submission of the Defence Research and 
Development Organisation that while the overall R&D budget has been increasing, 
there is a need to further enhance the allocation as a percentage of the total Defence 
Budget to achieve the goal of Atmanirbhar Bharat and maintain technological 
competitiveness with other leading countries in the world. The Committee appreciate 
the special increase in the defence capital budget in the current year due to Operation 
Sindoor and acknowledges the commitment of the Government to strengthen defence 
R&D in the coming years.  
 The Committee, however, strongly recommend that the Government may 
progressively increase the Defence R&D budget over the next five years which is very 
crucial for enabling higher investments in R&D, especially in latest advanced and critical 
technologies for supporting the development of better designed, more efficient and 
advanced defence products. Adequate and sustained funding should be ensured to 
support indigenous development of advanced defence technologies, promote 
innovation, and reduce dependence on imports. The Committee further suggest that 
periodic review of R&D projects and budget utilization may be undertaken by DRDO to 
ensure that resources are efficiently deployed for strategic capability development and 
technological self-reliance.  
19. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
Periodic review of R&D projects and budget utilization are being carried out 
through various structured mechanisms to ensure that resources are efficiently 
deployed for National Defence capability development and technological self-reliance. 
  
 DRDO projects are monitored by a two/ three-tier monitoring mechanism i.e. 
Apex Board (AB) chaired by Secretary DDR&D and Chairman DRDO, Executive Board 
(EB) chaired by concerned cluster Director General of the Nodal Lab and Project 

13 
 
Monitoring & Review Committee (PMRC) chaired by Director of Nodal Lab. Mission 
Mode (MM) projects or projects taken under Chapter-IV of DAP approval are also being 
reviewed by Joint Project Monitoring Team (JPMT) which is chaired by Senior Armed 
Forces Officers. In addition, Users participate in review meetings like Quarterly 
Interaction Meetings (QIMs) and Biannual Reviews with Indian Army, Quarterly 
Progress Reviews (QPRs) with Indian Air Force, Annual Synergy meeting with Indian 
Navy and Apex level reviews by Chiefs, Vice Chiefs and Deputy Chiefs of the Services 
with Secretary DDR&D during the execution of the projects. New provisions have been 
introduced in 2025 for Review by Secretary DDR&D for AoN accorded projects by 
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC)/Defence Procurement Board (DPB)/Service 
Procurement Board (SPB) (for Indian Army (IA)/Indian Air Force (IAF)/Indian Navy (IN)). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
20. The Committee from the Ministry reply take note of  the  multi-tier 
monitoring mechanism put in place by DRDO for review of R&D projects budget 
utilization i.e. Apex Board (AB) chaired by Secretary DDR&D and Chairman 
DRDO, Executive Board (EB) chaired by concerned cluster Director General of the 
Nodal Lab and Project Monitoring & Review Committee (PMRC) chaired by 
Director of Nodal Lab. Mission Mode (MM) projects or projects taken under 
Chapter-IV of DAP approval are also being reviewed by Joint Project Monitoring 
Team (JPMT) which is chaired by Senior Armed Forces Officers.  However, the 
Committee is of the considered view that its effectiveness should be reflected in 
the timely completion of projects, proper utilization of funds, and prevention of 
cost overruns.  The Committee, desire that steps taken by DRDO for timely 
completion of projects, proper utilization of funds and prevention of cost 
overruns may be apprised at the time of submitting Action Taken Statements. 
F. BENCHMARKING AND R&D PROJECTS BY DRDO 
Recommendation  No. 23 
21. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 The Committee observe that currently there is no comprehensive benchmarking 
available to compare the defence systems developed domestically with global 
technologies. However, the Ministry has informed that a Committee has been 
constituted to assess and benchmark all the systems developed against international 
standards. It was assured by the Ministry that within the next three to six months, a 
detailed assessment will be completed, enabling a clearer understanding of India’s 

14 
 
technological standing in defence relative to global achievements and the value derived 
from the expenditure incurred. The Committee note that this exercise will provide 
valuable insights for future planning and resource allocation.  
  The Committee recommend that DRDO may identify clear performance 
indicators such as cost efficiency, technological maturity, target dates for completion, 
time taken for development/completion and operational effectiveness, and undertake an 
independent review of its major R&D projects against international standards. Further, 
the benchmarking exercise should be completed within the proposed timeline of three to 
six months through a detailed report, highlighting areas of strength, gaps in capability, 
and a roadmap for improving innovation, accountability, and effective utilization of public 
funds.  
In this regard the Committee urge the Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (DRDO) to establish a structured and transparent benchmarking 
framework to periodically compare its research and development outcomes with leading 
global Defence technologies, institutions and global leaders in the field.   
22. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
DRDO is formulating the Key Performance Indicators for DIA-CoEs to evaluate 
their performance. 
Projects are submitted by academia to DRDO through DIA-CoEs and based on 
the Figure of Merit of the deliverables, the project outcomes are compared with 
international standards. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
23. The Committee observes that the Ministry’s response does not  
adequately respond to the core recommendation of the Committee. The  reply 
given  is very brief, limited and not comprehensive whereas such 
recommendation deserve a detailed and indepth reply with appropriate facts, 
data and list of measures taken or being planned and the roadmap for achieving 
global technological competitiveness. The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation that DRDO should expeditiously finalize and notify clear, 
measurable Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) covering cost efficiency, 
technological maturity, target  dates, completion time, and operational 
effectiveness.   The Committee stress upon that a structured, transparent, and 
periodic benchmarking framework may be instituted by DRDO as  recommended  
earlier and Committee may be apprised  of the same at the time of Action Taken 

15 
 
Statement by  the Ministry.    
 
G. ENCOURGING COLLABORATION WITH INDUSTRY/PRIVATE SECTOR AND 
ACADEMIA 
Recommendation  No. 24 
24. The Committee had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that DRDO has various schemes for collaborating with 
academic institutes and providing skills in the youth in the field of Defence Research 
and Technology. These measures aim to prepare skilled human resources and 
strengthen India’s indigenous defence research and innovation ecosystem.   
  The Committee note that DRDO has implemented several key schemes to 
strengthen defence research and skill development. These include five Research 
Boards focusing on Aeronautics, Armaments, Life Sciences, Naval, and Electronics & 
Communication Systems. DRDO has also established Industry-Academia Centres of 
Excellence (DIA-CoEs) at premier institutes to promote collaboration between DRDO 
labs, academia, start-ups, and industry, thereby building a directed research ecosystem. 
To develop skilled youth for defence research, DRDO has introduced M.Tech programs 
in Defence Technologies in 40 universities under AICTE, elective subjects in Defence 
Technology in B.Tech courses, around 8,000 internships annually for B.Tech and 
M.Tech students, and PhD programs at the Defence Institute of Advanced Technology 
(DiAT) for research in Defence Technology. These initiatives aim to create a strong 
talent pool and promote innovation in defence technologies.  
   The Committee compliment DRDO for assisting the academic institutions in the 
fields of Defence Research and Technology and desire that feasibility of designing 
courses in Defence Research, Technology and Production Industry for inclusion in 
curriculum of B.Tech as well as senior secondary classes in collaboration with various 
Education Boards in the country be explored so that the scientific aspiration, 
temperament and aptitude required in this field is inculcated in the youth at an early 
level of education. The Committee recommend that efforts be strengthened to enhance 
collaboration with the private sector, foreign institutions, and academia for effective 
technology and knowledge transfer. The Committee further recommend the Ministry of 
Defence to promote collaborative development involving DRDO, private industry, 
startups, and academic institutions so that advanced propulsion, guidance, and 
materials technologies could be developed within the country.  The Committee may also 
be apprised of the details and status of all collaborations of DRDO with foreign 
institutions /countries. 
25. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 

16 
 
DRDO provides funding support to Indian Academia and R&D Centres for basic 
research where initial Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of the technology is between 
1-2. The outcome of such research may further be utilized for technology maturation. 
During 2025-26, a total of 135 Grant-in-Aid (GIA) projects costing Rs. 207 Crores have 
been sanctioned under the Grants-in-Aid schemes of DRDO including Deep 
Tech.  Further efforts are being put into streamlining the process across the Research 
Boards and Extramural Research (ER) Scheme along with formulation of uniform and 
efficient protocols. 
 
 DRDO was part of the team formed by AICTE for designing UG minor degree in 
Defence Technology and provided the required inputs. AICTE has released the course 
curriculum of the electives required for B. Tech with Minor degree in Defence 
Technology. 
 
 DRDO projects sanctioned to academia through DIA-CoEs are focusing on 
futuristic Research through academia and on successful completion of academic 
research its outcomes are translated to technology by engaging industry. Industry is 
engaged either through ToT or for technology enhancement as per the SoP of industry 
engagement enabled by DRDO.  
 
Some of the significant achievements are as follows: 
i. Process for 3 ToTs is initiated and required Memorandum’s are signed for 
the academia projects on Light Weight Bullet Resistant Jacket  
ii. 1 ToT for spectral beam  
Following are the details where industry is engaged as Co-PI: 
i. For Extreme Heat Protective Clothing (EHPC)  
ii. For Extreme Cold Weather Clothing (ECWC) Projects sanctioned to 
academia through DIA-CoE till date, has no foreign collaborations.  
 
 Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme is a unique mechanism to 
promote Public and Private Sector industries especially MSMEs and startups that may 
work in collaboration with the academia or research institutions to carry out innovation, 
research and development of defence and dual use technologies with strong 
handholding, mentorship and support of DRDO.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
26. The Committee appreciates that DRDO has sanctioned 135 Grant-in-Aid 
projects worth Rs. 207 Crores in 2025-26, has supported AICTE in designing the 
B.Tech Minor Degree in Defence Technology, and is engaging academia and  
industry through DRDO Industry Academia – Centres of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) 

17 
 
and Transfer of Technology (ToTs). However, the Committee observes that while 
the reply mentions engagement of industry as Co-Principal Investigator (Co-PI) 
in Edge High-Performance Compute (EHPC) and Extreme Cold Weather Clothing 
(ECWC) projects, it states that DIA-CoE projects till date have no foreign 
collaborations with ECWC projects. The Committee, desire that the Ministry  may 
furnish details and current status of DRDO collaborations with foreign 
institutions/countries in all  R&D projects, if any, as recommended earlier.  
 
H. WOMEN EMPOWERMENT IN DRDO 
Recommendation   No. 26 
27. The Committee had recommended as under: 
The Committee believe that increasing the representation/ participation of women 
in scientific and technical roles will strengthen the talent pool and contribute to 
innovation and diversity within the organisation. Nari Shakti is also the prime focus of 
Government of India which includes women empowerment as well as women led 
development.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence ought to take proactive 
steps to increase the participation of women employees and incentivizing women 
scientists in DRDO by creating a supportive and inclusive work environment. Special 
recruitment drives, incentives, fellowships, mentorship programmes, and flexible work 
policies may be introduced to encourage more women to pursue careers in defence 
research and advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence, space systems, and 
quantum technologies. In addition international training opportunities and better 
promotional avenues for women scientists should also be explored. Such measures will 
help attract and retain talented scientists, including women scientists & researchers, 
while ensuring that DRDO continues to build strong indigenous capabilities in critical 
defence technologies. 
28.  The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
DRDO is a premier Central Government Organisation, which mandates to 
provide cutting-edge technologies for country defence preparedness and being a central 
government organization, all the directives issued by the Government of India are being 
followed in DRDO. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
29. The Committee note that the Ministry reply is very brief and limited and 
does not cover comprehensively the details regarding the specific efforts made 

18 
 
and the policies framed on special recruitment drives, incentives, fellowships, 
mentorship programmes, flexible work policies for women, as well as providing 
international training opportunities and better promotional avenues for women 
scientists in DRDO. The Committee would like the Ministry/DRDO to furnish 
concrete and detailed information on the steps taken and the measures 
implemented in this regard  at the time of furnishing of Action Taken Statement 
by the Ministry. 
I. GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL  
Recommendation  No. 27 
 
30. The Committee had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that the Defence Research and Development Organisation 
provides equal opportunities to women employees and has a well-established grievance 
redressal mechanism in place. The Committee appreciates the role of Internal 
Complaints Committee (ICC), the Sexual Harassment Electronic Box (She-Box), and 
the appointment of Nodal Officers in each lab to ensure timely redressal of complaints 
under the POSH Act. The structured Grievance Redressal Committees at lab and 
headquarters levels, along with the Director of Personnel as Nodal Officer for citizen 
grievances through CPGRAMS, demonstrate a strong framework for addressing 
employee and citizen complaints efficiently. The Committee note that as on 01 January 
2025, out of 1,160 grievances received, 1,030 have been disposed of, reflecting an 
effective grievance management system.  
 The Committee recommend that the DRDO may continue to strengthen its 
gender sensitization programmes and further reduce the pending grievances to ensure 
timely and transparent redressal for all employees, especially women. It is also 
suggested that periodic reviews be conducted to assess the effectiveness of ICCs, 
grievance committees, and She-Box mechanisms, along with awareness campaigns to 
encourage women employees to report issues without hesitation. Enhanced monitoring 
and reporting systems should be institutionalized to maintain zero tolerance for 
harassment and promote a safe, inclusive, and empowering work environment across 
all DRDO laboratories and establishments. The Committee may be apprised of action 
taken for effective grievance redressal of women along with details in all DRDO Labs & 
Establishments. 
31. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
In order to strengthen the complaint mechanism, a Standard Operating 
Procedure on dealing with complaints under Prevention of Sexual Harassment (POSH) 
Act has been issued under the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (SHWW) 

19 
 
(PP) Act 2013 in DRDO. Every year, a two-day workshop is conducted for the 
Chairperson and Members of the Internal Committee of all labs. Poster/Slogan 
competition was conducted in the year 2025 by all labs and at the National Level entries 
were judged, and prizes & certificates have been awarded to the best entries. The 
awareness/sensitization programmes conducted by the labs were also centrally 
evaluated and the best three awareness programmes were awarded certificate of 
appreciation during the workshop. All ICs have undergone the iGOT module of 
Prevention of Sexual Harassment (POSH). The complaint from women employees 
whether contractual or regular are being expeditiously handled by the lab ICs and report 
submitted to the Disciplinary Authority within 90 days of action. Annual Reports from all 
labs are compiled and submitted to the Secretary, DDR&D and details are reflected in 
the Annual Report of the Department.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
32. The Committee note that the steps taken such as issuing SOPs, conducting 
workshops, awareness programmes and iGOT training are appreciative. The 
Ministry in their  reply have further apprised the Committee   that Annual Reports 
from all labs are compiled and submitted to the Secretary, DDR&D and details are 
reflected in the Annual Report of the Department.  The Committee, in this regard 
desire that all out efforts should be made to strengthen the complaint mechanism 
and strict adherence to SOP on dealing with complaints under POSH Act. 
 

20 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 2026-27: General Overview 
  
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note that the Defence Budget is categorised/grouped under four 
Demands for Grants viz. Demand No. 19 – Ministry of Defence (Civil), Demand No. 20– 
Defence Services (Revenue), Demand No. 21 – Capital Outlay on Defence Services 
and Demand No. 22 – Defence Pension. The requirements for the Civil expenditure of 
the Ministry of Defence Secretariat, Defence Accounts Department, Canteen Stores 
Department, Defence Estates Organisation, Coast Guard Organisation, Jammu & 
Kashmir Light Infantry (J&K LI), Border Roads Organization and Armed Forces Tribunal 
are provided for in Demand No. 19- MoD(Civil). The Defence Services Estimates (DSE) 
reflects the detailed estimates for the Defence Services and Organizations/Services 
covered under Grant Number 20 and 21 of the Ministry of Defence.   
2.  The Services and Organizations covered under DSE are Army (including 
National Cadet Corps, Director General Quality Assurance and Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme), Navy (including Joint Staff), Air Force, Defence Research 
and Development Organization (DRDO) and Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination 
&Services). Grant Number 20 caters to revenue expenditure which includes expenditure 
on pay & allowances, transportation, revenue stores (like ordnance stores, ration, petrol, 
oil and lubricants, spares, maintenance of various platforms / equipment etc), revenue 
works (which include maintenance of buildings, water and electricity charges, rents, 
rates and taxes, etc.) and other miscellaneous expenditure. Grant Number 21 caters to 
Capital expenditure which includes expenditure on land, construction works, plant and 
machinery, equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, Naval Vessels, Aircraft and Aero 
engines, Dockyards, etc.  
   
3.  Demand No. 22 provides for Pensionary charges (Service pension, gratuity, 
family pension, disability pension, commuted value of pension, leave encashment etc.) 
in respect of the retired Defence personnel (including Defence civilian employees) of the 
three Services viz. Army, Navy and Air Force and employees of erstwhile Ordnance 
Factories.   
 

21 
 
Defence Budget 2026-27 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
 The Committee note that the total allocated budget for the Ministry of Defence for 
Financial Year 2026-27 i.e. ₹ 7,84,678.28 crore which amounts to approx. 2% of GDP 
and   accounts for 14.67% of total Central Government expenditure (53.47 lakh crore).  
Therefore, the Ministry of Defence has been given the highest allocation   among the 
Ministries. This allocation is 15.19% higher than BE allocation of FY 2025-26 (6. 81 lakh 
crore) and 7.12% higher than RE allocation for FY 2026-27(7.32 lakh crore). Out of the 
total Defence expenditure, largest share of 74.53 percent, i.e. ₹ 5,84,785.45 crore has 
been allocated for Defence Services Estimates (Grant Number 20 and 21). An amount 
of ₹ 3,65,478.98 crore has been allocated to Defence Services Revenue (Grant Number 
20). The Capital Outlay on Defence Services (Grant number 21) has been allocated an 
amount of ₹ 2,19,306.47 crore i.e. 24.99% higher than previous year. Defence Pension 
(Grant Number 22) has secured 21.84 percent of the total Defence budget i.e. ₹ 
1,71,338.22 crore. Further, 3.64 percent (₹ 28,554.61 crore) of the total Defence budget 
has been allocated to the Ministry of Defence (Civil) (Grant Number 19). Out of the total 
outlay for the Ministry of Defence for BE 2026-27, a share of 29.44% goes to capital 
outlay and 17.24% for Revenue expenditure.  
 
 2. Committee also note from the Ministry’s submission that Defence Budget has 
increased at a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 10.41% from FY 2021-22 to 
FY 2026-27 which is greater than the inflation rate in each year. Also, growth of 
Defence Budget in 2026-27 adjusting inflation rate (Consumer Price Index) of 2.37 
percent tantamount to 0.83 percent, which shows a marked improvement when 
compared to this growth rate in fiscal year 2025-26.   
 3.  The Committee are happy to note that The Union Budget 2026–27, the first after 
the landmark success of Operation Sindoor, underscores the Government’s unwavering 
commitment to national security through modernisation, self-reliance, and innovation. 
By accelerating indigenous defence manufacturing, channeling strategic investments 
into research and infrastructure, and prioritising the welfare of veterans, this Budget lays 
the foundation for a stronger, more resilient India. It is not just a financial plan, it is a 
blueprint for safeguarding sovereignty and advancing the long-term vision of Viksit 
Bharat@2047.  
  
 4. During oral evidence the representatives of the Ministry of Defence has 
submitted that during the current financial year, the Ministry of Defence had utilized 50 
percent of the capital allocation allotted to the Defence Services within the second 
quarter itself, and as of the present date, the MOD has already utilized more than 80 
percent of this year’s funds. It is due to this improved utilization that we have received 
such a significant increase in the capital budget. Seventy-five percent of the 
modernization budget has been earmarked for domestic procurement, which is part of 

22 
 
our efforts towards indigenization and self-reliance. Since earmarking funds for 
domestic industries in the financial year 2020–21, there has been a sharp rise in 
defence industry production in the country. In the financial year 2024–25, annual 
defence production stood at ₹1.51 lakh crore, which is 18 percent higher compared to 
the previous financial year, i.e., 2023–24. Similarly, during 2024–25, defence exports 
rose to ₹23,682 crore, reflecting a 12 percent increase over defence exports in 2023–
24.  
  
 5. For ensuring appropriate allocations against the projected budget requirements 
in the financial year 2026–27, the Ministry of Defence has held consultations with the 
Ministry of Finance. This process was carried out in close coordination with the Defence 
Services and other organizations under the MOD. During these meetings, the concerns 
of the Ministry were presented to the Ministry of Finance in detail, supported by facts 
and figures, due considerations. It is precisely for this reason that the Ministry of 
Defence has received such a substantial increase in the defence budget this year. The 
Committee welcome the coordinated efforts of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of 
Finance.   The Committee hope and trust that the Ministry of Defence will continue this 
momentum of   improved pace of fund utilization, rise in indigenous defence industry 
production, increase in defence export will further accelerate in future years so that the 
Ministry of Defence will get their required allocation as per the projection. The 
Committee, noting the steady and competent growth of the Defence Budget in recent 
years, recommends that, if required, the Ministry of Defence be provided with additional 
allocations at the Revised Estimates stage. This measure will ensure that the combat 
preparedness of our Forces is consistently maintained at an optimum level. The 
Committee further emphasizes that such allocations must be accompanied by effective 
and judicious utilization of resources to maximize operational efficiency.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 With respect to the budget allocation, the Committee is apprised that this Ministry 
submits the requirements projected by the Services to Ministry of Finance for favourable 
consideration. While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption 
capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall 
resource envelope available and pressing demands from other Ministries, etc. Based on 
the overall ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates funds 
among the Services and Organisations under MoD taking into account inter-services 
priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities, etc. 
 
2. Moreover, the Committee is assured that this Ministry will optimally utilise the 
allocated funds, and if required, this Ministry will seek additional funds at RE/MA stage 
to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to 
operational preparedness of our Armed Forces. 
 

23 
 
3. Further, it is intimated that in FY 2025-26, the Services have incurred 
expenditure to the tune of Rs. 5,35,189.87 crore (as per March (Pre.)) against RE of Rs. 
5,36, 224.26 crore, which marks almost full utilisation (99.80% of the allocated budget). 
Out of this, utilisation against Capital Budget of the Defence Services is 100% with only 
Rs. 2 crore left to be booked out of total allocation of Rs. 1,86, 454.20 crore for the FY 
2025-26. 
 
 
Utilization of Defence Budget 2025-26 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
 After a detailed analysis of the budgetary documents furnished by the Ministry of 
Defence, the Committee observe that as per the revised estimates for the years 2023-
24 and 2024-25, the total Defence Budget allocation at RE stage was ₹6,23,888.94 
crore and ₹6,41,060.00 crore respectively, out of which 97.69% and 99.21% of the 
funds have been utilised, respectively. The Committee further note that out of the 
amount of ₹7,32,511.9 crore allocated for total Defence Budget at Revised Estimates 
2025-26 stage, the actual expenditure incurred upto December 2025 is ₹5,29,933.0 
crore i.e. approximately 72.34 percent. The Committee, in this context, desire that 
concrete and concerted efforts be taken by the Ministry of Defence to achieve complete 
utilization of funds for FY 2025-26 to avoid saving of funds after the end of current 
Financial Year.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As regards the fund utilization for FY 2025-26, it is intimated that an expenditure 
of Rs. 7,29,385.43 crore (as per March Pre.) has been incurred against the RE of Rs. 
7,32,511.76 crore, which marks 99.57% utilization of the allocated funds. Further, it is 
also assured that this Ministry will take all necessary steps to fully utilize the allocated 
funds during FY 2026-27. 
 
 
Modernization Budget for the Defence Services 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
 The Committee on examination of Demands for Grants for the year 202627, find 
that in comparison to the Budget Estimates 2025-26 and Revised Estimates 2025-26, 
there has been an increase of 17.24 Percent and 21.84 Percent, in Revenue and 
Capital budget allocation respectively, for the three Services. With regard to Revenue 
expenditure under Defence Services Estimates for the three Services, there has been 
an increase of 17.24 percent and 4.49percent, respectively, when compared to that of 

24 
 
BE and RE 2025-26. The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry during 
deliberations on DFG 2026-27 that there is adequate money available for the Capital 
budget for the Forces. However, the limiting factors are the ability to sign contracts 
quickly and thereafter ensuring timely delivery of supplies. Certain geopolitical factors 
have also contributed to the challenge of timely procurement of equipment/weapon 
systems for the Forces.   
  
2. The Committee also learn that as 75 percent of the modernisation budget has 
been earmarked for procurement from indigenous sources, so that foreign exchange 
risk does not play a major part in allocation of capital acquisition budget for the Forces. 
Keeping in view current geo-political scenario and the inflation trends the Committee 
opine the need for further greater budget allocation for modernization of Defence forces 
with a special impetus on capital expenditure.  
  
3. The Committee desire that all out efforts may be instituted/contemplated by the 
Ministry to overcome the challenges of timely award and fulfilment of contracts for 
procurement of equipment/weapon systems/platforms for the Forces ensuring complete 
utilization of modernisation budget . The Committee may be intimated about the steps 
taken in this regard and the out come thereof at the time of furnishing Action Taken 
Replies. The Committee also recommend that budget as per the projections made by 
the Forces may be provided at RE stage of the Financial Year 2026-27 based on their 
functional and other requirements so that the operational preparedness of the Forces 
remains in right track.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The Committee is apprised that Capital Acquisition budget has increased by 
24.35% (in BE 2026-27 vis-à-vis BE 2025-26), which is a significant jump and there was 
no shortfall in the allocation as Ministry of Finance allocated to the tune of 100% of the 
projected requirement under Capital Head. This Ministry also acknowledges 
Committee’s concerns regarding current geo-political scenario and the inflation trends, 
and if required, additional funds will be sought at Supplementary/RE/MA stage.  
 
 
Modern Warfare 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee are aware of the fact that the budget to be spent on 
modernization cannot be predicted to a large extent, and accordingly feel that it is 
crucial to have intensive study and knowledge of emerging trends in technology that will 
have an impact on war and the art of warfare. Such emerging sectors are robotics 
automation, advanced drone technology, Sixth generation (6G) fighter crafts, 
hypersonic missiles, velocity (which uses hypersonic drones, etc.) and intelligence 

25 
 
warfare (includes artificial intelligence, data analytics and machine learning) and 
quantum technology. The Committee appreciate the proactive efforts of the Ministry in 
analyzing, recognizing and adopting critical/latest emerging technologies of warfare and 
recommend that adequate budgetary provisions for Research and Development in this 
direction be made available to the Armed Forces. The Committee may be apprised of 
the latest status update and development in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  DRDO has also identified 8 deep technology areas like Artificial Intelligence, 
Cognitive Technology, Quantum Technology, Neuromorphic Computing, Military Cyber 
Technology, Advanced Materials and Compound Semiconductor. The research verticals 
of established DIA-CoEs have been mapped to these identified deep technology areas 
for taking up long term research programs. In addition to the above-mentioned Deep-
Tech areas, DRDO, through DIA-CoEs has identified research verticals focusing on 
emerging sector like Advanced Material, Hypersonic, Drones/UAVs, Directed Energy 
Laser Technology and AI. The complete list with thrust area is available on DRDO 
website (drdo.gov.in).  
 
2. DRDO labs are developing subsystems/systems for addressing the requirement 
of modern warfare technology, utilizing deep technology areas for modern warfare 
system and other emerging sector mentioned above. DIA-CoEs fund academia projects 
are focusing on the futuristic research on deep tech area and other emerging 
technologies. Research outcome of these projects will be utilized by DRDO labs to 
develop components/ subsystems/systems for modern warfare. 
 
3. Further, an additional grant/Corpus of Rs 500 Cr has been approved by Hon’ble 
RM to cater for Deep-tech and cutting edge projects as separate verticals under 
Technology Development Fund (TDF) scheme. The process of the selection and 
identification of Deep Tech projects has been initiated. Currently, a total of 08 Projects 
under Cutting-edge technologies as SUMITRA-Startup for Military Technology 
Research Acceleration and 08 Projects under Deep-tech Development as SIDDHI-
Special Initiatives for Defence Deep-tech & Higher Scientific Innovation has been 
identified and accorded AoN.  
4.  It is further mentioned that TDF Scheme has been supporting Deep Tech from its 
inception in 2016. A total of 13 Deep tech projects of worth Rs. 49.41 Cr has been 
sanctioned with the existing fund of TDF scheme. Also, the quantum of funding under the 
TDF scheme has been increased from Rs 10 Cr to Rs 50 Cr per project by Hon’ble RM. 
TDF Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has been amended accordingly to simplify 
the existing process to make it more effective and efficient to deal with high risk projects. 
More overall funding will be sought after current corpus finishes. The Projects Proposed 

26 
 
on critical and latest emerging technologies by the Armed Forces are being taken up 
through DIA CoEs and TDF Schemes.  
 
 
Border Roads Organisation : Budgetary Allocation to BRO 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
 The Committee found that during the previous years (2024-25 and 2025-26), a 
total allocation of Rs. 12,475.42 and Rs. 12,827.56 crores were made to BRO 
respectively. The Committee further note that for BE 2026-27, under Ministry of Defence 
(Civil), the total allocation to BRO is ₹13,388.13 crore; allocation under Revenue head is 
₹5,994 crore and Capital head is ₹7,394 crore. This allocation for BE 2026-27 to BRO is 
approximately 94 percent of the projected amount i.e. Rs. 13,388 crore. Further, the 
expenditure incurred by BRO in FY 2025-26 (upto December 2025) is ₹7146.50crore 
out of Rs. 12,827.56 crore allotted under RE 2025-26. The Committee feel that there is 
a need to enhance the BRO budget so that timely development and completion of BRO 
projects in high altitude areas, border areas and difficult terrains could be done which is 
also a strategic requirement.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Border Roads Organisation projected their requirement of Rs. 6275.00 crore 
in Revenue Section and Rs. 7146.50 crore (NET) in Capital Section for Revised 
Estimates 2025-26. Against this projection, the budget provisions of Rs. 5681.06 crore 
in Revenue Section and Rs. 7146.50 crore (NET) in Capital Section were allocated to 
Border Roads Organisations. Now, the budget provision for Budget Estimates 2026-27 
is Rs. 5994.13 crore under Revenue Section and Rs. 7394.00 crore (NET) under 
Capital Section against their projections of  Rs. 6846.00 crore in Revenue section and 
Rs. 7600.00 crore (NET) in Capital section. 
 
2.  The Committee is assured that fulfilment of the mandate given to Border Road 
Organisation is one of the priority areas of this Ministry and their critical requirements 
will not be compromised due to want of funds. Requirement of additional funds for BRO, 
for the current Financial Year, will be considered on the basis of their absorption 
capacity and pace of expenditure, and will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at 
Supplementary/RE stage. 
 

27 
 
 
Employment generation to Local Labours  
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
 The Border Roads Organisation (BRO) plays an important role in developing 
infrastructure in remote border areas of India. Through its various projects, BRO 
deploys around 70,000 labourers, creating many job opportunities, especially for local 
people. It also supports local businesses by purchasing construction materials from 
nearby suppliers and contractors. By building and maintaining roads, bridges, tunnels, 
and airfields in difficult terrains, BRO improves connectivity in these regions. Better 
infrastructure not only makes travel and transportation easier but also supports local 
development, boosts market opportunities, and promotes tourism in these far-flung 
border areas.  
  
2. The Committee feel that need for the Government is to strengthen the role of the 
Border Roads Organisation in border infrastructure development in a more concerted 
manner, as its projects are not only improving strategic connectivity but also creating 
significant employment opportunities for local population. While around 70,000 labourer 
are currently engaged in various projects, continued emphasis on giving preference to 
local residents during recruitment ought to be encouraged. This policy should be 
institutionalized across all projects so that the population living in the remote border tail 
end regions are able to derive benefit of job opportunities and skill development. 
Greater participation of local suppliers/vendors and contractors in procurement of 
construction material should be promoted to enhance indirect economic benefits to the 
local /rural population. 
  
3.  The Committee suggest the Ministry further to consider expanding investment in 
improving roads, bridges, tunnels, and airfields in remote border areas to improve all-
weather connectivity. Such infrastructure development will enhance ease of living, 
improve access to markets, and promote economic growth in these regions. Improved 
connectivity will also facilitate tourism development and faster movement of people and 
goods, thereby contributing to overall regional development. Strengthening 
infrastructure in border areas will not only support national security objectives but also 
ensure inclusive growth and better livelihood opportunities for the local population. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The BRO remains committed to the policy of giving preference for employment to 
local labourers during recruitment for infrastructural development works. In case 
sufficient workforce as per requirement for execution of works is not available in local 
areas then labourers from outside / other states are engaged. 
 
 

28 
 
 
Modern and Latest Technologies for Border Infrastructure Development 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
 The Committee are happy to note the efforts of the Border Roads Organisation in 
adopting modern technologies and innovative construction practices to accelerate the 
development of border infrastructure in high altitude and difficult terrains. The infusion of 
modern construction equipment such as excavators, rock drills, snow sweepers and 
field diagnostic vehicles, along with the adoption of precast technologies, has greatly 
helped in reducing construction time thereby improving efficiency during limited working 
seasons. The Committee recommend that latest technological interventions and 
innovations should be put to use in an organised manner so as to ensure completion of 
projects in a time bound manner.  
  
2. The Committee further note the use of advanced construction techniques such 
as controlled blasting, cut and fill methods, cement treated bases, geotextiles and 
modular bridges, which have enhanced the durability and quality of infrastructure in 
extreme climatic conditions. The Committee recommend that the Government should 
continue to strengthen research collaborations with premier institutions such as Indian 
Institutes of Technology and National Institutes of Technology to promote innovation in 
construction technologies and improve living and working conditions of personnel and 
labourers engaged in these projects. In addition, wider adoption of EPC contracts and 
improved departmental policies may be encouraged to further enhance the pace, quality 
and sustainability of border infrastructure development. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The BRO has already undertaken following technical innovations for 
construction of roads in difficult terrains: - 
 
(a) Induction of modern construction equipment i.e Excavators, Road 
Boomers, All terrain utility vehicle, Snow Sweepers, Field diagnostic vehicle etc.  
(b) Use of Steel Slag in road construction. 
(c) Use of Inter Locked Concrete Paved Blocks (ILCB). 
(d) Use of various additives/modifiers to enhance the properties of bitumen 
while working in extremely cold and high altitude areas. 
(e) Use of cut & fill technique to optimize hill cutting. 
(f) Use of controlled blast techniques to minimize damage and higher output.  
(g) Use of Cement Treated Sub Base (CTSB) /Cement Treated Base (CTB) in 
extreme cold climate. 
(h) Using Geotextile, Geo Cell, Geogrid, Geo-membrane and Geo-composite 
in soil stabilization and road construction. 

29 
 
(j) Construction of modular Bridges of Cl-70R load classification.  
(k) Use of White Topping as thin lean concrete for resurfacing of bituminous 
roads. 
(l) Adoption of precast technologies in high altitude area where limited 
working season there to utilize the non-working seasons.  
 
 In addition to above, BRO has adopted use of following e-technology in 
DPR preparation of Bridges and roads through consultants: - 
 
(a) GIS (Geographic Information system)/ digital DPR tools 
(Surveykshak) —Reformed DPR processes by adopting GIS software 
(Surveykshak) and digital mapping to improve accuracy and speed in 
planning.  
 
(b) CAD (Computer-Aided Design) - Used for preparing accurate 
digital models, detecting design faults, estimating quantities and improving 
overall design coordination. 
 
(c) GPS/DGPS (Digital Global Positioning System) and Total 
Station – Utilising for precise surveying, layout marking and maintaining 
the required accuracy in bridge geometry. 
 
(d) Drone mapping and geological surveys — BRO has moved to 
drone-based mapping for accurate alignment surveys and geological 
reconnaissance in mountainous border areas.  
 
(e) Remote inspection & SHM (Structural Health Monitoring) — 
BRO is exploring drone inspection and modern remote sensing for 
maintenance via LiDAR/thermal and sensor-based inspection systems for 
bridges. 
(f) AI based Tunnel Monitoring System – AI based Monitoring 
System using CCTV analytics, environmental sensors and SCADA-based 
controls for real time safety and operations. BRO is in the process of 
adopting new e-technology such as Recce & Survey Drone to provide a 
soft strata heat map of different sediment types, AI based system to 
develop as Digital Elevation Model of the areas to work out various Tunnel 
Alignment and construction of roads over Moraines/Permafrost Glaciated 
areas. 
  
Apart from introduction of innovative technologies/materials in construction of 
border infrastructure, various other measures to augment the departmental capability 
are execution of works through EPC contracts, execution contracts, and revisions of 
departmental policies. Various research projects with premiere institutes like IITs/NITs 

30 
 
are being undertaken to enhance the pace of construction, quality of works and to 
improve the living standards of the workmen. 
 
Indian Coast Guard : Budget 2026-27 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
 The Committee learn that the amount allocated under Capital and Revenue 
heads to Indian Coast Guard Organisation (ICG) in Budget Estimates (BE) 2026-27 is 
₹4392.00 crore and ₹4000.00 crore, respectively. The Committee note that the Capital 
allocation to Coast Guard in BE 2026-27 has seen an increase of approximately 7.8 
percent compared to allocation in BE 2025-26. The reason for this significant increase 
in allocation for Capital expenditure, as adduced by the Ministry of Defence, is large-
scale acquisition plan for Coast Guard comprising 2 Pollution Control Vehicles, 8 Fast-
Patrol Vessels, 12 New Generation Offshore Patrol Vessels, 6 Air Cushion Vehicles, 22 
interceptor boats, helicopters, etc. in the immediate future. The Committee appreciate 
that significant financial provision, double the Capital allocation of BE 2022-23, has 
been made in this budget for capital budget for Coast Guard which will be a good step 
further in the direction of strengthening our maritime and coastal security. The 
Committee desire that details of this capital acquisition i.e. cost, timeframe for delivery 
and induction in Coast Guard, indigenous or foreign sources/vendors etc. may be 
intimated within three months of presentation of this Report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The details of capital acquisition contracts of Indian Coast Guard (ICG) are: 
 
Status of projects at contract stage 
 
Ser Project Contract 
Cost (₹ in 
Cr.) 
Delivery timeline Name of 
Contractor 
1. 08 Fast Petrol 
Vessel (FPV) 
473.47 05 vessels delivered. 
Subsequent vessels in 
03 months interval 
 
M/s Goa 
Shipyard Limited, 
Goa 
2. 02 Pollution 
Control Vessel  
(PCV) 
582.95 01 PCV delivered. 
2nd PCV – Oct 2026. 
3. 06 Next 
Generation 
Offshore Patrol 
Vessel (NGOPV) 
1614.89 1 st NGOPV – Jul 2027. 
Subsequent vessels in 
05 months interval. 
M/s Mazgaon 
Dock 
Shipbuilders  
Limited, Mumbai 
 

31 
 
4. 01 Training Ship 
(TS) 
310.94 Mar 2027. 
5. 14 Fast Patrol 
Vessel 
(FPV) 
1070.47 1 st ship- Sep 2026. 
Subsequent vessels in 
03 months interval. 
6. 06 Air Cushion 
Vehicle   (ACV) 
387.44 1 st ACV – end 
Jun 2026. 
Subsequent ACVs in 
03 months interval. 
M/s Chowgule &  
Company Private 
Limited,  
 
 7. 09 Advance Light 
Helicopter (ALH) 
MK-III 
4079.78 04 ALH delivered. 
05 ALH – Sep 2026. 
M/s Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited, 
Bangalore 
8. 02 Dornier 458.87 02 aircraft delivered M/s Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited, Kanpur 9. 08 Dornier 2312.00 04 aircraft – 2028 
04 aircraft - 2029 
10. 06 Advance Light 
Helicopter (ALH) 
MK-III 
2901.00 2029 M/s Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited, 
Bangalore 
  
 
Strengthening Maritime Security  
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee note that new and evolving threats such as cyber warfare, 
drones and Norco-terrorism are posing significant challenges to maritime security. The 
Committee appreciate the efforts of the Indian Coast Guard to enhance cyber resilience 
through the implementation of Project Digital Coast Guard and the use of advanced 
surveillance technologies. The Committee further note the intelligence-based anti-
narcotics operations being conducted in coordination with agencies such as the 
Narcotics Control Bureau and the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, along with 
continuous maritime surveillance through ships, aircraft and coastal surveillance 
systems. These measures have contributed in strengthening monitoring and 
interception capabilities in vulnerable maritime areas.  
  
2.  The Committee recommend the Government to further strengthen technological 
capabilities and inter-agency coordination to effectively address emerging threats in the 
maritime domain. Greater investment in unmanned aerial systems, anti-drone 
technologies and advanced cyber infrastructure, AI technologies may be considered to 
enhance persistent surveillance and rapid response capabilities. The Committee also 

32 
 
suggest expanding training, intelligence sharing and joint operations among maritime 
and security agencies and friendly nations so as to ensure timely detection, deterrence 
and neutralisation of threats such as narco-terrorism and hostile drone activities in 
India’s maritime zones. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
In order to further strengthen technological capabilities and inter-agency 
coordination to effectively address emerging threats in the maritime domain, the 
following measures have been taken by Indian Coast Guard (ICG): 
 
(a) Unmanned aerial systems, anti-drone technologies and advanced cyber 
infrastructure, AI technologies, etc. 
(i) Inducted 10 ‘Bhramer’ quadcopter drones and deployed at strategic coastal 
locations and onboard ICG ships. 
(ii) The case for capital procurement of 10 Mobile Anti Drone System for ICG shore 
stations is in progress.  
(iii) To enhance surveillance capability, ICG has established the Coastal Security 
Network which comprises of 46 Radar stations under Phase-I that are actively being 
exploited and 38 Radar stations under Phase – II that are presently at implementation 
stage.  
 (iv) Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) Challenge for ‘Development of 
Compact Drone for Operations at Sea Boarding & Spill Response Management’ - 
Milestone 5 achieved. 
 
(v) A Comprehensive Cyber Crisis Management Plan (CCMP) has been formulated 
to establish a structured and framework for preparing, responding to, and recovering 
from major cyber incidents such as data breaches and other disruptions to information 
systems. The plan delineates clear procedures for risk assessment, preventive actions, 
detection, containment, response, recovery and post incident review to ensure minimal 
operational impact and timely restoration of services. 
 
(vi) Artificial Intelligence (AI) Roadmap for Indian Coast Guard has been formulated 
for implementation framework that defines institutionalization of Artificial Intelligence 
and machine learning across various domains. 
 
(b) Training Expansion 
 
ICG has trained 2462 State/ Union Territories Coastal Police personnel all over India 
since 2009. Police personnel are trained at Coast Guard Training Centre at Kochi and 
District Headquarters. Additionally, ICG instructors are deputed to National Academy of 

33 
 
Coastal Policing, Gujarat for training Police personnel.  Further, Joint Coastal Patrol 
(JCP) with Coastal Police personnel was institutionalized in 2020 and so far 11,370 
State/ UT Coastal Police personnel have been trained in these JCPs. The same is 
being continued towards enhancing coordination. 
 
 (c) Intelligence Sharing 
An average of 400 Lead Intelligence Meetings are being conducted by ICG every year 
at Coast Guard District Headquarters and Station levels. 
(d) Joint Operations among Maritime Security Agencies and Friendly Nations 
(i) Since 2009, ICG has conducted 669 Coastal Security Operations and 285 
Coastal Security Exercises. The same is being continued with further refinement based 
on threat matrix. 
 
(ii) Since inception, ICG, in joint operations with various agencies have seized 
13,704.80 kilogram of narcotics with approximate market value of ₹55,314.20 Crore and 
525188 kilogram contrabands with approximate market value of ₹296 Crore. 
(iii) This data includes seizure of 166.977 kilograms of narcotics with approximate 
market value of ₹1174 Crore and 45752 kilogram contrabands with approximate market 
value of ₹296 Crore, since January 2026. 
 
 
Defence Estates Organisation : Budgetary Provision 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
 The Committee learnt that for Directorate General Defence Estates (DGDE), 
under Budget Estimates 2026-27, ₹896.16 crore and ₹ 35.41crore have been allocated 
under Revenue and Capital Head, respectively. The Committee find that the Revenue 
Budget Estimate of the Defence Estate Organisation has increased from ₹654.45 crore 
in 2025–26 to ₹896.16 crore in 2026–27, indicating higher funds for regular 
administrative and operational expenses. The Capital Budget Estimate has also 
increased slightly from ₹32.34 crore to ₹35.41 crore, reflecting a small rise in allocation 
for capital works and developmental activities. Overall, the budget for FY 2026–27 
shows a significant increase in revenue expenditure and a modest increase in capital 
expenditure for the Defence Estates Organisation.  
  
2.  It also learnt that the Ministry of Defence (MoD) provides financial assistance to 
Cantonment Boards in the form of ordinary Grant-in-Aid to balance their budget. The 
Committee find that for BE 2025-26, the total Grant-in-Aid to the Cantonments amounts 
to ₹412.626 crore compared to amount of Rs. 638.790 crore provided in BE 2026-27.  
In this regard, the Committee recommend that if required, additional funds 

34 
 
commensurate with pace of expenditure and prioritization of critical works should be 
allocated to the Cantonments at Revised Estimates stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This is factual information and the Committee may be assured that the request of 
additional funds for Directorate General Defence Estates (DGDE) will be considered on 
the basis of their absorption capacity and pace of expenditure, and will be 
forwarded/recommended to Ministry of Finance for consideration at RE 2026-
27/Supplementary stage. The Committee is assured that various welfare initiatives 
taken by Cantonment Boards in their areas will not be hampered for want of funds. 
 
Excision  of civil areas of select Cantonments and their merger with adjoining 
municipalities  
Recommendation No. 12 
 
The Committee, during examination of Demands for Grants for 2026-27, were 
informed that in order to move away from the Cantonment concept and bring uniformity 
in municipal laws governing civil areas of Cantonments and adjoining State Municipal 
areas, it was decided to consider excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and 
merge them with adjoining municipalities. The Committee learnt that subsequently 
Cantonment-wise committees in respect of 36 Cantonments have been constituted by 
the Ministry of Defence to look into the details of proposed modalities in terms of 
transfer/retention of assets and liabilities, Cantonment Board employees, pensioners 
and other related issues. Also, notifications have been issued inviting 
objections/suggestions concerning de-notification or excision of civil areas as the case 
may be, in respect of 61 Cantonment Boards namely Ajmer, Babina, Deolali, Nasirabad, 
Clement Town, Dehradun, Fatehgarh, Mathura, Ramgarh & Shahjanpur. The views / 
comments from the State Governments are still awaited.   
The Committee understand that excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and their 
merger with adjoining municipalities is a complex process involving many stakeholders 
such as military authorities, employees of Cantonment Boards civilians, State 
Governments etc, In this regard, the Committee recommend that priority may be 
accorded to accomplish this task at the earliest so that challenges faced by civilians in 
Cantonment Boards are resolved to a large extent.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MoD has shared broad modalities for excision of civil areas of Cantonments with 
the concerned State Governments for their views/comments. MoD has further 
constituted Cantonment-wise committees in respect of 38 Cantonments to look into the 
details of proposed modalities in terms of transfer/retention of assets and liabilities, 


35 
 
Cantonment Board employees, pensioners and other issues for excision of civil areas of 
Cantonments and their merger with adjoining State Municipalities. Out of these, detailed 
proposals in respect of 37 Cantonments have already been sent to the respective State 
Governments for their concurrence. 
2. Notifications have been issued inviting objections/suggestions concerning de-
notification or excision of civil areas as the case may be, in respect of 10 Cantonment 
Boards namely Ajmer, Babina, Deolali, Nasirabad, Clement Town, Dehardun, 
Fatehgarh, Mathura, Ramgarh & Shahjahanpur. The formal concurrence from the State 
Governments is still awaited.  
3. The issues pertaining to excision are being addressed by Cantonment Boards 
through ongoing consultations with all stakeholders.  
 
Civic and welfare facilities in the Cantonment Areas  
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
 The Committee observe that Cantonment Boards receive financial support from 
the Central Government mainly through three types of grants, namely Ordinary Grant-
in-Aid, Grant for Creation of Capital Assets, and Grant under the Swachhta Action Plan. 
In addition, based on the recommendations of the Fifteenth Finance Commission, 
Cantonment Boards (except those in Union Territories) also receive local body grants 
through the respective State Governments. These funds are mainly utilized for essential 
civic services such as sanitation, water supply, public health, primary education and 
maintenance of infrastructure, which are mandatory functions under the Cantonments 
Act, 2006. While the present allocations are generally sufficient to meet these essential 
services, the Boards also have several discretionary functions such as development 
works, parks, community facilities and other public utilities which require additional 
financial resources. Therefore, Cantonment Boards prioritize mandatory services and 
undertake other development activities depending on the availability of funds.  
 
2. The Committee learnt that the main duties and discretionary functions of the 
Cantonment Boards include Sanitation, Water supply, Education, Health facilities, Birth 
and Death registration, regulation of building construction etc. The Committee, in this 
context, recommend that regular monitoring of quality of welfare and civic amenities 
being provided in the Cantonment areas in the country be taken up by the Ministry and 
shortcomings, if any, may urgently be addressed.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee has observed that Cantonment Boards receive financial support 
through various grants which are primarily utilized for essential civic services. However, 

36 
 
additional financial resources are required for discretionary functions such as 
development works, parks, and community facilities. Cantonment Boards are also 
receiving financial assistance from the Central Government through Ordinary Grant-in-
Aid, Grants for Creation of Capital Assets and Swachhta Action Plan. 
 
2. Further, in pursuance of the recommendations of the Fifteenth Finance 
Commission, Cantonment Boards (excluding those in Union Territories) are receiving 
grants through the respective State Governments. 
 
3. These funds are primarily utilized for discharging mandatory functions under the 
Cantonments Act, 2006, including sanitation, water supply, public health, primary 
education, and maintenance of civic infrastructure. 
 
4.  While the existing allocations are broadly adequate to provide essential services, 
it is acknowledged that discretionary functions such as development works, parks, and 
community facilities require additional financial resources. In this regard, efforts are 
being made to: prioritize need-based development works, optimize internal revenue 
generation, and explore additional funding support through appropriate channels like 
CSR funds. 
5. With regard to the recommendation of the Committee regarding regular 
monitoring of the quality of welfare and civic amenities in Cantonment areas be 
undertaken by the Ministry and shortcomings, if any, be urgently addressed, it is stated 
that the Ministry/DGDE has an established adequate mechanism for periodic monitoring 
of the functioning of Cantonment Boards through Annual inspections, regular review 
meetings, and analysis of reports received from field formations. 
6. Continuous efforts are being made to ensure that the quality of civic and welfare 
services in Cantonment areas is maintained at the desired standards and any 
shortcomings are addressed promptly. It is further stated that the audit of Defence 
Estates and Cantonment Boards is conducted through a statutory and internal frame 
work designed to ensure transparency, financial discipline and effective governance. 
External audit is conducted by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India, and 
reports are examined by Parliamentary Committees including the Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC). Internal audit is carried out by the Defence Accounts Department 
(DAD), covering financial compliance and management. Special and performance 
audits are conducted as required, and corrective action is taken by the Ministry of 
Defence and DGDE. The Cantonment Board Accounts Rules, 2020 have strengthened 
accounting practices and transparency. 
 

37 
 
7. Further, Cantonment Boards have implemented the e-Chhawani portal across all 
61 Boards, providing 24x7 online citizen services. The portal offers a wide range of 
services including licensing, grievance redressal, certificates, tax payments, building 
approvals, online facilities for school through Suvidya portal and property-related 
services, with several services fully automated. Digital processes have enhanced 
transparency, reduced discretion, ensured traceability of transactions, and improved 
service delivery. Doorstep assistance is also provided to facilitate access for citizens, 
particularly senior citizens. 
8. Annual Administration Reports of Cantonment Boards are laid before Parliament 
as per statutory provisions. 
 
 
‘Bhoomi Raksha’ Module  
Recommendation No. 14 
 
 The Committee learnt that ‘Bhoomi Raksha’, an IT Module, has been launched 
on 16.12.2022 wherein eviction proceedings under the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 can be initiated and progressed online. This 
module has been introduced by the Ministry of Defence with a view to infuse efficiency 
and bring transparency in the process of removal of encroachments as well as conduct 
of eviction proceedings. The Committee urge the Ministry to use the Bhoomi Raksha 
module effectively and take proactive actions for encroachment removal and evictions 
on the basis of this data. The Committee also desire that details of the eviction 
proceedings initiated and being monitored using ‘Bhoomi Raksha’ module after its 
introduction in 2022 may be intimated to the Committee at the stage of furnishing Action 
Taken Replies by the Ministry. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Bhoomi Raksha module is being utilised in conjunction with digitised 
datasets to ensure transparency, efficiency and better monitoring of eviction 
proceedings. Access to defence land records is regulated due to security 
considerations. The observations of the Committee regarding use of the module for 
effective action against encroachment is duly noted. 
 
2. With regard to the eviction proceedings initiated and monitored after the 
introduction in 2022 of the Bhoomi Raksha module it is submitted that about 775 
eviction proceedings have been initiated, and these are being monitored by Defence 
Estates offices across the Country. 
 

38 
 
Safeguarding Defence Lands from Encroachment  
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
 The Committee note from the data and information provided by the Ministry that 
a large number of cases of encroachment and unauthorized construction on Defence 
lands have been detected including various cantonments during the last three years. 
The Committee applaud the efforts undertaken by the Government through the Defence 
Estates Organisation to carry out  regular inspection, digitization of land records and the 
implementation of systems such as Real Time Real Management (RTRM) to monitor 
encroachments and initiate action under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971 and the Cantonments Act, 2006. The Committee also note the 
use of GIS-based land management tools, surveys and coordination with civil 
authorities for the detection and prevention of encroachments on Defence land has 
resulted in safeguarding the menace of encroachment of Defence land.  
The Committee recommend that the Governments should further strengthen the 
monitoring and enforcement mechanisms to prevent instances of fresh encroachments 
on Defence land. Greater use of digital land management systems, GIS mapping, 
satellite imagery, AI based surveillance and periodic joint surveys with local 
administration may be undertaken periodically to ensure timely detection and removal of 
encroachments. The Committee also suggest that the construction of boundary walls, 
fencing and proper demarcation of vulnerable land parcels should be expedited so as to 
safeguard Defence land at prime locations and prevent unauthorized occupation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The observations and recommendations of the Committee regarding prevention 
and removal of encroachments on defence land, and need for strengthening monitoring 
and enforcement mechanisms, are noted. 
 
2. In order to address the issue of encroachments, a combination of technological, 
preventive and administrative measures has been adopted. This system, along with 
GIS-based land management tools and the development of encroachment layers, 
enables accurate identification and tracking of encroachments over time. Additionally, a 
Change Detection GIS Tool has been developed to monitor changes in land use 
patterns and detect fresh encroachments at an early stage. 
  
3. On the preventive side, a "Threat Matrix" has been prepared to classify defence 
land into different vulnerability categories such as highly vulnerable (Red Zone), 
vulnerable (Blue Zone) and relatively secure (Green Zone). Based on this assessment, 
measures have been undertaken for protection of land parcels. Projects for construction 
of boundary walls, fencing and demarcation pillars, and particularly in areas prone to 
encroachments and in prime locations are being undertaken. 

39 
 
 
4. Besides this, regular inspections are being carried out by Defence Estates 
Officers and Chief Executive Officers of Cantonment Boards, who also furnish annual 
certificates regarding encroachments. Defence land records have been fully digitised, 
and detailed instructions have been issued for vigilance, detection and prevention of 
new encroachments. Joint surveys with local administration are conducted periodically, 
and close liaison is maintained with civil police and revenue authorities to deter 
encroachment attempts. Wherever encroachments or unauthorised constructions are 
detected, prompt action is initiated under the provisions of the Public Premises (Eviction 
of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 and the Cantonments Act, 2006. 
 
5. Efforts are also being made to engage with State Governments in cases where 
defence land is under occupation by State agencies, with a view to exploring the 
feasibility of land exchange so that equivalent land may be secured for defence 
purposes. 
 
6. The recommendations of the Committee regarding enhanced use of satellite 
imagery, AI-based surveillance, GIS mapping and institutionalisation of periodic joint 
surveys have been duly noted. Similarly, the need to expedite construction of boundary 
walls, fencing and proper demarcation of vulnerable land parcels will also be accorded 
priority. 
 
7. Instructions have been issued to field offices for regular use of GIS mapping, 
satellite imagery, AI-based surveillance, and periodic joint surveys with local 
administration for timely detection and removal of encroachments. 
 
8. In order to secure defence land measuring 1267.88 acres, located in different 
pockets, sanctions have been accorded for construction of boundary 
wall/fencing/boundary pillars in the last 03 years. These are need based sanctions as 
per threat perception. 
 
9. With regard to demarcation of vulnerable land parcels, it is submitted that Phase-
I & Phase-II Survey of defence land pockets have already been completed. However, 
since survey/demarcation of defence land as provided under Acquisition Custody 
Relinquishment Rules 1944, being a continuous process, the same is carried out by the 
DEOs for land parcels located outside notified cantonments. The land survey is also 
carried out as and when need arises. 
 

40 
 
Defence Land Litigations 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
 The Committee observe that a large number of litigations are undergoing on 
various defence lands. The Ministry also submitted that information regarding the total 
number of pending land dispute and litigation cases will be compiled and provided 
separately. The Ministry has apprised that it is undertaking policy exercises relating to 
defence land leases with the objective of formulating a comprehensive and unified 
policy covering different categories of leases granted over the past many decades.   
 
2. The Committee note the submission made by the representatives of the 
Directorate General Defence Estates regarding ongoing policy exercises related to 
defence land leases and disputes. The Committee note that efforts are being made to 
develop a comprehensive and unified policy covering various categories of leases 
granted over a long period. The Committee also note the steps taken to address issues 
related to land disputes, including joint surveys and coordination with local authorities, 
particularly in regions such as Ladakh where matters relating to notified land rates and 
relocation of operational infrastructure are under consideration.  
 
3. The Committee recommend that the Government may expedite the formulation 
and implementation of a clear and comprehensive defence land lease policy to address 
long-pending cases and avoid future disputes. The Committee further suggest that 
issues relating to land rates, transfer of land and infrastructure relocation should be 
resolved in close coordination with the petitioner/complainant, concerned Union 
Territory administrations and defence authorities so as to ensure timely settlement of 
disputes before they reach at litigation level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The concern of the Committee regarding the large number of litigation cases 
involving defence land and the need for systemic measures to reduce disputes, are 
noted. 
 
2. Continuous efforts are being made to closely monitor court cases and pursue 
legal action in a time-bound manner so as to safeguard defence land and avoid adverse 
judicial outcomes. 
 
3. The total number of litigations pertaining to defence land comprises a wide 
spectrum of cases, including disputes arising out of acquisition of land for defence 
purposes, title disputes, cases relating to enhanced compensation, and litigation 
concerning encroachments and unauthorised constructions both within cantonment 
areas and outside cantonments. These matters, by their nature, involve multiple 

41 
 
stakeholders and legal complexities, thereby contributing to the overall volume of cases 
under litigation. 
 
4. All such litigation cases have been uploaded and are being regularly updated on 
the LIMBS (Legal Information Management & Briefing System) portal. All these cases 
are continuously monitored at the level of field offices and Directorates to ensure timely 
legal action. The total number of court cases reflected on the LIMBS portal is 14642. 
  
5. With regard to the recommendation on formulation of a comprehensive lease 
policy, it is submitted that the same is under consideration of the MoD/DGDE, with an 
objective to bring about uniformity, clarity and legal robustness in the management of 
various categories of leases granted over several decades, and to streamline lease 
administration so as to minimise disputes and litigation. 
 
6. The recommendations of the Committee relating to joint surveys, coordination 
with State/UT authorities, and resolution of issues pertaining to land rates, transfer of 
land and relocation of infrastructure have also been duly noted. Necessary action is 
being taken in coordination with concerned stakeholders to address such issues in a 
structured and time-bound manner.  
 
 
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen : Budget  
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
 The Committee learn that an amount of ₹60.80 crore and ₹11,000 crore has 
been allocated to Directorate General of Resettlement (DGR) and Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), respectively, for Budget Estimates 2026-27.  
Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) Secretariat and Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare 
(DESW) have been allocated sum of ₹542 crore and ₹12.39 crore, respectively. The 
Committee note that the budget for KSB, DGR and ECHS has generally increased over 
the years. However, on comparing the allocations for 2024–25 and 2025–26, it is 
observed that the allocation for KSB remained the same at ₹505.30 crore in 2024–25 
(BE) and declined to ₹404.30 crore in 2025–26 (BE), while DGR increased from ₹33.80 
crore in 2024–25 to ₹54.80 crore in 2025–26. Similarly, the ECHS allocation rose from 
₹6968 crore in 2024–25 (BE) to ₹8317 crore in 2025–26 (BE).  This shows that the 
Government is steadily increasing the budget to strengthen welfare and healthcare 
support for Ex-Servicemen.  
  
2. The Committee note the increasing trend in budgetary allocations for KSB, DGR 
and ECHS, particularly the enhancement proposed in the Budget Estimates for 2026–
27. While appreciating the Government’s efforts to augment financial support for the 
welfare and resettlement of Ex-Servicemen, the Committee observe that the allocations 

42 
 
for certain organisations such as DGR, DESW and KSB had remained largely static 
during 2024–25 and 2025–26. Keeping in view the rising number of beneficiaries and 
need to expand expanding welfare activities and the impact of inflation, the Committee 
recommend that the Government may consider further enhancing the budgetary 
allocations for these organisations in the coming years so as to enable them to 
effectively discharge their mandated responsibilities and strengthen welfare, 
resettlement and healthcare support for Ex-Servicemen and their dependents.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The funds provided to Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare (DESW) cater for 
the Establishment (Salaries & Office Expenses etc.) related expenditure of the 
Department. Further, as regards the Budget provision from Financial Year 2024-25 to 
2025-26 in respect of DESW, it is stated that funds during the said period have been 
provided keeping in view of the demand/projection made by DESW. As against the 
Budget Estimates (BE) for the Financial year 2025-26 (Rs. 11.97 crore), the funds to the 
tune of Rs. 12.39 crore have been allocated for BE 2026-27 which amounts to 
approximately 3.50% increase in BE 2026-27 over BE            2025-26. 
2.  Similarly, with regard to Budget provisions in respect of Directorate General of 
Resettlement (DGR) and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), it is 
stated that DGR had been allocated an amount of Rs. 54.80 crore in BE 2025-26 which 
has been further enhanced to Rs. 55.00 crore at BE 2026-27. Regarding ECHS, the 
funds of Rs. 8317.00 crore had been allocated at BE 2025-26 which has been 
enhanced to 12100.00 crore in BE 2026-27. As regards Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB), it 
is stated that though the funds to the tune of Rs. 204.30 crore were allocated, by 
prioritizing the requirements, at RE Stage (2025-26) against the BE 2025-26 of Rs. 
404.30 crore, the same have been enhanced to Rs. 250.00 crore in BE 2026-27. 
 
3.  The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional 
funds from Ministry of Finance in case it is demanded and projected by Department at 
Supplementary Stage Grant.  
 
 
Welfare of ESM 
Recommendation No. 18 
 
 The Committee find that the Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) Secretariat is the apex 
body responsible for the welfare of war widows, disabled soldiers, Ex-Servicemen and 
their dependents. The Committee further observe that financial assistance is provided to 
States/UTs through KSB towards establishment expenses of Rajya Sainik Boards 
(RSBs) and Zila Sainik Boards (ZSBs). The funding pattern is 75:25 for special category 
States/UTs such as Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 

43 
 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand, and 60:40 for other States/UTs, with the balance expenditure borne by the 
respective State Governments/UT Administrations. The Government of India also 
shares 50% of the cost for construction of Sainik Rest Houses (SRHs) from the Defence 
Services Estimates, while their maintenance is the responsibility of the States/UTs. The 
Committee also learn that KSB is assisted by 34 Rajya Sainik Boards and 434 Zila 
Sainik Boards functioning under the administrative control of the respective State 
Governments/UT Administrations. During FY 2024–25, an amount of ₹179.84 crore (till 
31 March 2025) has been disbursed to the States as Central share for welfare related 
activities.  
The Committee applaud the role played by KSB, RSBs and ZSBs in implementing 
welfare measures for Ex-Servicemen and their dependents across the country. 
However, considering the increasing number of beneficiaries and the growing 
requirements for welfare support at the grassroots level, the Committee recommend 
that the Government may consider enhancing financial assistance and strengthening 
the functioning of RSBs and ZSBs, including support for infrastructure such as Sainik 
Rest Houses. The Committee are of the view that adequate and timely allocation of 
funds will further improve the delivery of welfare services and ensure better support to 
Ex-Servicemen, war widows and their families.  
 
2. The Committee have also been apprised that Ministry undertakes review of 
various welfare schemes to enhance the grant amount and also launch new initiatives 
based on the feedback and inputs from Ex-Servicemen. The Committee desire that a 
comprehensive study may be taken by the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare in 
consultation with other stakeholders to increase avenues for welfare of 
children/wards/widows of Armed Forces Personnel such as exploring feasibility of 
increasing reservation for children/wards of Defence Personnel in Professional Colleges 
in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A number of welfare schemes are being implemented through the Kendriya 
Sainik Board in the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, Ministry of Defence for the 
benefit of the ex-servicemen. Further, the Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
and the Directorate General Resettlement also implement various welfare schemes for 
providing medical services and resettlement opportunities to ex-servicemen. 
  
2. The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, Ministry of Defence, and Kendriya 
Sainik Board remain responsive to the welfare needs of the ex-servicemen community 
by holding regular interactions, consultations, and meetings with all stakeholders. These 
include outreach programmes, grievance redressal camps, and other forums for direct 
interaction with ex-servicemen across the country. Consultations are also undertaken 
with State/UT Governments through meetings of the Rajya Sainik Boards and the State 

44 
 
Government Amalgamated Fund Management Committees, in which ex-servicemen 
representatives also participate. At the national level, events such as the Armed Forces 
Veterans Day and the National Conclave of Sainik Boards are organized to facilitate 
interaction and feedback amongst stakeholders. 
3. The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare organized the National Conclave of 
Sainik Boards in September 2025. This received participation from the Kendriya Sainik 
Board, Directorate General Resettlement, the Ex-servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme, the Controller General of Defence Accounts, Service Headquarters, Record 
Offices, officials of Rajya Sainik Boards of all States/UTs, representatives of 
organizations such as National Legal Services Authority, the Ministry of Electronics & 
Information Technology, as well as members from the ex-servicemen community. These 
interactions and consultations provide a platform for deliberations on issues concerning 
ex-servicemen welfare and have contributed towards a better understanding of issues 
pertaining to welfare of ex-servicemen and their dependents, including widows and 
wards. 
4. Some recent welfare initiatives/enhancements are as under: - 
(i) Financial assistance given to children/wards/widows of ex-servicemen 
through the Kendriya Sainik Board for children’s education, daughter’s/widow’s 
marriage and penury grants have been doubled from 1st November 2025. 
 
Type of Grant Financial Assistance 
prior to Nov 2025 (Rs) 
Financial Assistance prior 
to Nov 2025 (Rs) 
Penury Grant  4,000/- per month 8,000/- per month 
Marriage Grant 50,000/- 1,00,000/- 
Education 
Grant 
1,000/- per month  
per child 
2,000/- per month  
per child 
 
(ii) States were advised to set-up Common Service Centres in Zila Sainik 
Board  premises to assist in providing digital services to ex-servicemen wanting to 
avail various Government Schemes. To support this initiative, the Directorate 
General Resettlement has started a scheme for training of ex-servicemen in 
becoming Village Level Entrepreneurs who can then set up these Common 
Service Centres. 
 
(iii) States/UTs have been requested to facilitate the provision of free legal 
services  to ex-servicemen and their dependents, including widows and 
children under the Veer Parivaar Sahayata Yojna, being implemented under the 
aegis of National, State and District Legal Services Authorities. As on 31 Mar 
2026, 438 Legal Services Clinics have been established at Rajya and Zila Sainik 
Boards with 1,123 Legal Aid workforce providing legal aid. Till 31 Mar 2026, 

45 
 
2,366, Legal Aid awareness activities have been conducted and 14,929 
beneficiaries assisted under the Yojna.  
 
(iv) For the convenience of the ex-servicemen and their dependents, the 
Department has introduced policy provisions  enabling States to set-up 
Integrated Sainik Complexes in districts wherein the services of the Zila Sainik 
Board office, the CSD Canteens, Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
Polyclinics and Sainik Rest Houses are co-located in the same 
compound/building. Several States have started taking advantage of this scheme 
and have set up Integrated Sainik Complexes. 
  
5. These regular interactions by the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare and the 
Kendriya Sainik Board with stake holders has enabled a responsive and evolving 
welfare environment for the ex-servicemen. 
 
Ex-Servicemen Employment & Welfare  
Recommendation No. 19 
 
 The Committee note that the Directorate General Resettlement has put in place a 
wide range of resettlement schemes to ensure smooth transition of Ex-Servicemen 
(ESM) to civilian life. These include online placement assistance, job fairs, empanelled 
security services, management of CNG stations and COCO retail outlets, allotment of 
LPG distributorships, milk and SAFAL booths, technical services, and participation in 
PMBJP outlets. The Committee acknowledge the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
to provide meaningful employment, promote entrepreneurship, and leverage the skill-set 
of retired Armed Forces personnel. The Committee also appreciate the foresightedness 
of the Ministry to ensure that the resettlement training and skill development courses 
are also conducted in emerging sectors such as IT, AI, Data Science, Drone 
Technology, agribusiness, and management, thereby equipping ESM for diverse 
second-career opportunities.  
 
2. The Committee recommend that the Government may take necessary steps to 
provide special recruitment opportunities and if required, specific job quota for Ex-
Servicemen in Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Central and State Govts. and 
Autonomous Bodies in order to ensure their employment, security and welfare after 
retirement from the Armed Forces. The Committee further recommend that the existing 
reservation/quota for Ex-Servicemen in such organisations should be effectively 
implemented, and a proper monitoring and supervision mechanism may be put in place 
to ensure that these provisions are followed in letter and spirit. This will help in providing 
meaningful employment opportunities and support the rehabilitation of Ex-Servicemen.  
 

46 
 
3. The Committee further recommend the Ministry to expand these resettlement 
and welfare measures to cover all retiring personnel across the country, including 
widows and dependents. Efforts may be made to increase awareness about live 
schemes, enhance financial incentives, and strengthen coordination with public and 
private sector organizations to create more employment avenues. The Committee 
suggest that continued support for educational scholarships, healthcare assistance, 
rehabilitation centers, and housing subsidies to ensure holistic welfare of ESM and their 
families may be ensured to enable them to lead dignified and secure post-service lives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.  The Department is thankful for the appreciation expressed by the Hon’ble 
Standing Committee on Defence for the various resettlement measures undertaken by 
the Director General Resettlement for retired officers, JCOs and other ranks, such as 
DGR Ex-Servicemen Seminars-cum-Job Fairs and the ESM Coal Loading and 
Transportation Scheme. The Director General Resettlement remains committed to 
ensuring the smooth transition of ex-servicemen to civilian life through structured 
resettlement schemes, capacity building, and sustainable employment avenues. 
Continuous efforts are being undertaken to strengthen existing mechanisms and 
address the concerns highlighted by the Committee. 
 
Special Recruitment Opportunities and Effective Implementation and Monitoring 
of Reservation 
 
2. It is intimated that as per extant provisions, the reservation percentage for ex-
servicemen in Central Government are as under: - 
(i) 10% vacancies in the posts upto the level of Assistant Commandant in 
Central Para Military Forces. 
(ii) 10% vacancies in Group ‘C’ posts and 20% vacancies in Group ‘D’ posts 
in Central Government Ministry/ Departments. 
(iii) 14.5% vacancies in Group ‘C’ and 24.5% vacancies in Group ‘D’ posts 
(out of which 4.5% is reserved for disabled ex-servicemen and dependents of 
servicemen killed in action) in Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) and 
Public Sector Banks. 
 (iv) 100% in Defence Security Corps. 
 
3. Director General Resettlement makes continuous endeavors to ensure proper 
implementation of the reservation policy for ex-servicemen by collecting, compiling and 
analysing data on the status of ex-servicemen reservation on half yearly basis. Issue 
related to non-compliance of the ex-servicemen reservation are taken up and 
recommendations are made to DoP&T for better implementation and effective utilization 
of vacancies reserved for ex-servicemen. Recently, DoP&T has introduced a 100-point 
roster system for implementation of the ex-servicemen reservation policy. On the 

47 
 
introduction of the roster system, proper implementation would be ensured in all 
Government Departments. In order to achieve the above objectives, Director General 
Resettlement through its Reservation Monitoring Cell arranges meeting on regular 
intervals with the Liaison Officers on ex-servicemen reservation from various Central 
Government Department, CPSUs, Public Sector Banks to exchange views so as to 
ensure compliance of the ex-servicemen reservation policies and to seek their feedback. 
 
Expansion of Resettlement Measures 
 
4.  Several new proposals are being contemplated for opening up other avenues for the 
resettlement of ex-servicemen, such as extending the Allotment of Milk Booths 
schemes to other states as well, encouraging formation of ex-servicemen cooperatives, 
conducting specialized upskilling resettlement courses for ex-servicemen on Artificial 
Intelligence, Data Science, etc. Other efforts are also underway to widen the scope of 
the resettlement schemes of Director General Resettlement. 
 
Increase in Awareness about Schemes 
 
5. To increase the outreach to the ex-servicemen and their families through the 
social media platforms, a creative agency has been hired for ensuring timely, wider and 
more effective dissemination of information related to welfare schemes and resettlement 
initiatives. This is a step to strengthen digital engagement and inter-agency coordination 
among Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, Director General Resettlement, Kendriya 
Sainik Board and Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, for enhancing 
awareness, accessibility and utilisation of welfare measures by ex-servicemen and their 
families. It contributes to transparent, inclusive and citizen-centric governance while 
empowering beneficiaries through improved access to opportunities, services and 
support systems essential for successful post-retirement rehabilitation. 
 
Strengthening of coordination with Public and Private Sector Organisation to 
Create More Employment Avenues 
 
6. The recommendation to strengthen coordination with public and private sector 
organisations for creation of enhanced employment avenues for ex-servicemen has 
been duly noted. In this regard, the Directorate General Resettlement has been actively 
engaging with Central Public Sector Undertakings, State Government organisations, 
and leading private sector entities to expand employment opportunities for ex-
servicemen. Structured mechanisms such as Memorandum of Undertakings, industry 
partnerships, job fairs, and dedicated placement drives are being leveraged to improve 
outreach and absorption. Further, efforts are underway to align skill development 
programmes with industry requirements to ensure better employability. The Government 
will continue to intensify such collaborations and explore new sectors to create 
sustainable and meaningful employment opportunities for ex-servicemen. 

48 
 
 
Huge pending Litigations of ECHS 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
 The Committee note that with respect to settlement of bills and ECHS facilities 
and coverage issues there are a large no. of litigations in Courts by ESW. The 
Committee observes that consultations with other stakeholder Ministries are still in 
progress, as many of them are also facing litigation on the issue. The Committee also 
note that such litigations arise when Government policies are alleged to have been 
contravened or require clarification.  Several individuals have also approached courts 
seeking changes in the existing provisions. The Committee have been apprised that the 
matter is under examination and that stakeholder Ministries are in the process of 
harmonizing their views. The Committee are of the firm opinion that recurring litigation 
and policy ambiguities necessitate a more coordinated, time-bound, and transparent 
institutional response.  
  
2. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should establish a 
structured inter-Ministerial coordination mechanism to expeditiously resolve policy 
inconsistencies, minimize avoidable litigation, and ensure uniform implementation 
across all Departments. Further, while acknowledging that the present database of ex-
servicemen is operational and functional, the Committee strongly urges the creation of a 
unified, centralized, and standardized digital platform integrating all State and District 
Sainik Boards under a single national software architecture, with mandatory registration 
protocols, real-time updating, and seamless interoperability, so as to ensure efficient 
delivery of benefits, improved employment outreach, enhanced transparency, and 
robust data-driven policy planning for the welfare of veterans across. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Coordination Committee exist at the level of Department of Ex-Servicemen 
Welfare comprising of Secretary (ESW), Adjutant General, Chief of Personnel, Air 
Officer Incharge Administration, Director General Armed Forces Medical Services and 
Managing Director Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme. Last meeting held on 
22 Dec 2025. 
 
2. The data pertaining to operations of Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
was residing in physical servers. In line with Government Guidelines, it was decided to 
migrate the data to National Government Cloud in August 2025. National Government 
Cloud offers infrastructure and services like Compute, Storage, Kubernetes, Database 
and Network in a Secured Data Centre under the aegis of National Informatics Centre. It 
will result in seamless Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme services to our 
esteemed veterans and their dependents. The migration of Ex-Servicemen Contributory 

49 
 
Health Scheme applications to National Government Cloud shall be completed after the 
mandatory cyber security audits. 
 
Defence Research and Development Organisation : Budget 2026-27 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
 The Committee note that during FY 2025-26, budgetary allocation for DRDO was 
₹26816.82 Crore at BE stage. In a significant increase in allocation in BE 2026–27, total 
₹29,100 crore has been allocated for Defence R&D, out of which about 59.28% has 
been provided under the Capital Head and 40.72% under the Revenue Head. The 
Committee further note that ₹7,851.33 crore has been allocated for R&D projects and 
₹1,962.83 crore for support to Industry, Start-ups and Academia. The Committee also 
observe that the budget utilisation for Defence R&D has shown a steady trend during 
the last three years, reflecting continued efforts of the Ministry to strengthen research, 
infrastructure and collaboration with industry and academia in the defence sector.  
  
2. The Committee note that consequent upon the announcement in the Union 
Budget 2026 to promote deep tech innovation in India, the Technology Development 
Fund (TDF) Policy in DRDO is being modified to support Deep Tech Technology 
Project.  These projects are aimed to be undertaken for Defence applications and the 
DRDO-Industry-Academia Centers of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) and as well as Research 
Boards who are prioritizing Deep Tech & Intelligence surveillance and Reconnaissance 
(DT & ISR). The Committee also note that with both these schemes, about ₹2,000 crore 
is being spent from the available R&D Budget of DRDO. Keeping in view the key role of 
DRDO in developing critical, advanced and futuristic technologies and systems for 
empowering the Nation and our Armed Forces, the Committee recommend that the 
Government may ensure consistent and adequate budgetary allocation for Defence 
R&D in the coming years to support critical mission-mode projects and strengthen 
indigenous defence capabilities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee’s kind attention is invited towards the Table below where 
DRDO’s allocation percentage for BE and RE for the last five years and current financial 
year is mentioned. It is evident from the Table below that there is minimal shortfall in the 
projection and allocation varying between 1% to 3%.  
(In Rs. crore) 
  
BE 
Projection 
BE 
Allocation 
BE 
allocation  
(percent) 
RE 
Projection 
RE 
Allocation 
RE 
allocation 
(percent) 
2023-24 23,790.00 23,263.89 97.79% 23,836.82 23,691.74 99.39% 

50 
 
2024-25 24,508.00 23,855.61 97.34% 25,009.81 24,696.94 98.75% 
2025-26 27,240.14 26,816.82 98.45% 26,816.82 26,746.82 99.74% 
2026-27 29,499.90 29,100.25 98.65%     
2. Moreover, the Committee is apprised that this Ministry submits the requirements 
projected by the Services/Organisations to Ministry of Finance for favourable 
consideration. While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption 
capacity of the Services/Organisations, pace of expenditure in the current Financial 
Year, overall resource envelope available and pressing demands from other Ministries, 
etc.  Based on the overall ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence 
allocates funds among the Services and Organisations under MoD taking into account 
inter-services priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities, etc.  
 
Enhancement of Defence R&D Budget  
 
Recommendation No. 22 
 
 The Committee note from the submission of the Defence Research and 
Development Organisation that while the overall R&D budget has been increasing, 
there is a need to further enhance the allocation as a percentage of the total Defence 
Budget to achieve the goal of Atmanirbhar Bharat and maintain technological 
competitiveness with other leading countries in the world. The Committee appreciate 
the special increase in the defence capital budget in the current year due to Operation 
Sindoor and acknowledges the commitment of the Government to strengthen defence 
R&D in the coming years.  
 
2. The Committee, however, strongly recommend that the Government may 
progressively increase the Defence R&D budget over the next five years which is very 
crucial for enabling higher investments in R&D, especially in latest advanced and critical 
technologies for supporting the development of better designed, more efficient and 
advanced defence products. Adequate and sustained funding should be ensured to 
support indigenous development of advanced defence technologies, promote 
innovation, and reduce dependence on imports. The Committee further suggest that 
periodic review of R&D projects and budget utilization may be undertaken by DRDO to 
ensure that resources are efficiently deployed for strategic capability development and 
technological self-reliance.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Periodic review of R&D projects and budget utilization are being carried out 
through various structured mechanisms to ensure that resources are efficiently 
deployed for National Defence capability development and technological self-reliance. 
  

51 
 
2. DRDO projects are monitored by a two/ three-tier monitoring mechanism i.e. 
Apex Board (AB) chaired by Secretary DDR&D and Chairman DRDO, Executive Board 
(EB) chaired by concerned cluster Director General of the Nodal Lab and Project 
Monitoring & Review Committee (PMRC) chaired by Director of Nodal Lab. Mission 
Mode (MM) projects or projects taken under Chapter-IV of DAP approval are also being 
reviewed by Joint Project Monitoring Team (JPMT) which is chaired by Senior Armed 
Forces Officers. In addition, Users participate in review meetings like Quarterly 
Interaction Meetings (QIMs) and Biannual Reviews with Indian Army, Quarterly 
Progress Reviews (QPRs) with Indian Air Force, Annual Synergy meeting with Indian 
Navy and Apex level reviews by Chiefs, Vice Chiefs and Deputy Chiefs of the Services 
with Secretary DDR&D during the execution of the projects. New provisions have been 
introduced in 2025 for Review by Secretary DDR&D for AoN accorded projects by 
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC)/Defence Procurement Board (DPB)/Service 
Procurement Board (SPB) (for Indian Army (IA)/Indian Air Force (IAF)/Indian Navy (IN)). 
 
Benchmarking of R&D Projects by DRDO 
Recommendation No. 23 
 
 The Committee observe that currently there is no comprehensive benchmarking 
available to compare the defence systems developed domestically with global 
technologies. However, the Ministry has informed that a Committee has been 
constituted to assess and benchmark all the systems developed against international 
standards. It was assured by the Ministry that within the next three to six months, a 
detailed assessment will be completed, enabling a clearer understanding of India’s 
technological standing in defence relative to global achievements and the value derived 
from the expenditure incurred. The Committee note that this exercise will provide 
valuable insights for future planning and resource allocation.  
  
 2. The Committee recommend that DRDO may identify clear performance 
indicators such as cost efficiency, technological maturity, target dates for completion, 
time taken for development/completion and operational effectiveness, and undertake an 
independent review of its major R&D projects against international standards. Further, 
the benchmarking exercise should be completed within the proposed timeline of three to 
six months through a detailed report, highlighting areas of strength, gaps in capability, 
and a roadmap for improving innovation, accountability, and effective utilization of public 
funds.  
 
3. In this regard the Committee urge the Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (DRDO) to establish a structured and transparent benchmarking 
framework to periodically compare its research and development outcomes with leading 
global Defence technologies, institutions and global leaders in the field.   
 

52 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO is formulating the Key Performance Indicators for DIA-CoEs to evaluate 
their performance. 
 
2. Projects are submitted by academia to DRDO through DIA-CoEs and based on 
the Figure of Merit of the deliverables, the project outcomes are compared with 
international standards. 
Encouraging Collaboration with Industry /Private Sector and Academia  
 
Recommendation No. 24 
 
 The Committee note that DRDO has various schemes for collaborating with 
academic institutes and providing skills in the youth in the field of Defence Research 
and Technology. These measures aim to prepare skilled human resources and 
strengthen India’s indigenous defence research and innovation ecosystem.   
  
2. The Committee note that DRDO has implemented several key schemes to 
strengthen defence research and skill development. These include five Research 
Boards focusing on Aeronautics, Armaments, Life Sciences, Naval, and Electronics & 
Communication Systems. DRDO has also established Industry-Academia Centres of 
Excellence (DIA-CoEs) at premier institutes to promote collaboration between DRDO 
labs, academia, start-ups, and industry, thereby building a directed research ecosystem. 
To develop skilled youth for defence research, DRDO has introduced M.Tech programs 
in Defence Technologies in 40 universities under AICTE, elective subjects in Defence 
Technology in B.Tech courses, around 8,000 internships annually for B.Tech and 
M.Tech students, and PhD programs at the Defence Institute of Advanced Technology 
(DiAT) for research in Defence Technology. These initiatives aim to create a strong 
talent pool and promote innovation in defence technologies.  
   
3. The Committee compliment DRDO for assisting the academic institutions in the 
fields of Defence Research and Technology and desire that feasibility of designing 
courses in Defence Research, Technology and Production Industry for inclusion in 
curriculum of B.Tech as well as senior secondary classes in collaboration with various 
Education Boards in the country be explored so that the scientific aspiration, 
temperament and aptitude required in this field is inculcated in the youth at an early 
level of education. The Committee recommend that efforts be strengthened to enhance 
collaboration with the private sector, foreign institutions, and academia for effective 
technology and knowledge transfer. The Committee further recommend the Ministry of 
Defence to promote collaborative development involving DRDO, private industry, 
startups, and academic institutions so that advanced propulsion, guidance, and 

53 
 
materials technologies could be developed within the country.  The Committee may also 
be apprised of the details and status of all collaborations of DRDO with foreign 
institutions /countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO provides funding support to Indian Academia and R&D Centres for basic 
research where initial Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of the technology is between 
1-2. The outcome of such research may further be utilized for technology maturation. 
During               2025-26, a total of 135 Grant-in-Aid (GIA) projects costing Rs. 207 
Crores have been sanctioned under the Grants-in-Aid schemes of DRDO including 
Deep Tech.  Further efforts are being put into streamlining the process across the 
Research Boards and Extramural Research (ER) Scheme along with formulation of 
uniform and efficient protocols. 
 
2. DRDO was part of the team formed by AICTE for designing UG minor degree in 
Defence Technology and provided the required inputs. AICTE has released the course 
curriculum of the electives required for B. Tech with Minor degree in Defence 
Technology. 
 
3. DRDO projects sanctioned to academia through DIA-CoEs are focusing on 
futuristic Research through academia and on successful completion of academic 
research its outcomes are translated to technology by engaging industry. Industry is 
engaged either through ToT or for technology enhancement as per the SoP of industry 
engagement enabled by DRDO.  
Some of the significant achievements are as follows: 
iii. Process for 3 ToTs is initiated and required Memorandum’s are signed for 
the academia projects on Light Weight Bullet Resistant Jacket  
iv. 1 ToT for spectral beam  
Following are the details where industry is engaged as Co-PI: 
iii. For Extreme Heat Protective Clothing (EHPC)  
iv. For Extreme Cold Weather Clothing (ECWC) Projects sanctioned to 
academia through DIA-CoE till date, has no foreign collaborations.  
 
4. Technology Development Fund (TDF) Scheme is a unique mechanism to 
promote Public and Private Sector industries especially MSMEs and startups that may 
work in collaboration with the academia or research institutions to carry out innovation, 
research and development of defence and dual use technologies with strong 
handholding, mentorship and support of DRDO.  

54 
 
Critical and Latest Technology 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
 The Committee observe that DRDO is focusing on the development of futuristic 
defence systems, including hypersonic missiles and next-generation fighters. While the 
Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft (AMCA) represents India’s ongoing work on fifth-
generation fighters, efforts are also being planned to develop technologies for sixth-
generation fighters, which will be network centric and integrated with other platforms 
and ground systems. The Committee note that such initiatives are essential to keep 
pace with global technological advancements in defence.  
2. The Committee note the advanced technology and knowledge transfer priority for 
the development of Supersonic Glide Missile systems as part of India’s future combat 
and deterrence capabilities. Such systems combine the speed of supersonic or 
hypersonic delivery with the ability to glide and maneuver after launch, making them 
difficult for adversaries to detect and intercept. In view of the evolving nature of modern 
warfare and the increasing focus on network centric and cloud-enabled operations, the 
Committee are of the view that indigenous research and development in glide missile 
technology will not only enhance India’s strategic preparedness but will also ensure its 
operational flexibility.  
 
3. Adequate funding, time-bound milestones, and testing infrastructure should be 
ensured to accelerate progress in this area. The Committee is of the view that 
strengthening indigenous capabilities in supersonic glide missile technology will support 
the broader objective of technological self-reliance and complement future platforms 
such as next-generation fighter aircraft and unmanned systems.   
4. In this regard, the Committee recommend a separate budget head for R&D for 
critical & latest technologies may be created for ensuring better development & timely 
execution of such projects on priority. It will also ensure that lack of sufficient funds does 
not become an impediment in execution of such projects.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO is already working on development of Hypersonic Weapons i.e both 
Hypersonic Glide Vehicles (HGV) and Hypersonic Cruise Missiles (HCM). 
2. Hypersonic Weapons / Missiles offer significant advantages as travel at high 
speeds (Mach 5+) and at low altitudes. They are also highly maneuverable making them 
nearly impossible to intercept with current defense systems.  
3. They offer very less decision / reaction time for the adversaries, allow 
unexpected approach angles for surprise attacks and use immense kinetic energy to 
penetrate and destroy hardened targets. 

55 
 
4. As suggested by the committee, it will be ensured that funds do not become an 
impediment for execution of these projects. 
Women Empowerment in DRDO  
Recommendation No. 26 
 
 The Committee believe that increasing the representation/ participation of women 
in scientific and technical roles will strengthen the talent pool and contribute to 
innovation and diversity within the organisation. Nari Shakti is also the prime focus of 
Government of India which includes women empowerment as well as women led 
development.  
 
2. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence ought to take proactive 
steps to increase the participation of women employees and incentivizing women 
scientists in DRDO by creating a supportive and inclusive work environment. Special 
recruitment drives, incentives, fellowships, mentorship programmes, and flexible work 
policies may be introduced to encourage more women to pursue careers in defence 
research and advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence, space systems, and 
quantum technologies. In addition international training opportunities and better 
promotional avenues for women scientists should also be explored. Such measures will 
help attract and retain talented scientists, including women scientists & researchers, 
while ensuring that DRDO continues to build strong indigenous capabilities in critical 
defence technologies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO is a premier Central Government Organisation, which mandates to 
provide cutting-edge technologies for country defence preparedness and being a central 
government organization, all the directives issued by the Government of India are being 
followed in DRDO. 
 
Grievance Redressal  
Recommendation No. 27 
 
 The Committee note that the Defence Research and Development Organisation 
provides equal opportunities to women employees and has a well-established grievance 
redressal mechanism in place. The Committee appreciates the role of Internal 
Complaints Committee (ICC), the Sexual Harassment Electronic Box (She-Box), and 
the appointment of Nodal Officers in each lab to ensure timely redressal of complaints 
under the POSH Act. The structured Grievance Redressal Committees at lab and 
headquarters levels, along with the Director of Personnel as Nodal Officer for citizen 
grievances through CPGRAMS, demonstrate a strong framework for addressing 
employee and citizen complaints efficiently. The Committee note that as on 01 January 

56 
 
2025, out of 1,160 grievances received, 1,030 have been disposed of, reflecting an 
effective grievance management system.  
 
2. The Committee recommend that the DRDO may continue to strengthen its 
gender sensitization programmes and further reduce the pending grievances to ensure 
timely and transparent redressal for all employees, especially women. It is also 
suggested that periodic reviews be conducted to assess the effectiveness of ICCs, 
grievance committees, and She-Box mechanisms, along with awareness campaigns to 
encourage women employees to report issues without hesitation. Enhanced monitoring 
and reporting systems should be institutionalized to maintain zero tolerance for 
harassment and promote a safe, inclusive, and empowering work environment across 
all DRDO laboratories and establishments. The Committee may be apprised of action 
taken for effective grievance redressal of women along with details in all DRDO Labs & 
Establishments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to strengthen the complaint mechanism, a Standard Operating 
Procedure on dealing with complaints under Prevention of Sexual Harassment (POSH) 
Act has been issued under the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (SHWW) 
(PP) Act 2013 in DRDO. Every year, a two-day workshop is conducted for the 
Chairperson and Members of the Internal Committee of all labs. Poster/Slogan 
competition was conducted in the year 2025 by all labs and at the National Level entries 
were judged, and prizes & certificates have been awarded to the best entries. The 
awareness/sensitization programmes conducted by the labs were also centrally 
evaluated and the best three awareness programmes were awarded certificate of 
appreciation during the workshop. All ICs have undergone the iGOT module of 
Prevention of Sexual Harassment (POSH). The complaint from women employees 
whether contractual or regular are being expeditiously handled by the lab ICs and report 
submitted to the Disciplinary Authority within 90 days of action. Annual Reports from all 
labs are compiled and submitted to the Secretary, DDR&D and details are reflected in 
the Annual Report of the Department.  
 
 

57 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

58 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 

59 
 
 CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
04 August, 2026 Chairperson 
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 

60 
 
Confidential  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
The Committee held sitting on Tuesday, the 4th August, 2026 from 1530 hrs to 
1745 hrs in Committee Room No 3, Parliament House Annexe Extension, A Block, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta  
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Ms. S. Jothimani 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
11 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
12 Shri Virendra Singh 
13 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
14 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
15 Shri Naresh Bansal  
16 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
17 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
18 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
19 Smt. Darshana Singh  

61 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mallick              - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed Shri Pawan Khera, MP, Rajya Sabha  
to the sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  and upon nomination to this 
Parliamentary Committee.  Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and informed them about the agenda of the Sitting i.e. consideration and 
adoption of the Four (4) draft Action Taken Reports on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their 19th, 20th, 21st and 22nd  Reports on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 and one (1) draft 
Action Taken Report  i.e. 23rd  Report on the subject “Review of Sainik Schools, 
Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’ 
 
3. The Committee then took up the following five  draft Reports for consideration: 
 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2026-27 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian 
Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 
21)’; 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2026-27 on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
20 Dr. Santrupt Misra 
21 Shri Parth Ajit Pawar 
22 Shri Pawan Khera 

62 
 
Health Scheme and Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2026-27 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, 
Procurement Policy and Defence Pensions (Demand No. 21 and 22)’; and 
 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2026-27 on `Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Directorate of 
Ordnance (Coordination and Services)–New DPSUs, Directorate General of 
Quality Assurance, Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance 
and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
 
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian 
Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’. 
 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the Report Nos. 24th, 25th, 26th, 
and 27th without any modifications.  However, in the Report No. 28th, as 
suggested by some Members, status report with details of New Sainik 
Schools which have signed Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) under PPP 
Mode may also be furnished against Recommendation No. 9. The 
Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Report and present the same to the Parliament on a date convenient to him. 
 
5. ****Does not pertain to the report**** 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 

63 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH 
REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR      
2026-27 ON ‘GENERAL DEFENCE BUDGET, BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION, 
INDIAN COAST GUARD, DEFENCE ESTATES ORGANISATION, WELFARE OF EX-
SERVICEMEN AND DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION 
(DEMAND NOS. 19, 20 AND 21)’. 
 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             27 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
  
Recommendation Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16, 
17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26 and 27  
 
        
   Total  : 27 
 
Percentage:100% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
          
    -Nil- 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:0 % 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
     
  -Nil- 
 Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
             
 -Nil- 
                                                      Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 