 
6 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Forty-Seventh Report (1
the subject ‘A Review of Functioning of Zila Sainik Boards i
 
December
  
i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence
A Review of Functioning of Zila Sainik Boards in the Country
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence on he Country’]  

 
STANDING 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Forty-Seventh Report (17
the subject ‘A Review of Functioning of Zila Sainik Boards i
 
 
Presented
 
December
  
ii 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence
Review of Functioning of Zila Sainik Boards in the Country
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2024 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence  on he Country’] 
 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
Chapter I Report  
 
1 
Chapter II  Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
6 
Chapter III Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
19 
Chapter IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration and to be commented upon 
 
20 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/replies awaited 
 
22 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2024-25) HELD ON 12.12.2024 
 
      23 
II ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT  ON 
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN 
THE FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON THE SUBJECT  
‘A REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF ZILA SAINIK BOARDS IN 
THE COUNTRY’ 
 
      26 
   
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25)  
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Adhikari Deepak Dev 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Shri Lumba Ram 
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri N. Chandrasegharan 
24 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
25 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
26 Shri Naveen Jain 
27 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
28 Shri Praful Patel 
29 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
30 Shri Sanjay Singh 
31 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma           - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das     - Director 
3. Shri Vikas Kumar  - Under Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the      
Forty-Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject            
‘A Review Of Functioning Of Zila Sainik Boards In The Country’.  
2.  The Forty-Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024. The Report contained 14 Observations/ Recommendations. 
The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in June 2024. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 12 December, 2024. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Forty-Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence is 
given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                    RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
17  December, 2024          Chairperson 
26  Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                                Standing Committee on Defence

1 
 
DRAFT REPORT 
  
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Forty Seventh 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject ‘A 
Review of Functioning of Zila Sainik Boards in the Country’, which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.02.2024. 
2.         The Forty Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 14 
observations/ recommendations on the following aspects: 
Para No. Subject 
1.  Functioning of the department 
2. Functions and demarcation of responsibilities between Kendriya 
Sainik Board, Rajya Sainik Boards and Zila Sainik Boards. 
3. Zila Sainik Board 
4. Redressal of grievances 
5. Expenditure on Establishment 
6. Rehabilitation of Agniveer 
  
3.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 14 observations/recommendations contained in the Report on Forty Seventh Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject ‘A Review of 
Functioning of Zila Sainik Boards in the Country’’. The replies have been examined and 
categorized as follows:- 
i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II):Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12,13 and 14  
(Total - 12) 
ii. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
-Nil- 
(Total - 00) 
iii. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee , which require reiteration and 
Commented upon (Chapter IV):  
 Para Nos. 5 and 6 
  
 (Total - 02) 
  

2 
 
iv. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 -Nil- 
  
(Total - 00) 
  
4.         The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes in respect of 
comments contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and 
in any case, not later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
  
5.         The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the observations/recommendations made in the Forty Seventh Report of the 
Committee in the succeeding Paragraphs.   
   
Vacancies in Zila Sainik Boards(ZSB)s            
  
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
  
The Committee had recommended as under: 
             
6.         Vacancies in the ZSBs is yet another matter of concern for the Committee. The 
Committee understand that one of the major reasons is the reservation policy of the 
State Government which results in not filling up the posts in several categories leading 
to existence of perennial vacancies in the boards. In total, number of vacancies all over 
India is that of 530 Officers. It is a given fact that a shortage of manpower in any 
organization leads to inefficiency in the system and piling of unresolved cases which 
result into the non-fulfillment of the objectives of setting up of ZSBs. The Committee, 
therefore, in no uncertain words, recommend that these vacancies should be 
expeditiously filled up at the earliest in consultation with the State Governments 
concerned so that the ESM and their families do not wait for resolution of their 
grievances and keeping suffering the hardships. If required, a special recruitment drive 
may be undertaken to achieve the recommended ends.  
  
7.         The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
  
The issue of filling up of vacant post of officers and staff in the RSBs / ZSBs was 
discussed during 31 st KSB meeting chaired by Hon`ble RM held on 11 April 
2023 at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi. The issue of vacant posts has also been 
highlighted through DO letters written by Secy (ESW) to all Chief Secys of 
States/UTs on 06 March 2024 vide DO No 1(6)/2024/D(Res-II) and Secy, KSB 
on 10 January 2024 vide DO No 106/Policy/Appt policy/Vol-1 respectively. 
During the last one year (2023) one (01) Director and eighty two (82) Zila Sainik 

3 
 
Welfare Officers (ZSWOs) have been appointed in RSB/ZSBs. In order to 
encourage employment of only ESM in RSBs/ZSBs the Central Share is given 
only for pay of ESM staff. However, each state has their own employment rules. 
  
8.        The Committee note that in response to their recommendation on ‘vacant 
posts’  in their original report, which was presented to Parliament on 8th February, 
2024, the Ministry took a very prompt action by highlighting the issue through DO 
letters written by Secretary (ESW) to all Chief Secretaries of States/UTs on 6th 
March, 2024.  Yet, they are surprised that despite this prompt action, not a single 
appointment has been made till the time of receipt of the Action Taken reply from 
the Ministry. 
  
            The Committee also note  that the Ministry’s reference to matters  such 
as  discussion on vacant posts during the 31st KSB meeting and the 83 
appointments, which is mentioned  in the Ministry’s action taken  reply, pertain to 
the year 2023 - i.e. prior to the presentation of the Committee’s report.  The 
Committee feel that their concern for the 530 vacant posts and the need for filling 
of these posts through a special recruitment drive, as recommended in their 47th 
report was, perhaps, not accorded due seriousness by the Ministry.  They, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to take up the issue of vacant posts in Zila Sainik 
Boards very seriously and once again sensitize the State Governments 
concerned to undertake special recruitment drive, if required, to fill up the vacant 
posts without any further delay.  The Committee may also be informed of the 
steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
  Frequency of meetings of ZSBs 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
  
9.         The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
            The Committee note that structure of Zila Sainik Board for resolving the 
grievances of Ex-Servicemen, widows and their dependents includes a procedure 
wherein, the grievances are received at DESW/Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB)/ Rajya 
Sainik Boards (RSBs/ Zila Sainik Boards (ZSBs) through various means including online 
submission for their eventual resolution. The Committee also note that the 
interdependence in the functioning of bodies for resolution of the grievances of the ex-
servicemen wherein at the apex level, KSB is issuing policy guidelines and also 
administers the various welfare schemes funded from Armed Forces Flag Day Fund 
(AFFDF). The RSB oversees the State govt schemes and ZSBs have the day-to-day 
interface with ESM. All the applications for various welfare schemes and any other 
administrative requirement of ESM are routed through the ZSBs to the concerned State/ 
Central Govt authority. 
  

4 
 
Since ZSBs need to meet to resolve the grievances of ESM and their family 
members, therefore, the Committee were desirous of the knowing the prescribed norms 
regarding the number of meetings of ZSBs to be held in a year and the actual number of 
meetings held in various ZSBs during each of the last five years. The Committee also 
wanted to know whether the District Magistrates actually attend and head the meetings 
or if any other Senior Officer does it on their behalf under the delegated authority. The 
Committee also desired to know the exact figures in regard to the meetings not actually 
attended by the DMs in the last five years. The Committee are surprised that despite 
reminders, till the time of presentation of the report, the information on both the issues 
could not be provided to the Committee secretariat. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to oversee the affairs of the functioning of KSBs so that such 
basic information are kept ready in the records. Atleast now, the Committee should be 
furnished the complete details in one lot in regard to the meetings under reference. 
They also desire that for the benefit of all, such information can be uploaded on the 
website of the Ministry/KSB for ready reference of all concerned. 
  
10.       The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
  
The details of number of ZSB meetings held, attended by District Magistrate and 
decisions taken &amp; implemented in States/UTs in the last five years, as 
received from the RSBs are attached as Enclosure -1. 
  
11.     The Committee recall that in their original report, they had desired to be 
apprised of the prescribed norms regarding the number of meetings of ZSBs to 
be held in a year and actual number of meetings held in various ZSBs during 
each of the last 5 years.  They had also desired to know whether the District 
Magistrates attend and preside over such meetings or some other officials attend 
on their behalf.  However, the reply of the Ministry is conspicuous by the absence 
of any reference to the prescribed norms, although they have given details of the 
number of ZSB Meetings held, attended by DMs and decisions taken/implemented 
in States/UTs in the last five years. Since the intention of the Committee for 
seeking the norms was to see whether the meetings of the ZSBs as being held as 
per the prescribed norms or not, the Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to 
furnish information with respect to the prescribed norms, if any, for holding the 
ZSB meeting in a year.  The Committee are of the view  that if there is no norms 
prescribed at the moment, the Ministry may formulate a set of norms for holding 
such meetings in the ZSBs so that the meeting can be held as per norm and 
grievances can also be resolved within the prescribed time-limit.   
  
          Further, the scrutiny of the Action Taken reply reveal that there are States 
where no meetings have been held; in some State, it was held twice in a year and 
in some other States, it was held only once a year.  Witnessing such lack of 
uniformity in the working of ZSBs, the Committee feel that the Government 

5 
 
should formulate a set of norms expeditiously so as to prescribe the number of 
meeting of ZSBs to be held in a year and also the time-limit for resolving of 
grievances.  The Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
details of the meetings of ZSBs held, attended by DMs and decision taken etc. 
should also be uploaded in the Ministry’s web page, if not done so far, for ready 
reference of all concerned. 
  
 Reimbursement of medical expenses to the veterans 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
  
The Committee had recommended as under: 
12.       The matter of reimbursement of medical expenses to veterans and hospitals had 
invariably been raised during oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry. The 
Committee were also apprised that due to pending bills with ECHS, the hospitals refuse 
to entertain ESM and their family members. The Committee view this very seriously and 
desire that all the pending bill of hospitals should be cleared at the earliest and that the 
Ministry should make a robust system so that it can monitor the delay and blacklist the 
hospitals denying treatment to veterans and their family members. 
  
The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
13.       The initial ECHS Budgetary Allocation (BE) during the last financial year (2023-
24) of Rs. 5431.56 Cr was supplemented with additional funds of Rs. 4449.56 Cr at 
various budgetary stages which arrive at the final total Budgetary Allocation of Rs. 
9881.12 Cr during 2023-24. This has helped in clearing the previous backlog (Approx 
Rs. 3000 Cr) of pending bills of the empanelled hospitals besides streamlining the 
regular clearance of claims in a timely manner. The hospitals are not refusing any 
treatment to the veterans/families due to any bill pendency. The Ministry is also working 
on developing a comprehensive IT infrastructure to closely monitor the delay and quality 
of service being provided to the veterans/their families. 
  
14.      The Committee are happy to note that allocation of additional funds of 
Rs.4449.56 crores by the Ministry at various budgetary stages during 2023-24 has 
helped in clearing the previous backlog (approximately Rs.3000 crores) of 
pending bills of the empaneled hospitals, besides streamlining the regular 
clearance of claims in a timely manner.  The Committee also appreciate the 
Ministry’s initiative for developing a comprehensive IT infrastructure to closely 
monitor the delay and quality of service being provided to the veterans and their 
family members.  However, they would like to be apprised of the latest status of 
the ongoing work related to IT infrastructure. 

6 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1: 
 
The Committee are happy to note that a new Department of Ex-Servicemen 
Welfare (DESW) was created in the Ministry of Defence on 22nd September, 2004 
exclusively to pay focused attention to the welfare and resettlement of ESM in view of 
the expanding population of ex-servicemen (ESM) and widows. DESW is mandated to 
formulate and implement various policies and programmes for the welfare and 
resettlement of Ex-Servicemen in the country. The Department consists of two Division 
i.e. (i) Pension Division; and (ii) Resettlement Division. While the Pension Division of the 
Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare deals with pension policies for the Armed Forces 
personnel and redressal of grievances of Ex-servicemen, the Resettlement Division 
looks after the remaining matters. Further, DESW has three attached offices namely, 
KendriyaSainik Board Secretariat (KSB Sectt.), Directorate General of Resettlement 
(DGR) and Central Organisation, Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (CO, 
ECHS). KSB Sectt. Is responsible for the welfare of Ex-Servicemen and their 
dependents and also for the administration of welfare funds. 
 The work as ordained through DESW assumes special significance in the area of 
resettlement of the ex-servicemen as the proper resettlement is one of the main 
attractions for our Forces to join the Defence Services. At the handset of the mind it 
gives the security in terms of resettlement to the ex-servicemen and widows and their 
dependents. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This is factual information and Ministry has no comments to offer. 
 
  
 
 
Recommendation No. 2: 
 
The committee further note that the welfare of the Ex-Servicemen and their 
dependents is the joint responsibility of the Centre and the States/UTs. The Committee 
understand that a majority of the problems have to be resolved only by the States/UTs. 
Like the KendriyaSainik Board at the Centre, the Rajya/ZilaSainik Boards are 
responsible for policy formulation and implementation of resettlement and welfare 
schemes for Ex-servicemen, widows and their dependents residing in their respective 

7 
 
States/UTs/Districts.  To assist the Central Government in this regard, there are 34 
RajyaSainik Boards (RSBs) and 407 ZilaSainik Boards (ZSBs) in the country. The 
expenditure on the establishment of RSBs & ZSBs is  shared between the Centre and 
the States/UTs on 75:25 basis for the special category States/UTs (Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Uttrakhand, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Ladakh and Himachal Pradesh) and 60:40 basis for rest of the States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
(i) There are 34 RajyaSainik Boards (RSBs) and 413ZilaSainkBoards 
(ZSBs)  in the country.  
    
(ii) The special category States/UTs are Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, 
Tripura,Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh and Himachal 
Pradesh 
 
 
 
Demarcation of responsibilities between Kendriya Sainik Boards, Rajya Sainik 
Boards and Zila Sainik Boards 
 
Recommendation No. 3: 
 
From the information furnished by the Ministry, the Committee comprehend that 
there is a clear demarcation in the functioning of Kendriya Sainik Board, Rajya Sainik 
Boards and Zila Sainik Boards. While the major functions of Kendriya Sainik Board 
include coordinating inter-alia dissemination of policy directives as approved by the 
MoD towards ESM welfare, the functions of Rajya Sainik Boards include control and co-
ordination work of Zila Sainik Welfare Offices (ZSWOs) in the State and ensure their 
effective functioning. The Committee note that the functions of Zila Sainik Board have 
the prime points like monitoring welfare of families of servicemen and ESM in addition to 
assisting them in representing their cases with the local administration or the Defence 
authorities, giving information to the general public regarding conditions of service in the 
Armed Forces so as to assist intending candidates in approaching the appropriate 
recruiting authorities for purposes of enlistment, maintain a close liaison with the 
pension disbursing authorities/ agencies in the district to ensure correct and timely 
payment of pension/ other reliefs to ESM pensioners/dependents, assisting in 
settlement of land and other disputes, assist families of serving personnel in regards to 
their safety/security, promote and maintain, welfare measures in the District such as 
Rest Houses for ESM, old age pensioner homes, Jawan Bhawans/ shops, vocational 
and other training facilities, hostel for children of serving defence personnel and ESM 
etc. 
 
 However, the mutual dependence/ coordination of KSB/RSB/ZSBs with the 
Directorate General of Resettlement (DGR) is a noticeable feature which came to notice 
during examination of the subject. The KSB/RSB/ZSB and DGR coordinate with each 

8 
 
other for various inter mingling issues such as Census of ESM, grant of ESM status to 
personnel, reservation for ESM in Govt service, etc.   
 It has also come to the notice of the Committee that benefits of the Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes do not invariably reach the ESM beneficiaries and their families. 
Therefore, the Committee are of the considered view and, therefore, recommend that a 
mechanism be dwelt upon and given a finality so that there should be a better 
coordination between the agencies working for the welfare of ESM and widows and 
their families so that the benefits of the Centrally sponsored schemes reach the ESM 
and their family members invariably. It goes without saying here that the outcome 
should be periodically monitored regularly by the officer not below or equivalent to the 
Joint Secretary in the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) There are 10 schemes being run by KSB for the welfare of 
ESM/widows/dependents etc on pan India basis are as follows:- 
 
S No Scheme Amount 
(in Rs) 
(i) Penury Grant -  Non pensioners up to the rank of 
Hav (Above 65 years of age)  
4,000/-pm 
(ii) Education Grant - Wards of pensioner / non 
pensioner / widows up to the rank of Hav  as under :-  
      (i)    Boys / Girls - Grade-I to graduation 
      (ii)   Widow’s       - PG 
 
1,000/-pm 
(iii) 100 % Disabled Children Grant - Wards of 
pensioner / non pensioner up to the rank of JCO.  
3,000/-pm  
 
(iv) Daughter’s Marriage Grant -Daughters of pensioner 
/ non pensioner up to the rank of Hav (Applicable to 
two daughters only).   
 
 
 50,000/- (one time) 
 Widow Re-Marriage Grant - Widow of pensioner / 
non pensioner up to the rank of Hav.  
(v) Medical Treatment Grant – Non pensioner up to the 
rank of Hav& dependent. 
50,000/-(Max)  
(vi) Orphan Grant - Wards of pensioner / non pensioner 
for all ranks as under :-  
   (i)        Daughter till marriage. 
(ii) Son up to 21 years of age. 
3,000/- pm  
(vii) Vocational Trg Grant for Widows -Widows of 
pensioner / non pensioner up to the rank of Hav.  
50,000/- 
(One Time)  
(viii) Treatment of Serious Diseases Grant –Non 
pensioner / widow / dependent for all ranks  
1,50,000/- for major 
diseases (one time). 
 
75,000/- per annum for 
cancer and dialysis 
(ix) Modified Scooter Grant -Disabled ex servicemen 
up to the rank of JCO with a disability 50% or more. 
1,00,000/- once in ten 
years.  
 
(x) Interest Subsidy on Home Loan - Re-imbursement 
of interest on loan taken from banks for construction 
1,00,000/- one time 

9 
 
 
 
(b) The chain of processing of applications submitted by ESM is as follows:- 
 
      ESM→ZSB→RSB→KSB→JS(ESW)→Secretary(ESW) 
 
(c) All the 10 welfare schemes are periodically reviewed and monitored by 
JS(ESW) in the Case Consideration Committee Meeting which is held 
Quarterly in the office of JS(ESW). 
 
 
Composition of a Zila Sainik Board 
 
Recommendation No. 4 : 
 
The Committee note that the composition of Zila Sainik Board consists of District 
Collector as President, Senior Ex-service Officer as Vice President, Heads of State 
Govt Departments/ Recruiting Officer as Ex-officio members, Two Ex-Servicemen as 
Non official member, Four Prominent Citizens as Members, Zila Sainik Welfare Officer 
as Secretary along with seven-eight support staff, including Clerk, Peon, Driver etc., to 
assist in the day-to-day office work. The Committee have also been informed that the 
staff is sufficient for day to day working of Zila Sainik Board. 
 
 Taking cognizance of the above facts, the Committee do not agree with the view 
of the Ministry that ZSB’s mixed composition of civil administration and ESM facilitates 
resolution of issues of ESM in a better way, especially related to Revenue/ Home 
department. The Committee are of the view when there is already a District Collector, 
who is the head of all civil departments in a district as the President, instead of civilian 
officers, more number of ESMs should be added as members in the ZSBs, who 
themselves, by virtue of the experience of serving in the forces, are better equipped to 
understand their problems in true spirit. Therefore, the Committee, in no uncertain 
words recommend that all out efforts be done within a time frame to restructure and 
accommodate more numbers of ESMs so that issues surfacing be comprehended in the 
true earnest and more number of disputes resolved amicably and for mutual satisfaction 
of all stake holders. 
 
 The Committee also note that the State/UT Govts. have their own recruitment 
rules and staff in ZSBs which are employed as per the sanction accorded by respective 
State/ UT Govt. and also some ZSBs are employing personnel on contractual basis too. 
In this regard, the Committee, here, can only recommend the Ministry to impress upon 
the State Governments to give more representation to the ESM and that a uniform 
policy constituted across all the States/UTs to be implemented for resolving the 
grievances in an expeditious manner. They also recommend, wherever feasible even on 
hiring the personnel on contractual basis preference must be given to ESM. 
 
 
of house to War Bereaved, War Disabled and 
Attributable to Peace time casualties. 50% of the 
interest charged by the banks or Govt / Public Sector 

10 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issue of filling up of vacant post of officers and staff in the RSBs / ZSBs 
was discussed during 31st KSB meeting chaired by Hon`ble RM held on 11 
April 2023 at VigyanBhavan, New Delhi. The issue of vacant posts has also 
been highlighted through DO letters written by Secy (ESW) to all Chief Secys 
of States/UTs on 06 March 2024 vide DO No 1(6)/2024/D(Res-II) and Secy, 
KSB on    10 January 2024 vide DO No 106/Policy/Apptpolicy/Vol-1 
respectively. During the last one year (2023) one (01) Director and eighty-two 
(82) Zila Sainik Welfare Officers (ZSWOs) have been appointed in 
RSB/ZSBs.  In order to encourage employment of only ESM in RSBs/ZSBs 
the Central Share is given only for pay of ESM staff. However, each state has 
their own employment rules. 
 
 
Redressal of grievances by DESW, KSB, RSBs and ZSBs 
 
Recommendation No. 7: 
 
The Committee note that grievances are normally received at DESW, KSB, 
RSBs and ZSBs. These are resolved at an appropriate level or forwarded to the 
concerned authority for resolving the grievances of the ESM / Widows / their 
dependents. 
 
 The Committee are happy to learn that data of veer naris is maintained by the 
respective services and is shared with the ZSBs for necessary assistance. The Ministry 
vide written note informed the Committee that these details are collated and shared with 
KSB on half yearly basis by RSBs. Due attention is paid to monitoring the grievances of 
the Veer Naris. All the RSBs are regularly requested to resolve these matters on priority 
and forward the status of pending cases along with the monthly Pragati report. Further, 
modifications in the CPGRAM ver 7.0 have also been suggested to DS (P & G) / MoD 
with inclusions of all ZSBs for faster dissemination of the grievances. 
 
 The Committee are also happy to learn that the Ministry has devised time line for 
resolving / forwarding the grievances to the concerned departments and   practically all 
replies are rendered much before the cut off time in majority of cases. The Committee 
found that the majority of grievances received pertain to State Govt/other agencies via 
Record Offices are forwarded to them for early redressal and regularly proactive 
interaction by KSB Sectt with all RSBs. 
 
 The Committee also note that in addition, a help line has also been started in 
KSB (Grievances) Secretariat where approximately 25-30 queries per day are being 
received on the telephone from the ESM fraternity and the same are being 
redressed/suitably guided for their action. However, the Ministry failed to provide the 
comparative figures regarding the number of cases registered vis-à-vis disposed by the 
ZSBs districts wise during each of the last five years and issues pending resolution for 
more than five years in each of the ZSB, so that they can arrive at a definite conclusion 
on the effective working of ZSBs.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that the above 

11 
 
information should be furnished to them within one month of presentation of this report 
so they can extend useful guidance to the Ministry in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Details of grievances received/ resolved by ZSBs for the last five years from 
2019 to 2023 is attached as Enclosure-2.  
 
 
Role of the Ministry of Defence in resolving grievance 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8: 
 
The Committee understand that redressal of grievances is a key function of the 
Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare. Department is receiving pension related and 
other grievances from ex-servicemen through offline in hard copy as well as online 
through CPGRAMS/CPENGRAMS which are being processed with the concerned 
offices who are redressing the grievances of Ex-Servicemen efficiently and in a time 
bound manner. The Committee note that as per the information furnished to them by the 
Ministry, the grievances pending beyond the prescribed time limit are regularly followed 
up and regular interaction with the concerned offices is made for their speedy disposal 
as well as reviewing the pending grievances on a weekly basis. In the direction of 
prompt and satisfactory resolution of grievances following initiatives are then taken by 
the Ministry. 
 
(a) Personal contact with petitioners: Apart from written communication, petitioner 
are invariably contacted over the phone to obtain (i) specifies of the grievances, 
facts, service/pensioners details (ii) Feedback about resolution of grievances and 
to ascertain level of satisfaction. Contacting the petitioner over the phone in 
connection with his/her grievance is also providing immense satisfaction making 
him/her feel as an important part of the system. 
 
(b) Categorization of grievances: The department has categorized the grievances 
according to the nature of grievances received from ex-servicemen to know the 
root cause of the grievances and issuing instructions to the concerned offices 
about the deficiency. 
 
(c) Periodical monitoring at higher level: The status of pending pension grievances is 
being monitored at the highest level of the department by the Secretary in regular 
weekly/fortnight meetings. 
 
(d) Synergy of the existing infrastructure: The Existing set up of Sainik Boards is 
being utilized for assisting the petitioners and other ex-servicemen for 
competition of documents/Records required for release of pension and assisting 
in State Govt. related issues/grievances. 
 
 The impact of the above indicated initiatives, together with strict compliance with 
shorter timeline of 30 days for resolution of grievances and use of existing technology 

12 
 
has resulted in reduction of average disposal time from 87 days in 2014 to 33 days in 
2022. 
 
 The Committee are happy with the above measures and monitoring undertaken 
by the Ministry which has resulted in reduction of average disposal time from 87 days in 
2014 to 33 days in 2022. However, they desire that further reducing the time of 
redressal of grievance from 33 days to two weeks will fortify the bond between the 
Ministry and the ESM. 
 
 The Committee have also been informed that during the year 2022, 
approximately 11,000 complaints were received and most of them were through 
CPGRAM Portal. It was further informed that the complaints belonging to service 
matters were resolved at the level of the board but other complaints like personal 
matters or land issues, the board can only advise. The Committee in this regard only 
suggest that even in personal matters, board should extend all possible help, since 
most of the ESM, after spending a large active part of life away from their homes, do not 
remain familiar with civilian society and take time to again mingle with them. 
 
 The Committee also desire that the Ministry should give a ranking to each ZSB 
based on its performance related to efficiency in resolving grievances of ESM and their 
family Members and providing employment opportunities. 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has a system for the resolution of pension-related 
problems wherein a ESM can lodge a complaint through the Common Service Center in 
a far-flung village. However, the Committee are of the view that for better monitoring of 
the existing system and procedure, in the meetings of ZSBs, local MP and MLA of that 
area should be invariably invited to attend, which will help in providing immediate 
solution. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is pertinent to mention that as per DARPG guidelines, the time limit for the 
redressal of grievances is 30 days. As per the report of SCoD approximately 
11,000 grievances were received with an average disposal time of 33 days 
during the year 2022. Whereas during the year 2023 the number of 
grievances increased approximately by 3.3 times i.e. 36,662. However, the 
same was disposed offwith an average disposal time of 28 days. 
 
 
Criteria for opening of Zila Sainik Boards 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 : 
 
The Committee note that as per the existing provision of High Level Committee 
report, 1984, Zila Sainik Boards can be set up by concerned State Governments, if the 
population of ex-servicemen and families of serving/deceased service personnel is 7500 
and above. However, prior approval of Central Government is required if the number of 
families of ex-servicemen and serving/deceased service personnel in a district is less 
than 7500. Prior approval of the Central Government is also necessary for the 

13 
 
establishment of a District Welfare Board in that district or for the establishment of 
District Welfare Board consisting of 2 or 3 districts where population is less than 7500. 
 
 The Committee desired to know whether there is any proposal to open more 
ZSBs in the country in view of the increasing number of ESM and their family members. 
The Committee have been informed that opening of the new ZSBs is a continuous 
process. The total numbers of ZSBs in the country have been increased from 229 in 
1984 to a total of 409 by 2022.  It further stated that new ZSB can be established by the 
concerned State/ UT Governments themselves if the population of ESM and families of 
serving/ deceased service personnel is 7500 and above. In case the strength is less 
than 7500 and the need is felt to set up a ZSB due to demographic or other reasons, 
then the same can be done with prior approval of Central Govt/ MoD through KSB 
Sectt. These requests are considered favorably to facilitate the welfare of ESM 
community. 
 
The Committee are happy that the Ministry have an established procedure to open new 
ZSBs. However, considering the fact that many of the ESM and their families are 
located in far-flung areas, the Community recommend that ZSBs or sub-centres should 
also be opened in those areas which are a little away from the main concentration of the 
population or difficult to reach by an average old ESM. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ZSB is opened in each district where requisite population of ESM and family 
of serving/ deceased service personnel is 7500 and above. Incase of districts 
with less number of ESM and difficulty due to topography, case to case 
recommendation is given with the approval from MoD/DESW. Such Sub 
Centres of ZSB in district are already existing in States.  
 
Expenditure on Establishment 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 10 : 
 
The Committee note that the Central Govt provides 75% share of the cost of 
establishment of RSBs/ZSBs to 12 special category States/UTs (Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand) and 60% share for remaining States/UTs. 
The amount is allotted to States/UTs as per projection / expenditure. RSBs of States 
forward the consolidated requirement for the entire State. 
 
After gleaning through the information provided by the Ministry, the Committee note that 
the funds have been fully utilized.  However, in the absence of any concrete reply from 
the Ministry, the Committee could not comprehend clearly about the monitoring 
mechanism of the fund utilization. Therefore, the committee recommended that a robust 
mechanism for monitoring may be established and the Committee may be informed 
accordingly. 
 
 
 

14 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The following mechanism is used for monitoring of utilisation of funds:- 
 
(a)  It is intimated that as per the policy 60% / 75% of the cost of maintenance/ 
establishment of RSB/ ZSBs is provided by Govt. of India/ MoD as Central 
Share. 
 
(b)  The Central Share funds are released to the respective State Govts in two 
stages i.e: - 
 
(i) 50% of the admissible Central Share as an Advance payment, based on 
the Budget Estimate (BE) allocation by the State Govt. for the FY. 
 
(ii) The remaining/balance Central Share funds arereleased/reimbursed as 
Final Claim payment for the respective FY after Audit/booking of expenditure 
by the AG of the concerned State. 
 
(c) In view of the above, it may be inferred that there already exists an 
established mechanism of Audit/monitoring of the expenditure incurred by 
 the State for maintenance/ establishment of RSB/ZSBs by AG of the 
concerned State. The final payment of Central Share of funds for any FY is 
cleared only post scrutiny of the CAG Audited expenditure. 
 
Computerization to ease the functioning of KSB/RSB/ZSBs 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 11: 
 
The Committee note that KSB Sectt. has an independent web portal which was 
launched in 2016. This web portal enables ESM and their dependents to apply online 
for various Welfare Schemes funded from AFFDF. The disbursement of financial 
benefits is undertaken through Direct Benefit Transfer mode. The RSB/ZSBs are 
handling respective State Govt Welfare schemes through their web portals. The Ministry 
ascertained that KSB Sectt regularly monitors the CPGRAMS portal for grievances of 
ESM. In addition, all RSBs are also monitoring the CPGRAMS. Further modification in 
CPGRAM ver 7.0 has been suggested to DS (P & G) / MoD for inclusion of all ZSBs for 
faster dissemination of the grievances. 
 
 On the issue of networking between the KSB/RSB/ZSB and other departments, 
the Ministry apprised that it is primarily through emails. Regular interaction at the MoD 
level chaired by Secy (ESW)/ JS (ESW) where heads of each department attend are 
also undertaken. 
 
The Committee note that there exists a system of registration of ESM with ZSBs, 
however, the Committee find that ESM have to approach their respective RSB/ZSB to 
register their name. In this regard, the Committee urge the Ministry to create a system 
through which registration takes place automatically alongwith the pension papers, so 
that they don’t have to approach respective ZSB after their retirement. This move will 

15 
 
not only help the Ministry to have updated data about ESM but also help in creating 
central supervision of ESM as well as ZSBs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Most of the ESM are young and healthy at the time of retirement. They are 
required to visit their concerned ZSB for issue of I-Card for self/ dependents. 
This also helps the individual to liaise with the ZSB staff for future 
requirements. Therefore, the existing system is considered suitable and 
beneficial for the ESM community. Their physical presence ensures 
verification of service documents, PPO and other credential prior to issue of 
I-Card. 
 
 
Lack of uniformity in the States/UTs regarding ex-gratia monetary 
benefits/compensation to the martyrs in the country 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 12 : 
 
The issue of lack of uniformity in the States/UTs regarding ex-gratia monetary 
benefits/compensation to the martyrs in the country was addressed in earlier reports of 
the Committee specially in the Reports on Demand for Grants.During oral evidence of 
the Ministry, the issue was again raised and it was mentioned that Hon’ble Raksha 
Mantri has written to States about the enhancement of ex-gratia benefits. 
 
 The Committee note that ex-gratia lump sum compensation of Death is paid to 
eligible family members of martyred soldiers. The Committee were informed by the 
Ministry of Defence during the examination of related subjects in earlier reports that this 
amount varies for different categories of death of the soldier. Compensation of Rs. 25 
lakh is granted in case of death occurring due to accidents or acts of violence by 
terrorists, anti-social elements while performing duties and a compensation of Rs. 35 
lakh is paid in case of death occurring in border skirmishes and action against militants, 
terrorists, extremists, sea pirates etc. Besides, an amount of Rs. 45 lakh is granted as 
compensation in case of death occurring during enemy action in war, After the 
intervention of the Ministry, the amount of compensation has been raised by some of 
the State Governments and State like Gujarat have raised the amount toRs. 1 crore but 
a few states like Mizoram and Telangana are giving only Rs 6 lakh and Rs 5 lakh 
respectively. The Committee are of the considered view that though the loss of life of a 
soldier cannot be evaluated in monetary terms, yet financial grant helps provide a 
reasonable and respectful life to family members of the soldier. Further, it also acts as 
an incentive and encouragement for the youth to join the Armed Forces. Given this 
notion and considering the increase in the rate of inflation, the Committee desire to 
reiterate that the Government should seriously consider increasing the ex-gratia fund by 
Rs. 10 lakh in each of the above categories. The minimum amount under any category 
will be Rs. 35  lakhs and the maximum Rs. 55 lakhs. 
 
  The Committee wish to state that they are not oblivious of the fact that the issue 
regarding uniformity in payments of ex-gratia amount to the dependents of Martyrs has 
been raised and discussed in several meetings of the Committee without any positive 
outcome. Therefore, the Committee, in unequivocal terms, recommend that requisite 

16 
 
measures be initiated and should be put in place to sensitize state Governments to 
bring in more uniformity in granting  ex-gratia funds for families of martyred soldiers. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Hon’ble RakshaMantri, through a DO letter,had urged CMs / LGs of 
concerned State/UTs to enhance the ex-gratia and other grants. Recently the 
States of Manipur, Meghalaya and Rajasthan have enhanced the grants for 
Gallantry Award winners. Further, States are likely to increase these grants 
during their RSB meetings as and when these are conducted. 
 
 
Reimbursement of medical expenses to the veterans 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 13 : 
 
The matter of reimbursement of medical expenses to veterans and hospitals had 
invariably been raised during oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry. The 
Committee were also apprised that due to pending bills with ECHS, the hospitals refuse 
to entertain ESM and their family members. The Committee view this very seriously and 
desire that all the pending bill of hospitals should be cleared at the earliest and that the 
Ministry should make a robust system so that it can monitor the delay and blacklist the 
hospitals denying treatment to veterans and their family members.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The initial ECHS Budgetary Allocation (BE) during the last financial year 
(2023-24) of Rs. 5431.56 Cr was supplemented with additional funds of Rs. 
4449.56 Cr at various budgetary stages which arrive at the final total 
Budgetary Allocation of Rs. 9881.12 Cr during 2023-24. This has helped in 
clearing the previous backlog (ApproxRs. 3000 Cr) of pending bills of the 
empanelled hospitals besides streamlining the regular clearance of claims in 
a timely manner. The hospitals are not refusing any treatment to the 
veterans/families due to any bill pendency. The Ministry is also working on 
developing a comprehensive IT infrastructure to closely monitor the delay 
and quality of service being provided to the veterans/their families. 
 
 
Rehabilitation of Agniveer 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 14 : 
 
The Committee found that there is no assured employment or skill development 
programme exclusively designed for Agniveer, except for some percentage of 
reservation of jobs in Central Armed Police Forces. The Committee are happy to note 
that in consonance of their considered views during the examination of the subject, the 
Ministry have started monitoring of the quota in filling Government vacancies. The 

17 
 
Committee also desire that rather than simply monitoring the vacancies, Agniveers, who 
are destined to go out of the service after a certain years of service, should be informed 
personally about the vacancies and ensure that they fill up the forms to appear for the 
required physical and written tests so that no vacancy remain unfilled. Considering the 
plight of family members/Next of Kin, the Committee desire after Martyrdom of an 
Agniveer, same benefits should be provided to their family members that are provided 
to the family of a regular soldier. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) There is no assured employment for each Agniveer on exit. 
b) However, there is an exhaustive skill development and certification 
programme in place for Agniveers while in service. Each Agniveer shall 
obtain two KaushalPramanPatras at NSQF level 4.5 as per his trade in Indian 
Army. Agniveers shall also accrue one National Trade Certificate (ITI) based 
on his trade.  
c) The forwarding Ministries have also catered for reservation in jobs or 
financial concessions for entrepreneur endeavors for existing Agniveers:- 
 
(i)  Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA):10% horizontal reservation to the post 
of Constable (GD)/Rifleman in CAPFs (CISF, SSB, ITBP, CRPF & BSF) & 
Assam Rifles. 
(ii)   Ministry of Defence (MoD):10% horizontal reservation in Group ‘A’, ‘B’, 
‘C’ and lower level posts. 
(iii) Ministry of Railways:Notification issued for 10% reservation in RPF & all 
Level-1 posts. 5% reservation in all Level-2 to 7 posts. 
(iv) Ministry of Finance (MoF): Soft loans will be extended to ex-Agniveers 
under various Govt. schemes for encouraging entrepreneurship. 
(v) Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME): Subsidies, 5% 
reservation in courses and loans under preferential schemes have been 
exended to ex-Agniveers by MSME. 
 
d) In terms of same benefits be provided to family of Agniveer on death on 
duty as for permanent cadre, the compensation is provided as specified in 
the terms and conditions of service by Government of India. 
 
e) Details of various naval civilian posts for employment of ex-Agniveersare 
sent to Commands with a request to advise Agniveers on avenues available 
to join the Indian Navy as Naval Defence Civilian on completion of the 
Agniveer engagement. Commands have also been requested to highlight the 
requirement of upgradation of their skill/ educational qualification as 
applicable to various posts. 
 
f) Through collaborative efforts with Ministry of Education (MoE) and Ministry 
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MoSDE), educational 
upgradation and up-skilling of Agniveervayu during his/her service period has 
been ensured. A detailed syllabus, training and job role matching was carried 
out with the relevant departments under both these Ministries towards 
identifying commonalities and equivalence. Based on the same, MoU have 
been inked by IAF with Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) and 

18 
 
National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) to facilitate award of Graduation 
degree and Senior Secondary qualification to Agniveervayu (AgV) and 
Agniveervayu Non Combatants (AgV NCs). To seamlessly facilitate the 
process, IAF has been awarded Dual Recognition as the Awarding Body 
(AB) as well as Assessment Agency (AA) by the National Council of 
Vocational Education and Training (NCVET). In addition, Director General of 
Training (DGT) under MoSDE would also facilitate award of National Trade 
Certificate (NTC) to AgV NCs. AgV and AgV NCs will be issued with subject 
qualification certificate after successful completion of four years of their 
engagement period.It would be ensured that Agniveers are informed 
personally about the Government vacancies in the last year of their tenure. 
 
g) At present, the following is admissible to NoK from the Agniveer Corpus 
Fund in case of his/ her death: - 
 
 
 
Category Entitlements of Agniveervayu 
Death during engagement 
period on Bonafide duty 
(Category ‘Y/Z’) 
 
 
 
 
(i) Insurance cover of Rs. 48 lakhs from 
Public Fund. 
(ii) One-time ex-gratia Rs. 44 lakhs from 
Public Fund. 
(iii) Full pay for unserved period upto four 
years (with effect from date of death) 
including Seva Nidhi component. 
(iv) Balance accumulated (as on date) in 
the individual’s Seva Nidhi fund and 
Govt contribution including interest 
from the Agniveer Corpus Fund. 
 
Death during engagement 
period not on duty 
(Category ‘X’) 
(i) Insurance Cover of Rs 48 lakhs from 
Public Fund. 
(ii) Balance accumulated (as on date) in 
the individual’s Seva Nidhi Fund and 
Govt contribution including interest 
from the Agniveer Corpus Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Vacancies in ZSBs 
 
Recommendation No. 5 : 
 
Vacancies in the ZSBs is yet another matter of concern for the Committee. The 
Committee understand that one of the major reasons is the reservation policy of the 
State Government which results in not filling up the posts in several categories leading 
to existence of perennial vacancies in the boards. In total, number of vacancies all over 
India is that of 530 Officers. It is a given fact that a shortage of manpower in any 
organization leads to inefficiency in the system and piling of unresolved cases which 
result into the non-fulfillment of the objectives of setting up of ZSBs. The Committee, 
therefore, in no uncertain words, recommend that these vacancies should be 
expeditiously filled up at the earliest in consultation with the State Governments 
concerned so that the ESM and their families do not wait for resolution of their 
grievances and keeping suffering the hardships. If required, a special recruitment drive 
may be undertaken to achieve the recommended ends. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issue of filling up of vacant post of officers and staff in the RSBs / ZSBs 
was discussed during 31st KSB meeting chaired by Hon`ble RM held on 11 
April 2023 at VigyanBhavan, New Delhi. The issue of vacant posts has also 
been highlighted through DO letters written by Secy (ESW) to all Chief Secys 
of States/UTs on 06 March 2024 vide DO No 1(6)/2024/D(Res-II) and Secy, 
KSB on 10 January 2024 vide DO No 106/Policy/Apptpolicy/Vol-1 
respectively. During the last one year(2023) one (01) Director and eighty two 
(82) ZilaSainik Welfare Officers (ZSWOs) have been appointed in 
RSB/ZSBs.  In order to encourage employment of only ESM in RSBs/ZSBs 
the Central Share is given only for pay of ESM staff. However, each state has 
their own employment rules.  
 
 
Frequency of meetings of ZSBs 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 : 
 
The Committee note that structure of ZilaSainik Board for resolving the 
grievances of Ex-Servicemen, widows and their dependents includes a procedure 
wherein, the grievances are received at DESW/KendriyaSainik Board (KSB)/ 
RajyaSainik Boards (RSBs/ ZilaSainik Boards (ZSBs) through various means including 
online submission for their eventual resolution. 
 

21 
 
 The Committee also note that the interdependence in the functioning of bodies 
for resolution of the grievances of the ex-servicemen wherein at the apex level, KSB is 
issuing policy guidelines and also administers the various welfare schemes funded from 
Armed Forces Flag Day Fund (AFFDF).  The RSB oversees the State govt schemes 
and ZSBs have the day-to-day interface with ESM. All the applications for various 
welfare schemes and any other administrative requirement of ESM are routed through 
the ZSBs to the concerned State/ Central Govt authority. 
 
 Since ZSBs need to meet to resolve the grievances of ESM and their family 
members, therefore, the Committee were desirous of the knowing the prescribed norms 
regarding the number of meetings of ZSBs to be held in a year and the actual number of 
meetings held in various ZSBs during each of the last five years. The Committee also 
wanted to know whether the District Magistrates actually attend and head the meetings 
or if any other Senior Officer does it on their behalf under the delegated authority. The 
Committee also desired to know the exact figures in regard to the meetings not actually 
attended by the DMs in the last five years. The Committee are surprised that despite 
reminders, till the time of presentation of the report, the information on both the issues 
could not be provided to the Committee secretariat. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to oversee the affairs of the functioning of KSBs so that such 
basic information are kept ready in the records. At-least now, the Committee should be 
furnished the complete details in one lot in regard to the meetings under reference. 
They also desire that for the benefit of all, such information can be uploaded on the 
website of the Ministry/KSB for ready reference of all concerned. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The details of number of ZSB meetings held, attended by District Magistrate 
and decisions taken & implemented in States/UTs in the last five years,as 
received from the RSBs are attached as Enclosure -1. 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/REPLIES AWAITED 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          NEW DELHI;                                               RADHA MOHAN SINGH, 
17 December, 2024                                                            Chairperson, 
26 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Defence. 
 
 

23 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25)  
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 12th December, 2024 from 1500 hrs. to 
1515 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘53’, Samvidhan Sadan , New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
5 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
6 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
7 Ms. S. Jothimani 
8 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Shri Lumba Ram 
11 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
12 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
13 Shri Virendra Singh 
14 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
15 Com. Selvaraj V. 
16 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
17 Shri Naresh Bansal  
18 Shri N. Chandrasegharan 

24 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das  - Director   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Reports:- 
(i) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 
on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian 
Coast Guard, Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public 
Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence 
Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’; 
(ii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 
on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff and Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(iii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 
on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and 
Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’;  
(iv) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 
on ‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services–New 
DPSUs) and Defence Research and Development Organisation 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘A Review of the Working of the Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)’; and 
(vi) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-Seventh 
Report (17th Lok Sabha)  on the subject ‘A Review of Functioning of 
Zila Sainik Boards in the Country’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications.  
 
19 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
20 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
21 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

25 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament on a date convenient to 
him.  
5. ***Does not pertain to the Report*** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

26 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-SEVENTH 
REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (17TH LOK SABHA) ON THE 
SUBJECT ‘A REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF ZILA SAINIK BOARDS IN THE 
COUNTRY’. 
 
1.  Total number of 
recommendations                                                                              14 
               
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(please see Chapter II): 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14 
Total : 12 
Percentage: 85.71% 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
Recommendation Para No. –Nil-                                           
Total : 0 
Percentage: 00 % 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee, which require reiteration and 
commented upon (please see Chapter IV):  
Recommendation Para No. 5 and 6                                    
Total : 2 
Percentage: 14.28% 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies/replies awaited (please see Chapter V): 
Recommendation Para No. –Nil-                                    
Total : 0 
Percentage: 00 % 
 
 