i 
 
25 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on 
‘Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
and Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services  (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’] 
 
 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2026 / Sravana 1948 (Saka) 

ii 
 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on 
`Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
and Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services  (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2026 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2026 / Sravana 1948 (Saka) 


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) ……………………....…. iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... vi 
  
 
CHAPTER  I Report…………………………………………………………….. 1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  17 
 by the Government 
   
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 54 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 55 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final  56 
  replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  57 
 (2025-26) held on 04.08.2026. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on `Army, Air Force, 
Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and 
Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services  (Demand Nos. 
20 and 21)’. 
             60 

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2026-27) 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
*Smt. Darshana Singh, Dr. Santrupt Misra and Shri Parth Ajit Pawar have been nominated to the Standing Committee on 
Defence (2025-26) w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 5267 dated 04.06.2026 
@ Shri Pawan Khera nominated to the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26) w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 5724 
dated 24.07.2026 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
24 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
25 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
26 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
27 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
28 Smt. Darshana Singh * 
29 Dr. Santrupt Misra* 
30 Shri Parth Ajit Pawar * 
31 Shri Pawan Khera@ 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mallick    - Joint Secretary 
2.        Shri Amrish Kumar    - Director 
3. Shri Anjorem Kerketta    - Under Secretary   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on `Army, Air 
Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and Director 
General of Armed Forces Medical Services  (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
 
2.  The Twentieth Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 18th March, 2026. The Report contained 34 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in July, 2026. 
 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 4th August, 2026. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
04 August, 2026 Chairperson 
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence  

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme and Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 18 March, 2026.  
  
2. The Twentieth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 34 
observations/ recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No.  Subject  
Army 
1-2 Budgetary allocation and utilization of Army 
3 Percentage Share of Army Budget 
4 Budget for Modernization 
5 Modernisation and Modern Warfare Tactics 
6 Indigenization 
7 Force level of Army 
8 Women empowerment 
9 Preparedness for Hybrid war, including Kinetic and Non-Kinetic 
warfare 
10 Role of Army during humanitarian assistance and disaster 
Air Force 
11-12 Budgetary allocation and utilization of Air Force 
13 Percentage Share of Air Force Budget 
14 Budget for Modernization 
15 Planning for development of Sixth-Generation(6G) aircrafts 
16 Indigenization 
17 Operational preparedness and combat capabilities 
18 Role of Air Force during Human assistance and disaster 
Indian Navy 
19 Budgetary allocation and utilization of Navy 
20 Budget for Modernization 
21 Indigenisation 
22 Operational Preparedness and anti-narcotic operations 
23 Human assistance and disaster relief operations 
Joint Staff 
24 Budget 
25 Operationalization of theatre commands 
ECHS 
26 Budget  
27 Vacancies in ECHS Polyclinics 
28 Development of IT Infrastructure for ECHS 

2 
 
29 Payment of pending bills by ECHS to empanelled private 
hospitals 
30 ECHS in far-flung areas  
Directorate General Armed Force Medical Services (DFAFMS) 
 
31 DGAFMS 
32 Role of AFMS in War, Peace and HADR duties 
33 Training and Medical Research in AFMS 
34 Initiatives for Automation/Digitization in AFMS 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 34 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  The replies have been 
examined and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government (Chapter II): 
 
  Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24, 
          26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34  
 
 (Total - 33) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
(Chapter III): 
 
Para Nos.  -NIL-              (Total -0) 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. -NIL-             (Total - 0)  
  
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
 
  Para Nos.  25 
 (Total - 1) 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case 
not later than six months of the presentation of this report.  
 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendation/observations made in the Twentieth Report in the succeeding 
Paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
A. Budgetary allocation and utilization of Army 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1 & 2  
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
     “The Committee learnt that the total allocated budget for the Ministry of Defence 
for Financial year 2026-27 is Rs. 7,84,678.28 crore.  Out of which, the largest share 
of 74.52%, i.e. Rs. 5,84,785.45 crore has been allocated for Defence Services 
Estimates (DSE) (Grant No. 20 and 21). The Capital Outlay on Defence Services 
(Grant No. 21) is Rs. 2,19,306.47 crore and an amount of Rs. 3,65,478.98 crore 
allocated to Defence Services Revenue (Grant No. 20).  Out of the total Defence 
Services Revenue, an amount of Rs. 2,41,968.98 crore has been allocated for FY 
2026-27 to Army under Revenue head which is approx. 60% and in Capital head 
Rs. 41,672.94 crore allocated which is 19% of the total Capital Outlay of Defence 
Services.   Similarly, Air Force has been allocated an amount of Rs. 63,150.00 crore 
under Revenue head for FY 2026-27 which is approx. 17% of the total Defence 
Services Revenue and an amount of Rs. 88809.97 crore allocated under Capital 
head which is approx.  40% of the total Capital outlay on Defence Services. Further, 
Navy has been allocated an amount of Rs. 46,800.00 crore under Revenue head for 
FY 2026-27 which is approx. 13% of the total Defence Services Revenue and an 
amount of Rs. 70063.31 crore allocated under Capital head which is approx.  32% 
of the total Capital outlay on Defence Services.  The Committee appreciate the 
enhanced and favourable allocation both in Revenue and Capital heads to Army, Air 
Force and Navy for FY 2026-27 in comparison to the previous years to fulfil their 
liabilities.    
 
  2. The Committee note that the security challenges confronting our nation are 
diverse and intricate. The Indian Army recognizes these complexities alongside the 
swiftly changing geopolitical, socio-economic and technological landscapes. 
Consequently, the Indian Army has designated the period from 2022 to 2032 as the 
`Decade of Transformation’ to build a future ready force. The Committee also note 
that while continuously assessing operational readiness, the Indian Army remains 
dedicated to advancing national interests and protecting the country’s sovereignty 
and unity from both external and internal threats.   
 
  3.       To perform all the duties with perfection, the Army needs Revenue as well as 
Capital Budget as per the projection. Under Revenue Head, the Army had projected 
Rs. 2,61,542.98 crore for the financial year 2026-27, for Revenue against which the 
allocation is Rs. 2,41,968.98 crore, which is Rs. 19574 crore less than the 
projection. However, the Committee are happy to note that the allocation has been 
increased from Rs. 2,06,200 crore which stand as an increase of Rs.35768.98 core 
which is 17.34 percent. During the financial year 2025-26, against the projection of 
Rs  2,14,727.72 crore, it was allocated Rs. 2,06,200.00 crore, which was reduced by 
Rs. 8527.72 crore. In the RE same year, the Army made a projection of Rs. 
2,38,807.48 crore but the allocation was Rs 2,29,648.71 crore. The Committee find 
that during FY 2025-26, Rs 1,64,465.05 crore was spent till December, 2025 and Rs 
65183.66 crore will be spent in the coming three months. The Committee, hope that 
the Ministry would take prudent fiscal planning and concerted efforts to spend the 
remaining amount in the remaining period of the financial year without any savings. 
The Committee would like to know the final outcome in this regard from the Ministry 
consequent to the end of Financial Year while furnishing the Action Taken Notes. 

4 
 
The Committee hope that this increasing trend of Revenue budget will be continuing 
in future financial years.   The Committee understand that a major portion of the 
budget primarily goes towards salary/recurring expenses which is a fixed 
expenditure. The non-salary expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, ration, 
transportation, fuel, etc. which are essential for regular training and operational 
preparedness of the Army. During the year 2026–27, the allocation under non-
salary expenditure has been fixed at Rs.85,841 crore, as against Rs.60,672 crore in 
2025-26, reflecting a substantial increase of Rs.25,169 crore. When compared with 
the rise of Rs. 10,281 crore between 2024- 25 and 2025-26, this enhanced 
allocation marks a significant and welcome step forward. The Committee notes with 
appreciation the upward trend in non-salary expenditure and emphasizes that this 
positive trajectory should be sustained in the coming years. It is further reiterated 
that regular consultations with the Ministry of Finance at the highest level must be 
undertaken promptly once proposals for subsequent budgets are formulated, to 
ensure continuity and strengthening of this trend. 
 
 
    Under Capital Head, the Committee are happy to note that  since the year 
2023-24 till  2026-27, the Army   has been allocated the full amount as per their 
projection. During the BE for the financial year 2026-27, Army’s projection was Rs. 
41,672.94 crore and they have allocated the same amount. In RE of 2025-26, the 
projection of the Army was Rs. 36,198.43 crore and the allocation was Rs. 
35,239.66 crore. The Committee find that upto December 2025, Rs. 26810.53 crore 
has been spent. The Committee hope that the remaining fund will be gainfully 
utilized by the end of the current financial year.  The Committee understand that 
Capital Budget usually provides for expenditure on modernisation, enhancement of 
force level, infrastructure development, etc, which are essential not only for the 
modernization of the Army but also to safeguard territorial integrity of the nation. 
Over the years the cost of force level and infrastructure development also 
increasing. The Committee feel that the allocation for Capital budget should be 
incremental in nature, so that it can absorb the inflationary trends. While 
commending the Army’s decisive role in safeguarding national security during 
Operation Sindoor, the Committee emphasizes the need for sustained investment in 
defence preparedness. It urges that future budgets should prioritize the induction of 
state-of-the-art weapon systems and the development of requisite infrastructure, so 
that the Army’s hallmark swiftness and coordinated response to diverse security 
scenarios can be maintained and further strengthened.  
 
  2. The Committee also expect that our expenditure should be in proportion to the 
increase in defence spending of our neighbours. Therefore, the Committee feel that 
the Capital Budget of the Army should be sufficient to have a deterrent capacity to 
ward off adversaries in case of any hostility.” 
 
 
7. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
   “With respect to the fund utilisation by Army in FY 2025-26, under Capital 
head, the Committee is apprised that Army has fully utilised the Capital Budget. 
 
2. Further, it is submitted that it may not be appropriate to link the 
expenditure of Service(s) to the Defence Expenditure of neighbouring countries 
because India’s neighbouring countries vary in geographical size, GDP, 
population, etc. However, while projecting the requirement of funds under 
Capital Head, assessment of existing capability of the Forces is done in the light 

5 
 
of prevailing security situation along the borders and operational preparedness 
of the Armed Forces. Further, the Capital Acquisition plans of MoD are designed 
to cater for the long term and short term requirement of the Services and funds 
are projected based on anticipated cash outgo on yearly basis.  
 
3. Further, the Committee’s attention is invited towards the fact that Army 
has been allocated 100% of its projection under Capital Head since 2023-24, 
and, if required, this Ministry will seek additional allocation at RE/Supplementary 
Stages so that Army’s operational preparedness is not impacted adversely.” 
 
 
8. The Committee are pleased to note from the Action Taken reply that Army 
has fully utilised the Capital Budget in FY 2025-26.  The Committee also note that 
Army has been allocated 100% of its projection under Capital Head since 2023-24, 
and, if required, Ministry would seek additional allocation at RE/Supplementary 
Stages so that Army’s operational preparedness is not impacted adversely.   
The Committee, in its original report had recommended that our expenditure 
should be in proportion to the increase in defence spending of our neighbours. The 
Committee note from the Ministry’s Action Taken reply that it may not be 
appropriate to link the expenditure of Service(s) to the Defence Expenditure of 
neighbouring countries because India’s neighbouring countries vary in 
geographical size, GDP, population, etc. However, while projecting the requirement 
of funds under Capital Head, assessment of existing capability of the Forces is 
done in the light of prevailing security situation along the borders and operational 
preparedness of the Armed Forces. The Committee also note that the Capital 
Acquisition plans of Ministry of Defence are designed to cater to the long term and 
short term requirement of the Services and funds are projected based on 
anticipated cash outgo on yearly basis. 
 
        Further, the Committee in their original report had observed that out of RE 
allocation for FY 2025-26 of Rs. 2,29,648.71 crore under Revenue head, only Rs. 
1,64,465.05 crore was spent till December, 2025 and Rs. 65,183.66 crore was to be 
spent in the next three months.  Therefore, it urged for prudent fiscal planning and 
concerted efforts to spend the remaining amount in the remaining period of the 
financial year without any savings. The Committee had further desired to be 
apprised of the final outcome thereon consequent to the end of Financial Year 
while furnishing the Action Taken Notes.  However, the Ministry has not furnished 
information in this regard.  The Committee may be informed about the same while 
furnishing Action Taken Statement. 

6 
 
 
 
B. Planning for development of Sixth-Generation(6G) aircrafts 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
   “The Committee have been informed that two consortia are working on the 
sixth-generation aircraft. One is a consortium of the UK, Italy, and Japan and the 
another is a consortium of France and Germany and both are developing aircraft. 
The Committee have also been informed that Air Force will try to join forces with 
one of the consortia and begin considering a sixth generation fighter right away 
with a view to ensure that they do not lag behind in achieving the target for 
advanced aircraft. The Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft (AMCA) has been 
developed the design and discussions for its making are currently underway. The 
Committee understand that in view of technical advancement of fighter aircrafts 
globally and to meet the present security scenario, technical upgradation of 
aircrafts is required on top priority for enhancement of its combat capability.  The 
Committee recommend the Ministry to chalk out a trajectory in this regard and 
step forward the planning process for development and acquisition of Sixth-
Generation (6G) Aircrafts which would eventually enhance India’s air domain 
capabilities in today’s highly air-centric modern warfare. The progress made in 
this regard may kindly be intimated to the Committee at the time of furnishing the 
Action Taken Notes.” 
 
 
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
   “The Ministry of Defence has initiated efforts in a concerted manner to co-join 
the 6th Generation Fighter Aircraft Development Programme viz. Future Combat 
Air System (FCAS) spearheaded by the French Government.” 
 
11. With respect to the recommendation of the Committee, to chalk out a 
trajectory for requirement of technical upgradation of aircrafts on top priority for 
enhancement of its combat capability and stepping forward the planning process 
for development and acquisition of Sixth-Generation (6G) Aircrafts which would 
eventually enhance India’s air domain capabilities in today’s highly air-centric 
modern warfare, the Committee are pleased to note from the Action Taken reply 
that Ministry of Defence has initiated efforts in a concerted manner to co-join the 
6th Generation Fighter Aircraft Development Programme viz. Future Combat Air 
System (FCAS) spearheaded by the French Government. In this regard, detailed 
status report in development of acquisition of Sixth-Generation (6G) Aircrafts and 
any roadmap prepared alongwith tentative timeline for acquisition of such Aircrafts 
may be given at the time of submitting Action Taken Statement for the perusal of 
the Committee.  

7 
 
          The Committee, therefore, while acknowledging the need for enhancement of 
India’s air domain capabilities in today’s highly air-centric modern warfare desire 
that status report on development and making of Advanced Medium Combat 
Aircraft (AMCA) may also be given at the time of submitting Action Taken 
Statement for the perusal of the Committee.  
 
C. Budget for Modernization- Indian Navy 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee note that since 2021, there has been a continuous increase in 
the Navy's budget and Navy has been allocated a total Rs. 1,07,549.57 crores for 
FY 2026-27. The Committee have been apprised that in FY 2025-26, Navy 
(including Jt. Staff) was allocated Rs. 62,975.97 crore and Rs. 67,236.23 crore at 
BE and RE stage, respectively, under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) Head. 
Against these allocations, an expenditure of Rs. 48,187.57 crore has been 
incurred upto December, 2025. Further, in BE 2026-27, an allocation of Rs. 
67,524.45 crore has been made to Navy (including Jt. Staff) under Modernisation 
(Capital Acquisition) Head. The Committee have been informed that in case the 
expenditures exceed, the allocation will be provided in the revised estimates by 
the Ministry of Finance. The Committee have also been informed that capital 
budget allocations are also increasing as needed, reflecting our focus on 
capability development. The Committee are happy to note that domestic to 
foreign capital expenditure ratio has also been steadily increasing since 2020 and 
the increase in domestic expenditure is attributed to the Government's 
indigenization efforts.  The Committee note that the Navy's day-to-day operations 
and maintenance costs are paid  from the revenue budget which is consistent 
with the projected expenditure. The Committee also note that the Navy has 
achieved a healthy capital-to-revenue ratio and has continuously improving it as a 
result of our capability-driven approach.   
 
2.  The Committee further note that consistent budgetary support in the future 
is essential for the Navy's sustained planned growth and Navy are confident that 
they will become even stronger and more capable in the coming years. The 
Committee have also been informed that the Indian Navy Incubation Centre for 
Artificial Intelligence (INICAI) has been working continuously for the last three 
years to institutionalize AI adoption.  The dedicated compute center CRYSTAL 
with 24 GPUs is being used for the development, training and testing of advanced 
AI models. The Committee through supplementary reply have been informed that 
the fund allocated to Navy under Capital Acquisition (Modernization) Head of 
Accounts was utilized to support several new schemes in addition to supporting 
committed liabilities covering ongoing cases. The significant new projects include 
contract for 26 Rafale-M Aircraft, follow on Support/Follow on Supply Support of 
MH60R Helicopters and  Heavy Weight Torpedoes for Scorpene class 
submarines, among other projects.  The Committee have been informed further 
that out of the Modernization Budget, the Navy has been allocated Rs.47,748.31 
Cr (73.57%) for Committed Liabilities and Rs.17,146.28 Cr (26.43%) for New 
Schemes.  
 

8 
 
3.       Keeping in view the urgent requirement of modernization of the Armed 
Forces in view of the current global geo-political scenario, the Committee are 
hopeful that Navy shall gainfully utilize the allocated fund for modernization and 
technological upgradation in their platforms, infrastructure and armaments on 
priority for enhancing the naval capabilities, latest and advanced technology, 
naval fleets, equipments, vessels, weapons, etc. at par with the global 
standards.” 
 
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The Indian Navy is continually modernising to address emergent 
challenges in the maritime domain. The modernisation of Indian navy is centred 
on acquiring capabilities based on threat perception prevailing external security 
environment, emerging technologies and available fiscal space. Capability 
development is an ongoing process and is progressed in accordance with the 15-
year plan document namely Long Term Integrated Capability Perspective Plan 
(LTIPP), promulgated in 2012. Currently, the formulation of Integrated Capability 
Development Plan (ICDP), which is the replacement of LTIPP, is in progress and 
is being steered by HQIDS.” 
 
14. The Committee are pleased to note from the Action Taken reply that the 
Indian Navy is continuously striving towards modernisation  to address emergent 
challenges in the maritime domain. The Committee also note from the Ministry’s 
reply that the modernisation of Indian navy is centred on acquiring capabilities 
based on threat perception prevailing in external security environment, emerging 
technologies and available fiscal space. The Committee have been further apprised 
that Capability development is an ongoing process and is progressed in 
accordance with the 15-year plan document namely Long Term Integrated 
Capability Perspective Plan (LTIPP), promulgated in 2012. Further, the Committee 
also note that currently, the formulation of Integrated Capability Development Plan 
(ICDP), which is the replacement of LTIPP, is in progress and is being steered by 
HQIDS. 
In this regard, keeping in view the urgent requirement of modernization of 
the Armed Forces in view of the current global geo-political scenario, a progress 
report on the formulation of Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP) may be 
given at the time of submitting Action Taken Statement for the perusal of the 
Committee. 
 
D. Vacancies in ECHS Polyclinics 
 
Recommendation No. 27 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 

9 
 
     “The Committee find that there is a marginal gap between authorized and 
actual manpower at ECHS Polyclinics in some posts. The Committee have been 
informed that vacancies arise primarily due to the non-availability of Specialists in 
small towns and remote areas and this vacancy position is a dynamic figure and 
changes.  The Committee note that ECHS Polyclinics are functioning with 
contractual manpower authorised by the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, 
Ministry of Defence from time to time and as on January 2026, a total of 8,252 
contractual Medical/ Dental Officers, specialists, para medical staff and 
nonmedical staff vacancies have been allocated to Polyclinics across the country 
including Nepal. The Committee are happy to know that the Government has 
revised upwards the remunerations of ECHS contractual employees with effect 
from 24 July 2025 with a view to improve the interest and response for taking up 
contractual assignments with ECHS. Further, Traveling Allowance/ Dearness 
Allowance has also been granted to these contractual employees.  
 
2. Recognizing that the timely filling of vacancies in hospitals and polyclinics 
will significantly strengthen healthcare services for ex-servicemen, the Committee 
recommend that these vacancies be addressed in a time-bound manner. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard.” 
 
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
     “1. ECHS is making continual efforts to fill the contractual vacancies at the 
polyclinics.   Vacancies are duly advertised in local newspapers and media, and 
the selection boards are conducted regularly to fill up the vacant posts. As a result, 
the authorization and posting of contractual manpower at ECHS Polyclinics as on 
31.03.2026 is tabulated as under: 
 
Category of 
Manpower 
 
Authorized Engaged Vacancy Remarks 
Medical Staff 2144 2103 41 At Polyclinics yet to 
be operationalized, 
the vacancies are 
yet to be filled. 
Paramedical staff 2840 2823 17 
Non-medical staff 2832 2787 45 
Officer-in-charge 436 436 0 
Total 8252 8149 103 
 
2. The tabulation above shows an overall vacancy of 103 persons at the 
Polyclinics; there are 06 newly Polyclinics are yet to be operationalized.   
 
3. The gap between the authorised and the actual manpower is mainly due to 
non-availability of candidates at remote locations.  To mitigate this gap, on 24 Jul 
2025, Government has increased the remuneration by approx. 30% for contractual 
employees employed at Ex-Contributory Health Scheme polyclinics.  Enhanced 
remuneration along with provision of Travelling Allowance/Dearness Allowance will 
encourage applicants to apply for polyclinics located in remote areas for providing 
quality healthcare to beneficiaries.  
 
4. It is proposed to operationalize the remaining six polyclinics during FY 
2026-27 and also fill the remaining vacancies.” 
 
17. With respect to the recommendation of the Committee that the vacancies 
ought to be addressed in a time-bound manner in ECHS hospitals and polyclinics, 

10 
 
the Committee are pleased to note from the Action Take reply that ECHS is making 
continuous efforts to fill the contractual vacancies at the polyclinics.  The 
Committee also note that vacancies are duly advertised in local newspapers and 
media, and the selection boards are conducted regularly to fill up the vacant posts. 
The Committee while examining the Action Taken replies find from the tabulation 
that there is a total vacancy of 103 persons at the ECHS Polyclinics in the 
categories of Medical Staff, Paramedical staff and Non-medical staff as 06 newly 
Polyclinics are yet to be operationalized and it is proposed to be operationalized 
during FY 2026-27 and also filling the remaining vacancies. In this regard, 
acknowledging the timely filling of vacancies in hospitals and polyclinics for 
significantly strengthening healthcare services for ex-servicemen, the Committee 
reiterates their earlier recommendation that these vacancies may be addressed in a 
time-bound manner so that hospitals and polyclinics may not face any constraint 
in treatment of ECHS beneficiary. A detailed status report containing the efforts 
made for action plan, if any, and proposed timeline for operationalizing the 
remaining six polyclinics in this regard may be furnished at the time of submitting 
Action Taken Statement for the perusal of the Committee. 
  
 
E.  Development of IT Infrastructure for ECHS 
 
Recommendation No. 28  
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee have been informed that an unified system based on Micro 
Service Architecture has been envisaged with an aim to digitally transform the 
healthcare service delivery ecosystem of ECHS and develop a unified IT system 
for seamless and end-to-end management of scheme operations by providing a 
comprehensive, integrated and automated platform which can efficiently drive the 
inputs, processes and scheme outcomes. The Committee have also been apprised 
that the project is to be developed through an ‘In-house Capability Development 
Programme’ so that the digitalization process will enable the ECHS eco-system to 
operate more efficiently, improve access and quality to healthcare services for ex-
servicemen and their dependent families and reduce the burden on the manual 
system. The Committee appreciate the efforts taken by ECHS towards 
digitalization process of healthcare system and wish them all success in their 
endeavour.  The Committee recommend for timely completion of the projects 
which are underway so that ECHS eco-system may function more efficiently in 
providing healthcare facilities to Ex Servicemen and their dependants. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the final development of the unified IT 
system and its implementation in the eco-system of ECHS at the time of furnishing 
the Action Take replies.” 
 

11 
 
19. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
     “The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare and the CO of the Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme have as a first step in August 2025; decided to move 
the ECHS data to the National Government Cloud. The Government Cloud is a 
unique cloud service being offered for all Government projects. It offers various IT 
infrastructure for Compute, Storage, Kubernetes, Database and Network in a 
Secured Data Centre operated by National Informatics Centre. 
 
2. Moving the ECHS data to the National Government Cloud (NGC) is the 
foundation for seamless and end-to-end management of scheme operations with 
data security. It will result in better management of health services for our veterans 
and their dependents. The migration of Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme application to National Government Cloud is under progress, after this is 
completed, it is planned to start biometric authentication through e-Satyapan for all 
ECHS beneficiaries to strengthen the digitization process at ECHS.” 
 
20. The Committee are pleased to note that the Department of Ex-Servicemen 
Welfare and the CO of the Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme have as a 
first step in August 2025, decided to move the ECHS data to the National 
Government Cloud. The Committee also note that the Government Cloud is a 
unique cloud service being offered for all Government projects. It offers various IT 
infrastructure for Compute, Storage, Kubernetes, Database and Network in a 
Secured Data Centre operated by National Informatics Centre. 
 
 The Committee further note that moving the ECHS data to the National 
Government Cloud (NGC) is the foundation for seamless and end-to-end 
management of scheme operations with data security. Further, the Committee also 
agree that it will result in better management of health services for our veterans 
and their dependents. The Committee observed from the Ministry’s reply that the 
migration of Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme application to National 
Government Cloud is under progress and after its completion, it is planned to start 
biometric authentication through e-Satyapan for all ECHS beneficiaries to 
strengthen the digitization process at ECHS. The Committee, therefore, while 
acknowledging the role and importance of digitalization process for enabling the 
ECHS eco-system to operate more efficiently, improve access and quality to 
healthcare services for ex-servicemen and their dependent families, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation for timely completion of the projects which are underway 
so that ECHS eco-system may function more efficiently in providing healthcare 
facilities to Ex Servicemen and their dependants. 

12 
 
 Further, the Committee are hopeful that the e-Satyapan plan as informed by 
Ministry in their reply, would be developed and implemented in a time bound 
manner so that ECHS beneficiaries may avail the treatment facilities without any 
delay. A detailed status report containing the development for migration of ECHS 
application to National Government Cloud and also plan for biometric 
authentication through e-Satyapan may be furnished at the time of submitting 
Action Taken Statement for the perusal of the Committee. 
  
  
F. DGAFMS 
Recommendation No. 31  
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee note that the Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) provides 
dedicated, dependable and comprehensive health care to Defence Personnel and 
their dependents and consists of Medical Services of the Army, Navy and Air 
Force under the Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services (DGAFMS).  
The Committee also note that the organization of the office of DGAFMS, which 
comes directly under the Ministry of Defence comprises 10 lieutenant generals, 41 
major generals, 185 brigadiers, and 732 select colonels. The Committee have 
been informed that the heads of medical services of Army, Navy and Air Force will 
be responsible for functioning of these services under the respective Service 
Chiefs in accordance with any general policy directions that may be given by the 
DGAFMS and are the Medical Advisors to their respective Services.  The 
Committee have also been apprised that the AFMS is always striving to upgrade 
the infrastructure and equipment profile of its hospitals and other medical 
establishments and procurement of modern electromedical equipment empowering 
AFMS hospitals with latest diagnostic and therapeutic tools have led to a greater 
satisfaction among its clientele alongwith research in AFMS that has ensured 
optimal progress in modern medical technology for treatment and diagnosis of 
diseases.  Also, the professional training of doctors in AFMS has ensured in-house 
capability of specialists and super specialist medical care.   
 
2. During oral evidence the representative of DGAFMS through a presentation 
apprised the Committee that an amount of Rs. 1729.6278 crore  has been allotted 
under Revenue head and Rs. 850.0000 crore under Capital head for the FY 2026-
27. As regards, utilization of  allocated Funds for FY 2025-26 (till December 2025) 
i.e. Rs. 650 crore and 1744.42 crore (approx.) under Revenue head and Capital 
head, respectively. They stated that  the Funds allotted were adequate. The 
Committee note that some major projects are underway for 
upgradation/modernization of the infrastructure i.e. Command Hospital (Central 
Command) Lucknow, Base Hospital, Delhi Cantonment, Command Hospital (Air 
Force) Bangalore, 178 Military Hospital, 155 Base Hospital, Military Hospital, 
Meerut, Military Hospital, Yol, 92 Base Hospital, 425 Field Hospital and Indian 
Naval Hospital Ship, Pantanjali, Karwar and in addition upgradation of 180 Military 
Hospital from 148 beds to 250 beds, 153 General Hospital from 200 beds to 300 
beds and raising of 75 bedded Military Hospital at Along have been sanctioned by 
competent authority as part of capability development along northern borders.  
While appreciating the role and responsibilities of DGAFMS in medical services, 

13 
 
the Committee recommend the Ministry to provide adequate financial grants to 
DGAFMS in case of setting up of new hospitals/medical facilities and also 
upgradation of existing hospitals which are required for serving personnel of the 
Armed Forces.” 
 
22. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
     (a)   Some major projects underway for upgradation/modernization of the 
infrastructure are as follows:  
• Command Hospital (Central Command), Lucknow 
• Base Hospital, Delhi Cantt.  
• 178 Military Hospital 
• 155 Base Hospital 
• Military Hospital, Meerut 
• Military Hospital, YoI 
• 92 Base Hospital 
• 425 Field Hospital 
• Command Hospital Air Force (CHAF), Bangalore 
• 5 Air Force Hospital 
• Indian Naval Hospital Ship, Patanjali, Karwar 
 
(b)   Following raisings/up-gradations as part of capability development along 
northern borders has been sanctioned by competent authority:  
 
• Up-gradation of 180 Military Hospital from 148 beds to 250 beds. 
• Up-gradation of 153 General Hospital from 200 beds to 300 beds. 
• Raising of 75 bedded Military Hospital at Along. 
 
(c)   Progress of ongoing hospital projects are being monitored proactively. 
 
(d)  Funds for raising of new hospitals/medical facilities and upgradation of 
infrastructure of existing hospitals are demanded/provided through respective 
service Headquarters and subsequently submitted for the Ministry of Defence’s 
approval. 
 
23. The Committee are pleased to note from the Action Taken reply that up-
gradations of 180 Military Hospital from 148 beds to 250 beds, 153 General Hospital 
from 200 beds  to 300 beds and raising of 75 bedded Military Hospital at Along are 
part of capability development along northern borders and has been sanctioned by 
competent authority. The Committee also note that progress of ongoing hospital 
projects are being monitored proactively. The Committee are further pleased to 
note that Funds for raising of new hospitals/medical facilities and upgradation of 
infrastructure of existing hospitals are demanded/provided through respective 
service Headquarters and subsequently submitted for the Ministry of Defence’s 
approval.  
 

14 
 
          The Committee while examining the Action Taken replies observe that some 
major projects i.e. Command Hospital (Central Command), Lucknow,  Base Hospital, 
Delhi Cantt., 178 Military Hospital, 155 Base Hospital, Military Hospital, Meerut, 
Military Hospital, YoI, 92 Base Hospital, 425 Field Hospital, Command Hospital Air 
Force (CHAF), Bangalore, 5 Air Force Hospital and Indian Naval Hospital Ship, 
Patanjali, Karwar are underway for upgradation/modernization of the infrastructure. 
In this regard, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and are hopeful 
that the Ministry would provide adequate financial grants to DGAFMS in case of 
setting up of new hospitals/medical facilities and also for upgradation of existing 
hospitals which are required for serving personnel of the Armed Forces so that 
Defence Personnel and their dependents would be benefited from better quality 
medical facilities from these hospitals.  A status report on the major projects which 
are underway for upgradation/modernization of the infrastructure may be furnished 
at the time of submitting Action Taken Statement for the perusal of the Committee. 
 
 
G.  Training and Medical Research in AFMS 
 
Recommendation No. 33  
 
24. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee note that the Armed Forces Medical Services trains all kinds of 
medical, postgraduates and nursing students and there are 220 nursing cadets 
who are taken in every year alongside several research and innovation practices 
and innovative activities occurs in the AFMS. The Committee also note that the 
Armed Forces Centre for Computational Medicine has been established and it 
participated in a one-hour round table discussion at the AI Impact Summit. During 
oral evidence the representative of AFMS through a presentation apprised the 
Committee that Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) established by AFMS at Army 
Hospital Research and Referral and the Armed Forces Medical College which 
aims at enhancing molecular diagnostic capabilities. Morevoer, the nation's first 
licensed facility for frozen RBCs is located at the Armed Forces Transfusion 
Centre in Delhi, which can provide blood with a shelf life of up to ten years.  
Further, in-Principle approval of MoD has been accorded for establishment of an 
ICMR-AFMS Joint High Altitude Research Centre at Key long, Himachal Pradesh.  
The Committee have also been informed that there are several collaborative 
projects and several collaborations and MoUs with several premier institutions 
around the country, such as the IITs, DPG, Chandigarh, the IISC and the MHFW.   
 
2. The Committee were further informed that there are several collaborative 
projects ongoing, including with the ICMR and the National Health Research 
Priority, which serves to start projects on high-altitude combat, marine and 
aerospace medicine and in this regard seven such projects have been approved. 
The Committee note that there is a Center of Advanced Research, which is the 
AFS Biomedical Innovations Validation Integration Center in AFMC. The 

15 
 
Committee also note AFMS has contributed to the One Health Mission by 
providing expertise in various fields and is part of the One Health Conclave and 
which directly coordinates with various organizations such as the MEA, the MHFW, 
as well as MHA, the NDRF, the NACCO, and the CPCB. Expressing their 
satisfaction over the training and research programme provided to medical 
personnel by AFMS, the Committee recommend that the AFMS should keep its 
training and research curriculum up-to-date with the modern technologies, medical 
advancements and innovations with the aim of providing efficient medical facilities 
to  armed force personnel at the time of traditional as well as modern warfare.  It 
may be emphasised here that AFMS should keep abreast with the new and 
modern courses not only from the viewpoint of diagnostic doctors but also in the 
field of pharmacy related developments which are essential for modern medical 
care.   ” 
 
25. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
     “(a) AFMS conducts Undergraduate, Post Graduate and Super Specialty 
training in AFMS institutions as per the curriculum and guidelines of National 
Medical Commission (NMC)/National Board of Examinations in Medical Sciences 
(NBEMS). 
(b) In the field of pharmacy, AFMS conducts diploma courses in Pharmacy as 
per guidelines stipulated by Pharmacy Council of India and Maharashtra University 
of Health Sciences. 
(c) AFMS has operationalised Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with 
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) through active collaborative 
research, faculty exchange, joint training, and participation in national health 
research initiatives. Under the aegis of the MoU with ICMR, seven Armed Forces-
specific research projects are being undertaken under the National Health 
Research Priority Scheme.” 
 
26. With respect to recommendation of the Committee that the AFMS should 
keep its training and research curriculum up-to-date with the modern technologies, 
medical advancements and innovations with the aim of providing efficient medical 
facilities to  armed force personnel at the time of traditional as well as modern 
warfare, the Committee are pleased to note from the Action Taken reply that AFMS 
conducts Undergraduate, Post Graduate and Super Specialty training in AFMS 
institutions as per the curriculum and guidelines of National Medical Commission 
(NMC)/National Board of Examinations in Medical Sciences (NBEMS). The 
Committee further note that in the field of pharmacy, AFMS conducts diploma 
courses in Pharmacy as per guidelines stipulated by Pharmacy Council of India 
and Maharashtra University of Health Sciences. The Committee are also impressed 
to note that AFMS has operationalised Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with 
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) through active collaborative 
research, faculty exchange, joint training, and participation in national health 

16 
 
research initiatives.  Under the aegis of the MoU with ICMR, seven Armed Forces-
specific research projects are being undertaken under the National Health 
Research Priority Scheme. The Committee at this stage are hopeful that as 
recommended earlier; AFMS would keep abreast with the new and modern courses 
not only from the viewpoint of diagnostic doctors but also in the field of pharmacy 
related developments which are essential for modern medical care. 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
ARMY 
 
Budgetary allocation and utilization of Army 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee learnt that the total allocated budget for the Ministry of Defence for 
Financial year 2026-27 is Rs. 7,84,678.28 crore.  Out of which, the largest share of 
74.52%, i.e. Rs. 5,84,785.45 crore has been allocated for Defence Services Estimates 
(DSE) (Grant No. 20 and 21). The Capital Outlay on Defence Services (Grant No. 21) is 
Rs. 2,19,306.47 crore and an amount of Rs. 3,65,478.98 crore allocated to Defence 
Services Revenue (Grant No. 20).  Out of the total Defence Services Revenue, an 
amount of Rs. 2,41,968.98 crore has been allocated for FY 2026-27 to Army under 
Revenue head which is approx. 60% and in Capital head Rs. 41,672.94 crore allocated 
which is 19% of the total Capital Outlay of Defence Services.   Similarly, Air Force has 
been allocated an amount of Rs. 63,150.00 crore under Revenue head for FY 2026-27 
which is approx. 17% of the total Defence Services Revenue and an amount of Rs. 
88809.97 crore allocated under Capital head which is approx.  40% of the total Capital 
outlay on Defence Services. Further, Navy has been allocated an amount of Rs. 
46,800.00 crore under Revenue head for FY 2026-27 which is approx. 13% of the total 
Defence Services Revenue and an amount of Rs. 70063.31 crore allocated under Capital 
head which is approx.  32% of the total Capital outlay on Defence Services.  The 
Committee appreciate the enhanced and favourable allocation both in Revenue and 
Capital heads to Army, Air Force and Navy for FY 2026-27 in comparison to the previous 
years to fulfil their liabilities.    
 
2. The Committee note that the security challenges confronting our nation are diverse 
and intricate. The Indian Army recognizes these complexities alongside the swiftly 
changing geopolitical, socio-economic and technological landscapes. Consequently, the 
Indian Army has designated the period from 2022 to 2032 as the `Decade of 
Transformation’ to build a future ready force. The Committee also note that while 
continuously assessing operational readiness, the Indian Army remains dedicated to 
advancing national interests and protecting the country’s sovereignty and unity from both 
external and internal threats.   
 
3.       To perform all the duties with perfection, the Army needs Revenue as well as 
Capital Budget as per the projection. Under Revenue Head, the Army had projected Rs. 
2,61,542.98 crore for the financial year 2026-27, for Revenue against which the allocation 
is Rs. 2,41,968.98 crore, which is Rs. 19574 crore less than the projection. However, the 
Committee are happy to note that the allocation has been increased from Rs. 2,06,200 
crore which stand as an increase of Rs.35768.98 core which is 17.34 percent. During the 

18 
 
financial year 2025-26, against the projection of Rs  2,14,727.72 crore, it was allocated 
Rs. 2,06,200.00 crore, which was reduced by Rs. 8527.72 crore. In the RE same year, 
the Army made a projection of Rs. 2,38,807.48 crore but the allocation was Rs 
2,29,648.71 crore. The Committee find that during FY 2025-26, Rs 1,64,465.05 crore was 
spent till December, 2025 and Rs 65183.66 crore will be spent in the coming three 
months. The Committee, hope that the Ministry would take prudent fiscal planning and 
concerted efforts to spend the remaining amount in the remaining period of the financial 
year without any savings. The Committee would like to know the final outcome in this 
regard from the Ministry consequent to the end of Financial Year while furnishing the 
Action Taken Notes. The Committee hope that this increasing trend of Revenue budget 
will be continuing in future financial years.   The Committee understand that a major 
portion of the budget primarily goes towards salary/recurring expenses which is a fixed 
expenditure. The non-salary expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, ration, 
transportation, fuel, etc. which are essential for regular training and operational 
preparedness of the Army. During the year 2026–27, the allocation under non-salary 
expenditure has been fixed at Rs.85,841 crore, as against Rs.60,672 crore in 2025-26, 
reflecting a substantial increase of Rs.25,169 crore. When compared with the rise of Rs. 
10,281 crore between 2024- 25 and 2025-26, this enhanced allocation marks a significant 
and welcome step forward. The Committee notes with appreciation the upward trend in 
non-salary expenditure and emphasizes that this positive trajectory should be sustained 
in the coming years. It is further reiterated that regular consultations with the Ministry of 
Finance at the highest level must be undertaken promptly once proposals for subsequent 
budgets are formulated, to ensure continuity and strengthening of this trend. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
 Under Capital Head, the Committee are happy to note that since the year 2023-24 
till  2026-27, the Army   has been allocated the full amount as per their projection. During 
the BE for the financial year 2026-27, Army’s projection was Rs. 41,672.94 crore and 
they have allocated the same amount. In RE of 2025-26, the projection of the Army was 
Rs. 36,198.43 crore and the allocation was Rs. 35,239.66 crore. The Committee find that 
upto December 2025, Rs. 26810.53 crore has been spent. The Committee hope that the 
remaining fund will be gainfully utilized by the end of the current financial year.  The 
Committee understand that Capital Budget usually provides for expenditure on 
modernisation, enhancement of force level, infrastructure development, etc, which are 
essential not only for the modernization of the Army but also to safeguard territorial 
integrity of the nation. Over the years the cost of force level and infrastructure 
development also increasing. The Committee feel that the allocation for Capital budget 
should be incremental in nature, so that it can absorb the inflationary trends. While 
commending the Army’s decisive role in safeguarding national security during Operation 
Sindoor, the Committee emphasizes the need for sustained investment in defence 
preparedness. It urges that future budgets should prioritize the induction of state-of-the-
art weapon systems and the development of requisite infrastructure, so that the Army’s 
hallmark swiftness and coordinated response to diverse security scenarios can be 
maintained and further strengthened.  
 

19 
 
2. The Committee also expect that our expenditure should be in proportion to the 
increase in defence spending of our neighbours. Therefore, the Committee feel that the 
Capital Budget of the Army should be sufficient to have a deterrent capacity to ward off 
adversaries in case of any hostility.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With respect to the fund utilisation by Army in FY 2025-26, under Capital head, the 
Committee is apprised that Army has fully utilised the Capital Budget. 
 
2. Further, it is submitted that it may not be appropriate to link the expenditure of 
Service(s) to the Defence Expenditure of neighbouring countries because India’s 
neighbouring countries vary in geographical size, GDP, population, etc. However, while 
projecting the requirement of funds under Capital Head, assessment of existing capability 
of the Forces is done in the light of prevailing security situation along the borders and 
operational preparedness of the Armed Forces. Further, the Capital Acquisition plans of 
MoD are designed to cater for the long term and short term requirement of the Services 
and funds are projected based on anticipated cash outgo on yearly basis.  
 
3. Further, the Committee’s attention is invited towards the fact that Army has been 
allocated 100% of its projection under Capital Head since 2023-24, and, if required, this 
Ministry will seek additional allocation at RE/Supplementary Stages so that Army’s 
operational preparedness is not impacted adversely.   
 
Percentage Share of Army Budget 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
 The Committee note that the percentage share of the Army’s budget during FY 
2021-22 was 42.54 percent for the revenue budget, 10.53 percent for capital budget and 
the overall percentage was 53.06 percent out of the Defence Services Estimates.  
However, in FY 2026-27 the percentage share is 41.38 per cent for revenue budget, 7.13 
percent for  capital budget and the overall percentage is 48.50 percent.   
 
2.         Notwithstanding the percentage share of the Army budget, the Committee have 
been assured by the representative of the Ministry of Defence that any additional budget 
required for priority operations, sustenance and Modernization of the Indian Army will be 
met at the revised/supplementary stage.   
 
3.        Keeping in view the important role of Army to secure the vast land borders and 
conduct counter insurgency operations, the Committee hope that fund will not be an issue 
of concern for the Army and as per submission made by the Ministry, Army’s further 
requirement will be met at the revised/supplementary stage. 
 
 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2026-27, an amount of Rs. 2,83,595.87 crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 
43,995.19 crore over BE 2025-26) has been allocated to Army which is an increase of 
18.36% over BE 2025-26 allocations. Further, if required, additional funds will be sought 
at Supplementary/ Revised Estimate stage to meet the requirements to ensure that 
planned Capital and Revenue Expenditure for the Army does not face any issues related 
to funds.  
 
Budget for Modernization  
Recommendation No. 4 
 
 The Committee note from the replies submitted by the Ministry that in the Financial 
Year 2025-26, an amount of Rs. 26,100.00 crore and Rs. 29,000.00 crore were allocated 
to Army at BE and RE stage, respectively, under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) 
Head. Further, in BE 2026-27, an amount of Rs. 34,150.00 crore has been allocated to 
Army under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) Head which is approx. 31% higher than 
the previous allocation. The Committee have also been apprised that in addition to 
normal procurement, the Government has also established emergency procurement 
arrangements. The Committee have also been informed that Army purchased drones, 
counter-drone systems, electronic warfare, training weapons, and other equipment and 
also used these in Operation Sindoor and benefited from them. Army made these 
procurements in keeping with the changing methods of warfare.  In view of this renewed 
emphasis on modernization, the Committee recommend that modernization of the Army 
should be accorded top priority in view of the current global geopolitical scenario and for 
acquiring latest and advanced technology weapons/equipments, it is also emphasized 
here that in case of any further need, all out efforts should be undertaken by the Ministry 
to enhance Army’s budgetary requirements at the revised/supplementary grant stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. The 
Committee is assured that additional requirement of Army, if any, will be projected at 
supplementary/RE stages of the current financial year. 
 
Modernization and Modern Warfare Tactics  
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee note that the Indian Army is actively involved in various 
technology-related national missions from 6G initiatives to the latest National Quantum 
Mission. It also finds that Indian Institutes of Technology and other research and 
development establishments have facilitated technology conversion alongwith identified 
16 technology clusters each with specific responsibilities and outcomes.  The Committee 
have been informed that a high-power computing AI cloud is being developed effectively 
for all the three Services. In this regard, Indian Army had taken the initiative and signed 
an MoU with IIT, Madras  for innovations. The Military College of Telecommunication 

21 
 
Engineering has become a strategic partner in Indian AI Mission, Chips to Start-up 
Mission and quantum key distribution projects. The Committee applaud the initiatives of 
the Ministry for vigorously and steadily progressing the   capability development and  for 
reviewing and renewing  the acquisition procedures under Atmanirbharta, based on 
lesson from Operation Sindoor and emerging threat perception. The Committee also find 
that over three hundred schemes are planned to acquire potent fighting capabilities over 
the next ten years. It has also come to the knowledge of the Committee that post 
Operation-Sindoor, emergency procurement provisions were accorded in 2025 for capital 
and revenue procurement to further enhance capability to development. The Committee 
are also happy to know that emergency procurements are being utilised for acquiring 
drones, counter-drones, weapon systems, precision ammunition, electronic warfare and 
surveillance systems. The Committee understand that conventional wars were fought in 
only three modes i.e., land, air and water, but recently there is a paradigm shift in the 
technology used in fighting a war. There have been innovations and experiments in 
western countries, and the use of drones, including sea-drones, space, cyberspace, 
kinetic and non-kinetic format etc. has enveloped the sphere of war, which can be fought 
from very distant locations through a remote-controlled methodology In this regard, the 
Committee feel that the technology-related National Missions, National Quantum Mission 
and high-power computing AI cloud  will definitely enable our Armed Forces to develop a 
robust digital infrastructure, besides improving the existing weaponry. While appreciating 
all these critical developments, the Committee recommend that all the 
initiatives/programs must follow laid-down time-lines of their technological delivery to 
enable the Forces to use and adapt themselves in a timely manner.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Indian Army is actively addressing the need for technological advancements driven 
by the evolving nature of warfare. It is proactively inducting latest technologies and 
reviewing ongoing projects to prevent the adoption of outdated systems, while also 
supporting industry and academia to promote self-reliance (Atmanirbharta). Key initiatives 
undertaken are as outlined in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Induction of New Technology 
25 Products/ Technologies have been identified to be replaced/ discarded with 
New Technologies which have been shared with industry and academia through the 
following documents: - 
Technology Perspective Capability Roadmap (TPCR) 2025. Released in 
August 2025, TPCR 2025 includes 146 Indian Army products (including joint 
projects) across various technology domains slated for induction into the Indian 
Army's inventory. Procurement plans are underway to acquire these products. 
Compendium of Technological Challenges (CTC) 2025. Released on 
September 23, 2025, CTC 2025 outlines 41 technological challenges across 19 
functional domains of warfare, ranging from armament and unmanned systems to 

22 
 
artificial intelligence and quantum technology. Development agencies (DRDO, 
industry, and academia) have been approached to submit respective proposals. 
SWAYAT Roadmap. Few weapon systems/ platforms have been identified which 
can be converted to autonomous capabilities. The roadmap also identifies several 
critical technology modules and autonomous weapon systems in three domains 
for indigenous development and subsequent induction into the Indian Army. 
UAS Roadmap. 'Indian Army's Technology Roadmap for Unmanned Aerial 
Systems and Loitering Munitions' was released on April 6, 2026. The document 
aims to provide long-term visibility of Indian Army requirements to industry, 
academia and R&D organizations, fostering a focused approach to development 
and production. 
Support to Industry and Academia 
Indian Army is leveraging all provisions outlined in the Defence Acquisition 
Procedure 2020 (DAP 2020) and subsequent amendments, particularly within the iDEX, 
Make and TDF schemes. Key Indian Army initiatives include the following: - 
Orientation to Indian Army's Area of Responsibility (AoR). The Forward Area 
Orientation Programme provides Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
and Startups with insights into Indian Army's operational challenges in varied 
terrains and weather conditions, enabling them to develop suitable equipment. 
Suo Moto Proposals. Suo Moto Proposals under the iDEX and Make schemes 
are being progressed to rapidly develop niche technologies. Currently, several 
Make projects have been initiated based on such proposals. Similarly, various 
iDEX projects were launched in response to open challenges submitted by 
Startups and MSMEs. 
Support During Development. Continuous guidance, facilitation and support 
are provided by Nodal Officers. Currently, several Nodal Officers, stationed at 
Category 'A' Establishments are supporting various ATB and iDEX projects. User 
involvement is thus integrated into the development process. 
Project Facilitation Teams (PFT). Dedicated PFTs have been assigned to each 
project to facilitate co-development and co-creation. 
Access to Field Firing Ranges. Field Firing Ranges have been earmarked for 
industry and academia for conducting internal validation during the development 
phase. 
 
Access to Establishments and Field Locations.  Access is granted to 
Category 'A' Establishments and field locations for internal evaluation during the 
development phase. 
 Provision of In-Service Equipment. In-service equipment is provided for the 
development phase of upgrades and related projects. 


23 
 
 
Indigenization  
Recommendation No. 6 
 
 The Committee find from the replies submitted by the Ministry that during the last 
five financial year (2020-21 to 2024-25) and current Financial year 2025-26 (upto 
December, 2025), total 479 capital acquisition contracts have been signed for capital 
procurement of defence equipment for Army, out of which 419 contracts worth about 
91.32% of total contracts value, have been signed with Indian Vendors for capital 
procurement of defence equipment. The Committee note that during FY 2020-21 Rs. 
17446.83 crore expenditure incurred on indigenous procurement for Defence equipment 
by Army. However, during FY 2025-26 (upto December, 2025) this has been increased to 
Rs. 20853.41 crore which is approx. 20% higher. The Committee also note that in BE 
2025-26, an amount of ₹22, 600 Cr (i.e. 86.59% of the total allocation of ₹26,100 Cr to 
Army under Capital Acquisition Head) has been earmarked to Army for acquisition from 
indigenous sources. However, in FY 2026-27, an amount of ₹28,909.00 Cr (i.e. 84.65% 
of the total allocation of ₹34,150.00 Cr) is proposed for Capital Acquisition for Army from 
indigenous sources (Domestic Procurement).   
      
2.  Further, the Committee find that the Ministry of Defence has taken a number of 
initiatives towards import substitution in armament acquisition and achieve the goal of 
Make in India initiative. DAP 2020, being the guiding document of capital acquisition has 
incorporated a number of initiatives i.e. Highest priority to procurement is given to Buy 
(Indian-IDDM) Category, followed by Buy (Indian), Buy and Make (Indian), Buy (Global 
Manufacture in India), Buy (Global) Categories, induction of Make-I (Govt. Funded) and 
Make-II (Industry-Funded) projects to promote prototype development of niche 
technology items in collaboration with development Agencies including private entities, 
induction of Make-III process (mainly through ToT) for indigenization of imported spares 
with the aim of enhancing self reliance through import substitution, mandate to increase 
IC in various categories of procurement under DAP-2020 with minimum 50% of overall 
IC, self-reliance in Indian Defence eco system with “No foreign sourcing” and  foreign 
procurements, encourage participation of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) to create a robust defence industrial eco-system with aim to enhance the ease 
of doing business, provide grant-in-aid by DRDO through the Technology Development 
Fund (TDF) to industries including MSMEs and start-ups along with Academic and 
Scientific institutions for the development of defence and dual-use technologies, 
notification of a list of weapons/platforms banned for import with a view to promote 
domestic and indigenous industry by MoD and earmarking of 75% of the total capital 
budget for domestic Capital procurement for FY 2024-25 and FY 2025-26.   
  
3. The submissions made by the representative during oral evidence revealed that 
self-sufficiency in defence procurement and manufacturing is a strategic imperative for 
India. For example, through concerted and pro-active efforts and in close coordination 
with other agencies 163 out of 175, that is, 93 per cent ammunition variant have been 
indigenised. The Committee have been informed that a of total 57 items have been 
authorised as part of special clothing and mountaineering equipment and out of which 53 

24 
 
have been indigenised. The Committee are happy to know that the Indian Army has also 
acquired the capability for developing in-house drone systems with the aim to undertake 
development of indigenous autonomous weapon systems with desired lethal payload and 
appropriate human control missions. The experiment was conducted in April, 2025 to 
evaluate indigenous capability in autonomous weapon systems and to evolve a roadmap 
for its induction.  
 
4.        While commending the efforts, made by the Ministry towards indigenization, the 
Committee recommend that consistent and systematic efforts alongwith the meticulous, 
prudent and long term planning should be in place to maintain this pace of Atmanirbhar 
and future ready Force and the Ministry should extend all the financial and administrative 
support in this regard by imbibing the principle of ‘one step ahead’. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As self-sufficiency in defence manufacturing and procurement is a strategic 
imperative, the Indian Army is consistently working towards becoming an Atmanirbhar 
(self-reliant) and future ready force. Details of these efforts are provided ahead. 
Capital Procurement 
In FY 2025-26, Rs 27,160.63 crore (87.60%) of the total allocation of Rs 31 
,005.29 crore at the Modified Appropriations (MA) stage was spent on Capital Acquisition 
from Indigenous sources (Domestic Procurement). Similarly, 84.65% of the Army's total 
Capital Acquisition Budget for FY 2026-27 has been earmarked for domestic Capital 
Procurement. 
Revenue Procurement 
Indigenisation of Ammunition. The Indian Army maintains a large inventory of 
ammunition comprising of 175 in-service variants. Through close coordination with 
DRDO, DPSUs and the private industry, 159 ammunition variants (90.85%) have been 
indigenized. 
Status of Remaining Variants. Of the remaining 16 variants, 1 1 cases are 
progressing towards indigenization (Indian Army is the lead agency for four cases under 
the Make in India Initiative). 
Indigenisation of Special Clothing & Mountaineering Equipment (SCME). 
Initiatives to indigenise SCME items are driven by the goal of fostering the growth and 
development of Indian alternatives and reducing import dependency. Recent efforts have 
resulted in the indigenisation of 55 out of 57 SCME items. Balance two items (Jacket 
Down and Trouser Down) are expected to be indigenised by the end of 2026. 
Force level of Army  
Recommendation No. 7 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that acquisition of equipment is an ongoing 
process and equipment holdings are dynamic and change based upon obsolescence, de-

25 
 
induction and new inductions. The Committee have been apprised that a focused 
approach has been adopted to make up the deficiencies by way of urgent procurement of  
Weapons/equipment/ammunition items to meet the operational requirements through the 
delegated financial and Emergency Procurement powers of the Indian Army.  The 
Committee have also been informed that Indian Army closely collaborating with DRDO, 
DPSUs and Private Industry to ensure resilient supply chains towards indigenization.  
Thus, 90% of Indian Army’s ammunition has been indigenised i.e. (157 out of 175 items) 
resulting in reducing import dependency & establishing a robust ‘Atmanirbhar’ 
Ammunition Manufacturing ecosystem.  
 
2. The Committee note that the Rudra Brigade represents the most significant 
structural change in Indian Army which is combined arms formations that permanently 
integrate infantry, armour, artillery, engineers, signals, air defence, drones and logistics 
echelons. Further, Bhairav Battalions, Ashni protons and shaktimaan regiments have also 
been raised and these specialised units will combine speed, technology and precision 
which are designed from modern warfares. The Committee also note that the Indian Army 
is fully committed to the vision of a developed India @ 2047 and is carrying out Military 
Civic Action Projects under Operation Sadbhavana in the border areas. The Committee 
may be apprised about the status of all these efforts.  
 
3. The Committee are happy to note that all the three Services are working towards 
one common goal and enhancing their integration through pursuits in common 
operational planning process, technology development, harmonising intelligence 
surveillance and reconnaissance resources, aggregating remotely piloted assets, joint 
standard operating procedures and formulation of joint military civil fusion doctrine. The 
Committee have been informed that Indian Army is enhancing its  defence through 
integration of Akashteer, Command and control system which creates a real time unified 
and automated picture of the battlefield by integrating with the Indian Air Force Integrated 
Air Command and Control System. The Committee wish to emphasize the continuity of all 
these efforts and may be apprised of the progress made in these.  
4. The Committee have also been informed that curriculum/syllabi for institutionalised 
training in Indian Army is reviewed on regular basis to keep them current and relevant 
based on the existing policy in vogue. The revision of Syllabi is a dynamic & continuous 
process. The Committee have further informed that Training Advisory Committee has 
been formed at HQ ARTRAC to make concerted efforts for obtaining inputs from all 
stakeholders in order to prepare comprehensive list of topics for inclusion in training 
under the heads of Technology Absorption, lessons learnt from ongoing conflicts and 
situations prevailing along borders. The Committee are happy to know that a large 
number of General Staff Publications are being upgraded and revised to include latest 
inputs on New Generation Equipment/ lessons learnt from recent conflicts & technical 
data on disruptive/ niche technology/ equipment to prepare officers to handle changing 
character of war.  
 
5. The Committee are also happy to know that the Indian Army causalities have 
reduced over the years by equipping the shoulders with better weapons, surveillance 
system and protective gear as also focused training. The Committee express their 

26 
 
satisfaction over the continuous effort being made to further augment the capacity of the 
hitherto existing capable forces in the army. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation contains statements of facts as noted by the Committee, 
and have been noted for compliance. 
Women Empowerment  
Recommendation No. 8 
 
 The Committee are happy to learn that a number of steps have been taken to 
ensure induction of more women in Indian Army.  The Committee have been informed 
that after 2020, consequent to the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s announcement from the 
ramparts of Red Fort, Permanent Commission to Women Officers is being granted in 13 x 
Combat Support Arms and Services such as Regiment of Artillery, Corps of Signals, 
Corps of Engineers, Army Aviation Corps, Army Air Defence, Corps of Electronics and 
Mechanical Engineers, Army Service Corps, Army Ordnance Corps, Intelligence Corps, 
and Remount & Veterinary Services. The Committee have also been informed that 
Permanent Commission to Women Officers in Army Education Corps, Judge Advocate 
General Army Medical Corps, Army Dental Corps & Military Nursing Services continues 
hitherto-fore. The Committee note that from the year 2021, women officers are also being 
commissioned in Army Aviation as pilots. The Committee also happy to  note a series of  
new initiatives with regard to women empowerment  such as  increase of women officers 
vacancies from 80 per year to 144 per year, earmarking 120 vacancies per year for 
women officer cadets in Officers Training Academy, opportunity to appear in staff college 
exam at par with their male counterparts, consideration for Col (Selection Grade) ranks 
and given command appointments of Units/ Battalions, reservation of 10% seats for girls 
in all 33 Sainik Schools, induction of women officers at NDA,  permission to appear in 
RIMC and RMS entrance exams, equal opportunities for promotion, equal opportunity for 
employment in field/UN Mission/ Instructor/ Sport Activities, equal opportunity of training 
courses to include Defence Service Staff College, Wellington and induction of 1700 
women into Corps of Military Police in a phased manner to join Indian Army will certainly 
a new chapter with respect to induction of women officers in the Army. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts made by the Indian Army for their commitment towards women 
empowerment.  The Committee are optimistic that the new initiatives made by the army 
towards women empowerment will continue further in the years to come of  women led 
development for  Viksit Bharat in Defence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation contains statements of facts as noted by the Committee, 
and have been noted for compliance. 
 
 
 

27 
 
Preparedness of Hybrid war, including Kinetic and Non – kinetic warfare 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
  The Committee note that Indian Army remains fully prepared to address the 
evolving character of hybrid warfare, which encompasses both kinetic (conventional) and 
non-kinetic (cyber, electronic, information and space enabled dimensions). The 
Committee have been informed that the Army maintains a high state of operational 
readiness along all active borders through sustained training, realistic field exercises, 
infrastructure development and capability enhancement along with modernisation efforts 
including induction of advanced weapon systems, precision munitions, networked 
communications, surveillance platforms and improved mobility assets in the form of 
kinetic preparedness.  The Committee have also been informed that the Army has 
strengthened its capabilities in the form of non-kinetic capabilites through cyber defence, 
electronic warfare, spectrum management, counter drone systems, information 
operations, operationalization of  dedicated cyber and electronic warfare units, 
enhancement of  secure communication networks, leveraging artificial intelligence, data 
analytics and indigenous research and development to enhance situational awareness 
and decision superiority. The Committee have further been informed that in view of the 
proliferation of unmanned aerial systems, integrated counter-drone grids and electronic 
counter-measure systems have been progressively deployed. The Committee note that 
the Army is aligned with the national vision for Multi-Domain Operations, ensuring 
coordinated employment of land, air, cyber, space and information capabilities and also 
working on Civil Military Cooperation. The Committee understand that preparedness in 
hybrid war, including kinetic and non-kinetic warfare is need of the hour for sustaining 
strongly in the present changing warfare system.  The Committee therefore strongly 
emphasizes towards the preparedness of Army for modern warfare. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to undertake all out efforts in exploring new avenues in the field 
of kinetic, non kinetic and hybrid capabilities for achieving the target to build our nation 
impenetrable during war like situations in future.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Indian Army has progressively enhanced its preparedness for hybrid warfare 
by integrating conventional kinetic capabilities with emerging non-kinetic domains. On 
the kinetic front, modernisation of infantry, mechanized forces, artillery and aviation 
assets has improved responsiveness and lethality across varied terrains. Augmentation 
of long-range precision strike capabilities, supported by robust Intelligence, Surveillance 
and Reconnaissance (ISR) and Post-Strike Damage Assessment (PSDA), have been 
key enablers. Hard-kill kinetic responses against hostile Unmanned Aerial Systems, 
including Directed Energy Weapons (DEW) are being inducted. Emphasis on network-
centric warfare, jointness with the Indian Air Force and Navy and the use of dual-use 
infrastructure ensure rapid force mobilisation and coordinated operations. Regular 
exercises simulating multi domain conflict scenarios strengthen readiness for high-
intensity engagements under hybrid conditions. 

28 
 
In the non-kinetic domain, the Indian Army has significantly expanded capabilities 
in cyber warfare, electronic warfare, information operations and management of the EM 
spectrum. Dedicated cyber units, in coordination with national agencies, focus on 
securing critical networks and conducting cyber operations. Electronic Warfare units are 
being equipped with advanced systems for spectrum dominance and the Indian Army is 
integrating counter-drone capabilities across all stakeholders to establish a unified 
Counter-unmanned Aerial System grid. Information operations have been refined to 
counter adversarial narratives in the cognitive domain. 
Institutionally, the Indian Army is aligned with the Joint Multi-Domain Operations 
doctrine and enhancing synergy with the tri-services and civil agencies. Multi-Domain 
Operations based exercises are being conducted to validate and refine cross-domain 
linkages. Emphasis on indigenous technology, artificial intelligence and specialised 
training is ensuring readiness to address the evolving challenges of hybrid warfare in a 
comprehensive and integrated manner. 
 
Role of Army during humanitarian assistance and disaster  
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 Role of the Army in providing relief during natural disasters and calamities is yet 
another success story. The Committee have been informed that despite its extensive 
operational commitments, the Indian Army remains at the forefront of humanitarian 
assistance and disaster relief. During 2025, the Indian Army deployed 141 columns, 
including Engineer Task Forces, at over 80 locations across 10 states, rescuing 28,293 
civilians and providing medical aid to approximately 7,318 people. The Committee have 
also been informed that additionally, 133 Indian Army personnel, including medical and 
engineering staff are deployed in Sri Lanka in response to the humanitarian crisis caused 
by Cyclone Ditawah.  The Committee note that presently Indian Army has deployed 
approximately 5,000 military personnel with 5 infantry battalions and 11 formed units, 
apart from staff officers and military observers, across 10 UN missions. The Committee 
find that India, leveraging its seven decades of exemplary service in UN-peacekeeping 
missions positioned itself at the forefront of peacekeeping by hosting the UN Troop 
Contributing Countries Chiefs’ Conclave, 2025 held at New Delhi. The event brought 
together army chiefs, senior military leaders, policy experts and UN officials from 32 troop 
contributing nations.  The Committee wish the Army all success in their endeavour, for 
which people of our country and friendly neighbouring countries feel secure even during 
calamities.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation contains statements of facts as noted by the Committee and 
have been noted for compliance. 
 
 
 
 


29 
 
Air Force 
 
Budgetary allocation and utilization of Air Force  
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
 While examining Demand Nos. 19 & 20 in respect of the Air Force for the year 
2026-27, the Committee find that under Revenue Section, Air Force projected Rs. 
71,889.04 crore against which an allocation of Rs. 63,150.00 crore has been made. The 
allocation is lower by Rs. 8,738.77 crore i.e. 12 percent than the projection.   
 
2.  As informed, the non-salary expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, ration, 
transportation, fuel, etc. which are essential for regular training and operational 
preparedness of the Air Force, therefore, 12 per cent cut in the allocation may hamper 
the training and operational preparedness of the Air Force. The Committee hope that 
during Supplementary Grants and Revised Estimate stages, the Ministry will take into 
consideration this fact and make additional allocation as per the need of the force.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. The 
Committee is assured that additional requirement of Air Force, if any, will be projected at 
supplementary/RE stages of the current financial year. 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
 The Committee are happy to find that in Capital segment, the allocation has been 
same as that of the projected during 2026-27 i.e. Rs. 88,809.97 crore. It is a known fact 
that the Capital Budget of a Department primarily provides for expenditure on 
modernisation, enhancement of Force level, infrastructure development etc. and 
allocating as per projection reflects the determination on the part of the Government for 
potential development of the force. Moreover, during oral evidence, the representative of 
the Ministry informed the Committee that there has been an 18 percent increase in the 
IAF's defence budget allocation in the financial year 2026-27. The Committee note that 
the capital budget is generally 52 percent of the total budget allotment. The Committee 
also note that expenditure on domestic procurement has increased over a period of time, 
and it was close to 90 percent in both the previous financial year and the current year, 
against the mandated target of 77 percent. The Committee have further note that the 
capital budget has been increased by 37 percent. Of this, 40 percent has been 
earmarked for new schemes. The Committee have also been informed that close to 7 
percent of the budget is used for infrastructure development and the capital acquisition 
and infrastructure development budget has seen a positive increase over a period of 
time.  The Committee hope and trust that  the  trend of enhancement  will be continued in 
the  future financial year.  The Committee note that in FY 2024-25, BE allocation was Rs. 
59,062.07 crore, out of which expenditure incurred to Rs. 51,426.19 crore and in FY 
2025-26 (upto December 2025). During the year 2025-26, out of BE allocation 
Rs.64,811.68 the expenditure incurred to Rs. 50,675.77 crore.  The Committee are 

30 
 
hopeful that the Ministry will ensure that the allocated funds are fruitfully and fully utilized 
in by Air Force so that modernisation trajectory of Air Force is will further augmented.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During the FY 2025-26, against an MA of Rs. 64,487.11 Cr for Capital budget, IAF 
utilisation was Rs. 64,506.92 Cr. The planning for budget expenditure is carried out 
considering both long and short term plans, and IAF is provisioned with adequate capital 
budget annually, in order to process its prioritised cases for modernisation. Any additional 
demand projected by IAF at the RE or MA stage is considered favourably. 
 
Percentage Share of Air Force budget  
Recommendation No. 13 
 
 From the data supplied by the Ministry, the Committee note an evident increase in 
the percentage share of the revenue budget of the Air Force, out of Defence Services 
Estimates. The budget of the Air Force increased from 8.83 per cent of DSE in 2021-22 
to 10.80 per cent in 2026-27. The Committee find that although there is a marginal 
decrease the capital budget share of Air Force, in term of percentage, at the same time in 
FY 202627, the overall percentage has been increased from 24.16 per cent in the year 
2021-22 to 25.99 per cent in 2026-27. The Committee are of the considered view that in 
view of the current geo-political scenario and highly air-centric modern warfare today, the 
overall percentage share of Air Force in the DSE budget needs to be increased further to 
help galvanise the Indian Air Force and keep the country combat ready for any air-centric 
advanced warfare. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With respect to the percentage share of Air-Force in the DSE budget, the 
Committee is apprised that budget allocation is based on projection of the Service, 
expenditure trend, absorption capacity, Committed Liabilities, etc. Further, if required, 
additional funds will be sought at Supplementary/Revised Estimate stage to ensure that 
the country’s combat readiness for any air-centric advanced warfare remains unaffected.  
 
Budget for modernization  
Recommendation No. 14 
 
 The Committee note that in the Financial Year 202526, an amount of Rs. 
59,646.83 crore was allocated at BE stage under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) 
Head against which expenditure of Rs. 48,182.18 crore has been incurred till December, 
2025.  Further, through supplementary reply the Committee have been informed that an 
amount of Rs. 54,123.91 crore (89.58%) has been utilized under the IAF Capital 
Acquisition Budget as on 17.02.2026.  In BE 2026-27, an amount of Rs. 83,257.47 crore 
has been allotted under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head.  Further, during oral 
evidence, the representative of the Ministry informed the Committee that the capital 
budget earmarked for modernization will primarily be utilized for acquiring combat 

31 
 
platforms and critical combat enablers like multi-role fighter aircraft, flight refuellers, 
medium transport aircraft and various unmanned aerial systems and alongwith the 
platforms there is also a proposal to acquire air-to-air, air-to-ground, and surface-to-air 
guided ammunition, as well as loitering munitions. The Committee have been informed 
that thirty-nine airfields and nine Advance Landing Grounds are listed under the joint user 
category to promote civil aviation in India and are key to the Government’s endeavour in 
providing last-mile connectivity through “Mission UDAN”. Further, through supplementary 
reply the Committee have been informed that an amount of Rs. 41,753.96 crore (69.18%) 
and Rs. 18,598.70 crore (30.81%) has been earmarked against ongoing Committed 
Liabilities and New Schemes, respectively.  
 
2.         Keeping in view the modernization of the Armed Forces especially during the 
current geo-political scenario in the world, the Committee urge the Air Force to gainfully 
utilize the allocated funds for modernization and technological upgradation in armament 
and in the procurement of other vital platforms.  The Committee further opine that a 
further augmentation of modernisation budget of Air Force will further improve its combat 
capabilities with the acquisitions of newer and latest advanced aircrafts, weapons and 
equipments for Air Force.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to enhance its operational capabilities, IAF will be progressing certain 
major acquisition cases in FY 2026-27. These include acquisition and upgradation of 
combat aircraft, combat enablers like AEW&C & FRA, Medium Altitude Long Endurance 
UAS, Air to Air, Air to Surface & Surface to Air weapons, Medium Transport Aircraft and 
D&D of Indigenous Multi Role Helicopter, among others. IAF has been provisioned with 
adequate Capital Budget to progress the above mentioned cases and in case of any 
additional demand, the same will be projected at RE or MA stage. The budget will be 
utilised effectively based on Committed Liabilities as well as New Schemes as planned. 
During the FY 2025-26, against an MA of Rs 64,487.11 Cr for Capital budget, IAF utilised 
Rs. 64,506.92 Cr. 
 
Planning for development of Sixth Generation (6G) aircrafts  
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
 The Committee have been informed that two consortia are working on the sixth-
generation aircraft. One is a consortium of the UK, Italy, and Japan and the another is a 
consortium of France and Germany and both are developing aircraft. The Committee 
have also been informed that Air Force will try to join forces with one of the consortia and 
begin considering a sixth generation fighter right away with a view to ensure that they do 
not lag behind in achieving the target for advanced aircraft. The Advanced Medium 
Combat Aircraft (AMCA) has been developed the design and discussions for its making 
are currently underway. The Committee understand that in view of technical 
advancement of fighter aircrafts globally and to meet the present security scenario, 
technical upgradation of aircrafts is required on top priority for enhancement of its combat 

32 
 
capability.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to chalk out a trajectory in this regard 
and step forward the planning process for development and acquisition of Sixth-
Generation (6G) Aircrafts which would eventually enhance India’s air domain capabilities 
in today’s highly air-centric modern warfare. The progress made in this regard may kindly 
be intimated to the Committee at the time of furnishing the Action Taken Notes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Defence has initiated efforts in a concerted manner to co-join the 
6th Generation Fighter Aircraft Development Programme viz. Future Combat Air System 
(FCAS) spearheaded by the French Government.  
 
Indigenization  
Recommendation No. 16 
 
 The Committee note that Indian Air Force is committed towards self-reliance and is 
providing full-fledged support to the national objectives. The Committee have been 
informed that in order to spearhead innovation and indigenisation, the Indian Air Force 
has formed a new directorate, named Directorate of Aerospace Design (DAD) which 
actively interacts with industries, R&D institutions and academia to ascertain niche 
technologies in aerospace domain and evolve modus operandi to convert them into 
tactical and strategic war fighting solutions utilising indigenous resources.  During 
deliberations also, a representative of the Air Force apprised the Committee that Indian 
Air Force stress on self-reliance dates back to 1958, when Kanpur-1 was conceived and 
built at the Air Force Station in Kanpur. Thereafter, from Marut to Tejas, Dhruv to 
Prachand, the Indian Air Force has been fully committed to self-reliance.   The Committee 
have also been informed that in financial year 20242025 and the current financial year, 
Air Force have spent approximately 90 percent of their allocated capital budget on 
domestic resources. Air Force have also signed some major acquisition contracts with 
private industries. The iDEX, TDF and MAKE cases have generated business 
opportunities worth over ₹13,000 crore in the defence manufacturing ecosystem. The 
Committee have been informed that expenditure of Air Force on capital acquisition from 
domestic sources for FY 2023-24, FY 2024-25 and FY 2025-26 is Rs. 29,441.12 crore, 
Rs. 42,593.85 crore and Rs. 43,469.34 crore, respectively.  
 
2.         The Committee note that the Indian Air Force has also published an IPR policy, 
aligned with India's mission of "Gyan Shakti" which will foster creativity and innovation. 
The Committee are happy to note that the current and future major acquisition projects 
such as multirole fighter aircraft, medium transport aircraft and unmanned aerial systems 
are entirely based on "Make-in-India" initiatives. The Committee find that for minimizing 
the effect of geo-political uncertainties and to achieve supply chain resilience, the 
defence sector may progressively become self-reliant. The Committee have also been 
informed that the need of the hour is to progressively achieve self-reliance in the defence 
sector and in these efforts, the 'AMCA' fighter aircraft by 2035 will be proved an inflection 
point and also help Air Force in indigenously developing some critically niche 
technologies related to aerospace. The Committee understand that 100 per cent 

33 
 
indigenization is not possible and feasible in a short period of time, nevertheless, while 
commending the efforts of Air Force towards indigenization, the Committee recommend 
that constant endeavours be made to achieve their goals in a phased manner and 
eventually making the country self reliant in this field.   
 
Reply of the Government 
  
All efforts are being made to progressively become self-reliant in the defence 
domain. Multi Role Fighter Aircraft (MRFA) case is being pursued to bridge the capability 
gap as well as enhance manufacturing capacities in India apart from Light Combat 
Aircraft (LCA) Programme. In addition, Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) MK-II and Advanced 
Medium Combat Aircraft (AMCA) are at Design and Development (D&D) stage. Similar 
commitments are being pursued in acquisition cases for combat enablers, replacement of 
legacy transport fleet, helicopters, weapon systems, surveillance systems, EW network 
centric operations etc. IAF maintains constant liaison with both public and private sector 
to facilitate progress in niche technology areas and specific domains which are yet not 
available through indigenous sources. IAF has been actively organising Industry 
Outreach Events (IOE) and had recently organised an IOE at AF Stn Hakimpet, 
Hyderabad on 17 March 20.  
 
2. Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) scheme and the ‘Make’ project 
framework are being leveraged to accelerate indigenisation. This approach aims to 
mitigate risks associated with lengthy development cycles and high costs, while 
simultaneously building a resilient and innovative industrial base. Some key iDEX 
projects pertaining to IAF are helicopter launched weaponised drones, Bullet Proof (BP) 
jackets for aircrew, Humanitarian Assistance Disaster Relief (HADR) module for 
Chinooks, Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) borne Nuclear Biological Chemical (NBC) 
Detection Capabilities with Airborne Location System (ALS) equipped UAS Helicopter 
mounted Counter Unmanned systems. 
 
Operational preparedness and combat capabilities  
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
 The Committee note that the roles and functions of Air Force include offensive 
strikes against enemy vital areas and centers of gravity during combat and defending 
Indian airspace at all the times. The Committee also note that to support both of these 
tasks, Air Force perform critical roles such as intelligence surveillance for enemy 
positions and air transfer operations to relocate our troops from one battle zone to 
another. In all these roles, the Air Force plays an important role in coordinated operations 
with the Army and Navy.  The Committee further note that the Indian Air Force is 
responsible for air defence of the Indian airspace. More than thirty lakh aircraft are closely 
monitored by radar network of Air Force every year and this onerous responsibility is 
executed while ensuring required flexibility for civil traffic.  
      The Committee have been informed that the fighter aircraft remains the main 
instrument of prosecuting the air war and conversely for air defence too and these aircraft 

34 
 
are equipped with air-to-air and air-to-surface weapons for self-protection. The 
Committee have also been informed that Air Force is working on the procurement and 
upgradation of new aircrafts to maintain our combat capabilities. Furthermore, the IAF is 
fully participating in the development and design (D&D) of the LCA Mark 2 and AMCA. 
The Committee note that among the combat-capable helicopters, Apache, Prachand and 
ALH Mark 4 are also fully operational in the IAF and apart from these, surface to surface 
missiles like BrahMos and light ammunition along with under development space systems 
also enhance our strike capability.  The Committee have been further apprised  that 
Critical Combat Enablers like Airborne Early Warning Aircraft, flight refuellers and special 
Electronic Intelligence and surveillance platforms are vital in current warfare. The 
Committee also note that the Indian Air Force leads six Integrated Working Groups, 
comprising the Hawk, Prachand, Apache, Dornier and Akash missile systems and the Air 
Force is also leading service for cyber and EW training.  The Committee are also happy 
to note that this year, the Indian Air Force has conducted a number of transoceanic 
bilateral and multilateral exercises, both within and outside the country. 
 In this regard, the Committee understand that in view of the present  warfare system 
Air Force is playing a vital role in combat and defending Indian airspace. The Committee 
commends the Indian Air Force for its commendable role during Operation Sindoor. By 
executing precision strikes with advanced aerial platforms and integrating indigenous 
technologies, the Air Force demonstrated exceptional professionalism and operational 
readiness. Its swift deployment, accurate targeting, and seamless coordination with 
ground forces ensured the success of the mission, significantly degrading hostile 
infrastructure. The Committee emphasize upon the Ministry that such capabilities 
underscore the importance of continued investment in modern air power to maintain 
India’s strategic edge and safeguard national security. The Committee, therefore, urge 
upon the Ministry to make all necessary efforts for providing adequate financial support 
for acquiring latest advanced aircrafts, weapons and equipments required to meet the 
challenges of present geo-political scenario so that preparedness and combat capability 
of Air force are enhanced to a significant level.  
 During oral evidence the representative of Air Force has also apprised the 
Committee that space domain is a key force enabler, hence the Air Force has formed a 
Space Training Cell at its College of Air Warfare, which has become a nodal training 
centre. The Committee have been informed that near-space is a crucial domain impacting 
combat capability today. The Indian Air Force doctrine for near-space operations is also 
under development. To enhance air defence effectiveness, assets from all armed forces 
and civil aviation have been integrated. The Committee have also been apprised that the 
Air Force's responsibility and limits for aerospace extends to a range of approximately 20 
kilometers and are currently working to expand this area to include near-space as many 
hypersonic ballistic missiles fly within this range. Therefore, Air force needs to work upon 
this area to neutralize them. Air Force want to establish space capabilities include ISR, 
position and timing and communications. These are handled by the Defense Space 
Agency.   
 The Committee understand that recently there is a paradigm shift in the technology 
used in fighting a war and the responsibility of Air Force has been extended also to space 
capability with a view to protect our aerospace. In this regard, the Committee desire that 

35 
 
IAF should be provided with adequate financial resources and support to meet the 
requirement of near-space operations so that our nation should stand firmly at par with 
other global players in the field of space capability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
-Classified- 
 
Role of Air Force During Human Assistance and disaster  
 
Recommendation No. 18 
 
 The Committee have been informed that that during this year on the natural 
disasters, the Air Force efficiently delivered relief materials and evacuated people from 
the affected areas. These missions were delivered over 145 tons of relief supplies and 
rescued over 2,000 people. The Committee have also been informed that HADR has not 
been limited to our national boundary due to prevailing geo-political situations, Indian 
citizens have been safely evacuated from troubled areas, which is a testimony to our 
mobility, reach and responsiveness. The Committee note that more than 500 tonnes of 
relief material has been delivered through these missions and more than 2,800 civilians 
have been rescued.  In this regard, the Committee wish the Air Force all success in their 
endeavour to play a vital role in evacuation of citizens residing foreign countries during 
war like situation and also extending human assistance in need during calamity or 
disaster within the country and abroad.   
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The role of IAF in HADR Operations has been appreciated by SCoD. IAF will 
continue to strive and maintain the same standards in future as well. 
 
Indian Navy 
 
Budgetary allocation and utilization of Navy 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
 The Committee understand that the Indian Navy plays a crucial role in maintaining 
security in the region and fostering peace and stability in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). 
The Indian Navy faces evolving threats both conventional and sub conventional sources, 
requiring continuous adaptation to safeguard maritime interests.  To maintain high 
Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA), the Navy deploys assets along critical sea routes 
and chokepoints.  Additionally, in alignment with India’s security vision- Security and 
Growth for All in the Region (SAGAR)- the Indian Navy actively collaborates with partner 
nations in the IOR, enhancing their naval capabilities and strengthening maritime 

36 
 
infrastructure through training, platform transfers, and technical assistance.  In this 
regard, a representative of Navy, during the presentation before the Committee, stated 
that total budget allocation for Navy during FY 2024-25 was Rs. 90998.95 crore out of 
which expenditure incurred of Rs. 79461.90 crore, in FY 2025-26 allocation was Rs. 
97149.80 crore out of which 87089.27 crore expenditure incurred (upto December) and a 
major share in the Navy’s budget for FY 2026-27 i.e. Rs. 1,07,549.57 crore is devoted 
towards the substantial increase in capital expenditure.  
   
2. The Committee find that under Capital Head in BE 2026-27, allocation has been 
same as that of projected of Rs. 70,063.31 crore.  The allocation of  BE 2026-27  shows 
an increase of Rs. 4710.49 crore in comparison to BE 2025-26. The Committee are of the 
considered view that increase in capital segment of the Navy budget will further help in 
strengthening the Indian Navy towards modernization of naval fleets, warships and 
equipments and development of advanced naval combat capabilities.  
  
3. During FY 2023-24, FY 2024-25 and FY 2025-26 allocation under revenue head 
was Rs. 32,284.20 crore, Rs. 32,778.73 crore and Rs. 38,149.80 crore, respectively. The 
Committee find that under revenue head, the BE allocation in 2026-27 is, higher than the 
previous years i.e. Rs. 46,800.00 crore. Noticing a higher projection during 2026-27, the 
Committee hope that the Ministry would provide additional grant during the 
supplementary/revised stage, if needed, to carry out their modernisation plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. The 
Committee is assured that additional requirement of funds for Navy, if any, will be 
projected at supplementary/RE stages of the current financial year. 
Budget for Modernization  
Recommendation No. 20 
 
 The Committee note that since 2021, there has been a continuous increase in the 
Navy's budget and Navy has been allocated a total Rs. 1,07,549.57 crores for FY 2026-
27. The Committee have been apprised that in FY 2025-26, Navy (including Jt. Staff) was 
allocated Rs. 62,975.97 crore and Rs. 67,236.23 crore at BE and RE stage, respectively, 
under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) Head. Against these allocations, an 
expenditure of Rs. 48,187.57 crore has been incurred upto December, 2025. Further, in 
BE 2026-27, an allocation of Rs. 67,524.45 crore has been made to Navy (including Jt. 
Staff) under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head. The Committee have been 
informed that in case the expenditures exceed, the allocation will be provided in the 
revised estimates by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee have also been informed 
that capital budget allocations are also increasing as needed, reflecting our focus on 
capability development. The Committee are happy to note that domestic to foreign capital 
expenditure ratio has also been steadily increasing since 2020 and the increase in 
domestic expenditure is attributed to the Government's indigenization efforts.  The 
Committee note that the Navy's day-to-day operations and maintenance costs are paid  
from the revenue budget which is consistent with the projected expenditure. The 

37 
 
Committee also note that the Navy has achieved a healthy capital-to-revenue ratio and 
has continuously improving it as a result of our capability-driven approach.   
 
2.  The Committee further note that consistent budgetary support in the future is 
essential for the Navy's sustained planned growth and Navy are confident that they will 
become even stronger and more capable in the coming years. The Committee have also 
been informed that the Indian Navy Incubation Centre for Artificial Intelligence (INICAI) 
has been working continuously for the last three years to institutionalize AI adoption.  The 
dedicated compute center CRYSTAL with 24 GPUs is being used for the development, 
training and testing of advanced AI models. The Committee through supplementary reply 
have been informed that the fund allocated to Navy under Capital Acquisition 
(Modernization) Head of Accounts was utilized to support several new schemes in 
addition to supporting committed liabilities covering ongoing cases. The significant new 
projects include contract for 26 Rafale-M Aircraft, follow on Support/Follow on Supply 
Support of MH60R Helicopters and  Heavy Weight Torpedoes for Scorpene class 
submarines, among other projects.  The Committee have been informed further that out 
of the Modernization Budget, the Navy has been allocated Rs.47,748.31 Cr (73.57%) for 
Committed Liabilities and Rs.17,146.28 Cr (26.43%) for New Schemes.  
 
3.          Keeping in view the urgent requirement of modernization of the Armed Forces in 
view of the current global geo-political scenario, the Committee are hopeful that Navy 
shall gainfully utilize the allocated fund for modernization and technological upgradation 
in their platforms, infrastructure and armaments on priority for enhancing the naval 
capabilities, latest and advanced technology, naval fleets, equipments, vessels, weapons, 
etc. at par with the global standards. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Indian Navy is continually modernising to address emergent challenges in the 
maritime domain. The modernisation of Indian navy is centred on acquiring capabilities 
based on threat perception prevailing external security environment, emerging 
technologies and available fiscal space. Capability development is an ongoing process 
and is progressed in accordance with the 15-year plan document namely Long Term 
Integrated Capability Perspective Plan (LTIPP), promulgated in 2012. Currently, the 
formulation of Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP), which is the replacement 
of LTIPP, is in progress and is being steered by HQIDS. 
 
Indigenisation  
Recommendation No. 21 
 
 During the oral evidence, the representative of Navy informed the Committee that 
the country has made significant progress in bridging the gap with other nations in the 
area of self-reliance, however, the non-availability of critical engines due to continued 
dependence on foreign OEMs has hampered the progress. The Indian Navy has taken up 
this issue on a mission mode.  The Committee note that the important cases related to 

38 
 
the development of main propulsion systems are in progress under the Make-I and 
Technology Development Fund schemes. The Committee have been informed that the 
Indian Navy has been working towards steadily increasing Indigenous content in 
shipbuilding projects over the years, reaching approximately 76% in INS Vikrant and 
continuous efforts are being made with DRDO and industry to increase indigenization 
across the entire spectrum of weapons and sensors. The Committee have also been 
informed that self-reliance has been the cornerstone of the Indian Navy's capability 
development across all domains of naval warfare and under the Atmanirbhar Bharat 
initiative, the Navy is actively providing problem statements to the TDF and iDEX. The 
Committee find that there has been a significant increase in the number of indigenisation 
cases progressed by the Navy under various Government of India schemes, from 
approximately 4 cases in 2019 to 284 cases in 2025. The Indian Navy is the largest 
contributor to the iDEX ecosystem with 198 challenges, accounting for approximately 
35% of the total. Appreciating the efforts made by the Navy towards achieving 
indigenization, the Committee recommend that concerted efforts be made to expedite 
completion of the ongoing projects so that the Navy attains greater degree of 
`Aatmanirbharta’ in near future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Indian Navy (IN) endeavours to significantly enhance indigenisation content, both 
in the ongoing ship building projects, as well as in weapons and sensors. The Indian 
Navy aims to achieve 100% self-reliance in defence equipment by 2047. Towards the 
same, IN has been actively collaborating with industry partners through initiatives such as 
SPRINT and iDEX. The iDEX scheme is being utilised to support ‘pole-vaulting’ in R&D 
for Defence Excellence. The IN has received more than 2800 proposals from the Indian 
Industry that have been converted into 198 challenges and led to the conclusion of 239 
Development Agreements that facilitate development of prototypes. Significantly, this 
initiative has enabled collaboration with more than 150 MSMEs/Start-ups under the iDEX 
Scheme, with AON accorded for 34 cases to the tune of Rs 3066.25 crores and with 
contracts concluded for 21 cases amounting to Rs 1754.24 crores till date. Concerted 
efforts are on to consolidate challenges launched and convert them into viable products 
and expedite induction, leading to technical advancement of the Indian Navy. 
 
Operational preparedness and anti-narcotic operations 
 
Recommendation No. 22 
 
 The Committee note that the Cabinet Committee on Security has assigned overall 
responsibility for maritime security to the Indian Navy and this is being carried out in close 
coordination with the Indian Coast Guard and other stakeholders. The Committee also 
note that the Navy has four main roles: military, diplomatic, constabulary and benign. The 
various functions under each role have also been listed and to achieve these functions, 
naval forces are deployed on overlapping missions while maintaining a continuous 
presence at sea. The Committee have been informed that for performing effectively these 
roles, the Navy need to be continuously monitored India's 11,100 km long coastline, 

39 
 
1,379 islands and 2.2 million square km of Exclusive Economic Zone through Maritime 
Domes Awareness. The Committee have also been apprised that this maritime domain 
awareness serves as the backbone of all naval operations which is ensured through the 
deployment of naval assets across all five domains, 24/7 into 365.  
 
2. The Committee have been further informed that since November 2023, the Indian 
Navy has deployed 48 capital ships in the Gulf of Aden, resulting in the safe transit of 
approximately 16.5 million metric tonnes of cargo on board 392 merchant vessels with an 
estimated economic value of approximately US$  
7 billion.  
 
3. The Committee note that Anti-piracy efforts have resulted in the boarding of over a 
thousand vessels and the apprehension of 62 pirates who were suitably dealt with by the 
provision of Maritime Piracy Act, 2022. Over 170 maritime incidents have been reported 
in the region in the past year in which lives of more than 570 people could be saved. The 
Committee further note that in anti-narcotics operations which was undertaken in March 
2025, the Indian Navy's frontline frigate INS Tarkash successfully intercepted 2,500 kg of 
narcotics in the Western Indian Ocean. During oral evidence, the Committee have been 
apprised that whatever the Navy seizes, all those things are handed over to the Narcotics 
Control Board. Expressing their satisfaction over the role and operational preparedness 
of the Indian Navy, the Committee are hopeful that keeping in view the drastic changes in 
the modern warfare tactics, the Navy will continue to protect the maritime zone and 
prevent piracy and other maritime security threats.   
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Indian Navy(IN) is committed to strengthening maritime security in the Indian 
Ocean Region (IOR) to ensure a favourable and positive maritime environment. The 
Indian Navy maintains regular presence and surveillance in India’s maritime ‘Areas of 
Interest’. IN operations, in the IOR, based on the concept of Mission Based Deployments 
(MBDs) are aimed at sustained surveillance for enhanced Maritime Domain Awareness 
(MDA), show presence and address military challenges, tackle contingencies such as 
Anti-piracy, Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) and Search and 
Rescue (SAR). These are in consonance with Hon’ble PM’s vision of ‘SAGAR’ (Security 
and Growth in All Regions) and ‘MAHASAGAR’ (Mutual and Holistic Advancement of 
Security and Growth across Regions), and the IN’s Maritime Security Strategy. The 
following deployments/presence are maintained by IN round the year in vicinity of specific 
maritime areas: - 
 
 Anti-Piracy Patrols.  The IN has been maintaining continuous presence in 
the piracy affected area of Gulf of Aden and off the East Coast of Africa for anti-
piracy patrols since 2008. Since commencement of the operation, more than 162 

40 
 
IN ships have been deployed for anti-piracy patrol and over 4200 merchant ships 
have been safely escorted. 
 
 Approaches to Malacca Strait (MALDEP).  IN has been maintaining 
continuous presence in approaches to Malacca Strait (MALDEP), a gateway to 
IOR, to undertake surveillance and develop credible MDA in the region, including 
maintaining a close watch on extra regional forces transiting in/out of IOR. 
 
 Central and South Indian Ocean (CENTDEP and SOUTHDEP).   
The deployment is aimed at establishing presence of IN in the Central and 
Southern Indian Ocean Region, enhancing MDA, monitoring Chinese maritime 
activities and engaging with our maritime neighbours. 
 
Human assistance and disaster relief operations  
 
Recommendation No. 23 
 
  During deliberations, a representative of the Navy informed the Committee that 
the Navy has conducted several humanitarian assistance in disaster relief, search and 
rescue and medical evacuation missions particularly notable among these are Operation 
Brahma and Operation Sagar Bandhu which have been successfully completed recently. 
The Committee have been informed that during Operation Brahma the first relief 
consignment from India, weighing 10 tons departed through INS Savitri on 29th March 
2025 and a total 512 tons of relief materials were delivered to Myanmar. The Committee 
have also been informed that during Ditwaha Cyclone in Sri Lanka, Naval ships Vikrant 
and Udayagiri were present in Colombo and acted as first responders. On 29 November, 
2025 approximately 10 tons of relief material was provided and three Chetak helicopters 
from Vikrant safely rescued eight stranded Sri Lankan civilians. A total of 969 tons of 
relief material was provided by the Indian Navy which is one of the largest assistance in 
recent years. In this regard, the Committee wish the Navy all success in their endeavour 
to act as first responder in extending human assistance and supplying essential items in 
need during calamity or disaster occurred within the country and also abroad.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Indian Navy stands as the primary instrument and principal manifestation of 
India’s maritime power, ensuring the security of the seas. The Indian Navy’s contribution 
to strengthening maritime security, upholding good order at sea, and providing 
humanitarian assistance will be continued, to reinforce India’s role as the region’s 
‘Preferred Security Partner’ and ‘First Responder’. 
 
Joint Staff 
Budget  
Recommendation No. 24 
 

41 
 
 The Committee note that during the year 2026-27, against the projection of Rs. 
8,253.47 crore an allocation of Rs. 7,238.72 crore has been provided for Joint Staff. The 
Committee understand that Joint Staff continued to play a crucial role in enhancing 
jointness and integration among the Indian Armed Forces through formulation of joint 
doctrines, conduct of integrated training and exercise and development of unified 
operational strategies. The Committee note that the Joint Ops Staff at HQ IDS 
coordinates Tri-Services operational issues in consultation with the three Service HQs 
through the COSC established Joint Operational Committee (JOCOM) and Joint 
Operational Logistics Committees (JOLC).  The Committee also note that the issues of 
operational relevance to the three services, including organisation, structures and 
procedures are brought to JOCOM periodically and consensus arrived by discussions 
and deliberations between the stakeholders.  The Committee further note that Tri-Service 
operational issues at the SHQ level are handled by the Joint Ops Staff at HQ IDS and 
inputs of the same provided to DMA through staff channels.  The Committee have also 
been informed that a Future Operations Analysis Group is proposed to be established at 
Headquarter IDS to develop tactics, techniques, procedures and operational art for 
fighting future wars. Jointness and integration in networking, communications, aerospace 
safety, logistics and maintenance are the major focus areas identified.  
 
2.         The Committee, while appreciating the role and responsibilities of HQ Integrated 
Defence staff/Joint Staff express their hope that the Ministry would provide additional 
grant, at the supplementary/revised stage in order to further strengthen the Joint Staff.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2026-27, an amount of Rs. 7,238.72 crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 885.90 
crore over BE 2025-26) has been allocated to Joint Staff which is an increase of 13.94% 
over BE 2025-26 allocations. Further, if required, additional funds will be sought at 
Supplementary/ Revised Estimate stage to meet the requirements to ensure that planned 
Capital and Revenue Expenditure for the Joint Staff does not face issues related to funds.  
 
ECHS 
Budget  
Recommendation No. 26 
 
 The Committee note that close to 64 lakh beneficiaries including Ex-servicemen 
(ESM) and their dependents are presently availing ECHS benefits. In the financial year 
2025-26, the projection of ECHS was Rs. 12017.22 crore, however, the allocation was 
i.e. Rs. 8317.00 crore, thereby there was a deduction of Rs. 3700.22 crore. The 
expenditure during FY 202526 was Rs. 9263.29 crore till 31 January, 2026. The 
Committee have also been informed that the  during the year 2025-26, the allocation at 
BE stage i.e Rs. 8317 crore has been enhanced to Rs. 11000 crore which is an increase 
of Rs. 2683.00 crore During the FY 2026-27 the projection was Rs. 15827.44 crore, 
however, allocation was Rs. 12100.00 crore. During oral evidence, the representatives of 
ECHS informed the Committee that the ECHS budget in 2021-22 was ₹4,865 crore which 
has been increased by 225 percent in four years. The Committee have been informed 

42 
 
that the allocation for the scheme is increasing much faster than other schemes. The 
expenditure under this scheme, which treats ex-servicemen, is cashless and capless.  
 
2.         The Committee at this stage recommend that the budget allocated at BE or RE 
stage may be fully utilized as such expenditure is meant for the welfare of Ex-Servicemen 
of our country. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The final budget allocation for the Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
during FY 2025-26 was Rs. 14,858 crores and an amount of Rs. 14,731.60 crores were 
expended by ECHS (99.15%).   
 
Vacancies in ECHS Polyclinics  
Recommendation No. 27 
 
 The Committee find that there is a marginal gap between authorized and actual 
manpower at ECHS Polyclinics in some posts. The Committee have been informed that 
vacancies arise primarily due to the non-availability of Specialists in small towns and 
remote areas and this vacancy position is a dynamic figure and changes.  The Committee 
note that ECHS Polyclinics are functioning with contractual manpower authorised by the 
Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, Ministry of Defence from time to time and as on 
January 2026, a total of 8,252 contractual Medical/ Dental Officers, specialists, para 
medical staff and nonmedical staff vacancies have been allocated to Polyclinics across 
the country including Nepal. The Committee are happy to know that the Government has 
revised upwards the remunerations of ECHS contractual employees with effect from 24 
July 2025 with a view to improve the interest and response for taking up contractual 
assignments with ECHS. Further, Traveling Allowance/ Dearness Allowance has also 
been granted to these contractual employees.  
 
2. Recognizing that the timely filling of vacancies in hospitals and polyclinics will 
significantly strengthen healthcare services for ex-servicemen, the Committee 
recommend that these vacancies be addressed in a time-bound manner. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. ECHS is making continual efforts to fill the contractual vacancies at the polyclinics.   
Vacancies are duly advertised in local newspapers and media, and the selection boards 
are conducted regularly to fill up the vacant posts. As a result, the authorization and 
posting of contractual manpower at ECHS Polyclinics as on 31.03.2026 is tabulated as 
under: 
 
Category of 
Manpower 
Authorized Engaged Vacancy Remarks 
Medical Staff 2144 2103 41 At Polyclinics 

43 
 
Paramedical staff 2840 2823 17 yet to be 
operationalize
d, the 
vacancies are 
yet to be filled. 
Non-medical staff 2832 2787 45 
Officer-in-charge 436 436 0 
Total 8252 8149 103 
 
2. The tabulation above shows an overall vacancy of 103 persons at the Polyclinics; 
there are 06 newly Polyclinics are yet to be operationalized.   
 
3. The gap between the authorised and the actual manpower is mainly due to non-
availability of candidates at remote locations.  To mitigate this gap, on 24 Jul 2025, 
Government has increased the remuneration by approx. 30% for contractual employees 
employed at Ex-Contributory Health Scheme polyclinics.  Enhanced remuneration along 
with provision of Travelling Allowance/Dearness Allowance will encourage applicants to 
apply for polyclinics located in remote areas for providing quality healthcare to 
beneficiaries.  
 
4. It is proposed to operationalize the remaining six polyclinics during FY 2026-27 
and also fill the remaining vacancies.  
 
Development of IT Infrastructure for ECHS  
 
Recommendation No. 28 
 
 The Committee have been informed that an unified system based on Micro 
Service Architecture has been envisaged with an aim to digitally transform the healthcare 
service delivery ecosystem of ECHS and develop a unified IT system for seamless and 
end-to-end management of scheme operations by providing a comprehensive, integrated 
and automated platform which can efficiently drive the inputs, processes and scheme 
outcomes. The Committee have also been apprised that the project is to be developed 
through an ‘In-house Capability Development Programme’ so that the digitalization 
process will enable the ECHS eco-system to operate more efficiently, improve access 
and quality to healthcare services for ex-servicemen and their dependent families and 
reduce the burden on the manual system. The Committee appreciate the efforts taken by 
ECHS towards digitalization process of healthcare system and wish them all success in 
their endeavour.  The Committee recommend for timely completion of the projects which 
are underway so that ECHS eco-system may function more efficiently in providing 
healthcare facilities to Ex Servicemen and their dependants. The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the final development of the unified IT system and its 
implementation in the eco-system of ECHS at the time of furnishing the Action Take 
replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare and the CO of the Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme have as a first step in August 2025; decided to move the 

44 
 
ECHS data to the National Government Cloud. The Government Cloud is a unique cloud 
service being offered for all Government projects. It offers various IT infrastructure for 
Compute, Storage, Kubernetes, Database and Network in a Secured Data Centre 
operated by National Informatics Centre. 
 
2. Moving the ECHS data to the National Government Cloud (NGC) is the foundation 
for seamless and end-to-end management of scheme operations with data security. It will 
result in better management of health services for our veterans and their dependents. 
The migration of Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme application to National 
Government Cloud is under progress, after this is completed, it is planned to start 
biometric authentication through e-Satyapan for all ECHS beneficiaries to strengthen the 
digitization process at ECHS. 
 
Payment of pending bills by ECHS to empanelled private hospitals 
 
Recommendation No. 29 
 
 The Committee note that the revenue budget of ECHS is allocated internally under 
four main heads of expenditure, these are Medical Treatment Related Expenditure 
(MTRE), Medical Stores, Salary and Others. The Committee also note that during FY 
2026-27 BE allocation is Rs. 12100 crore. The Committee have been informed that 
approximately 78% of ECHS budget allocation is planned for reimbursement of medical 
bills (Medical Treatment Related Expenditure) and about 15% for procurement of 
medicines and medical stores. From the reply submitted by the Ministry to resolve 
perennial problem of unsettled ECHS medical bills of the private recognized hospitals, the 
Committee note that the Bill processing is a dynamic and ongoing process and normally, 
it takes approx. two months for the processing a medical bill of an empanelled hospital. 
The Committee also note that this period can get extended in case a claim is put under 
the ‘Need More Information (NMI)’ observation, however, all efforts are made to clear 
outstanding bills in a time bound manner.  The Committee have also been informed that 
several steps have been taken to ensure efficient and time settlement of bills of ECHS 
empanelled hospitals i.e. continuously monitoring Turn Around Time (TAT) with the Bill 
Processing Agencies (BPA), monitoring of response time for the ‘Need More Information 
(NMI)’ cases with empanelled hospitals for faster processing to such bills that require 
further information/clarification from hospitals, assignment of more doctors to Regional 
Centres (RCs) facing heavy bill processing workloads to accelerate approvals, 
establishment of centralized dashboard to track the status of all submitted, approved and 
pending bills and ensuring better transparency and faster processing and forwarding Bills 
of Regional Centres with higher load to Regional Centres with lower bill loads to hasten 
processing.   
  
2.  During oral evidence, the representative of the Department also apprised the 
Committee that the allocation received is not in proportion to the expenditure amount  
admitted that there is a need to for increase  the allocation further. The Committee 
understand that inflated bills from empanelled hospitals are leading to multiple review 
cycles, increasing approval times.  The Committee hope that adequate fund are allocated 

45 
 
to ECHS including additional fund at supplementary stage as and when required, so that 
the inconvenience being faced by the ESM could be resolved, and the private hospitals 
may not find a reason for rejecting ESM for admission and treatment.   
 
3.  The Committee express their concern that the issue of pendency surfaces before 
the Committee during the examination of DFGs every year. The Committee urges the 
Department of Ex Servicemen Welfare to address that pending bills settlement issue on 
priority.  Efforts should be made for reducing the pendency to the minimum. This will be in 
the overall welfare interests of the Ex-servicemen and their dependants. In this regard, 
the Committee would also like to be further apprised on the following sets of information:  
(i) The numbers of ESM/Dependents who approached all the polyclinics combined 
during the last three years;  
(ii) The number of ESM who approached all defence hospitals combined for treatment of 
themselves and the dependent during the last three years; and  
(iii) The number of ex-serviceman/dependent who were referred for super specialty 
treatment in private hospitals.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The budget allotment under ECHS for the Medical Treatment Related Expenditure 
has increased from Rs.1900 crs. in FY 2018-19 to Rs. 12,898 crs in FY 2025-26. This is a 
578% increase in allotment, to meet the growing requirements for implementing the 
scheme. An overview of the budgetary allocation during the last eight years is as under:- 
 
FY Budget Allotment 
(Rs in crores) 
for ECHS 
MTRE Allotment 
(Rs in crores) 
2018-19 3198 1900 
2019-20 5199 3929 
2020-21 5321 4197 
2021-22 4870 3680 
2022-23 6929 5461 
2023-24 9880 8264 
2024-25 10929 9256 
2025-26 14858 12898 
 
2. The processing of medical bills of emapanelled hospitals and individual 
beneficiaries is a dynamic and time taking process. Normally, bills generated in the last 
months of any Financial Year get cleared in next Financial Year. This results in some 
cyclic carry forward liability. 
3. The information sought is tabulated as under: 
(i) Data on the number of ex-servicemen/dependents who approached all the 
Polyclinics during the last three years: 
 

46 
 
S. No Year No of Patients Visit in Polyclinics 
1 2023 1,71,77,491 
2 2024 1,83,41,539 
3 2025 1,98,62,537 
 
(ii) The number of ex-servicemen who approached all Defence Hospitals 
combined for treatment of self & dependent during the last three years: 
 
Ser No Year No of Patients Referred to Service 
Hospitals 
1 2023 3,18,449 
2 2024 3,32,457 
3 2025 3,23,569 
 
(iii) The number of ex-servicemen/dependents referred for specialty/super-
specialty treatment to private empanelled hospitals in last three years: 
 
Ser No Year No of Patients Referred to private 
empanelled  Hospitals 
1 2023 36,90,406 
2 2024 39,82,705 
3 2025 40,05,398 
 
 
ECHS in far-flung areas 
Recommendation No. 30 
 
 The Committee note that ECHS is systematically increasing the number of 
polyclinics and upgrading existing ones so that more veterans, including those in remote 
regions, can access healthcare without traveling long distances.  The Committee also 
note that ECHS has launched Tele-Consultation through ECHS Services Health 
Assistance and Tele-consultation (e-SeHAT) module pan India which enables 
beneficiaries in obtaining online tele-consultation for medical treatment from their homes 
without visiting the polyclinics. The initiative aim is to provide health care services through 
safe and structured video based clinical consultations and it shall also facilitate 
beneficiaries settled in remote and far-flung areas. The Committee further note that in 
order to extend the reach to rural and remote locations, a Pilot Project for three Mobile 
Medical Units (MMU) on the lines of National Health Mission at the existing Type ‘E’ 
Polyclinics (Rampur, Tenga/Tura and Poonch) was initiated on 03 November, 2025.   
 
2. The Committee have also been informed that these MMUs will extend healthcare 
facilities to beneficiaries settled at remote, far flung areas with provision of basic 
diagnostics, lab investigations, issue of medicines and grant of referral on need basis 
thus resulting in provisioning of medical services and healthcare to beneficiaries at their 
doorstep. Further, the requirement of new Polyclinics is reviewed from time to time with 
an objective to serve a larger beneficiary population.    

47 
 
  
3.  The Committee while expressing their satisfaction over increase in ECHS 
coverage in far-flung and distant areas over the the years, and devising of new methods 
and initiatives to help ESM through ECHS, at the same urge the Department of Ex 
Servicemen Welfare to continue their efforts for further expansion of ECHS to remote and 
untouched areas by constructing more new polyclinics and deploying more Mobile 
Medical Units. The Committee hope that these new proposed arrangements will be put in 
place in the coming years.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To extend the outreach of the scheme in rural and remote locations and to extend 
basic healthcare facilities to veterans, a number of steps have been taken by the Ministry 
of Defence. These are detailed in the succeeding paras: 
 
 
 1. Tele-Consultation through ECHS Services Health Assistance and Tele-
consultation:  To enable ex-servicemen residing in remote, far-flung areas and those 
unable to physically visit the polyclinic due to illness, age, or mobility constraints, E-
SeHAT Tele-consultation services were introduced in October 2025 through the Ex-
Contributory Health Scheme mobile app. The tele-consultation is provided by the 
available polyclinic doctors. This initiative also reduces congestion and waiting time in 
polyclinics and more than 2,100 tele-consultations have been carried out by various 
Polyclinics. The benefits/impact of the reform are as under:  
(i) Reduces the need for physical visits, especially for elderly beneficiaries 
(ii) Ensures timely medical advice and continuity of care 
(iii) Improves access to specialists across locations 
(iv) Enhances convenience and efficiency in healthcare delivery 
 
2. Mobile Medical Units: To provide access of health services to ex-servicemen 
residing in far-flung and remote areas a pilot project for Mobile Medical Units has been 
initiated. Three Mobile Medical Units on the lines of the National Health Mission have 
been launched on pilot basis at Rampur in Himachal Pradesh, Tura in Meghalaya and 
Poonch in J&K on 02 Feb 2026. After successful completion of the Pilot Project, final 
decision on establishment of Mobile Medical Units in the remote areas shall be 
considered. The benefits/impact of the reform are as under:  
 (i) Strengthens last-mile healthcare delivery 
 (ii) Reduce travel burden for elderly pensioners 
 (iii) Improve outreach in remote and inaccessible areas 
 (iv) Ensure early diagnosis and timely treatment 
 
3. Home Delivery of Authorised Local Chemist Medicines. To support elderly and 
infirm beneficiaries, Ex-Contributory Health Scheme initiated the facility of home delivery 
of medicines. As of April 2026, approximately 23,923 medicine packets have been 
delivered. The benefits/impact of the reform are as under: 
(i) Minimizes the need for repeated visits to polyclinics 

48 
 
(ii) Ensures continuity of treatment for chronic patients 
(iii) Reduces inconvenience for aged and differently-abled beneficiaries 
(iv) Improves adherence to prescribed treatment 
 
DGAFMS 
Recommendation No. 31 
 
 The Committee note that the Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) provides 
dedicated, dependable and comprehensive health care to Defence Personnel and their 
dependents and consists of Medical Services of the Army, Navy and Air Force under the 
Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services (DGAFMS).  The Committee also note 
that the organization of the office of DGAFMS, which comes directly under the Ministry of 
Defence comprises 10 lieutenant generals, 41 major generals, 185 brigadiers, and 732 
select colonels. The Committee have been informed that the heads of medical services of 
Army, Navy and Air Force will be responsible for functioning of these services under the 
respective Service Chiefs in accordance with any general policy directions that may be 
given by the DGAFMS and are the Medical Advisors to their respective Services.  The 
Committee have also been apprised that the AFMS is always striving to upgrade the 
infrastructure and equipment profile of its hospitals and other medical establishments and 
procurement of modern electromedical equipment empowering AFMS hospitals with 
latest diagnostic and therapeutic tools have led to a greater satisfaction among its 
clientele alongwith research in AFMS that has ensured optimal progress in modern 
medical technology for treatment and diagnosis of diseases.  Also, the professional 
training of doctors in AFMS has ensured in-house capability of specialists and super 
specialist medical care.   
 
2. During oral evidence the representative of DGAFMS through a presentation 
apprised the Committee that an amount of Rs. 1729.6278 crore  has been allotted under 
Revenue head and Rs. 850.0000 crore under Capital head for the FY 2026-27. As 
regards, utilization of  allocated Funds for FY 2025-26 (till December 2025) i.e. Rs. 650 
crore and 1744.42 crore (approx.) under Revenue head and Capital head, respectively. 
They stated that  the Funds allotted were adequate. The Committee note that some major 
projects are underway for upgradation/modernization of the infrastructure i.e. Command 
Hospital (Central Command) Lucknow, Base Hospital, Delhi Cantonment, Command 
Hospital (Air Force) Bangalore, 178  
Military Hospital, 155 Base Hospital, Military Hospital, Meerut, Military Hospital, Yol, 92 
Base Hospital, 425 Field Hospital and Indian Naval Hospital Ship, Pantanjali, Karwar and 
in addition upgradation of 180 Military Hospital from 148 beds to 250 beds, 153 General 
Hospital from 200 beds to 300 beds and raising of 75 bedded Military Hospital at Along 
have been sanctioned by competent authority as part of capability development along 
northern borders.  While appreciating the role and responsibilities of DGAFMS in medical 
services, the Committee recommend the Ministry to provide adequate financial grants to 
DGAFMS in case of setting up of new hospitals/medical facilities and also upgradation of 
existing hospitals which are required for serving personnel of the Armed Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 

49 
 
 
(a)   Some major projects underway for upgradation/modernization of the infrastructure 
are as follows:  
 Command Hospital (Central Command), Lucknow 
 Base Hospital, Delhi Cantt.  
 178 Military Hospital 
 155 Base Hospital 
 Military Hospital, Meerut 
 Military Hospital, YoI 
 92 Base Hospital 
 425 Field Hospital 
 Command Hospital Air Force (CHAF), Bangalore 
 5 Air Force Hospital 
 Indian Naval Hospital Ship, Patanjali, Karwar 
(b)   Following raisings/up-gradations as part of capability development along northern 
borders has been sanctioned by competent authority:  
 
 Up-gradation of 180 Military Hospital from 148 beds to 250 beds. 
 Up-gradation of 153 General Hospital from 200 beds to 300 beds. 
 Raising of 75 bedded Military Hospital at Along. 
(c)   Progress of ongoing hospital projects are being monitored proactively. 
 
(d)  Funds for raising of new hospitals/medical facilities and upgradation of infrastructure 
of existing hospitals are demanded/provided through respective service Headquarters 
and subsequently submitted for the Ministry of Defence’s approval.  
 
 
 
Role of AFMS in War, Peace and HADR duties  
Recommendation No. 32 
 
 The Committee observe that the mission of the AFMS is to deliver comprehensive 
medical care of the highest standards during operations as well as peacetime, within the 
country as well as abroad, alongwith seamless medical logistics support, research, and 
training. The Committee also note that the DGAFMS has an elaborate mechanism of 
reviewing and delivering medical care across the country including border and remote 
areas across the three services including physical visits and periodic online reviews by 
senior AFMS officers to these areas. The Committee also note that the DGAFMS has 
visited medical units of Headquarters 15 Corps and medical units of Headquarters 16 
Corps in Jammu & Kashmir in the month of  April and June, 2025, respectively.  In 
addition, various functionaries including Director Generals of Medical Services (DGsMS) 
of respective Services (Army/ Navy/ Air Force) also visit medical facilities located pan 
India including border areas as part of familiarization visit and departmental inspections.  
The Committee have been informed that existing facilities in the border areas are 
essentially meant for providing combat medical support to soldiers deployed along 
International Border, Line of Actual Control and Line of Control of the nation.  The 

50 
 
Committee have also been apprised that the terrain constraints including weather and 
operational limitations often lead to unique medical challenges. The Committee note that 
Field Hospitals, Station Medicare Centres and Sick Bays are equipped with necessary 
infrastructure and terrain related medical equipment for providing combatants optimal 
medical support.  The Committee are happy to know that the Armed Forces Medical 
Services conducts HDR operations overseas. The Committee also find that recently in 
Myanmar, more than 2,500 casualties were treated and also in Sri Lanka, 7,500 
casualties and 500 surgeries were done.  
 
2.        The Committee wish the AFMS all success in their endeavour, for which armed 
force personal feel secure during war and peace time. The Committee also urge AFMS to 
explore new avenues for providing medical related services during pandemic like 
situations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a)   Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) was the first organized health sector in the 
country to host and quarantine Indian citizens stranded in Wuhan, who were evacuated to 
the Manesar quarantine camp starting 01 February, 2020.  The AFMS designed Standard 
Operating Procedures for quarantine, testing protocols, disinfection procedures and 
reporting formats, which were then shared and improved upon in liaison with Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare. 
(b) AFMS hospitals across the country were geared up for receiving patients of 
COVID-19, with special Intensive Care Units (ICUs), High Dependency Units (HDUs) and 
Isolation Wards.  Treatment services at some of these hospitals were offered as aid to 
civil authorities in the event of State health establishments being overwhelmed by COVID 
patients in the worst case scenario.  Fifty dedicated and mixed COVID hospitals were set 
up during the pandemic.  Special financial powers of DGAFMS under emergency 
procurement was invoked for provision of specialized medical stores to augment the 
surge capacity of hospitals. 
 
(c) Facilities for all types of COVID-19 test such as Reverse Transcription Polymerase 
Chain Reaction (RT PCR), Cartridge-Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test 
(CBNAAT), TrueNat, Rapid Antigen Test (RAT) etc.  were established during the 
pandemic and have been further strengthened.  As on date, 41 Viral Testing Labs 
are functional in AFMS for advanced molecular diagnosis. 
 
(d) AFMS operated dedicated COVID facilities for civilians in the first and second 
waves of the pandemic in collaboration with DRDO: 
 (i) Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel COVID Hospital, Delhi Cantt (500 bedded) 
(ii) ESI Hospital at Patna (500 beds) 
(iii) Pandit Rajan Mishra Hospital, Varanasi (750 beds) 
(iv) Dhanvantari COVID Hospital, Ahmedabad (1000 beds) 
(v) Atal Bihari Vajpayee Hospital Lucknow (450 beds) 

51 
 
  A total of 525 MOs and Specialists, 224 Nurses and 616 paramedical Staff 
 were detailed by the DGAFMS as an aid to Civil Authorities at these hospitals.  A 
total of 5129 civilian COVID-19 patients were managed at these hospitals. 
 
Training and Medical Research in AFMS 
 
Recommendation No. 33 
 
 The Committee note that the Armed Forces Medical Services trains all kinds of 
medical, postgraduates and nursing students and there are 220 nursing cadets who are 
taken in every year alongside several research and innovation practices and innovative 
activities occurs in the AFMS. The Committee also note that the Armed Forces Centre for 
Computational Medicine has been established and it participated in a one-hour round 
table discussion at the AI Impact Summit. During oral evidence the representative of 
AFMS through a presentation apprised the Committee that Next Generation Sequencing 
(NGS) established by AFMS at Army Hospital Research and Referral and the Armed 
Forces Medical College which aims at enhancing molecular diagnostic capabilities. 
Morevoer, the nation's first licensed facility for frozen RBCs is located at the Armed 
Forces Transfusion Centre in Delhi, which can provide blood with a shelf life of up to ten 
years.  Further, in-Principle approval of MoD has been accorded for establishment of an 
ICMR-AFMS Joint High Altitude Research Centre at Key long, Himachal Pradesh.  The 
Committee have also been informed that there are several collaborative projects and 
several collaborations and MoUs with several premier institutions around the country, 
such as the IITs, DPG, Chandigarh, the IISC and the MHFW.   
 
2. The Committee were further informed that there are several collaborative projects 
ongoing, including with the ICMR and the National Health Research Priority, which serves 
to start projects on high-altitude combat, marine and aerospace medicine and in this 
regard seven such projects have been approved. The Committee note that there is a 
Center of Advanced Research, which is the AFS Biomedical Innovations Validation 
Integration Center in AFMC. The Committee also note AFMS has contributed to the One 
Health Mission by providing expertise in various fields and is part of the One Health 
Conclave and which directly coordinates with various organizations such as the MEA, the 
MHFW, as well as MHA, the NDRF, the NACCO, and the CPCB. Expressing their 
satisfaction over the training and research programme provided to medical personnel by 
AFMS, the Committee recommend that the AFMS should keep its training and research 
curriculum up-to-date with the modern technologies, medical advancements and 
innovations with the aim of providing efficient medical facilities to  armed force personnel 
at the time of traditional as well as modern warfare.  It may be emphasised here that 
AFMS should keep abreast with the new and modern courses not only from the viewpoint 
of diagnostic doctors but also in the field of pharmacy related developments which are 
essential for modern medical care.    
  
 
 
 

52 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) AFMS conducts Undergraduate, Post Graduate and Super Specialty training in 
AFMS institutions as per the curriculum and guidelines of National Medical 
Commission (NMC)/National Board of Examinations in Medical Sciences 
(NBEMS). 
(b) In the field of pharmacy, AFMS conducts diploma courses in Pharmacy as per 
guidelines stipulated by Pharmacy Council of India and Maharashtra University of 
Health Sciences. 
(c) AFMS has operationalised Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR), All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) through active collaborative 
research, faculty exchange, joint training, and participation in national health 
research initiatives. Under the aegis of the MoU with ICMR, seven Armed Forces-
specific research projects are being undertaken under the National Health 
Research Priority Scheme.  
 
Initiatives for Automation/Digitization in AFMS 
 
Recommendation No. 34 
 
 The initiatives of the AFMS is yet another success story which need special 
mention. The Committee note that some initiatives have been taken in the field of 
automation/digitization in AFMS including operationalisation of e-Aushadi which is a 
internet based software application and all medical units of AFMS are presently using 
these modules for procurement and demand of consumables in medical stores. An 
another initiative is Operationalisation of e-Upkaran which is an online inventory 
management application for non-expendable medical stores and facilitates indenting, 
inventory management of medical equipment from the most peripheral unit till the largest 
tertiary care hospital. The third is Ni-KSHAY portal which is a web-based patient 
management system for Tuberculosis control under the National Tuberculosis Elimination 
which helps health functionaries to register Tuberculosis cases for testing, treatment and 
follow up.  The Committee have also been informed that the DGAFMS has signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding with Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space 
Applications and Geo-informatics (BISAG-N), Ministry of Electronics and IT for co-
development of Digital Healthcare solutions. The Committee feel that such facilities will 
go a long way in catering to the needs of the Armed Forces personnel. The Committee 
wish the AFMS all success in their endeavour in which the requirements and necessities 
of Armed Force Personnel should be fulfilled in a better way. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) e-Aushadhi and e-Upkaran continue to be utilized for Pan India Medical Logistics 
Maintenance.  The Scope of the application is being enhanced to improve services 
and strengthen the supply chain management. 

53 
 
 
(b) Directorate General of Medical Services (Navy) [DGMS(Navy)] in coordination with 
Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications and Geo-informatics 
(BISAG-N) have developed digital platforms to digitize critical medical functions 
ranging from Annual Medical Examinations, various Specialist Returns etc. 

54 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 

55 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited  
 
 
 
 
Operationalization of theatre commands  
 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
 The Committee note that with a view to fast track the process of Theaterisation, a 
dedicated team of officers from all three Services has been formed under the Chief of 
Integrated Staff to Chairman Chiefs of Staff Committee (CISC). The Committee also note 
that three Joint Staff Officers undertake study of global military organisations as well as 
organise discussions among the three Services to streamline the process of 
reorganisation. The Committee further note that issues that merit consensus building are 
discussed in the Chiefs of Staff Committee (COSC) to arrive at a common understanding 
and following a collaborative approach. The Joint Staff has been able to take forward the 
process of Theaterisation to an advanced stage.  The Committee have been informed 
that the Joint Staff at HQ IDS will continue to coordinate operational issues at Theatres 
with the three SHQs during the operationalisation process and thereafter. The Committee 
have also been informed that it is envisaged that all operational coordination issues 
between Theatres as well as with Services would be coordinated through the Joint Ops 
Staff on the structures that are approved. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
developments in this regard at the time of furnishing the Action Taken replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Final report for operationalization of Theatre Commands is under consideration 
and further deliberations are ongoing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
04 August, 2026 Chairperson 
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 

57 
 
Confidential  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
The Committee held sitting on Tuesday, the 4th August, 2026 from 1530 hrs to 
1745 hrs in Committee Room No 3, Parliament House Annexe Extension, A Block, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta  
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Ms. S. Jothimani 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
11 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
12 Shri Virendra Singh 
13 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
14 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
15 Shri Naresh Bansal  
16 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
17 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
18 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
19 Smt. Darshana Singh  
20 Dr. Santrupt Misra 
21 Shri Parth Ajit Pawar 
22 Shri Pawan Khera 

58 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mallick              - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed Shri Pawan Khera, MP, Rajya Sabha  to 
the sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  and upon nomination to this 
Parliamentary Committee.  Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and informed them about the agenda of the Sitting i.e. consideration and 
adoption of the Four (4) draft Action Taken Reports on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their 19th, 20th, 21st and 22nd  Reports on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 and one (1) draft 
Action Taken Report  i.e. 23rd  Report on the subject “Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya 
Indian Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’ 
 
3. The Committee then took up the following five  draft Reports for consideration: 
 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2026-27 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian 
Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 
21)’; 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-
27 on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme and Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services (Demand 
Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2026-27 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, 

59 
 
Procurement Policy and Defence Pensions (Demand No. 21 and 22)’; and 
 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2026-27 on `Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Directorate of 
Ordnance (Coordination and Services)–New DPSUs, Directorate General of 
Quality Assurance, Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance 
and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
 
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian 
Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’. 
 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the Report Nos. 24th, 25th, 26th, and 
27th without any modifications.  However, in the Report No. 28th, as suggested 
by some Members, status report with details of New Sainik Schools which have 
signed Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) under PPP Mode may also be 
furnished against Recommendation No. 9. The Committee, then, authorised 
the Chairperson to finalise the above draft Report and present the same to the 
Parliament on a date convenient to him. 
 
5. ****Does not pertain to the report**** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
 

60 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH 
REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE 
YEAR 2026-27 ON ‘ARMY, AIR FORCE, NAVY, JOINT STAFF, EX-
SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME AND DIRECTOR 
GENERAL OF ARMED FORCES MEDICAL SERVICES (DEMAND NOS. 20 AND 
21)’. 
 
1. Total No. of Recommendations            34 
 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
 
 Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16, 
17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33 and 34. 
        
   Total  : 33 
Percentage:97.05% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter 
III): 
 
 -Nil- 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:00 % 
 
1. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
-Nil- 
  
Total : 00 
Percentage:00% 
 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V)  
 
Recommendation Para Nos. 25 
                            
   Total : 01 
Percentage:2.94% 
 