 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2024-25) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY & DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
              
 
 
‘DEVELOPMENT & MODERNISATION OF FISHING HARBOURS’ 
         
        
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025 / Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
20
00
00 

 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 
(2024-25) 
 
          
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY & DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
              
 
 
‘DEVELOPMENT & MODERNISATION OF FISHING HARBOURS’ 
 
 
            
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                   20.08.2025 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                 20.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
AUGUST, 2025 / SHRAVANA, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 


 
 
COA No.519 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) iii 
Introduction v 
REPORT 
PART – I 
Chapter – I Introduction 1-3 
Chapter – II  Development and Modernisation of Fishing Harbours and Fish 
Landing Centers 
A. Existing Capacity of Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing 
Centers 
B. Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours 
C. Blue Port Initiative 
D. Coastal and Marine Pollution 
E. Central Institute of Coastal Engineering for Fishery (CICEF) 
F. International Standards of Hygiene and Traceability 
G. Export Inspection Council of India/Export Inspection Agency 
H. Deep-Sea Resources in Exclusive Economic Zones 
4-24 
Chapter – III Management of Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centers 25-30 
Chapter – IV Central Schemes/Funds for Development of Fishing Harbours and 
Fish Landing Centers 
A. CSS Blue Revolution Scheme (2015-16 to 2019-20) 
B. Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
C. Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund 
(FIDF) 
D. Release of Central Funds for Modernisation and 
Development of Fishing Harbours 
E. Notified Landing Centers Developed into Fishing Harbours  
and Fish Landing Centers under Central Sector and Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes 
31-35 
Chapter – V Important Issues related to Fishermen and Traditional Fishing 
Communities Residing in Harbour Areas/ Landing Centers 
A. Health, Education and Housing Facilities 
B. Compensation During Fish Ban/Lean Season 
C. Coastal Erosion, Construction of Resorts and Reduction of 
Land Meant for Traditional Fishing Activities 
D. Institutional Credit to Traditional Fishermen 
E. Extending Benefits Given to Agriculturists to Fishers and 
Fishermen  
F. Fishery Expert in Krishi Vigyan Kendra’s (KVKs) 
36-45 
PART – II 
Observation and Recommendations of the Committee 46-63 
Annexure I 64 
Annexure II 65-70 
APPENDICES 
 Minutes of the 30th Sitting of the Committee held on 3rd July, 2025 71-75 
 Minutes of the 35th Sitting of the Committee held on 18th August, 2025 76-77 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi-   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 2. Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai  
  3. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
 4. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
 5. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
 6. Shri Kuldeep Indora 
 7. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav  
 8. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9. Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
12. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
13. Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14. Shri Murasoli S. 
15. Shri Dharambir Singh 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri Banshilal Gurjar  
26. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30. Shri P.P. Suneer 
31. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f  8th August, 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para 
No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025. 
 

iv 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
3. Shri Ashwaghosh Bhaurao Lokhande - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Twentieth Report on the Subject ‘Development & 
Modernisation o f Fishing Harbours’ pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries). 
 
2. The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing had selected the Subject for examination during 2024 -25.  Evidence on 
the Subject by the representatives of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Fisheries) was held at their Sitting on 3rd July, 2025.   
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 18.08.2025. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) for 
appearing before the Committee and furnishing requisite information in connection 
with the examination of the Subject. 
 
  
            
       
 
NEW DELHI;                          CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
18 August , 2025                                                             Chairperson, 
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Agriculture
             Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
  

1 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
INTRODUCTION 
Fisheries and aquaculture in India are an important source of food, nutrition, 
employment and income which provides livelihood to about 28 million fishers and fish 
farmers directly and almost twice the number along the value chain. Globally the sector 
stands at number 1 in terms of Inland Capture Fish Production and is the 6 th largest 
Marine Capture Fish Producer. Fisheries Sector in India is growing at a robust average 
annual growth rate of 9% and contributes 1.09% to National Gross Value Added (GVA) 
and 7.43% to Agriculture Gross Value Added. The growth of this sector is higher than 
that of agriculture and allied sector in the country. Marine Resources of the country 
include a Coast Length of 11099 Km along with 200 nautical miles of Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) which has a potential yield of 53.106 lakh tons (per annum) 
including Deep Sea and Oceanic resources of 2.31 lakh tons.  
1.2 To harvest the rich Marine fishery resources of the country, fishing vessels fleet 
along with Fishing Harbours and Fish landing Centres play an important role as they 
provide safe landing, berthing, loading and unloading facilities for fishing vessels.  
Thus, the development of Fishing Harbours (FH) and Fish Landing centres (FLCs) and 
modernization of existing Fishing Harbours is important for the post-harvest operations 
of the exploited fishery resources. Modernisation of fishing harbour infrastructure in 
the country would generate several benefits adding to the country’s economy and the 
socio-economic wellbeing of the fisher community in particular and the fishing industry 
as a whole.  
1.3 There are about 1,547 notified marine fishing centres/fish landing points in the 
country where fish is landed and marketed. Government of India has so far sanctioned 
for the development of infrastructure facilities of one kind or the other at about 379  
marine fishing harbours and fish landing centres. In addition to this respective State 
Governments have also developed infrastructure facilities in few of the fishing centres. 
1.4 In the country, at present, 2,44,401 fishing vessels of different categories are 
plying in nine coastal States and four Union Territories. This includes 129 Deep Sea 
fishing vessels, 1,33,264 Motorised Fishing Vessels, 65,582 Mechanised Fishing 
Vessels and 41,191 Non -Motorised Fishing Vessels. However, it is imperative to 
mention that, modern landing and berthing facilities exist only for 39,927 Mechanised 

2 
 
Fishing Vessels which in only 62.79% of existing Mechanised Fishing fleet of the 
Country, thus a substantial gap exists in the fishing harbour and fish landing centre 
infrastructure leading to overcrowding, congestion and hygiene issues. Further, with 
stringent imposition of International Standards like Hazard Analysis Critical Control 
Point (HACCP) and Euro norms by most of the importing countries, maintaining of 
cleaner fishing harbours becomes imperative. 
1.5 Thus development of Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres is one of the 
thrust areas supported under various schemes implemented by the Department of 
Fisheries as enumerated below: 
i) Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of 
Fisheries 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) from 2015 -16 to 2019 -20 under 
which approval was accorded to a total of thirteen fishing harbour/fish 
landing centre projects at a total cost of Rs.1463.63 crore for 
development in Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Odishha, 
Puducherry and Andhra Pradesh.  
 ii) Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
Flagship Scheme of the Department with an outlay of Rs.20,050 crore 
to be implemented over a period of five years from 2020 -21 to 2024-25 
envisaged for the Development of fishing harbours and fish landing 
centres as one of its important objectives. The Sch eme has both 
components namely Central Sector Scheme (CS) and Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS). The scheme has been further extended for 
the period 2025-26 with no cost extension.  
 iii) Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) 
FIDF was created with a total fund size of Rs 7522.48 crore and during 
the period from 2018 -19 to 2022 -23, approval was given to 121 
infrastructure projects at a total cost of Rs.5588.63 crore with project cost 
restricted for interest subvention at Rs.3738 .19 crore to various 
States/UTs and other implementing agencies.  
 

3 
 
 iv) Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah Yojana (PM-MKSSY) 
PM-MKSSY is a Central Sector Sub-scheme under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana approved by Cabinet on 8th February 2024 with 
an outlay of Rs.6000 crore for a period of 4 years i.e. 2023 -24 to 2026-
27 in all States and UTs. The Scheme aims at formalization of fisheries 
sector, supporting micro enterprises, safety and quality assurance 
systems and access to institutional credit. 
1.6 Further, Central Institute of Coastal Engineering for Fishery (CICEF) a sub -
ordinate office under the Department of Fisheries extends necessary technical 
assistance to the needy States/UTs in reconnaissance studies and conducting 
economic and technical studies to identify priority sites for the development of Fishing 
Harbours and Fish Landing Centres. 
  

4 
 
CHAPTER-II 
DEVELOPMENT AND MODERNISATION OF FISHING HARBOURS AND FISH 
LANDING CENTERS 
A. Existing Capacity of Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centers.  
 Government of India has approved projects proposals to the tune of Rs 9,832 
crore for construction/ modernization/maintenance of 117 fishing harbors/fish landing 
centers in Coastal States/UTs under various schemes such as Blue Revolution, 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) and Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) which would create safe landing & birthing 
facilities for about 48,000 fishing vessels. 
2.1 The Committee inquired about the current capacity in terms of safe landing and 
berthing facilities which is available for fishing vessels operating in the country. The 
Department in their reply stated the following: 
“The Marine Fisheries sector in India at present has 2.38 lakh fishing vessels 
including 63,582 Mechanized Fishing Vessels. The Department of Fisheries, 
Government of India has been supporting and supplementing the efforts of 
State Governments and UTs for creation of need based infrastructure facilities 
in the form of fishing harbours and fish landing centres. The landing and 
berthing facilities created so far can accommodate a total of about 1.48 lakh 
fishing vessels including 39,927 Mechanized Fishing Ves sels. Further, the 
Department of Fisheries, Government of India envisions to provide finance 
assistance through various schemes to State Governments and Union 
Territories(UTs) for development of more fishing harbours and fish landing 
centres to cater to the operational fishing vessels in the country”.   
2.2 On being asked, if the existing landing and berthing facility in the country is 
sufficient enough to accommodate the active fishing fleet of the Country and, if not, 
what measures are taken by the Department to prevent overcrowding and poor 
maintenance of fishing harbours The Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Department of Fisheries, Government of India provides central financial 
assistance to the State Governments, Union Territories(UTs) and Central or 
State entities for creating of fishing harbours and fish landing centres. The 
Government of India, Department of Fisheries, since inception of the central 
schemes has supported for development 379 fishing harbours and fish 
landing centres and the landing and berthing facilities created at these fishing 
harbours and fish landing centres are inadequate to accommodate 2.38 lakh 
active fishing vessels operating in the country. Therefore, development of 

5 
 
fisheries infrastructure in the form of fishing harbours and fish landing centres 
has been one of the important areas envisaged and supported under various 
schemes implemented by the Department of Fisheries, Government of India 
to cater to the requirements  of safe landing, berthing and allied facilities. 
Further, Government of India has accordingly envisioned development of 
more number of fishing harbours and fish landing centres by providing 
financial assistance to State Government/U.T. 
In addition, the Department of Fisheries, Government of India while approving 
the projects inter -alia stipulates that concerned State/UT Government will 
ensure generation of adequate financial resources required for post 
construction management and operation of the Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing 
Centre on a self - sustainable and profitable manner. This includes efficient 
operational conditions of the Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing Centre in 
accordance with national/international hygienic standards/specification s in 
force from time-to-time”. 
 
2.3 Acknowledging the huge gap between the existing safe landing and berthing 
facilities available for fishing vessels and the actual number of fishing vessels 
operating in the country, the Committee inquired about the measures taken by the 
Department to bridge the gap. In response, the Departm ent submitted the following 
reply:  
“The Marine Fisheries sector in India at present has 2.38 lakh fishing vessels 
and the existing landing and berthing facilities are adequate to accommodate 
about 1.48 lakh fishing vessels. 
To address the requirement of safe landing and berthing facilities, the 
Department of Fisheries, Government of India has been supporting and 
supplementing the efforts of State Governments and UTs for creation of need 
based infrastructure facilities in the form of fishing harbours and fish landing 
centres.  
The development of safe landing and berthing facilities for fishing vessels in 
form of fishing harbour and fish landing centres is one of the important areas 
envisaged and being supported under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Samapada 
Yojana (PMMSY). Such fisheries infrastructure projects are taken up on 60:40 
cost sharing basis between the Central and the concerned State respectively. 
The concerned State/UT Governments are required to submit techno -
financial viable proposals together with confirmation of availabilit y of State 
share, necessary land and clearance required for implementation of the 
projects.  
Besides, the Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund 
(FIDF) being implemented by the Department of Fisheries also provides 
concessional finance to the State Governments and UTs for development of 
fisheries related infrastructures. Under t his scheme DoF provides interest 

6 
 
subvention up to 3% on the loan sanctioned for creation of such fisheries 
infrastructure facilities. 
These schemes envisage to address the demand and supply gaps in safe 
landing and berthing facilities along with other land based facilities. The 
activities supported under the ongoing schemes are as under :- 
i). Development of New Fishing Harbour and Fish Landing Centes. 
ii). Expansion of Existing Fishing Harbours. 
iii). Modernisation and up-gradation of Existing Fishing Harbours 
iv). Dredging of Existing Fishing Harbour.  
In addition, the Department of Fisheries, Government of India also provides 
need based technical assistance through CICEF to the needy State/UTs for 
identifying potential sites, conducting necessary engineering and economic 
investigations and formulation o f Techno -Economic Feasibility Reports 
(TEFR).The Department of Fisheries, Government of India envisioned to 
develop more number of fishing harbours including modernization of existing 
fishing harbours and upgradation of existing fish landing centres to fis hing 
harbours to address the gaps in infrastructure requirements. 
It is worthwhile to mention that the Department of Fisheries, Government of 
India during the last 11 years has sanctioned the proposals of various Coastal 
State Governments and UTs for development of a total 117 fishing 
harbours/fish landing centres at a p roject cost of Rs 9832 crores under 
various Central schemes. It is estimated that these fishing harbours and fish 
landing centres will provide safe landing and berthing facilities to about 
48,000 additional fishing vessels”. 
2.4 The Committee further inquired about the status of all the 117 fishing 
harbours/fish landing centres that are to be developed/modernized by the Department 
of Fisheries and whether there is there any time frame for the completion of all the 
projects. The Department submitted the following reply as stated below: 
“Out of the 117 Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres  projects taken 
up under various schemes of the Department of Fisheries, Government of 
India, 20 fishing harbour and fish landing centre projects are completed, 37 
fishing harbour and fish landing centre projects have achieved more than 
50% progress and 60 fishing harbour and fish landing centre projects are at 
mid level of completion. The average time period of about 2 -3 years is 
stipulated for completion of a fishing harbour project and about 12-18 months 
for completion of smaller magnitude project like f ish landing centre including 
maintenance dredging project”.  
 

7 
 
B. Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours. 
2.5 The Committee has been informed that three Smart and Integrated Fishing 
Harbours are being developed at Vanakbara in Diu, Karaikal in Puducherry and 
Jakhau in Gujarat. The Committee desire to know the status of development of the 
harbours and the probable completion date, and clarification, if any Central Monitoring 
Committee has been constituted by the Department to oversee their work. The 
Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying in the recent past has envisaged to develop Smart & Integrated 
Fishing Harbours in line with Blue Port Initiative of Food and Agriculture 
Organisation (FAO).  Accordingly, the Department of Fisheries, Government 
of India during the FY 2024 -25 has sanctioned three Smart and Integrated 
Fishing Harbours namely Jakhau in Gujarat, Vanakbara in Diu and Karaikal 
in Puducherry at a a total estimated cost of Rs 369.8 crore under Pradha n 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY).While the cost of Jakhau Fishing 
Harbour is shared between the Government of India and Government of 
Gujarat at 60:40 basis, the cost of other two fishing harbours namely Karaikal 
and Vanakbara is fully met by the Government of India being the UT projects.  
This represents an innovative approach to modernize fishing infrastructure 
while prioritizing environmental sustainability, efficiency, and safety provisions 
by implementing smart technologies. The projects are being implemented by 
the respective States/UTs with a stipulated time period for completion of 18 
months. 
The present status of these three smart and Integrated fishing harbour 
projects are furnished below: 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Project 
Cost (Rs 
in 
crores) 
Status 
1. Development of 
Smart and 
Integrated Fishing 
Harbour at 
Karaikal, 
Puducherry (U.T.) 
 119.94  The pre -tendering activities have been 
completed by the Government of 
Puducherry; tender has been floated and 
bids received are under scrutiny in the UT 
Government. It is expected that work 
order to the selected contractor will be 
issued by second week of July, 2025. 
Laying of foundation stone for the 
harbour civil infrastructure is also 
shortly planned. The probable date of 
completion is 18 months i.e. March, 
2026. 
 
 

8 
 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Project 
Cost (Rs 
in 
crores) 
Status 
2. Development of 
Smart and 
Integrated Fishing 
Harbour at 
Vanakbara, Diu  
128.86 The pre -tendering activities have been 
completed by UT Administration, tender 
for the project work has been floated. 
Since the lowest bid (L1) received was 
reported to be higher than the estimated 
cost, UT Administration has been advised 
for re-tendering of the work.   At present, 
issuance of Revised Notice Inviting 
Tender (NIT) for all components of the 
integrated fishing harbour project is under 
process. 
3. Development of 
Smart and 
Integrated Fishing 
Harbour at 
Jakhau, Kutch, 
Gujarat  
121.00 The pre -tendering activities have been 
completed by the Government of Gujarat, 
tender for the project works has been 
floated. Since the lowest bid (L1) received 
through the competitive bidding process 
was higher than the estimated cost, the 
Government of Gujarat presently in the 
process of finalizing the revised estimate. 
              Total  369.80  
 
……  “The PMMSY guidelines has provisions for a Project Monitoring Unit 
(PMU) comprising of domain experts under National Fisheries Development 
Board (NFDB) for monitoring the projects/activities of PMMSY on regular 
basis. Accordingly, the Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) comprising of domain 
experts and headed by the Chief Executive, National Fisheries Development 
Board (NFDB) has been constituted for monitoring the projects/activities of 
PMMSY on regular basis” 
2.6 On being asked by the Committee, if the Department has any plans to develop 
Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours in all the Coastal States of the Country, the 
Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying in the recent past has studied various good practices/models with 
latest technologies globally available and after much deliberations have 
envisaged to develop Smart & Integr ated Fishing Harbours in line with Blue 
Port Initiative of Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Accordingly, the 
Department of Fisheries, Government of India during the FY 2024 -25 has 
sanctioned three Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours namely Jakha u in 
Gujarat, Vanakbara in Diu and Karaikal in Puducherry at a total estimated 
cost of Rs 369.80 crore under Pradhan Mantri Matsya SampadaYojana 
(PMMSY).  
The Development of Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbour in India 
represents an innovative approach to modernizing fishing infrastructure while 

9 
 
prioritizing environmental sustainability, efficiency, and safety. 
Implementation of smart technologies in fishing harbour can revolutionize the 
industry by improving operations, enhancing safety measures, and promoting 
sustainable practices. The States/UT s has been advised to formulate all 
future techno-financial proposals of fishing harbour proposals incorporating 
Smart. Blue and Green components under PMMSY”. 
C. Blue Port Initiative. 
2.7 The Committee enquired about eco fishing ports and the Blue Port Initiative of 
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) which is being implemented by the 
Government. The Department in their reply submitted the following: 
“The concept of Eco Fishing Ports is quite similar to the Blue Port Initiative of 
FAO. The Eco -Fishing Ports are to implement a comprehensive set of 
interventions designed to modernize infrastructure, promote sustainability, and 
strengthen governance. Further, the eco fishing ports also envisioned to support 
the development of resilient, efficient, and environmentally responsible fishing 
harbours. The modern, environmentally sustainable fishing harbours presently 
designed and developed are to reduce the ecological impact of fishing activities 
and improve the overall sustainability of the fisheries sector. These ports are also 
integrated the environmental safeguards, responsible waste and fuel 
management, use of renewable energy, and modern infrastructure to promote 
sustainable fisheries and marine ecosystem conservation. The Department of 
Fisheries, Government of India in collaboration with French Development Bank 
(AFD) has conducted workshop on development of Eco -Fishing Port in May, 
2025. Further, the Road Map to Blue Port Initiative of FAO is intended to assist 
fishing ports to implement a Blue Transformation approach at strategic and 
operational level through involvement of stakeholders, the implementation of 
projects and actions, and the measurement of impact. Most coastal communities 
are highly dependent on fishing activities. The value chain of the fisheries sector 
is specifically challenging in social, economic and environmental terms. Activities 
related to the fisheries value chain, such as catching, l anding, processing and 
commercialization are strongly interrelated and dependent on other sectors, 
technology, support services, biotechnology, energy and others.  The path to 
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) requires the involvement 
of different economic, social and environmental dimensions in addressing local 
developmental needs.  
It is relevant to add that the Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying, Government of India has in March, 2025 signed an 
agreement of Technical Cooperation Programme with Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nation (FAO) for Strengthening of Blue Ports in India. 
The Government of India envisions development of more numbers of Smart and 
Integrated Fishing Harbours in conformity with the Blue Port Initiatives in future”.  

10 
 
D. Coastal and Marine Pollution. 
2.8 The Committee were concerned about environmental pollution in coastal areas 
due to Modernisation of Fishing Harbours/Fish Landing Centres and Mechanization of 
fishing boats which would invariably lead to higher fuel consumption and thereby 
pollution. The Committee, therefore, asked the Department about the measures being 
taken in this regard, the Department submitted the following reply:   
“The Government of India is focused on development of fishery harbours  by 
deploying eco -friendly, green and blue components coupled with smart and 
integrated devices also smart sensors with AI driven decision making 
mechanisms. These components reduce the carbon foot print, reduce the 
pressure on fisheries resources and allo w real -time monitoring of various 
parameters so as to keep pollution levels under check at the fishery harbour 
premises. 
 
Further, the smart and integrated fishing harbour envisages system of close and 
real time monitoring of the environmental parameters, offer proper hygiene and 
support facilities to minimize post -harvest losses and eliminate the pollution 
around the fishing harbours.  Besides, sanitation facilities supported with sewage 
treatment and effluent treatment plants are also provided at the fishing harbours 
and while discharge of sewage, parameters are closely monitored to maintain 
them under check. 
 
The modern fishing harbours are provided facilities for management of solid and 
liquid waste and also facilities for segregation of the waste into organic and 
recyclable material. While the recyclable waste can be sent for recycling inhouse 
or outside, the organic waste can either be converted to fish -meals or compost 
as the case may be to create a circular economy. The modern harbours are going 
to use green energy, to supplement their power demand by promoting use of 
solar and wind energy to substantially reduce the carbon foot print of the asset.  
 
The fishing harbours will also economize the fuel consumption of fishing vessels 
during their visit to the fishing harbour by providing efficient vessels management 
system to pre -allocate landing & berthing space, support facilities like 
mechanized loading and unloading services in tandem to reduce the turn-around 
time for the vessels. Such system also optimizing fuel consumption while on their 
trip to the fishing harbours.  
 
The new fishing vessels are now encouraged to fit with more fuel -efficient 
engines to reduce the cost of catch per unit effort. The replacement for older 
boats was also provisioned, especially for the artisanal fishermen under PMMSY. 
The Department of Fish eries, Government of India has also encourages 
kerosene free fishing, promoted use of LPG kits in such boats. More recently 

11 
 
there are reports of battery boats available for artisanal fishermen that have a 
short range of about 50 to 70 kilometers”. 
2.9 The Committee desire to know about the measures taken by the Department 
for promotion of green energy in fisheries sector, the Department submitted the 
following reply: 
“The Department of Fisheries, Government of India envisions to transform fishery 
harbours by integrating green and blue infrastructure with advanced digital tools. 
These measures aim to shrink carbon emissions, conserve resources, and 
enable continuous pollution monitoring via digital technologies. Smart fishing 
harbours will harness IoT to tr ack environmental metrics in real time, while 
enhancing hygiene and offering post -harvest support to curb organic pollution. 
They will include sewage and effluent treatment units whose outflows are closely 
managed and reused for irrigation or toilet flushi ng, edging the harbours toward 
zero discharge. 
Renewable energy generated from solar panels and wind turbines will offset 
harbour power needs and cut the overall carbon footprint. Fishing operations will 
become more efficient through vessel management systems that allocate berths 
and mechanize loading,  slashing turnaround times and fuel consumption. New 
boats will feature more efficient engines and trial alternative fuels such as 
hydrogen, while older vessels are being replaced under PMMSY and retired 
without polluting. 
The Department of Fisheries has promoted kerosene -free fishing by installing 
LPG kits and has introduced battery-powered boats with a range of 50–70 km for 
artisanal fishermen”. 
E. Central Institute of Coastal Engineering for Fishery (CICEF). 
2.10 Central Institute of Costal Engineering for Fishery is entrusted with extending 
necessary technical assistance to the needy States/UTs in conducting necessary 
economic and technical studies to identify priority sites for development of Fishing 
Harbours/Fish Landing Centres. It also prepares preliminary construction plans and 
supporting facilities etc. and monitors the progress of construction sanctioned under 
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme in association with the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying. 
2.11 The Committee asked for details regarding the sites identified by CICEF during 
the last five years as potential sites for development of Fishing Harbours and Fish 
Landing Centres. The Department submitted the following reply: 

12 
 
 “The CICEF during last 5 years has conducted the reconnaissance surveys 
and identified a total 87 potential sites for development as fishing harbours 
amd fish landing centres.  Year-wise details of the potential fishing harbours 
and fish landing centres sites identified by CICEF during the last five years in 
the maritime States/UTs for development as Fishing Harbours and fish 
landing centres are furnished below” 
 
 
 
 
 
2.12 On being asked about if CICEF have experts who can deal with environmental 
and mathematical modal studies which complete projects reports, the Department 
submitted the following reply: 
“CICEF focuses primarily on engineering aspects of fishery infrastructure 
planning and preparation of necessary Techno -Economic Feasibility Report 
(TEFR) of FH/FLC projects in the country. Environmental and Mathematical 
Model Studies aspects at present are not a part of the mandate of CICEF.  It 
is relevant to add that the Central government organizations like CPWRS, 
under Ministry of Jalshakti, located at Pune and other academic institutions 
are dealing the aspects of mathematical model studies and environm ental 
studies and they are also catering the requirements of such studies for 
FH/FLC projects”. 
2.13 The Committee inquired about the measures taken by the Department to 
strengthen CICEF on the Budgeting, Infrastructure, Human Resources and 
Administrative fronts. The Department in their response submitted the following: 
“The Central Institute of Coastal Engineering for Fishery(CICEF), formerly 
known as Pre-Investment Survey of Fishing Harbours (PISFH) established in 
January 1968, as a sub-ordinate office under the DoF, Government of India. 
The Institute’s average annual bu dget for the past five years is Rs. 5 crore 
and adequate budget is provided to the Institute to carry out its activities 
smoothly. The Institute has its own two -storey office building constructed in 
2003 through the Central Public Works Department, Bengal uru. In order to 
fulfil its mandated work, the Institute is equipped with survey and sub -soil 
investigation equipment and four office vehicles. The Institute has been 
functioning with the sanctioned strength of 47 comprising technical and 
administrative pe rsonnel and out of such sanctioned post, 10 posts are 
vacant at present.  In order to align with the Government of India’s plans to 
Sl. No. Year Sites identified Total no. of sites 
Identified FH sites FLC sites 
1. 2020-21 - 45 45 
2. 2021-22 4 22 26 
3. 2022-23 1 5 6 
4. 2023-24 3 3 6 
5. 2024-25 2 2 4 
 Total  10 77 87 

13 
 
develop smart and integrated fishery harbours in the country, CICEF is being 
strengthened to cater the demands of all Maritime States/UTs. Strengthening 
of CICEF is a multi -pronged strategy focused on budget, infrastructure and 
human resources. The framewo rk for further strengthening of CICEF as 
envisaged by the Department of Fisheries, Government of India includes:  
Budgetary Support Enhanced Allocation:  Increasing core budget under 
the Ministry’s annual plan for training, exposure visits and infrastructure. 
Ensuring dedicated grants for specific missions like Blue Economy, 
Sagarmala etc. 
Project-Based Funding: The TEFRs presently prepared by the Institute are 
incomplete for want of physical/mathematical model studies and EIA/EMP 
studies which are pre -requisites for project funding. The Institute needs to 
outsource these studies for which the Department of Fisheries is envisioning 
to provide necessary funds to CICEF to outsource these studies from the 
annual budget.  
Encourage inter-ministerial projects: Department of Fisheries is allowing 
CICEF to take-up inter-ministerial projects (e.g., MEA). 
Infrastructure Enhancement: To facilitate CICEF to build up the required 
Information Technology (IT) facilities and engineering capabilities, the 
Department of Fisheries is fully supporting the Institute to procure the need -
based hardware, software, latest survey and subsoil equipment. 
Modernization of Facilities:  CICEF is upgrading the prerequisite 
engineering survey and subsoil investigations equipment with the modern 
advancements in the field. 
Human Resources Development:  The DoF is backing -up in recruiting 
experts in Civil/Coastal engineering fields by filling the posts on timely basis. 
With the assistance of DoF, capacity building programs through IITs, NIOT 
and related foreign institutions are envisaged. Exposure visits of the Institute 
officers to foreign FHs, involving study tour abroad/overseas learning 
programmes, to the growth of the organization in terms of quality and output 
is another aspect, where DoF is fully supporting.  
Collaboration with Academia: The DoF is planning to promote internship in 
partnership with institutions like IIT, NIO, Central Universities and 
international smart fishery infrastructure institutes. 
Staff Retention and Incentives:  Through the concerned international 
aid/collaborations, the Department of Fisheries has envisioned to create 
opportunities for international training, and recognition awards”. 
2.14 On being asked, if CICEF received any technical assistance from foreign 
organisatons such as United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Food and 

14 
 
Agriculture Organisation (FAO), Swedish International Development Cooperation 
Authority (SIDA) and United Nations for development of Fishing Harbours and Fish 
Landing Centres, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) of United Nations (UN) 
rendered technical assistance to CICEF in the form of technical expertise and 
engineering equipment till January 1974. Thereafter, Swedish International 
Development Agency (SIDA) provided t echnical assistance to CICEF in the 
form of engineering survey and subsoil equipment and technical consultancy 
services for 2 years from 1974 to 1976. After cessation of the aforementioned 
technical assistance, the Institute on its own continued its activ ities with the 
support of Department of Fisheries, Government of India”. 
2.15 On being asked about the current staff strength/technical staff strength in 
CICEF and if there has been any increase in the staff strength of CICEF in the last five 
years, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“The CICEF has been functioning with the sanctioned staff strength of 47 
comprising 29 technical and 18 are non -technical. The process of filling up 
10 vacant posts in CICEF is underway with following due administrative 
procedures of DoPT.  Since the sanctioned staff strength is adequate to cope 
with the mandated works assigned to CICEF, there has been no increase in 
the staff strength of CICEF in the last five years”.      
 
F. International Standards of Hygiene and Traceability.  
2.16  When asked about the number of fishing harbours/ fish landing centres 
operational in the country, which, adhere to, or are compliant with the International 
Standards like Hygiene and Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) and Euro 
norms, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Fishing harbours and fish landing centres handling fish and fishery products 
intended for export are required to comply with hygiene, sanitary and traceability 
standards in accordance with the Government of India’s Notification S.O. 730(E) 
dated 21st August 1995, as amended. This provides the statutory framework for 
approval and monitoring of facilities including compliance with HACCP and 
importing country’s requirements such as EU norms. To this end, the Export 
Inspection Council (EIC) lists fishing harbours and landing centres on its website 
based on assessment and approval. List of Fishing Harbours / Fish Landing 
Centres handling the fish and fishery products intended for export is at    
Annexure I. 

15 
 
The approval process is initiated at the request of EIC -approved seafood 
processing establishments that source raw material from these harbours. 
Request for listing of these facilities has been submitted by the approved fishery 
export establishments, as th ey procure the raw materials from these Fishing 
Harbours / Fishing Landing centres.  
Upon the request of export establishments (by approved technologist of 
establishment) who intend to procure their material from Fishing Harbours / 
Fishing Landing Centres, an Assessment Panel of Experts (APE) led by EIA 
consisting members from MPEDA and ot her members empaneled by the EIC, 
will take up the assessment. The APE will assess Fishing Harbours / Fishing 
Landing Centres and the APE will inform the non -conformities / suggestions for 
improvement, if any, to the respective facilities.  Approval is gra nted based on 
compliance with hygiene requirements detailed in Appendix D and E of the 
Executive Instructions for Primary Production of Fish and Fishery Products 
(January 2016) issued by the EIC. 
However, efforts are being made under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY) to improve infrastructure, as many fishing harbours require 
modernization and upgrading to meet these standards. MPEDA, through its 
society NETFISH, is actively supporti ng this by promoting best practices and 
implementing successful models like the Munambam Fishing Harbour 
Management Society (MFHMS). MPEDA has also deployed 100 Harbour Data 
Collectors (HDCs) across major fishing harbours to support traceability through 
daily fish landing data collection. 
For transparency and export compliance, only those harbours and landing 
centres meeting international standard listed for export purposes by the EIC, 
facilitating traceability from the point of landing to the export destination”. 
2.17 On being asked about the measures taken by the Department to maintain 
hygiene and sanitary conditions in Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centers, the 
Department submitted the following reply:  
“Since, the management, maintenance and operation of Fishing Harbour/Fish 
Landing Centres are being carried out by the respective State/U.T. 
government as per their guidelines. The Maintenance, Manag ement 
Societies in respective fishing harbour monitors the activities like cleaning, 
maintenance and utilization of facilities etc. and ensure proper hygienic 
standards. Society enforces all necessary steps towards responsible fishing 
practices.  
Further, the Department of Fisheries, Government of India in the conditions 
of administrative approval of the project to State/UT stipulates that concerned 
the Concerned State/U,T, Government to ensure generation of adequate 
financial resources required for post construction management and operation 

16 
 
of the Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing Centre on a self - sustainable and 
profitable manner. The concerned State /UT Governments are to ensure 
efficient operational conditions of the Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing Centre in 
accordance with national/international  hygienic standards/specifications in 
force from time-to-time”. 
2.18 On being asked about the measures taken by the Department to spread 
awareness amongst the fishermen cooperatives with respect to HACCP and EU 
norms and modern technologies and whether the fish supply chain in the country is 
connected to digital tracking platform, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Department of Fisheries has undertaken multiple initiatives to spread 
awareness among fishermen cooperatives and stakeholders regarding 
HACCP, EU norms, and modern technologies. Through MPEDA and its 
extension arm Network for Fish Quality Management and Sustainable Fishing 
(NETFISH), regular training programs, capacity -building workshops, and 
awareness campaigns are being conducted across coastal states to educate 
fishers on international standards, hygienic handling, traceability, and 
sustainable fishing practices. 
As per the HACCP Training Calendar 2025 –26, MPEDA has scheduled 10 
structured training programs across key coastal hubs, including Kakinada, 
Mangalore, Porbandar, Visakhapatnam, Bhimavaram, Bhubaneswar, 
Vijayawada-Nellore, Kolkata, Mumbai, and Kochi, betwe en June 2025 and 
March 2026. These sessions are aimed at building hands-on capacity among 
fishers, processors, and exporters on food safety compliance and export 
readiness. 
To further empower stakeholders, the Department has formalized a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Open Network for Digital 
Commerce (ONDC) to create a dedicated digital e -marketplace, enabling all 
fisheries stakeholders to easily buy and sell the ir products, thus improving 
market access and transparency. 
To support infrastructure and technological adoption, the Department, under 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF), provides central 
financial assistance for strengthening post -harvest infrastructure such as 
wholesale and retail fish markets, kiosks, ice plants, cold storages, and 
refrigerated vehicles for seamless cold chain management. These schemes 
also promote innovative technologies such as biofloc, Recirculatory 
Aquaculture Sys tems (RAS), pen and cage culture, and advanced fish 
breeding techniques, alongside data -driven digital tools for fish stock 
assessment and aquaculture management. 
Additionally, 100 Harbour Data Collectors (HDCs) have been deployed by 

17 
 
MPEDA across major harbours to collect real -time fish landing data, 
facilitating digital traceability and linking the supply chain to modern tracking 
platforms. These integrated efforts aim to modernize the fisheries sector while 
ensuring quality, sustainability, and market competitiveness 
National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) being a nodal agency for 
implementation of Fishermen cooperatives is creating awareness during 
various outreach program to the fishers and fish farmers of cooperative 
societies on the safety issues that need to b e taken care during culture, 
promoting certification traceability, standard that need to be maintained as a 
part of best management practices. While establishing infrastructure facilities 
as a post -harvest management i.e . facilities such as processing units, cold 
storage the norms of HACCP and EU are duly followed. Farmers are created 
awareness on banned antibiotics and safety regulations that need to be 
followed in hatcheries also”. 
2.19 Net to Plate Concept is being used by major fish importing countries where fish 
sold is traceable to the country of origin, the waters it was fished from along with 
the entire Post Harvest Infrastructure which handled the exported product. On 
being asked if such a concept is being envisaged by the Department in the country 
also, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Department of Fisheries is proactively working towards implementing 
the "Net to Plate" concept in India, aligning with international standards 
adopted by major seafood -importing countries. This approach ensures 
complete traceability of fish and fisher y products from the country of origin 
and fishing grounds through every post -harvest stage to the consumer. The 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and the Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah -Yojana (PMMKSSY) aim to strengthen post -
harvest in frastructure, promote digital traceability through the National 
Fisheries Digital Platform (NFDP), and enhance value realization and 
compliance with export requirements. Initiatives like the Tuna Cluster 
Development Programme in Andaman & Nicobar Island al so promote 
traceable and sustainable harvest of high -value species. In addition, the 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority (CAA), under the Department of Fisheries, 
Government of India, plays a foundational role in strengthening traceability 
across the aquaculture  value chain by ensuring that all aquaculture 
operations within coastal areas or areas under its jurisdiction are legally 
registered, environmentally compliant, and adhere to prescribed regulatory 
norms. In support of international traceability and food sa fety regulations, 
India has implemented Catch Certification Schemes for the EU and Japan 
through the Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA), which 
validates catch certificates to ensure legality of fishing and prevent IUU 
(Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated) practices. These are managed through 
digital systems and integration with the Re ALCraft platform, along with field 

18 
 
data collection through Harbour Data Collectors. Further, residue monitoring 
plays a crucial role in assuring product quality and compliance. The National 
Residue Control Plan (NRCP), implemented by MPEDA on behalf of the 
Export Inspection Council (EIC), m onitors residues in aquaculture products 
exported to the EU under EU regulations 2017/625 and 2022/1644. MPEDA 
operates NABL -accredited labs to test over 120 parameters including 
antibiotics, dyes, pesticides, PCBs, and heavy metals, drawing around 
3,500–4,000 samples annually from hatcheries, farms, and feed mills. In 
addition, Pre-Harvest Testing (PHT) was introduced in 2009 to screen farmed 
shrimp at the pond level for banned antibiotics like Chloramphenicol and 
Nitrofurans, now mandatory for exports to the EU and UK, with 12,000 –
13,000 certificates issued annually through 14 ELISA labs. Complementing 
this, Pre-Export Testing (PET) is conducted for consignments ready for export 
to screen for food safety hazards. EIC is the competent authority for PET and 
issues health certificates for major markets like the EU, Japan, South Korea, 
Russia, and China, with MPEDA and accredited private labs supporting 
implementation. These integrated measures on catch documentation, residue 
control, and pre -export testing for m a robust framework for ensuring 
traceability, food safety, and market compliance, strengthening India’s 
position as a reliable seafood exporter under the "Net to Plate" vision”. 
2.20 The Committee inquired about the measures taken by the Department to 
address the issue of contamination and antibiotic /lead/mercury residue that is found 
in fish harvested in the Country. The Department submitted the following reply: 
“To ensure the availability of safe and wholesome food to the consumers, 
regular surveillance, monitoring, inspection and random sampling of food 
products including fish and fishery products are being carried out by the 
officers of Food Safety Departments of the respective States/UTs to ensure 
compliance of the standards laid down under the Food Safety and Standards 
Act, 2006, and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The enforcement 
of FSSAI Act and its Rules and regulations primarily rests with State 
Governments and UTs. In this regard, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
Government of India is the Administrative Ministry for the implementation of 
FSSAI Act. 
The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying has taken up the matter of contamination of chemical formalin in 
preservation of fish with State Governments and UTs requesting to take 
necessary safety measures and regulatory actions in this regard. In order to 
tackle harmful use of formalin in fish and fishery products intended for human 
consumption the Department of Fisheries, Government of India has advised 
the State Governments/UTs and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) for setting up a task force including concerned States 
Departments/agencies for joint inspection and testing of chemical substances 

19 
 
like formalin content in fish using CIFT (ICAR -Central Institute of Fisheries 
Technology, Kochi) test kits named ‘CIFTest Kit’ in respective States. Further, 
the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (CAA) under Department of Fisheries, 
Ministry of Fisheries, Anim al Husbandry and Dairying regulates the 
hatcheries and farming of shrimp and have banned the use of 20 antibiotics 
and other pharmacologically active substances used in brackish water 
aquaculture. The CAA also issues certificates of compliance to aquacultu re 
inputs that are free from adulterants and contaminants. In addition, 
Department has also advised the States/UTs to constitute a Task force for 
prevention of usage of banned antibiotics in Fisheries and aquaculture related 
activities. The Department is a dvising the States/UTs to encourage the 
farmers to attend the technical and demonstration workshops/training 
programs related to seed & feed, technology infusion, ornamental fisheries, 
hatchery technologies etc. on periodic basis in order to increase in 
productivity and quality of fishery produce”. 
G. Export Inspection Council of India/Export Inspection Agency. 
2.21  When asked about the role played by Export Inspection Council of India (EIC) 
and Export Inspection Agency (EIA) in the Development and Modernisation of fishing 
harbours/fish landing centers and whether approval of EIC of EIA is mandatory for all 
the fishing harbours and fish landing centres operating in the Country, the Department 
submitted the following reply: 
“No, approval from the Export Inspection Council of India (EIC) or Export 
Inspection Agencies (EIAs) is not mandatory for all fishing harbours or fish 
landing centres operating in the country. Only those Fishing Harbours and 
Fish Landing Centres that handle fish and fishery products intended for export 
are required to obtain approval from EIC, in accordance with the Government 
of India Notification S.O. 730(E) dated 21st August 1995 and its subsequent 
amendments. 
Facilities that cater solely to domestic/local consumption are not required to 
be approved by EIC. The list of EIC-approved Fishing Harbours/Fish Landing 
Centres is publicly available on the EIC website. This listing ensures that 
these facilities meet inte rnational hygiene, traceability, and food safety 
standards necessary for export trade. The list of EIC approved is furnished at 
Annexure-I”. 
2.22  On being asked, whether, the standards/guidelines of major importing countries 
and Export Inspection Council of India are kept in mind while planning/constructing or 
modernization of Fishing Harbours/Fish Landing Centres in the Country, the 
Department submitted the following reply: 

20 
 
“Yes, proposals for upgradation, modernization, or establishment of new 
Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres are formulated with due 
consideration to the standards and guidelines laid down by the Export 
Inspection Council of India (EIC) as well as the  requirements of major 
importing countries, such as the European Union and others. These include 
compliance with HACCP principles, EU hygiene regulations, and traceability 
norms. 
As per S.O. 730(E), approval from EIC is mandatory for harbours handling 
fishery products meant for export. To facilitate export trade and ensure 
traceability, EIC maintains a list of such approved facilities. Requests for 
listing are made by approved seaf ood processing establishments, which 
source raw material from these harbours. Upon such a request, an 
Assessment Panel of Experts (APE) comprising representatives from EIA, 
MPEDA, and other empaneled members conducts a thorough evaluation of 
the facilities. 
During assessment, the APE examines compliance with hygiene and 
handling protocols. Non -conformities or suggestions for improvement are 
communicated to the respective facilities. Only those harbours that fulfill the 
stipulated requirements are listed by EIC for export purposes. 
Furthermore, all such facilities must adhere to the standards laid down in 
Appendix D and E of the Executive Instructions for Primary Production of Fish 
and Fishery Products – January 2016, which outline the structural and 
operational hygiene requirements for harbours and landing centres. 
Continuous improvement is necessary to meet evolving requirements of 
importing countries and to ensure India’s seafood exports remain compliant 
and competitive”.  
2.23 The Committee further desire information if there is any defined ‘code of 
conduct’ for responsible fishing to be carried out in the country, in response, the 
Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United Nations, adopted the 
‘Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries’ (CCRF) on 31stOctober, 1995,in 
order to ensure effective “conservation, management, and development of 
living aquatic resources”, the Code lays down ethical principles and 
international norms of conduct. The National Policy on Marine Fisheries, 2017 
is in line with the principles of the ‘1995 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible 
Fisheries’. Besides, the Marine Fishing Regulation Acts  (MFRAs) and 
Policies of the States/UTs are also aligning with the principles of the Code for 
responsible fishing. 
India has implemented the measures in line with the FAO ‘Code of Conduct 
for Responsible Fisheries’, aligned with the global standards. Reflecting these 

21 
 
principles, India’s National Policy on Marine Fisheries (NPMF), 2017 serves 
as the national guidance for responsible marine fisheries. It emphasizes 
sustainable utilization of resources within India’s Exclusive Economic Zone 
(EEZ) through ecosystem -based a pproaches, Maximum Sustainable Yield 
(MSY), and precautionary principles. The policy promotes regulation of 
fishing effort, spatial and temporal closures, fleet and gear controls, and 
protection of ecologically sensitive areas. It further strengthens Monit oring, 
Control and Surveillance (MCS) mechanisms using vessel registration, 
modern satellite based vessel communication and support systems, and 
inter-agency coordination. The policy also supports responsible marine 
aquaculture and ensures compliance with international obligations to prevent 
illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing. In addition, various 
State/UT Marine Fishing Regulation Acts (MFRAs) and State/UT policies are 
also progressively aligning with the CCRF principles, collectively reinf orcing 
India’s commitment to responsible and sustainable fisheries”. 
2.24 Fishing Harbours handling fishery products for exports require to adhere to 
certain operational and hygiene requirements and need mandatory approval of Export 
Inspection Agency (EIA) to remain competitive in International Market. When asked 
by the Committee on the possibility of making such requirements mandatory for other 
Fishing Harbours as well who cater to the Domestic Market so as to provide quality 
fish products for the domestic population as well, the Department submitted the 
following reply: 
“Fishing Harbours handling fish and fishery products for exports are 
mandated to comply with hygiene and operational standards as per 
Government of India’s Notification S.O. 730(E), and must obtain approval 
from the Export Inspection Agency (EIA) to meet in ternational requirements 
such as HACCP and EU norms. These standards ensure food safety, 
traceability, and sanitary handling throughout the supply chain. 
Recognizing the growing demand for safe and quality fish products within the 
domestic market, there is a strong case for extending similar hygiene and 
operational requirements to fishing harbours catering to domestic consumers. 
Ensuring compliance with food safety standards, aligned with the Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), would help prevent contamination, 
improve public health outcomes, and build consumer confidence in seafood 
consumed locally. 
While many domestic harbours currently lack the infrastructure to meet such 
standards, the Department is actively working through schemes like the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) to support 
modernization, capacity building, and hygiene improve ments. A phased 
implementation approach —starting with high -landing volume harbours —
could help transition towards nationwide adoption of uniform quality 
standards, ensuring that both export and domestic markets benefit from safe, 

22 
 
hygienically handled fishery products”. 
H. Deep-Sea Resources in Exclusive Economic Zones. 
2.25 On being asked, if the current fleet of Deep -Sea Fishing Vessels available in 
the country are sufficient to harness the Deep -Sear resources in India’s Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) and whether any assessment has been done by the 
Department in this regard, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“India’s EEZ covers an expansive area of over 22 lakh square kilometres (km2), 
rich in marine living resources. However, the vast deep -sea areas beyond the 
continental shelf remain largely unexplored and underutilized for fishing 
activities. The assessments made by the Committee of Experts including 
scientists from the Fishery Sur vey of India (FSI), Central Marine Fisheries 
Research Institution (CMFRI) and other research organizations have revealed 
the immense potential of deep-sea fishery resources, both within the EEZ and 
in international waters. The current fleet of Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels available 
in the country is not sufficient to harness the Deep -Sea Resources of the 
Country. India's deep sea fishing industry is still nascent, with significant 
untapped potential to be harnessed. The estimate for the overall EEZ potential 
for 2018 by Committee of Experts was 7.158 million tonnes, including 
conventional (74%) and non -conventional resources (26%). The potential of 
conventional resources was estimated at 5.31 million tonnes in  2018. The 
estimate for non -conventional resource potential was at 1.847 million tonnes. 
Out of the non -conventional resources, the resource potential for deep -sea 
myctophids was 1 million tonnes, followed by ocean squids (0.63 million 
tonnes), jellyfish (0.2 million tonnes), and marine algae (0.017 million tonnes), 
indicating the additional resources that could be tapped for deep-sea fishing. 
Indian EEZ possesses significant untapped offshore/oceanic fisheries potential. 
According to the Expert Committee Report (2018), the total offshore/oceanic 
fisheries resource potential for the Indian EEZ, including the Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands, is estim ated at 2,30,832 t. The highest potential is estimated 
for skipjack tuna (99,500 t), followed by yellowfin tuna (83,500 t) and pelagic 
sharks (25,000 t). The potential for oceanic squids too is estimated at 6,30,000 
t, representing an underutilized resource.  Considering the scope for harnessing 
of oceanic/deep -sea fisheries resources in EEZ and High seas and 
recommendations of the National Policy on Marine Fisheries, 2017, the support 
to traditional fishermen for acquisition of 918Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels has 
been provided by Government of India under its Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
(CSS) on ‘Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of 
Fisheries’. Subsequently, the “Support for acquisition of Deep -Sea Fishing 
vessels for traditional fishermen” has also been continued under the ‘Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana’ (PMMSY), wherein project proposals for 

23 
 
acquisition of 470 deep -sea fishing vessels have been sanctioned so far. The 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana also supports “up -gradation of 
existing fishing vessels for export competencies”, and so far approvals have 
been accorded for up-gradation of 473 vessels for export competency in various 
States/UTs.  
The Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for procurement of Deep-Sea Fishing 
Vessels under PMMSY is also developed by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways (MoPSW ), Government of India to ensure quality and safety 
aspects of deep-sea fishing vessels.                                                                                    
In the Union Budget 2025-26 of the Government of India, it has been inter alia 
announced that the Government will bring in an enabling framework for 
sustainable harnessing of fisheries from Indian Exclusive Economic Zone and 
High Seas to unlock the untappe d potential of the marine sector, with special 
focus on the Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands. Accordingly, the 
steps are being taken for implementation of the above -mentioned budget 
announcement”. 
2.26 The Committee, desire to know the measures taken by the Department  to 
harness the Deep -Sea Resources of the Country beyond 12 nautical miles in 
Exclusive Economic Zone, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“Government of India introduced National Policy on Marine Fisheries in 2017 
which inter-alia recommends for introduction of new scheme(s) for deep -sea 
fishing and introduction of indigenous deep -sea fishing vessels through 
fishermen cooperatives/self -help groups, on -board training and linkages to 
markets and export. 
Considering the scope for harnessing of deep -sea fisheries resources in EEZ 
and High seas and the recommendations of the National Policy on Marine 
Fisheries, 2017, a new sub-component (scheme) was introduced in 2017 under 
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CS S) on Blue Revolution to support 
acquisition of deep -sea fishing vessels at unit cost of Rs.80 lakhs, and 
approved 918 Deep Sea fishing vessels at a total cost of Rs. 734.40 crore. 
Subsequently, w.e.f 2020-21 onward, the support for Deep Sea fishing vessels 
has been provided under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY) with enhanced unit cost of Rs.120 lakh with subsidy amount of Rs.48 
lakh for general and Rs.72 lakh for SC/ST/Women. So far, 470 Deep Sea 
fishing vessels had been approved under the  PMMSY at a total cost of Rs. 
56.40 crore. 
Government of India envisions to promote utilization of fishery resources in the 
EEZ and the High Seas by Indian fishing vessels in a sustainable manner. It is 
relevant to note that fishing in the High Seas is subject to compliance of relevant 
provisions in the International Agreements/Arrangements and to be undertaken 
with proper monitoring and communication mechanisms to safe guard coastal 

24 
 
security and safety of fishermen at sea. India is a member of Indian Ocean 
Tuna Commission (IOTC), Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), and has also recently joined the South 
Indian Ocean Fisheries Agreement (SIOFA ) to enable fishing in the high seas 
under these Regional Fisheries Management Organizations (RFMOs). 
Government of India, in its Budget announcement (Para No. 20) has inter alia 
announced that “…To unlock the untapped potential of the marine sector, our 
Government will bring in an enabling framework for sustainable harnessing of 
fisheries from Indian Excl usive Economic Zone and High Seas, with special 
focus on the Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands”,  
DoF, GoI is taking steps to bring in an enabling framework for sustainable 
harnessing of fisheries from Indian Exclusive Economic Zone and High Seas 
as per the above-mentioned Budget Announcement to harness the Deep-Sea 
Fishery Resources”. 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-III 
MANAGEMENT OF FISHING HARBOURS AND FISH LANDING CENTERS 
3.1 With respect to management of Fishing Harbours  and Fish Landing Centers, 
the Committee inquired about the guidelines that are being followed for management 
of Fishing Harbours/Fish Landing Centers and whether there are any specific 
guidelines by the Centre in this regard or fishing harbours/fish landing centers are run 
according to the guidelines of the respective States/UTs. In response, the Department 
submitted the following reply: 
“Fisheries and Fishing within the territorial waters is a state subject and the 
same is governed as per the provisions of the Marine Fishing Regulation Acts 
of the concerned coastal States/UTs and their State Policies. The coastal 
State Governments have the prime responsibility to develop infrastructure 
and post-harvest development in their respective States. The management 
of fishing harbour and fish landing centre is generally done by respective 
State/U.T as per their guidelines. Further, the Department of Fisheries, 
Government of India while approving the projects stipulates that concerned 
State/UT Government will be fully responsible for management, maintenance 
and operation of the Fishing Harbour in a professional an d financially self -
sustainable manner. It is also stipulated that the concerned State /UT 
Government shall devise a suitable levy structure so as to ensure adequate 
revenue realization out of various services provided in Fishing Harbour/Fish 
Landing Centre, value addition facilities created and lease rents or any other 
receipts etc. The revenue realized should be deposited in a separate account 
maintained in a local nationalized bank in the name of the Fishing 
Harbour/Fish Landing Centre management body to be set up by the 
Concerned State/UT Government. It has been suggested and advised to the 
State Governments/UTs that the revenue realized should be utilized for 
meeting various expenses on regular maintenance including dredging, 
management, operations and f urther modernization/up -gradation of the 
Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing Centre. The Concerned State/UT Government 
to ensure generation of adequate financial resources required for post 
construction management and operation of the Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing 
Centre on a self - sustainable and profitable manner. The concerned State 
/UT Government are also to ensure efficient operational conditions of the 
Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing Centre in accordance with 
national/international hygienic standards/specifications in force from time-to-
time”. 

26 
 
3.2 The Committee further asked if Government bodies alone run fishing harbours 
or other stakeholders or people working in harbours are also given representation in 
the management bodies. The Department submitted the following reply: 
“Generally, Government institution carry out the maintenance and 
management of the fishing harbours. T he Fishing Harbour Management 
Societies consists of District collector as Chairman, Executive Engineer of the 
concerned division of the State Government as Vice -chairman, Deputy 
Director, Fisheries department as Member Secretary with representatives 
from different categories of beneficiaries, local self -Government bodies and 
trade unions. The composition of Management, Maintenance and Operation 
of Fishing H arbour vary from State to State. For example (i) In Kerala, the 
management society formed in each harbour of State Government of Kerala 
includes officials from various government departments, representatives from 
political parties, trade unions and fishermen. (ii) In Odisha, State Government 
is managing it’s all Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres by constituting 
Management Society FH&FLC with active participation of District 
Administration, Stake Holders, Police personnel, local representative with 
Fisheries Officials registered under certificate of Registration of Society Act, 
XXI of 1860 issued by the Concerned District Magistrate. (iii) In U.T. of 
Puducherry fishing Harbour Management Society’ constituted for 
maintenance and management of the Fishi ng harbour in the U.T of 
Puducherry. The governing body of the society is governed by official and 
three non -official members (boat owners).(Iv) In Karnataka, presently the 
management of fishing harbours and fish landing centres is being carried out 
by leasing out the maintenance rights to individuals / societies through tender 
cum auction. State Government of Karnataka has issued a government order 
to form Harbour Management Society for every harbour. The issued 
government order has made provision for form ing Governing body with 
representation from boat owners, labourers and others along with 
Government representatives. (v) In UT of Daman, Diu & DNH, the Diu and 
Daman Fisheries Co -operative Federation Ltd has been registered for 
management and operation of the proposed Smart and Integrated Fishing 
Harbour at Vanakbara, Diu consisting of the Collector as Chairman, 
representatives of Department of Fisheries(UT), Dy. Collector & H.O. 
Fisheries, Members Fisheries Co -op. society Ltd, General Manager, Co -
operative Bank ltd. Diu , Asst. Registrar of Co -op. Societies, Co -operative 
Department, Daman etc.  From the above it can be seen that the composition 
of Management, Maintenance and Operation of Fishing Harbour varies State 
to State/U.T”.  
3.3  The Committee desire details about those Fishing Harbour Managements in 
the Country have the representation of other stakeholders/labourers also in their 
managing bodies. In response, the Department submitted the following reply: 

27 
 
“Since the management, maintenance and operation of Fishing Harbour/Fish 
Landing Centres  are being carried out by the respective State/U.T. 
government as per their guidelines, the composition of such management 
societies/body vary from State to State/UT. Generally, all the State/UT 
Governments have provisions for representations from Stakehol ders/ 
Fishermen in Fishing Harbour management society”. 
3.4 On being asked, if the Department have taken any initiative for setting up of 
Cooperative-Management Societies to run Fishing Harbours/fish landing Centres, 
which would also include stakeholders along with government representatives, the 
Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Department of Fisheries, Government of India has formed the 
management, maintenance and operation body In the Chennai Fishing 
Harbour owned by Government of India for efficient management, 
maintenance and operation. The composition of management, maintenance 
and operation body along with government representatives consists of 
stakeholders viz. representative of fiber/country boat operator, representative 
of mechanized boat operator, representative of fishing industry as member. 
Marine Product Export Development Authority under Government of 
India is working closely with the Department of Fisheries of State/U,T.  
Government to promote improved harbour management practices through its 
society MPEDA -NETFISH. MPEDA has been actively promoting the 
Munambam Model of Fishing Harbour Management Society (MFHMS) as an 
effective model for the management of fishing harbours. This model 
encourages the formation of similar management societies and committees 
across fishing harbours in coastal states to ensure efficient and participatory 
governance. The MFHMS is an autonomous co -management society 
established in 2005, with the District Collector of Ernakulam serving as its 
Chairman. It includes representation from key stakeholders such as fishers,  
harbour workers, officials from the State Fisheries and Port Departments, 
MPEDA, and others. This ensures participatory decision-making and efficient 
day-to-day management of the harbour. The society is responsible for 
collecting revenue from various sources such as toll charges, user fees, and 
rents. These funds are utilized for daily operations, repair and maintenance, 
and the further development of harbour facilities. With strong support from 
stakeholders, MFHMS has successfully implemented good handlin g 
practices for fish and ice, maintained hygiene and sanitation, and enforced a 
code of conduct within the harbour. Munambam model of Co - management 
is a successful self-sustainable model and MPEDA promotes the same to the 
harbors of other states also thro ugh facilitating study tours and field visits. 
The success of the Munambam model has already led to its replication at 
Paradip Fishing Harbour in Odisha. This demonstrates significant potential 

28 
 
for adoption across other fishing harbours and landing centers in maritime 
states throughout the country”. 
3.5 On being asked by the Committee, if, the Department has any plans to 
introduce or devise a uniform co -operative management system for fishing 
harbours/fish landing centres so as to give representation to fishers, fish labourers, 
boat owners, public represe ntative and other stakeholders in the Harbour 
Management body, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“Fisheries and Fishing within the territorial waters is a State subject and the 
same is governed as per the provisions of the Marine Fishing Regulation Acts 
of the concerned coastal States/UTs and their State Policies. The coastal 
State Governments have th e prime responsibility to develop infrastructure 
and post -harvest development in their respective States. The post 
construction management of fishing harbour and fish landing centre is 
generally done by respective State/U.T. as per their guidelines.  The 
composition of Management, Maintenance and Operation of Fishing Harbour 
vary from state to state. Generally, all the State/UT Government have 
provisions for representations from Stakeholders/Fishermen in Fishing 
Harbour Management Society. 
Further, the Department of Fisheries from time to time envisions to 
issue need based advisory to States/UTs to put in place efficient and robust 
management systems for management of fishing harbours/fish landing 
centres. 
The Department of Fisheries, Government of India has formed the 
management, maintenance and operation body In the Chennai Fishing 
Harbour owned by Government of India for efficient management, 
maintenance and operation. The composition of management, maint enance 
and operation body along with government representatives consists of 
stakeholders viz. representative of fibre/country boat operator, representative 
of mechanized boat operator, representative of fishing industry as member. 
Department of Fisheries, Government of India envisions participatory system 
of management and the same has been enshrined in the administrative 
approvals accorded to the States/UTs, yet the role is restricted to advisory 
only and the operations and management of the finished infrastructure vests 
with respective States/ UTs. The States/UTs choose and implement the 
operations and management plan for the infrastructure constructed”. 
3.6 On being asked, about the custodian of the revenue, that is collected from 
Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres, and, whether, the revenue so collected 
is adequate to run the harbours, the Department submitted the following reply: 

29 
 
“The respective State/UTs are custodian of revenue collected from FH/FLC 
under jurisdiction of State/UT.  The model of collection of revenue form 
FH/FLC varies from State to State. For example Model followed by Fishery 
harbours in Kerala collects different user charges viz. gate collection for 
vehicles entry into harbour, fishing boat landing charges, berthing  charges, 
wharfage charges, renewal of different licenses for fish auction agents, 
merchants, women vendors/labourers, harbour workers, rents for repair yards 
and tourism as entry fee to breakwater. The  revenue is credited in separate 
bank account and utilised for maintenance, operation and management. 
Further, the Department of Fisheries, Government of India in the conditions 
of administrative approval of the project to State/UT stipulates that the 
Concerned State /U.T. Government shall devise a suitable levy structure so 
as to ensure adequate revenue realization out of various services provided in 
Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing Centre, value addition facilities created and 
lease rents or any other receipts etc. The Concerned State/U,T, Government 
to ensure generation of adequate financial resources requir ed for post 
construction management and operation of the Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing 
Centre on a self- sustainable and profitable manner”. 
3.7  The Committee further inquired if there is any provision from the Department to 
give additional revenue to Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centers who have very 
low revenue generation/collection, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“As per PMMSY guidelines, the maintenance, management and operation 
post construction of fishing Harbours, fish landing centres are to be borne by 
respective State/UT. Thus, the Department of Fisheries, Government of India 
is not providing any additional revenue to FH/FLCs. Further, the Department 
of Fisheries, Government of India in the conditions of administrative approval 
of the project to State/UT stipulates that the Concerned State/UT Government 
to ensure generation of adequate financial resources requ ired for post 
construction management and operation of the Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing 
Centre on a self - sustainable and profitable manner. The Concerned 
State/U.T. Government to provide additional funds required, if any, over and 
above the revenue realiz ed on account of various charges and levies 
collected, for maintenance and operation of the Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing 
Centre”.  
3.8 As stated by the Department, the Munambam  (Kerala) model of Co -
management is a successful and self -sustainable model. On being asked by the 
Committee about the measures taken by the Department to promote Munamban 
model in all the Coastal States, the Department submitted the following reply:  
“The Department of Fisheries, Government of India while approving the 
projects stipulates that concerned State/UT Government will be fully 

30 
 
responsible for management, maintenance and operation of the Fishing 
Harbour in a professional and financially self -sustainable manner. It is also 
stipulated that the concerned State /UT Government shall devise a suitable 
levy structure so as to ensure ade quate revenue realization out of various 
services provided in Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing Centre, value addition 
facilities created and lease rents or any other receipts etc. The Concerned 
State/UT Government to ensure generation of adequate financial res ources 
required for post construction management and operation of the Fishing 
Harbour/Fish Landing Centre on a self - sustainable and profitable manner. 
The concerned State /UT Government are also to ensure efficient operational 
conditions of the Fishing Ha rbour/Fish Landing Centre in accordance with 
national/international hygienic standards/specifications in force from time -to 
time. 
Further, the Department of Fisheries from time to time envisions to issue need 
based advisory to States/UTs for efficient and robust management system 
incorporating good practices/models for fishing harbours/fish landing 
centres”. 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
CENTRAL SCHEMES/FUNDS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FISHING HARBOURS 
AND FISH LANDING CENTRES 
Central financial assistance is provided for development of fishing harbours and 
fish landing centres to Coastal State Government’s, Union Territories and Port Trusts 
with an objective to;  
i) provide infrastructure facilities for safe landing, berthing of fishing 
vessels; 
ii) create shelter basins for fishing vessels and fishermen; and 
iii) provide land-based facilities for post-harvest management. 
4.1 The funding pattern for Development of Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing 
Centres under CSS Blue Revolution Scheme was 100% funding by Centre for UTs 
and Central Government Organisations and sharing in the ratio of 50:50 between the 
Centre and State with respect to other States. Under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY) the ratio is 60:40 sharing between Centre and State for States and 
100% Central funding for UTs. 
A. CSS Blue Revolution Scheme (2015-16 to 2019-20) 
4.2  During the tenure of CSS Blue Revolution Scheme, the Department of 
Fisheries approved a total of 13 fishing harbours/fish landing centre projects with a 
total cost of Rs.1463.63 crore. Further, Central Investment of Rs. 453 Cr under Blue 
Revolution (Department of Fisheries) and Rs. 254 Cr under Sagarmala (M/o Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways) (total 707 crores) was released to States during the scheme 
period by the Central Government. 
4.3 The Committee, however, note that out of the approved 13 fishing harbours and 
fish landing centre projects, only 06 fishing harbours/fish landing centre projects have 
been completed and 06 are still in various stages of progress along with 01 project still 
in pre-tendering stage. 
 
 

32 
 
B. Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
4.4 PMMSY a flagship scheme is being implemented by the Central Government 
with and outlay of Rs. 20,050 crore over a period of five years i.e  from 2020-21 to 
2024-25. No cost extension is given to PMMSY for another period of one year i.e FY 
2025-26. Development of fishing harbours and fish landing centres is one of the 
important thrust areas under the Scheme. A total of 58 projects for Modernisation and 
Development of fishing harbours and fish landing centres have been approved under 
both the components {i.e. Central Sector Scheme (CS) and Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme (CSS)} the Scheme with a total investment of Rs 3281.32 crore having 
Central share of Rs. 1,698.45 crores. 
4.5  The Committee, however, note that out of the 58 projects approved under 
PMMSY for modernization/development of FH/FLS, only two (02) projects have been 
completed till date and 31 projects are under various stages of progress. Further, 21 
projects are still under pre -tendering stage and project costs of 04 projects is being 
revised.                                      
C. Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF). 
4.6 FIDF a dedicated fund with a corpus of Rs. 7522.48 was created during 2018 -
19 to address the infrastructure requirement and finance development of fisheries 
sector by the Department of Fisheries. Under the scheme, concessional finance is 
provided to the Eligible Entities (EEs), including State Governments/Union Territories 
for development of identified fisheries infrastructure facilities by the Nodal Loaning 
Entities (NLEs) namely National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD), National Co operatives Development Corporation (NCDC), and all 
Scheduled Banks by way of interest subvention up to 3% per annum by Government 
of India. The maximum repayment period for such loan is 12 years inclusive of 
moratorium of two years. The tenure of FIDF has been extended upto March 2026. 
4.7 Under FIDF, Department of Fisheries has approved a total of 46 fishing 
harbours/fish landing centre projects at a total cost of Rs. 5087.97 crore restricting the 
project cost at Rs. 3318.82 crore for interest subvention under FIDF. 
4.8 The Committee note that out of the 46 projects approved under FIDF, only 12 
projects have been completed and 28 projects are in various stages of completion. 

33 
 
Further, 5 projects are still in pre -tendering stage and 01 project is pending due to 
court case.  
4.9 The Committee has been informed that a total of 117 projects for Development 
and Modernization of fishing harbours and fish landing centres have been approved 
under various Schemes of the Department namely Blue Revolution, Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana and Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development 
Fund. However, out of these approved projects, only 20 projects have been completed 
till date and 97 projects are in various stages of progress or pre-tendering stage. Thus, 
the percentage of completed projects is very low i.e. only 23%. 
D. Release of Central Funds for Modernisation and Development of Fishing 
Harbours 
4.10 The Committee desire to know the details of funds released till date by the 
Central Government for development/modernisatoin  of Fishing Harbours and Fish 
Landing Centres under Blue Revolution, Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY) and Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF). In 
response the Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Department has accorded approvals to the proposal of various State 
Governments, UTs and other Central Government organizations for 
development of a total of 117 Fishing Harbour Fish Landing Centres including 
modernizations and maintenance dredging at a  total cost of Rs 9735 crore 
under Blue Revolution, Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
and Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF). The 
funds to the tune of Rs 1069 crore has been released for development/ 
modernization of Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres under Blue 
Revolution and Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). Further, 
loan to the tune of Rs1220 crore has been disbursed for development of 
fishing harbours and fish landing centres by NABARD under F isheries and 
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) Scheme. The 
department of Fisheries, Government of India has released a sum of Rs. 60 
crores towards interest subvention under FIDF. In addition, during the current 
financial year, the Department of Fisheries, Government of India has issued 
mother sanctions as per SNA -SPRASH guidelines of Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for implementation of the various fisheries 
development projects including Fishing Harbours and Fish landing ce ntre 
approved under PMMSY”. 

34 
 
4.11 The Committee further inquired about the measures taken by the Department 
to address the issue of slow pace of release of Central Funds to Infrastructure projects 
such as Modernization and Development of fishing harbours. The Department 
submitted the following reply: 
“The Central funds are released for development of fishing harbour/fish 
landing centre projects based on the submission of utilization certificate (UC) 
of the previously released central share, submission of physical & financial 
progress reports by the State/UT.  The main reasons attributed for slow pace 
of release of central funds are (i) delay in completion of pre -tendering 
activities, (ii) slow progress of the projects, (iii) Litigations, (iv) fund absorbing 
capacity of project implementing agencies. The State Governments and UTs 
have been advised from time-to-time to resolve the bottlenecks and speed up 
the project implementation.   
Further, the system of SNA -SPARSH has largely addressed the issue of 
timely availability of central funds for completion of the projects. During the 
current financial year, the Department of Fisheries has issued mother 
sanctions as per SNA -SPRASH guideline s of Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance and made available a bulk of amount for implementation 
of all the sanctioned activities including FH/FLC projects under the PMMSY. 
Accordingly, the States/UTs can channelize the funds towards fast 
progressing project activities”.  
E. Notified Landing Centres Developed into Fishing Harbours and Fish 
Landing Centres under Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes. 
4.12 On being asked by the Committee about the number of notified fish landing 
centers that have been developed/modernized into fishing harbours till date, the 
Department submitted the following reply: 
“Based on advise  of the Department of Fisheries, Government of India, the 
coastal State Governments/UTs have notified a total of 1547 fish landing 
centres under respective Marine Fisheries Regulation Act (MFRA). Out of 
1547 fish landing centres, as of now 379 fish landing centres have been taken 
up for development as fishing harbours and fish landing centres along the 
country’s coastline. The selection of notified landing centres for development 
as fishing harbours and fish landing centres are done based on strategic 
considerations, including the number of fishing boats operating from the 
notified landing centre, number of fishermen involved in fishing and allied 
activities, volume of fish landings, proximity to major fish markets and fish 
processing centres and other existing infrastructure. The notified fish landing 
centres with higher magnitude of the aforementioned parameters and 

35 
 
economic potential are prioritized for development as fishing harbours and 
fish landing centres”.  
State-wise details (as on June, 2025) of notified fishing harbours and fish landing centres 
completed/commissioned and under construction with the central assistance under the CSS 
during the period 1964 to 2014  
Sl. 
No 
Name of State/ Union 
Territory 
Notified 
landing 
centres 
Centres taken 
up for 
development 
under CSS 
Fishing Harbours Fish Landing Centres 
Major fishing 
harbours 
Commissione
d 
Minor fishing harbours 
Commissio
ned 
Under 
Construction Commis
sioned 
Under 
construction 
1. West Bengal 66 22 2 7 - 13 - 
2. Odisha 73 36 1 4 2 28 1 
3. Andhra Pradesh 350 42 1 4 8 22* 7 
4. Tamil Nadu 301 65 1 15 5 24 20 
5. Puducherry  41 10 - 3 4 1 2 
6. Kerala 204 53 1 16 8 27 1 
7. Karnataka 115 28 - 10 5 13 - 
8. Goa 34 7 - - 2 5 - 
9. Maharashtra 173 59 1 2 11 35 10 
10. Gujarat 107 32 - 6 5 21 - 
11. Daman & Diu 12 4 - 1 1 2 - 
12. Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
51 18 - 1 - 17** - 
13. Lakshadweep 20 3 - - - 3 - 
      Total: 1,547 379 7 69 51 211 41 
* 3 FLCs was developed under TRP.                                                        
** 4 FLCs approved under the Tsunami Rehabilitation Package (TRP). Besides, 13 FLCs under the UT 
plan.   
Creation of infrastructure facilities at a total of 379 fishing centres against 1547 existing fishing centres 
in the Country has been taken up, which forms about 24.49% coverage.  
4.13 The Committee asked about the amount of funds that have been disbursed by 
the Centre for development of these notified landing centres till date, the Department 
submitted the following reply: 
“The Government of India, Department of Fisheries since inception of the 
Central Schemes has provided the central funds to the tune of Rs 1860.62 
crore for development of fishing harbours, fish landing centres including 
modernization and up-gradation of the existing one”.  

36 
 
CHAPTER-V 
IMPORTANT ISSUES RELATED TO FISHERMEN AND TRADITIONAL FISHING 
COMMUNITIES RESIDING IN HARBOUR AREAS/LANDING CENTRES 
The Department has stated that about 5 million fishermen are living in 3477 
fishing villages in the country along its coast. Further, based on the advice of the 
Department of Fisheries, the Coastal State Governments and Union Territories have 
notified a to tal of 1547 fish landing centers under respective Marine Fisheries 
Regulation Act (MFRA). These notified fishing harbours and fish landing centers are 
catering to the 3477 fishing villages along the Coast.  
A.  Health, Education and Housing Facilities. 
5.2 When the Committee asked about the details of fishermen population residing 
in the 1547 notified landing centres, individually, and the total population engaged in 
fisheries and fisheries activities in all the notified centres, the Department submitted 
the following reply: 
“In coastal region, there are  1547 notified fish landing centre and it is 
assumed that these 1547 notified fish landing centre  are catering to 3477 
coastal fishing villages with about 50 lakh fishermen population engaged in 
fisheries and fisheries activities. However, the specific population at each fish 
landing centre is not available”.  
5.3 The Committee further enquired about the mechanism/criteria of the 
Department while selecting notified landing centres for their development into fishing 
harbours, since the Department does not have specific population data with respect 
to each of the notified landing centres. The Department in their response submitted 
the following: 
“About 5 million fishermen are living in 3477 fishing villages along the coast 
and the notified 1547 fishing harbours and fish landing centers are catering 
to these fishing villages.  The selection of notified landing centres for 
development as fishing harbours and fish landing centres are based on site 
specific feasibility study that includes factors such as strategic considerations, 
number, size and type of fishing vessels operating f rom the notified fish 
landing centre, number of fishermen involved in fis hing and allied activities, 
volume and value of fish landings, proximity to major fish markets and fish 
processing centres and other existing infrastructure including forward and 
backward linkages. The notified fish landing centres with higher magnitude of 

37 
 
the aforementioned parameters and economic potential are prioritized for 
development as fishing harbours and fish landing centres”. 
5.4  The Committee inquired about the social security measures such as health, 
education, housing, Institutional credit and Insurance (life/equipment) facilities that are 
available to the fishermen population residing in the 1547 notified landing centres. The 
Department submitted the following reply:  
“The Department of Fisheries, GoI, under PMMSY has been providing safety 
kits to the fishermen operating in traditional or motorized fishing vessels to 
ensure their safety and timely assistance in case of accidents. Financial 
provisions are made under PMMSY  to provide livelihood and nutritional 
support during the ban period to the fishermen community. The Department 
of Fisheries, GoI has provisioned for insurance cover to fishers under 
PMMSY, in a cost sharing mechanism with the States and UTs. The insurance 
covered to the fishers include a cover of Rs. 5 Lakhs in case of death and 
Rs.2.5 lakhs in case of permanent disability. Insurance premium subvention 
is also provided for insurance of fishing vessels to safeguard the loss of 
property of the fishermen. The states are encouraged to provide Kisan Credit 
Cards for the fisheries sector, ensuring financial inclusion and support for 
livelihood activities. Besides, collateral free Mudra Loans is available to be 
availed by the fishermen for financing their business  requirements. Further, 
Department of Fisheries, Government of India has been focusing on providing 
additional livelihood opportunities to the fishermen community residing at the 
coast. Preference is accorded to the traditional marine fisher youth as an 
alternative livelihood option in case of marine recreational fisheries. 11 
modern coastal fishing villages were sanctioned under PMMSY at the cost of 
7.5 Cr. each for Blue economy/Blue growth with an aim to maximize economic 
and social benefits to coastal fis hers while minimizing environmental 
degradation through sustainable fishing practices. Fishers of these villages 
were envisioned to be empowered for securing their livelihoods and equal 
participation along the fisheries value chain. The Department of Fishe ries, 
GoI has taken up development of 100 coastal fishing villages as Climate 
Resilient Coastal Fishermen Villages (CRCFV) under PMMSY with an outlay 
of Rs. 200 crore with 100% central funding for improving infrastructure and 
community welfare including fi sheries economic activities. In addition, there 
are other schemes run by the respective state Governments that are 
beneficial to the fishermen, for example the State of Karnataka runs Matsya 
Ashraya scheme for housing for fishermen, Vidyanidhi scheme for t he 
education of the children of fishermen/ fish farmers”. 
The fisher folks can avail facilities offered by other ministries like Ayushman 
Bharat for medical insurance cover, Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima 
Yojana (PMJJBY) and Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY) for 
life and accident insurance including hospitalisation cover of Rs 25000”.  

38 
 
5.5 State of Karnataka through Matsya Ashraya Scheme and Vidyanidhi Scheme 
respectively provides Housing and Education for fishermen and children of fishermen. 
When asked by the Committee, whether the Department of Fisheries, GOI is 
implementing any such scheme or does it plan to implement any such central scheme 
in near future. The Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Department of Fisheries, GoI, primarily focuses on development of the 
fisheries infrastructure along the fisheries value chain to facilitate fisher-folks 
to not only improve production as well as productivity of the fisheries sector 
but also contribute towards improving their socio-economic condition. Under 
PMMSY scheme the Department of Fisheries from FY 2021-22 has extended 
benefits of Group Insurance Scheme to 36.74 lakh fisher-folks annually.  
The safety of the fishermen has been addressed by way of providing 2135 
safety kits to the artisanal fishermen. While 14,300 communication and 
tracking devices have been sanctioned for smaller boats to ensure 
communication and tracking in case of a mishap.  Under PMMSY, 1 lakh 
indigenously developed transponders at the total cost of Rs 364 Crore  have 
been provisioned for all the mechanized boats in India and that 27894 of 
these transponders have already been installed till 1st of July 2025. 
In addition to this Livelihood and nutritional support is provided to about 3 
million fisher-folks during the ban period. Special efforts have been made by 
the department of fisheries to extend Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) to the fisher 
folks providing financial inclusion. 
There are other beneficial schemes run by respective ministries that are 
available to all the citizens of India, like PM AwasYojna, Pradhan Mantri 
Ujjwala Yojna, Ayushman Bharat Yojna, Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Yojna 
and Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan. 
Other than the schemes mentioned above, there are specific schemes run by 
various states as mentioned in the question. Some examples follow: 
State of Uttarakhand provides subsidies on fish farming inputs, while State 
of Tamil Nadu provides subsidies for the purchase of equipment and sales 
tax on the diesel is reimbursed for the mechanized vessels, while other 
states provide facilities for training and capacity building”. 
B. Compensation During Fish Ban/Lean Season. 
5.6 When the Committee asked about the amount of compensation given to 
fishermen during the Fishing ban /lean season and whether the compensation granted 

39 
 
is enough for the fishermen families for their daily sustenance needs, the Department 
submitted the following reply: 
“The Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) implemented by the 
Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, 
Government of India provides livelihood and nutritional support for socio -
economically backward active traditional fisher’s families during the fishing 
ban/lean period. Under this scheme, the Governmental financial assistance of 
Rs. 3,000/- per annum is provided to each enrolled beneficiary and the enrolled 
beneficiary’s contribution is Rs. 1,500/- annually.  Such accumulated amount of 
Rs. 4,500/- is disbursed to each enrolled beneficiary by the respective State/ 
Union Territory (UT)  at the rate of Rs. 1,500/ - per month during the fishing 
ban/lean period for three months annually. This is not a compensation but 
financial assistance provided to fishermen during fishing ban/lean period. 
The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Fisheries Husbandry 
and Dairying is implementing Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY)- a scheme to bring about Blue Revolution through sustainable and 
responsible development of fisheries s ector in India. PMMSY scheme has 
provision for income support component namely Livelihood and nutritional 
support for socio-economically backward active traditional fisher’s families for 
conservation of fish resources during during fishing ban/lean period.  Under this 
component assistance is provided @Rs. 3000/ - per fishers and beneficiaries’ 
own contribution of Rs. 1500/- for three months during fishing ban/lean periods 
in the ratio of 50:50 for general State, 80:20 for North Eastern States and 
Himalayan States while 100% for UTs. During the last five years (2020 -21 to 
2024-25) , 5.95 lakh fishers were provided livelihood and Nutritional support per 
annum at a Project outlay of Rs.1384.80 crore. The details of achievements 
under the activity is as under”. 
(Rs. In lakhs) 
Sl.N Name of the States Average Fishers provided Livelihood 
Support from 2020-21 to 2024-25  Annually  
Physical (No.) Proj. Cost GoI 
Share 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 250 45.00 30.00 
2 Andhra Pradesh 110680 19922.40 6640.80 
3 Assam 26000 4680.00 2496.00 
4 Bihar 12500 2250.00 750.00 
5 Chhattisgarh 11500 2070.00 690.00 
6 Gujarat 7500 1350.00 450.00 
7 Himachal Pradesh 4316 776.95 414.37 
8 Jammu and Kashmir 20492 3688.56 2459.06 

40 
 
9 Karnataka 29095 5237.02 1745.68 
10 Kerala 213791 36466.17 12459.37 
11 Lakshadweep 625 112.50 75.00 
12 Madhya Pradesh 14911 2684.04 894.69 
13 Maharashtra 1000 180.00 60.00 
14 Mizoram 4718 849.16 452.88 
15 Odisha 11250 2520.00 839.97 
16 Puducherry 33584 6045.04 4030.02 
17 Rajasthan 576 102.09 34.11 
18 Sikkim 174 31.28 16.68 
19 Tamil Nadu 233778 48345.05 14026.69 
20 Telangana 2500 450.00 150.00 
21 Tripura 3634 620.49 348.84 
22 Uttar Pradesh 250 45.00 15.00 
22 Uttarakhand 50 9.00 4.80 
5.7 During the evidence meeting held on 3 rd July, 2025 on the subject 
“Development and Modernisation of Fishing Harbours’ several members expressed 
their concern about the amount of compensation that is being provided to fishermen 
during the fish ban/lean season and suggested that the compensation may be 
enhanced proportionately given the current economic conditions and Inflation. 
C. Coastal Erosion, Construction of Resorts and Reduction of Land Meant 
for Traditional Fishing Activities. 
5.8 Coastal regions of the country have been inhabited by many Traditional Fishing 
Communities and thus a traditional fishing system exists in such regions. In every 
State/UTs such regions are being used by traditional fishing communities for small 
scale fishing activities. One of such region in West Bengal is called “Khotis’ and they 
are know by different names in different States/UTs. 
5.9 On being asked, whether, the Department has any study/assessment with 
respect to affect of climate change and coastal erosion on the reduction of land (khotis) 
meant for traditional fishing activities, the Department submitted the following reply:  
“The construction of coastal protection works are not falling under the ambit 
of the fisheries development schemes implemented by the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying. Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 

41 
 
Husbandry and Dairying supports the coastal states and union Territories for 
development of fishing harbour and fish landing centres for creation of need 
based shelter basin, safe landing and berthing facilities and land based 
facilities for smooth conduct of fishers and fish relating activities. The fishing 
harbours and fish landing centres developed under the schemes, inter -alia, 
comprising of need based waterside and landside facilities like breakwaters, 
training walls and groynes primarily to create she lter and tranquil basin for 
smooth operations of fishery activities, protect the lives and assets of 
fishermen during the rough weather and natural calamities. 
No such study with respect to affect of climate change and coastal erosion on 
the reduction of land (khotis) meant for traditional fishing activities has been 
conducted by the Department of Fisheries, Government of India”. 
5.10 The Committee, further desire to know, if any exercise has been conducted by 
the Department to assess the affects of mechanized fishing activities/ use of bottom 
trawlers/ pollution from coastal resorts on the decrease in land originally earmarked 
for traditional fishermen to carry out fishing activities, the Department submitted the 
following reply: 
“Fisheries and Fishing within the territorial waters is a state subject and the same 
is governed as per the provisions of the Marine Fishing Regulation Acts of the 
concerned coastal States/UTs and their State Policies. The fishermen in different 
coastal States/UTs are practicing different methods of fishing based on different 
fish stocks, local conditions and traditional practices. While methods like Bottom 
Trawling or Purse Seine is allowed in some States/UTs, the same is banned in 
the other States/UTs. Th e Department of Fisheries, Government of India has 
issued the National Policy on Marine Fisheries, 2017 to provide guiding principles 
to all coastal States/UTs to ensure sustainable fisheries. The fishing areas are 
reserved under the respective MFRAs by th e concerned coastal States/UTs for 
their traditional fishermen in order to protect their livelihood interests and to 
prevent overexploitation of fishery resources”. 
5.11 On being asked, if there are any guidelines/laws to regulate the construction of 
coastal resorts or any recorded instances of traditional fishing areas being sold 
off/allocated for construction of coastal resorts thereby depriving the traditional fishing 
communities of their livelihoods, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“The construction of coastal resorts and related activities along the Indian 
coastline is regulated under the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification, 
2011, issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC), Government of India,  under the provisions of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986. Further, ‘Fisheries’ and ‘Fishing within the territorial 
waters’ i.e, up to 12 nautical miles is a state subject and the same is governed 

42 
 
as per the provisions of the Marine Fishing Regulation Acts of the concerned 
coastal States/UTs and their State Policies. 
There is no such information received from State/U.T. regarding selling off or 
allocation of traditional fishing areas in their jurisdiction for the construction of 
coastal resorts, thereby depriving the local fishing communities of their 
livelihood”.  
5.12 According to a Report by Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI), 
2022, there has been a sharp decline in artisanal, non -mechanized fishing sector in 
annual fishing catch i.e. from 88% in 1960 to just 1% in 2022. On being asked about 
the measur es taken by the Department to protect the interest of such 
artisanal/traditional fishermen, the Department submitted the following reply: 
“Commencing as a purely traditional activity post -independence in 1950’s, 
fisheries have now transformed to a commercial enterprise. The pattern of 
marine fish landings in India during the past fifty years reveals that 
contribution by the artisanal sector t o the total production was significant up 
to the sixties. Subsequently, the Government of India along with coastal 
States/UTs have been implementing the schemes and programs since 
decades for motorization and modernization of traditional crafts in order t o 
empower the traditional fishers and to strengthen their livelihoods. This has 
resulted in conversion of non -motorized traditional fishing crafts into 
motorized fishing boats over a period of last five decades. Besides, the 
mechanized fishing vessels have  also been increased in the country, which 
are also mostly operated by the fishermen community in the country. Due to 
the introduction of more number of both motorized and mechanized fishing 
vessels, as well as increased fishing activities, there was need to regulate the 
marine fisheries sector. Accordingly, based on the model Bill circulated by the 
Union Government in 1979, the Marine Fishing Regulation Acts (MFRAs) 
were enacted by the States/UTs in 1980’s. The MFRAs have earmarked the 
areas (through zonation), to protect the interests of the traditional fishers by 
reserving their fishing grounds. Various state MFRAs have designated areas 
starting from 5 kilometers from the shore as the no fishing zones for the bigger 
boats ensuring no loss of livelihood fo r artisanal fishermen. In addition, the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) provides financial 
assistance to traditional fishers for Up -gradation of non-mechanized boats 
(e.g., for safety gear, navigation), provision of life-saving appliances, 
communication and tracking devices, support for refrigerated transport, fish 
vending units for shore-side activities, etc.Under PMMSY, special focus has 
also been accorded for Training and Capacity building of fishermen, fish 
farmers, fish workers and other st akeholders. Development of coastal fish 
landing centres suitable for small-scale operations, focus on value addition, 
branding and marketing of artisanal catch are also supported under PMMSY 
and other schemes. These measures helps artisanal fishers with safety, 

43 
 
efficiency, and better market access. In addition, under PMMSY scheme, 937 
units of artificial reefs were sanctioned with an outlay of 291.38 crore to 
improve fish stocks and biodiversity in the coastal areas as well as 
improvement of fish catch for the artisanal fishermen ensuring economic 
viability as well as mitigating the loss of livelihood in the region due to any 
man-made or natural reasons.  The developed facilities in Fishing Harbour 
and Fish Landing Centre have dedicated facilities for artisanal fi shermen, 
such as small craft landing areas, auction platforms, and ice storage 
facilities”. 
D. Institutional Credit to Traditional Fishermen. 
5.13 The Committee desire to know about the protective measures envisaged by the 
Department to protect the small and traditional fishermen from lenders/loan sharks 
who provide finance at a very exorbitant interest rates thereby putting the existence of 
small fishermen in jeopardy. The Department submitted the following reply: 
“The facility of Kisan Credit Card (KCC) has been extended to 4.64 lakh 
fishers/fish farmers that provides working capital and short-term loans at low 
interest rates, Collateral-free loans and interest subvention available for 
timely repayment. This helps in replace high -interest informal loans with 
affordable institutional credit. In addition, the Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) scheme of the department 
Offers long -term low-interest loans to individuals, cooperatives, and SHGs 
that helps in building infrastructure (boats, nets, cold storage), reducing 
reliance on informal financier providing finance at a very exorbitant interest 
rates. 
In addition, the Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying is implementing a new Central Sector Sub -scheme 
namely the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah-Yojana (PM-MKSSY) 
under the ongoing Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) which 
will promote formalization of Fisheries Sector and envisages registration of 
40 lakh stakeholders on National Fisheries Digital Platform (NFDP) with the 
Access to Institution Credit Support to 6.4 lakh micro-enterprises. 
Further, The Pradhan Mantri MUDRA Yojana (PMMY), empowers small and 
micro-entrepreneurs across India fostering financial inclusion, PMMY 
provides easy collateral-free loans up to ₹10 lakh for non-corporate and non-
farm income -generating activities.  PMMY extends collateral -free loans to 
small enterprises that face significant challenges in acc essing formal 
institutional credit”. 
 

44 
 
E. Extending Benefits Given to Agriculturist to Fishers and Fishermen. 
5.14 The Committee desire to know if the Department has explored the possibility of 
extending the benefits as given under Kisan Samman Nidhi to Fishermen, the 
Department submitted the following reply: 
“The Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) implemented by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer Welfare aims at providing financial 
assistance to cultivable landholding farmer families across the country to 
enable them to take care of expenses related to agriculture and allied activities 
as well as domestic needs. Under the Scheme, an amount of Rs.6000/ - per 
year is transferred in three instalments of Rs.2000/ - directly into the bank 
accounts of the farmers. However, PMMSY scheme has provision for income 
support component namely Liveliho od and nutritional support for socio -
economically backward active traditional fisher’s families for conservation of 
fish resources during fishing ban/lean period. Under this component 
assistance is provided @Rs. 3000/ - per fishers and beneficiaries’ own 
contribution of Rs. 1500/ - for three months during fishing ban/lean periods in 
the ratio of 50:50 for general State, 80:20 for North Eastern States and 
Himalayan States while 100% for UTs. During the last five years (2020 -21 to 
2024-25) , 5.95 lakh fishers w ere provided livelihood and Nutritional support 
per annum at a Project outlay of Rs.1384.80 crore”. 
5.15 The Committee, further asked if electricity can be provided free of cost to fishers 
and fish farmers as is being given to agriculturists, the Department submitted the 
following reply: 
“Although fisheries is generally considered an activity allied to agriculture, only 
a few states provide free or subsidized electricity to the fish farmers. It is 
notable that electricity forms the major input for a fish farm and is used for 
running the water pumps, aeration un its etc. and in addition to that filtration 
drums and ionizers in case of RAS units. Providing electricity free of cost for 
fisheries activities will help in reducing the cost of production and therefore 
enhance the income of the fish farmers improving the ir socio -economic 
condition. At present there is no provision to provide electricity for fisheries like 
agriculture”. 
F. Fishery Expert in Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). 
5.16 On being asked by the Committee, about the measures taken by the 
Department to set up Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) for Fishery Sector in the Country, 
the Department submitted the following reply: 

45 
 
“Krishi Vigyan Kendra’s (KVKs) are primarily agricultural extension centers 
established by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) under the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE), Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, G overnment of India. It focuses on 
technology assessment, refinement, and demonstration to improve agricultural 
practices and productivity at the local level. KVKs act as a bridge between 
research institutions and farmers, disseminating improved technologie s and 
providing training to enhance agricultural practices. ICAR has so far 
established a total 736 KVKs across the country. Some of the KVKs provide 
expert advice on fisheries, while the rest do not have a fisheries expert 
available. While the Department of Fisheries envisions that a fisheries expert 
be available at all KVKs so that fisheries related information can be shared 
with fish farmers extensively, the mandate of hiring professionals at such KVKs 
rests with ICAR”. 
5.17 During the evidence meeting on the subject held on 3 rd July, 2025, several 
Members raised the issue for the need of Krishi Vigyan Kendra’s for Fishery Sector 
and suggested that there should be dedicated KVKs catering to the needs of fishery 
sector. 
  

46 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. Development and Modernisation of Fishing Harbours (FHs) and 
Fish Landing Centres (FLCs) – Accelerating the Pace. 
The Committee has been informed that there are a total of 1547 
notified Fish Landing Centres (FLCs) in the Country where fish is 
landed, and, Government of India since 1964 has selected 379 of 
these notified centres for development as Fishing Harbours and Fish 
Landing Centres under various Schemes. Further, selection is done 
based on strategic considerations such as number of fishing boats 
operating from the landing centre, number of fishermen involved, 
volume of fish landings and proximity to major fish markets and fish 
processing centres. 
The Committee, note that, since 1964, Government of India 
(GoI) has been implementing, both, Central Sector and Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes for the development of Fishing Harbours (FHs) 
and Fish Landing Centres (FLCs) for safe landing and berthing 
facilities of fishing vessels. From the period 2014 onwards, GoI has 
implemented Schemes such as Blue Revolution (BR), Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) and Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) for development and 
modernization of FHs and FLCs. However, the Committee, observe 
that during the period i.e. from 1964 to June 2025, i.e. in a span of six 
decades, a total of only 287 landing centres out of 379 selected 
centres have been constructed/commissioned which include 07 
major Fishing Harbours, 69 minor Fishing Harbours and 211 Fish 
Landing Centres. 

47 
 
The Committee are concerned that in a span of six decades 
only 379 landing centres out of 1547 notified landing centres have 
been selected for development into FHs and FLCs, which is a meagre 
24%. Further, only 75% (287) of the selected landing centres hav e 
been completed till June 2025. The Department has also stated that 
the landing and berthing facilities available in these 379 FHs and 
FLCs is for 1.48 lakh fishing vessels which is inadequate to 
accommodate the 2.38 lakh active fishing vessels currently 
operating in the country.   
Taking into account the huge potential of Fisheries Sector in 
the country and the deficit in the modern landing and berthing 
facilities, the Committee recommend that the Department should 
take concrete efforts and select more notified landing centres for 
modernization and development into Fishing Harbours and Fish 
Landing Centres and the Department may also consider to relax 
some of the strategic considerations while selecting these notified 
centres for development. The Committee understand that increased 
public funding in modernization of FHs and FLCs would create 
assets and infrastructure which would in turn effectuate the overall 
growth of Fisheries Sector and provide modern and hygienic 
amenities for the fishermen working in these harbours and landing 
centres. The Committee also recommend that the Department may 
take necessary measures and establish a Central Monitoring 
Committee to oversee and ensure that these projects are completed 
well within time to bridge the gap between the current fishing fleet 
of the country and the existing capacity of landing and berthing 
available at Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken by the 
Department in this regard. 

48 
 
2. Development of Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours. 
The Committee, note that, the development of Smart and 
Integrated Fishing Harbours is an innovative approach to plan, 
design and develop modern infrastructure in line with Blue Port 
Initiative of Food and Agriculture Organisation which involves 
economic, s ocial and environmental development of the Fishing 
Harbour Area. The Department during the FY 2024-25 has sanctioned 
three Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours namely Jakhau in 
Gujarat, Vanakbara in Diu and Karaikal in Puducherry with a total 
estimated co st of Rs. 369.8 crore. Further, the projects are being 
implemented by the respective States/UTs with a stipulated time 
period of completion in 18 months. 
The Committee, understand that rising awareness amongst the 
domestic consumers, and export requirements on food and safety, 
the Fishing Harbours in India need to be modernized so as to meet 
the parameters of hygiene, sanitation, bio-safety and cleanliness as 
accepted in International Markets. Thus, development of Smart and 
Integrated Fishing Harbours across the coastal regions becomes 
imperative, which in turn would improve operations, safety 
measures, environmental sustainability and socio -economic well -
being of the fishermen working there. However, the Committee, is 
concerned, that the three Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours 
which were sanctioned during the FY 2024 -25, namely, in Jakhau, 
Vanakbara and Karaikal respectively are still in pre -tendering stage 
and their work has not started. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should proactively investigate the 
issues which are causing delay in the work starting at Jakhau, 
Vanakbara and Karaikal and take concrete measures to address 
them. The Committee, further, recommend that the Department 

49 
 
should conduct a feasibility study, to assess, if Smart and Integrated 
Fishing Harbours can be established in all the coastal States/UTs 
which have substantial fishermen population and fishery resources. 
At least one Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbour in  each Coastal 
State/UT may be developed by the Department, Government of India 
for speedy development of the Fishery Sector in India.  
3. Strengthening of Central Institute of Coastal Engineering for 
Fishery (CICEF). 
The Committee note that Central Institute of Coastal 
Engineering for Fishery (CICEF) is entrusted with extending 
necessary technical assistance to the needy States/UTs in 
conducting necessary economic and technical studies to identify 
priority sites for de velopment of Fishing Harbours (FH) and Fish 
Landing Centres (FLC). Further, CICEF becomes even more 
important, given the country’s plan to develop Smart and Integrated 
Fishery Harbours.  
The Committee has been informed that, the Techno-Economic 
Feasibility Report (TEFR) prepared by CICEF are incomplete for want 
of physical/mathematical model studies, Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
studies whic h are pre -requisites for project funding. However, at 
present Environmental and Mathematical Model Studies aspects are 
not part of CICEF mandate and the institute needs to outsource 
these studies for which the Department is envisioning to provide 
necessary funds from its annual budget. 
Given the importance of physical/mathematical model studies 
and EIA/EMP studies, the Committee recommend that CICEF should 

50 
 
recruit experts who can deal with environmental and mathematical 
model studies to enable complete project reports. Further, the staff 
strength of CICEF should be reviewed and adequate measures 
should be taken to fill the vacancies in the institute. The Com mittee 
also recommend that CICEF staff should be given adequate 
international exposure through study tours and overseas learning 
programmes to enhance their skills and output. Accordingly, the 
budget of the Institute may be increased to meet such requirements.  
4. Export Inspection Council of India (EIC). 
The Committee has been informed that approval of Export 
Inspection Council of India (EIC) is mandatory for only those Fishing 
Harbours (FH) and Fish Landing Centres (FLC), which handle fish 
and fishery products, intended for export in accordance with the 
Government of India Notification S.O.730(E) dated 21st August, 1995 
and its subsequent amendments. Harbours which handle exports 
must maintain certain standards and guidelines as mandated by EIC, 
such as compliance with Hazard Analysis Critical Control Poin t 
(HACCP) principles, European Union (EU) hygiene regulations and 
traceability norms. Furthermore, all such facilities have to adhere to 
the standards laid down in Appendix D and E of the Executive 
Instructions for Primary Production of Fish and Fishery Pr oducts – 
January 2016, which outline the structural and operational hygiene 
requirements for harbor and landing centres. Thus , the quality and 
hygiene requirements of importing countries are kept in mind to 
ensure that the country’s seafood exports remain compliant and 
competitive. 
The Department has also stated that proposals for upgradation, 
modernisaton or establishment of new Fishing Harbours (FH) and 

51 
 
Fish Landing Centres (FLC) are formulated keeping in mind, the 
standards and guidelines laid down by the EIC as well as the 
requirements of major importing countries. 
The Committee note that facilities that solely cater to domestic 
or local consumption do not require any mandatory approval from 
EIC, and therefore, not bound by their quality and hygiene standards 
to operate. The Committee, strongly feel that it is high t ime, that we 
as a country, should treat our domestic consumers at par with 
international consumers, when it comes to providing quality and 
hygienic fish and fishery products and maintain the highest 
structural and operational hygiene in conformity with int ernational 
standards. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
guidelines and quality standards of Export Inspection Council of 
India (EIC) should be applied to Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing 
Centres catering to domestic consumers as well and necess ary 
infrastructure modernization and development of FH and FLC should 
be done on priority basis. This would ensure food safety, public 
health, contain contamination, traceability and sanitary hygiene 
throughout the supply chain and maintain uniformity in q uality 
standards both in domestic as well as international markets. The 
Committee would like to be further apprised on the matter. 
5. Co-operative Management Structure for Fishing Harbours/Fish 
Landing Centres in the Country. 
The Committee observe that effective management of Fishing 
Harbours is an important aspect in addition to development and 
modernization of harbours. However, many Fishing Harbours and 
Fish Landing Centres operating in the country do not have proper 
management structures and are run with meager resources lacking 

52 
 
basic health, hygiene and sanitary amenities. The Committee has 
been informed that the management of Fishing Harbour and Fish 
Landing Centres is generally done by respective State/UTs as per 
their guidelines, however, Department of Fisheries, Government of  
India while approving the projects stipulates that concerned 
State/UT Government will be responsible for management, 
maintenance and operation of the Fishing Harbour in a professional 
and financially self-sustainable manner.  
The Committee has also been informed that Marine Product 
Development Authority (MPEDA) under Government of India along 
with Department of Fisheries of States/UTs is working towards 
improving harbour management practices through its society 
MPEDA- NETFISH. MPEDA has been promoting the Munambam 
(Kerala) Model of Fishing Harbour Management Society (MFHMS) as 
an effective model for management of fishing harbours to ensure 
efficient and participatory governance which includes 
representation form key stakeholders  such as fishers, harbour 
workers, officials from the State Fisheries and Port Departments, 
MPEDA and the District Collector serving as its Chairman. The model 
ensures participatory decision making and efficient day to day 
management of harbours thereby pr omoting good handling 
practices for fish and ice, hygiene and sanitation, and enforce a code 
of conduct within the harbour. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that co -operative 
management societies with active participation from the government 
agencies and stakeholders such as fishers, harbour workers, boat 
owners and women/public representatives should be ideal for 
running Fi shing Harbors and Fish Landing Centres and thus the 
Department should make efforts and pursue State/UT Governments 

53 
 
to either implement the “Munamban Model” in all their Fishing 
Harbours/Fish Landing Centres, ‘or’ the Department may themselves 
develop a model co -operative management system, which may 
function as a guiding force to be implemented by all Coastal 
States/UTs voluntarily. The Department may also explore the 
possibility of linking the release of central funds to State/UTs (for 
development and modernization of Fishing Harbours/Fish Landing 
Centers) to the establishment of a co -operative harbour 
management system, so as to ensure and pursue States/UTs to set 
up Co-operative Management Systems with participatory decision 
making in their  respective Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing 
Centres.  
6. Release of Central Funds for Development and Modernisation 
of Fishing Harbours/Fish Landing Centres. 
The Committee have been informed that since inception of the 
Central Schemes, Government of India has provided funds to the 
tune of Rs 1860.62 crore for development of Fishing Harbours (FH), 
Fish Landing Centres (FLC) including modernization and up -
gradation of the existing ones. Further, approval have been accorded 
for 117 FH, FLC proposals of various States/UTs to the tune of Rs. 
9735 crore under Blue Revolution, Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY) and Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure 
Development Fund (FIDF).  However, funds have been released to 
the tune of Rs 1069 crore for development/ modernization of Fishing 
Harbours and Fish Landing Centres under Blue Revolution and 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and a loan to the 
tune of Rs1220 crore has been disbursed for development of Fishing 
Harbours and Fish Landing Centres by NABARD under Fisheries and 

54 
 
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) Scheme along 
with release of Rs. 60 crores towards interest subvention under FIDF. 
 The Committee are concern about the slow pace of release of 
Central Funds to infrastructure projects such as Modernization and 
Development of fishing harbours and were informed that funds are 
released based on the submission of utilization certificate (UC) of 
the previously released central share and submission of physical 
and financial progress reports by the State/UT. The Department also 
submitted that the main reasons for slow pace  of release of central 
funds are due to delay in completion of pre-tendering activities, slow 
progress of the projects, litigations and fund absorbing capacity of 
the project implementing agencies.  
The Commi ttee observe that timely release of Central Funds 
meant for Development and Modernisation of Fishing Harbours and 
Fish Landing Centres is very crucial if these projects are to see the 
light of the day. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department may coordinate with States/UTs and streamline the 
issues such as submission of Utilsation Certificates and completion 
of pre -tendering activities and if possible, set up a Central 
Monitoring Committee to even out any such obstacles in the release 
of Central Funds and ensure that the projects are completed well 
withing the time frame.   
7. Social Security Measures, Housing and Education Facilities for 
Fishermen working in Fishing Harbours/Fish Landing Centres. 
The Committee have been informed that under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) fishermen are provided safety kits 
to ensure their safety at sea, livelihood and nutritional support 
during fish ban period, accidental insurance cover in a cost sharing 

55 
 
mechanism with the States/UTs and insurance premium subvention 
for insurance of fishing vessels. The Committee has also been 
informed that fishermen can avail facilities offered by other 
ministries under several ongoing welfare schemes, such as, 
Ayushman B harat for medical insurance cover, Pradhan Mantri 
Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) and Pradhan Mantri Suraksha 
Bima Yojana (PMSBY) for life and accident insurance including 
hospitalization cover of Rs. 25000. 
The Committee, however, note that to address the specific 
housing, and education needs of the fishermen, there are no 
targeted schemes of the Department at present. Previously, the 
Department implemented the ‘Blue Revolution: Integrated 
Development and Management of Fisheries’ scheme, which included 
the ‘National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen a centrally sponsored 
initiative which was designed to provide financial assistance and 
support to fishermen in India. One of the aims of the scheme was to 
empower fishermen by facilitating the construction of houses.  
The Committee, recommend that the Department may take 
measures to assess the housing and educational requirements of 
fishermen in coastal areas and examine if in the current scheme i.e. 
PMMSY, specific components for housing and educational needs  
such as educational loans and scholarships for fishermen/fishermen 
families can be included. The Department may also explore the 
possibility if, in Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana (Gramin), some 
percentage in housing allotment selection can be reserved 
specifically for fishermen communities. The Committee would like to 
be apprised further in the matter. 
 

56 
 
8. Compensation During Lean Fishing Season to be Substantial. 
The Committee have been informed that under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), Government of India provides 
livelihood and nutritional support for socio -economically backward 
active traditional fishermen families during the fishing ban/lean 
period for three months. Under the scheme financial assistance of 
Rs.3000 per annum is provided to each enrolled beneficiary and the 
enrolled beneficiary’s contribution is Rs 1500 annually. Thus , an 
amount of Rs 4500 is disbursed to each enrolled beneficiary by the 
respective State/UT annually. The Committee note that during the 
last five years i.e. from 2020 -21 to 2024 -25, only 5.95 lakh fishers 
were provided livelihood and nutritional support pe r annum with a 
project outlay of Rs. 1384.80 cores. 
According to the data of the Department of Fisheries, there are 
about 2.8 crore fishermen in all the Coastal States and Union 
Territories of the country. The Committee are concerned that in the 
last five years i.e. 2020 onwards the Department has disbursed 
livelihood and nutritional support to only 5.95 lakh fishermen 
annually which is a meager 2.1% of the fishermen population. The 
Department was unable to distribute financial assistance to all the 
fishermen even in a span of five years is very disheartenin g and a 
matter of concern. The Committee also do not accept the argument 
that most of the fishermen are not registered and hence unable to 
take benefit of the said scheme of the Department. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Department 
should take immediate measures to address the dismally low 
performance of the scheme meant to provide livelihood and 
nutritional support to fishermen during the fish ban period. The 

57 
 
Committee also recommend that considering the current economic 
parameters and inflation, the Department should make efforts to 
increase the financial assistance provided during the fish ban period 
to at least ten thousand rupees per fishermen annually with out any 
annual contribution from the fishermen.  
 
9. Safeguarding the Interests of Small and Traditional Fishermen 
against High Interest Loans from Private Lenders. 
The Committee are concern about the plight of small and 
traditional fishermen who bear the brunt of paying exorbitant 
interest rates on the loans taken by them from private lenders to 
carry out fishing activities. The Department has informed the 
Committee that Kisan Credit Card (KCC) facility, that has been 
extended to 4.78 lakh fishers/fish farmers provides them with 
working capital and short -term loans at low interest rates. Further 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) 
scheme o ffers long -term low interest loans to individuals, 
cooperatives and Self -Help Groups. The Committee has also been 
informed that the sub scheme under PMMSY, viz Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah -Yojana (PM -MKSSY) promotes 
formalization of fisheries sector and also aims at registration on 40 
lakh stakeholders on National Fisheries Digital Platform (NFDP) 
which will give them access to Institutional credit support. 
 The Committee, observe that there are about 2.8 crore fishers and 
fish farmers engaged in fisheries sector in the country, however only 
4.64 lakh fishers/fish farmers have been provided with KCC which is 
a meagre 1.6%. Further, under PM -MKSSY, 25.48 lakh stakeholders 
are being registered on NFDP. 

58 
 
The Committee are concerned about the low performance of the 
KCC scheme and understand that formalization of Fisheries Sector 
is very important to ensure targeted implementation of the Schemes 
of the Department so that the intended benefits of the Schemes are 
reaped by the Fishermen well withing time. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department may take concrete 
measures to expand the reach of KCC to fishermen and ensure that 
more and more fishers/fish farmers are registered to promote 
formalization of fisheries sector, so that they have ready access to 
the institutional credit provided under various schemes and thus get 
protected against private lenders and dependence on informal 
borrowing methods having exorbitant interest rates. 
 
10. Protecting the Traditional Fishing Systems and Securing the 
Livelihoods of Traditional/Artisanal Fishermen. 
The Committee note that the Traditional Fishing Systems which 
include traditional Fish Landing sites and small -scale fish vending 
zones exists in various coastal villages across coastal regions of the 
country and are being used by Traditional/Artisanal Fishermen since 
decades for their livelihood needs. The Committee observe that 
these systems are facing existential threats, and the coastal land 
earmarked for them to carry out fishing activities is being reduced 
due to various issues such as climate change,  coastal erosion, 
mechanized fishing activities, pollution and construction of coastal 
resorts etc. 
 The Committee were concern about the plight of these 
Traditional Fishing System across coastal regions and the well -
being of the fishermen working in them. The Committee have been 

59 
 
informed by the Department that all these issues come under the 
ambit of either the Marine Fishing Regulation Acts (MFRA) of the 
concerned States/UTs and their State Policies or the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC). 
 The Committee, understand that, even though these issues 
come under the ambit of State/UTs or other Ministries, the 
Department of Fisheries, Government of India cannot ignore their 
role in protecting and securing the rights of Traditional/ Artisanal 
Fishermen working in these Traditional Fishing Systems. Climate 
change and its affects directly affect the fishermen population of the 
country and corrective measures need to be taken to mitigate the 
effects of climate change and coastal erosion. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department may undertake a study, 
and assess, the effects of climate change and coastal erosion on the 
reduction in land meant for Traditional Fishing Systems where 
traditional fishing activities are carried out since decades by 
traditional/artisanal fishermen for their livelihood and survival 
needs. 
 
11. Extending Benefits Given to Agriculturists to Fishers/ 
Fishermen. 
The Committee feel that the benefits given to Agriculturists 
under the Pradhan Mantri Kisaan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) and the 
facility of Free of cost Electricity, may also be extended to the fishers 
and fish farmers of the country, given that, fisheries is  an allied 
activity of agriculture and such benefits would no doubt help them 
swim over the tide of economic hardships and thereby development 
of the Fisheries Sector in general. 

60 
 
The Department has informed the Committee, that under Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) component of income 
support, namely, Livelihood and Nutritional support for socio -
economically backward active traditional fisher’s families, during 
fish ban period, an amount of Rs. 4500 is provided annually. 
The Committee understand that electricity forms a major input for 
a fish farm and is necessary for running water pumps, aeration units 
etc. in addition to filtration drums and ionizers in case of 
Recirculatory Aquaculture Systems (RAS). The Department has also 
informed the Committee, that providing electricity free of cost for 
fisheries activities will help in reducing the cost of p roduction and 
enhance the income of the fish farmers improving their socio -
economic condition. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department may explore the possibility of providing free electricity 
to fishers/fish farmers and pursue with States/UTs to extend such a 
benefit to fishers either by making a provision in their Central 
Scheme components or incentivizing States/UTs to provide the 
same. The Committee would like to be apprised further on the matter. 
 
12. Fishery Expert in Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). 
The Committee have been informed that PMMSY lays inter-alia 
special focus on training, skill development, skill upgradation and 
capacity building through trainings, awareness programmes and 
exposure visits to various stakeholders in the fishery sector valu e 
chain for various fishing technology, aquaculture and post-harvest 
related activities. Further, the training, awareness, exposure and 
capacity building programmes are carried out through the National 
Fisheries Development Board (NFDB), ICAR institutes, K rishi 

61 
 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), other organizations and State/UT Fisheries 
Departments.   
The Committee observe that the scope and range of Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras covers a wider area and a total of 736 KVSs have been 
established by Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) in the 
country which act as a bridge between research institutions a nd 
farmers, disseminating improved technologies and providing 
training to enhance agricultural practices. However, with regard to 
fisheries, the Department has stated that some of the KVKs provide 
expert advice on fisheries while the rest do not have fishery expert. 
The Committee, feel that, Kisan Vigyan Kendras can play an 
important role for the disseminating of information with respect to 
various fishing technology, aquaculture, post -harvest related 
activities and the research done by fishery institutes and 
universities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department may take necessary measures and pursue with ICAR, so 
as to ensure that fishery experts are appointed/deputed in the KVKs, 
especially in the coastal areas or areas where fishing activities are 
substantial.  
 
13. Deep Sea Fishing- Acquisition of Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels to 
Harness the Potential of the Country’s Exclusive Economic 
Zone (EEZ) 
The Committee note that India has an expansive Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) covering an area of 22 lakh square kilometres, 
rich in marine living resources, which remain largely unexplored and 
underutilized for fishing activities. The Committee have been 

62 
 
informed that the potential yield of Fisheries within EEZ (tons per 
annum) is 5.31 million tons including Deep -Sea and Oceanic 
resources of 2.31 lakh tons. However, the current fleet of Deep -Sea 
Fishing Vessels available in the country are not sufficient to harness 
the Deep-Sea Resources of the Country.  
The Committee have been informed that  under the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) on Blue Revolution, acquisition of 918 
Deep-Sea fishing vessels at unit cost of Rs.80 lakhs was approved 
with a total cost of Rs. 734.40 crore. Further, under the Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) the unit cost was 
increased to Rs.120 lakh with subsidy amount of Rs.48 lakh for 
general and Rs.72 lakh for SC/ST/Women, and, so far, 470 Deep Sea 
fishing vessels had been approved under the PMMSY at a total cost 
of Rs. 56. 40 crore. The Committee, however, note that the current 
fleet of Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels in the country is only 129 vessels.  
In the Union Budget 2025 -26 of the Government of India has 
announced that the Government will bring in an enabling framework 
for sustainable harnessing of fisheries from Indian Exclusive 
Economic Zone and High Seas with special focus on the Andaman & 
Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands.  
The Committee observe that under the Blue Revolution 
Scheme and PMMSY, a total of 1338 Deep -Sea fishing vessels have 
been approved, however, the Deep-Sea fishing fleet of the country is 
only 129 vessels which is inadequate to harness the potential of 
India’s EEZ. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department may take pro -active steps to acquire/increase the fleet 
of Deep Sea Vessels so that the true potential of Deep-Sea resources 
in India’s EEZ can be harnessed and the gap between the existing 

63 
 
and required fleet of Deep - Sea fishing vessels can be bridged. 
Further, the Fishing Harbours may also be modernised to 
accommodate such fishing vessels. 
 
 
New Delhi CHAIRPERSON 
18 August, 2025 Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
  

64 
 
Annexure-I                 
List of Fishing Harbours / Fish Landing Centres handling the fish and fishery  
products intended for export approved by EIC (Reply in reference to Q11 (a)) 
S.no. Name of the 
Fishing/Fish 
Landing Centre. 
S.no. Name of the 
Fishing/Fish 
Landing 
Centre. 
S.no. Name of the 
Fishing/Fish 
Landing Centre 
S.no Name of the 
Fishing/Fish 
Landing 
Centre. 
1 Adimalathurs 28 Honnawara 53 Mopla Bay 78 Sasoon Dock 
2 AlibagKoliwada 29 Idintha Karai 54 Munambam 79 Satpati 
3 Arnala 30 Jaigad 55 Munnakkadavu 80 Soula 
4 Ambalapuzha 31 Jakhau 56 Muthalapozhy 81 Sultanpur 
5 Arthungal 32 Kakinada 57 Muttom JEPPIER 82 Tadri 
6 Azheekal 33 Kanyakumari 58 Nagapattinam 83 Tharuvaikulam 
7 Beyore 34 Karwar 59 Nate 84 Thengapattanam 
8 Baindur 35 Kaupu 60 Navunda 85 Thoothur 
9 Balarmgadi 36 Kayamkulam 61 Neendakara 86 Thppumpady 
10 Belekeri 37 Kochi 62 Nizampatnam 87 Thottappaly 
11 Bhatkal 38 Kodiyakarai 63 Okha 88 Tuticorin 
12 Chennai 39 Kolachel 64 Onni Bhatti Dabhol 89 Uttan 
13 Cheruvathur 40 Kootapuli 65 Pampan 90 Vallavilai 
14 Chettuva 41 Kota 66 Pradeep 91 Vanakbara 
15 Chilka Lake 42 Kottaipattinam 67 Pazhayar 92 Vasai 
16 ChinnaMuttam 43 Koyilandi 68  Petuaghat Deshpran 93 Vellapatti 
17 Colachel 44 Kumta 69 Ponnani 94 Vengurla 
18 Cuddalore 45 Kurumpanai 70 Porbandar 95 Veraval 
19 Devgad 46 Machilipatnam 71 Pune 96 Versova 
20 Digha Sankarpur 47 Malim Goa 72 Punnapra 97 Vishakapatnam 
21 DighaSankarpur 48 Malpe 73 Puthiyappa 98 Vizhizham 
22 Diu 49 Malvan 74 Rajpara 99 Vypin 
25 Hangarakatta 50 Mandabam 75 Rameshwaram   
26 Harne 51 Mangalore 76 Ratnagiri   
27 Hejamadi 52 Mangrol 77 Sakthikulangara   
 
  

65 
 
Annexure-II 
Status of approved 117 Fishing Harbour (FH)/Fish Landing Centre (FLC)  under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY)/ Blue Revolution (BR)/Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF)  
S.  
No 
Name of 
the 
State 
Scheme FH/FLC Name of the project  
Cost  
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Status as on May, 2025 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) 
1 West 
Bengal 
PMMSY FH 1. Modernisation and upgradation 
of Petuaghat Fishing Harbour 
43.17 Physical Progress of about 
67% is achieved and Work 
is in progress. 
PMMSY FH 2. Modernisation and upgradation 
of Shankarpur Fishing Harbour 
44.70 Physical Progress of about 
62% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 3. Modernisation and upgradation 
of Frasergunj Fishing Harbour 
7.05 Physical Progress of about 
82% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 4. Modernisation and upgradation 
of Kakdwip Fishing Harbour 
14.50 Physical Progress of about 
77% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
2 Odisha PMMSY FH 1. Modernization of Paradip 
Fishing Harbour 
108.91 Physical Progress of about 
49% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 2.  Development of Stage-II 
Fishing Harbour at Nuagarh 
(Astranga) 
179.90 The project cost is revised 
by State Government and 
project is under pre-
tendering stage. 
BR FH 3. Construction of Chandipur 
Fishing Harbour 
49.94 Physical Progress of about 
65% is achieved and Work 
is in progress. 
FIDF FLC 
4. Establishment of Fish Landing 
centre at Sorana in Khordha 
9.29 Physical Progress of about 
50% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
FIDF FLC 5. Establishment of Fish Landing 
centre at Kalupahaghat in Khorda 
7.56 Physical Progress of about 
50% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
FIDF FLC 6. Establishment of Fish Landing 
centre at at Kasia in Badruk 
7.85 Physical Progress of about 
50% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
3 Andhra 
Pradesh 
PMMSY FH 1.  Modernization of 
Visakhapatnam Fishing Harbour 
178.51 Physical Progress of about 
29.6% is achieved and 
Work is in progress 
PMMSY FH 2. Development of Pudimadaka 
Fishing Harbour 
387.00 State Government of 
Andhra Pradesh is 
preparing revised proposal 
based on low cost model of 
fishing harbour 
PMMSY FH 3. Development of 
Budugatlapalem Fishing Harbour 
386.20 State Government of 
Andhra Pradesh is 
preparing revised proposal 
based on low cost model of 
fishing harbour  
PMMSY FH 4. Development of Kothapatnam 
Fishing Harbour 
364.00 State Government of 
Andhra Pradesh is 
preparing revised proposal 
based on low cost model of 
fishing harbour. 
PMMSY FLC 5. Development of  Bheemili Fish 
Landing Centre 
24.86 Work is under tendering 
stage. 
PMMSY FLC 6. Development of Chintapalli 
Fish Landing Centre 
23.74 Work is under tendering 
stage. 
PMMSY FLC 7. Development of Rajayyapeta 
Fish Landing Centre 
24.77 Work is under tendering 
stage. 
PMMSY FLC 8. Development of Rayadaruvu 
Fish Landing Centre 
23.90 Work is under tendering 
stage. 

66 
 
S.  
No 
Name of 
the 
State 
Scheme FH/FLC Name of the project  
Cost  
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Status as on May, 2025 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) 
PMMSY FLC 9. Development of Dondavaka 
Fish Landing Centre 
23.90 Work is under tendering 
stage. 
PMMSY FLC 10. Development of Uppalanka 
Fish Landing Centre 
5.74 Work is under tendering 
stage. 
BR FLC 11. Biyyaputhippa FLC 13.58 Previously, GoAP is 
planning to develop it as 
Fishing Harbour. Now, it is 
informed that the State will 
take up as FLC.. The work 
is under pre -tendering 
stage. 
BR FH 12. Construction of Juvvaladinne 
FH  
288.8 Work Completed. 
FIDF FH 13. Construction of Fishing 
harbour at Uppada in East 
Godavari 
289.4 59% Physical Progress of 
Work is achieved. 
FIDF FH 14. Construction of Fishing 
harbour at Vodarevu in Prakasham 
409.22 Work is under pre -
tendering stage, 
FIDF FH 15. Construction of Fishing 
harbour at Machilipattinam in 
Krishna 
252 56% Physical Progress of 
Work is achieved. 
FIDF FH 16. Construction of Fishing 
harbour at Nizampattinam in 
Guntur 
340.78 62% Physical Progress of 
Work is achieved. 
4 Tamil 
Nadu 
PMMSY FH 1. Modernization of Chennai 
Fishing Harbour 
97.95 Physical Progress of about 
55% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 2. Up -gradation of Pazhayar 
Fishing Harbour 
26.26 Physical Progress of about 
58% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 3. Maintenance Dredging of 
Colachel Fishing Harbour 
4.94 Physical Progress of about 
47% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FLC 4. Development of Nettukuppam 
Fish Landing Centre 
15.70 Physical Progress of about 
8% is achieved and Work is 
in progress 
PMMSY FLC 5. Development of Thazankuppam 
Fish Landing Centre 
3.92 Physical Progress of about 
8% is achieved and Work is 
in progress 
PMMSY FLC 6. Development of 
Arangankuppam Fish Landing 
Centre 
3.40 Physical Progress of about 
17% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FLC 7. Development of 
Goonankuppam Fish Landing 
Centre 
3.40 Physical Progress of about 
16% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
BR FH 8. Constructio of Mookaiyur FH 113.9 Work completed 
BR FLC 9. Construction of Kunthukal FLC 74 Work completed 
FIDF FH 10. Construction of Fishing 
harbour at Tharangampadi in 
Nagapattinam  
120 Work completed 
FIDF FH 11. Construction of Fishing 
harbour at ThiruvottriyurKuppam 
in Tiruvallur District 
200 99% Physical Progress 
achieved and work in 
progress  
FIDF FH 12. Development of existing 
Fishing Harbour at Mudhunagar 
in Cuddalore 
100 Work completed 
FIDF FH 13. Development of Fishing 
Harbour at Arcottuthurai in 
Nagapattinam District 
150 Physical Progress of 91% 
achieved. 

67 
 
S.  
No 
Name of 
the 
State 
Scheme FH/FLC Name of the project  
Cost  
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Status as on May, 2025 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) 
FIDF FH 14. Construction of Fishing 
harbour at Azhagankuppam in 
Villupuram District 
235 work held up due to court 
case.  
FIDF FH 15. Development of Fishing 
Harbour at Vellapallam in 
Nagapattinam District 
100 Physical Progress of 79% 
achieved. 
FIDF FH 16. Expansion and Modernization 
of Thengapattinam Fishing 
Harbour 
253 Physical Progress of 66% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 17. Extension of T-Jetty at 
Tharuvaikulam in Thoothukudi 
District 
10 Work completed 
FIDF FLC 18. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Mandapam (North) in 
Ramanathapuram District. 
10 Work completed 
FIDF FLC 19. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Mandapam (South) at in 
Ramanathapuram District. 
10 Work completed 
FIDF FLC 20. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Kottaipattinam, 
Pudukottai 
3.05 Work completed 
FIDF FLC 21. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Vadakkamapattinam, 
Pudukottai 
1.55 Work completed 
FIDF FLC 22. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Puthukudi 
1.4 Work completed 
FIDF FLC 23. Providing additional facilities 
to Fish Landing Centre at 
Portonovo-Annankovil at 
Cuddalore District 
10 Physical Progress of 98% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 24. Providing additional 
Infrastructure facilities to Fish 
Landing Centre at Mudasalodai 
Village at Cuddalore District 
9.5 Physical Progress of 98% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 25. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Chandrapadi Village in 
Nagapattinum District. 
10 Physical Progress of 96% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 26. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Vanagiri Village in 
Nagapattinum District. 
8 Work completed 
FIDF FLC 27. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre Keezhathottam in 
Thanjavur 
8 Work completed 
FIDF FLC 28. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Kellamundhal in 
Ramanathapuram District 
10 Work completed 

68 
 
S.  
No 
Name of 
the 
State 
Scheme FH/FLC Name of the project  
Cost  
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Status as on May, 2025 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) 
FIDF FLC 29. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Aruvikarai Village in 
Tirunelveli District 
10 Work completed 
FIDF FLC 30. Establishment of fish landing 
centre at Sothikuppam and 
Rasapettai village in  Cuddalore 
District 
8.5 Physical Progress of 77% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 31. Establishment of Fish 
Landing Centre at 
Mudhaliyarkuppam and 
Chettynagar Villages in 
Villupuram District 
7 Physical Progress of 95% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 32. Establishment of Fish landing 
centre at Chithiraipettai and 
Nanjalingampettai villages in 
Cuddalore District 
7.5 Physical Progress of 91% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 33. Establishment of Fish 
Landing Centre at Pudhukuppam 
and Anichankuppam Villages in 
Villupuram District 
7 Physical Progress of 77% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 34. Establishment of fish landing 
centre at Tsunami Nagar and 
Akkaraigori village in Cuddalore 
District 
4.5 Physical Progress of 87% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 35. Establishment of fish landing 
centre at Sonankuppam village in 
Cuddalore District 
5.5 Physical Progress of 40% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 36. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Sattankuppam in 
Thiruvallur District. 
8 Physical Progress of 25% 
achieved. 
FIDF FLC 37. Construction of Fish Landing 
Centre at Sunnambukulamin 
Thiruvallur District. 
8 Physical Progress of 92% 
achieved. 
5 Puducherry PMMSY FH 1. Development of Fishing 
Harbour at Thengaithittu 
53.39 Physical Progress of about 
20% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 2. Development of Smart and 
Integrated Fishing Harbour at 
Karaikal, Puducherry  
119.94 Work is under tendering 
stage.  
PMMSY FLC 3. Development of Periakalpet 
Fish Landing Centre 
20.14 Work awarded to 
Contractor. 
PMMSY FLC 4. Development of Nallavadu Fish 
Landing Centre 
18.94 Physical Progress of about 
50% is achieved and Work 
is in progress. 
BR FH 5. Up -garadation of Puducherry 
FH 
15.63 Physical Progress of about 
90% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
6 Kerala PMMSY FH 1. Modernization of Cochin 
Fishing Harbour 
169.17 Physical Progress of about 
51% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 2. Expansion of Kasargod Fishing 
Harbour 
70.53 Physical Progress of about 
37% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 

69 
 
S.  
No 
Name of 
the 
State 
Scheme FH/FLC Name of the project  
Cost  
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Status as on May, 2025 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) 
PMMSY FH 3. Expansion of Muthalapozhy 
Fishing FH 
177.00 Work awarded to 
contractor and is in 
progress 
PMMSY FH 4. Modernisation & Upgradation 
of PonnaniFH 
18.73 Physical Progress of about 
57% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 5. Modernisation & Upgradation 
of Puthiyappa FH 
16.06 Physical Progress of about 
71% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 6. Modernisation & Upgradation 
of KoyilandyFH 
20.90 Physical Progress of about 
67% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 7. Maintenance dredging of 
existing KayakulamFH 
    5.53 Work is in tendering stage 
PMMSY FH 8. Maintenance dredging of 
existing ChettuvaFH 
    5.53 Work awarded to 
contractor and is in 
progress.  
PMMSY FH 9. Maintenance dredging of 
existingPonnaniFH 
    6.37 Physical Progress of about 
65% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FH 10. Maintenance dredging of 
existing Beypore FH 
    5.94 Physical Progress of about 
20% is achieved and Work 
is in progress  
PMMSY FH 11. Maintenance dredging of 
existing Puthiyappa FH 
5.64 Work completed 
PMMSY FH 12. Maintenance dredging of 
existing Koyilandy FH 
5.88 Work Completed 
FIDF FH 13. Development of Arthungal 
Fishing Harbor(Balancework) -
Kerala 
161 Work of part component 
under progress and part 
component under pre -
tendering stage 
7   Maharashtra PMMSY FH 1.  Development of Mallet Bunder 
Mazgaon 
96.60 Physical Progress of about 
52% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
PMMSY FLC 2. Development of Shiroda Fish 
Ladning Centre 
15.24 Work is in pre -tendering 
stage 
PMMSY FLC 3. Development of Dandi 
Makrebag FLC 
4.52 Work is in pre -tendering 
stage 
PMMSY FLC 4. Development of Taramumbri 
FLC 
7.76 Physical Progress of about 
80% is achieved and Work 
is in progress  
PMMSY FLC 5. Development of Dabhol FLC 9.39 Physical Progress of about 
20% is achieved and Work 
is in progress  
PMMSY FLC 6. Development of Korlai FLC 7.65 Work is in progress  
PMMSY FLC 7. Development of Palshet FLC 8.34 Physical Progress of about 
30% is achieved and Work 
is in progress  
PMMSY FLC 8. Development of Revdanda FLC 45.96 Work is in pre -tendering 
stage 
PMMSY FLC 9. Development of Asgoli FLC 8.83 Work is in pre -tendering 
stage 
PMMSY FLC 10. Development of Budhal FLC 6.57 Work is in pre -tendering 
stage 
BR FH 11. Modernisation of Sassoon 
Dock FH 
92.52 Physical Progress of about 
45% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
BR FH 12. Construction of Karanja FH 149.80 Work Completed. 
BR FH 13. Construction of Anandwadi 
FH 
88.44 Physical Progress of about 
65% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
FIDF FH 14. Construction of Fisheries 
Harbour at Jeevana, Taluka 
Shrivardhan, District Raigad 
185.48 Physical Progress of about 
50% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 

70 
 
S.  
No 
Name of 
the 
State 
Scheme FH/FLC Name of the project  
Cost  
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Status as on May, 2025 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) 
FIDF FH 15. Construction of Fisheries 
Harbour at Bharadkhol, Near 
Shrivardham, District Raigad 
119.64 Work is under pre -
tendering stage. 
FIDF FH 16. Construction of Fisheries 
Harbour at Harnai Taluka Dapoli 
District Ratnagiri 
221.34 Physical Progress of about 
20% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
FIDF FH 17. Construction of Fisheries 
Harbour at Sakhari Nate Taluka 
Rajapur District Ratnagiri 
146.9 Physical Progress of about 
20% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
FIDF FH 18. Development of Fishing 
Harbour at Satpati Near Palghar, 
Palghar District 
267.12 Work is under pre -
tendering stage 
8 Karnataka PMMSY FH 1. Modernisation & upgradation 
of Mangalore FH 
37.47 Work is in tendering stage 
PMMSY FH 2. Modernisation of Malpe FH 12.52 Work is in tendering stage 
PMMSY FH 3. Modernisation of Gangoli FH 22.18 Work is in tendering stage 
PMMSY FH 4.Maintenance dredging at 
Amadalli FH 
5.61 Work is in tendering stage 
PMMSY FH 5. Dredging work at Tadari FH 2.65 Work is in tendering stage 
PMMSY FLC 6.Maintenance dredging at 
Harwada & Belekeri FLC 
4.14 Work is in tendering stage  
BR FH 7. Construction of Kulai Fishing 
Harbour 
196.51 Physical Progress of about 
12% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
BR FH 8. Construction of Hejmadi Kodi 
Fishing Harbour 
138.6 Physical Progress of about 
67% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
BR FLC 9. Taining walls at Alvekodi and 
Tenginagundi FLC 
86.08 Work Completed. 
9 Assam  PMMSY FLC 1. Development of Chunari FLC 19.91 Work is in progress. 
10 Gujarat PMMSY FH 1. Development of Smart and 
Integrated Fishing Harbour at 
Jakhau, Kutch 
121.00 Work is in tendering stage 
BR FH 2.Development of 3rd Stage of 
Mangarol FH 
155.83 
 
Work completed. 
FIDF FH 3.Development of Fishery 
Harbour at Navabandar 
295.85 Physical Progress of about 
92% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
FIDF FH 4.Development of Fishery 
harbour at Madhwad 
175.07 Physical Progress of about 
17% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
FIDF FH 5.Development of Fishery 
Harbour at Veraval – Phase 2 
260 Physical Progress of about 
54% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
FIDF FH 6.Development of Fishery 
Harbour Porbandar –Phase 2 
392 Project is under pre-
tendering stage. 
FIDF FH 7. Development of Fishery 
Harbour at Sutrapada 
232 Physical Progress of about 
39% is achieved and Work 
is in progress 
11 U.T. of 
Dadra 
Nagar 
Haveli & 
Daman 
and Diu. 
PMMSY FH 1. Development of Smart and 
Integrated Fishing Harbour at 
Vanakbara, Diu 
128.86 Work is in tendering stage. 
 
 
  

71 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3 rd July, 2025, from 1100 hours to 1330 
hours in Committee Room ‘3’, Block -A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
5.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
6.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
7.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
8.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel  
9. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
10. Shri Dharambir Singh 
11. Shri Dushyant Singh 
12. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
13. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
 
                Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
15. Shri Madan Rathore 
16. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
17. Shri P. P. Suneer 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.          Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria - Deputy Secretary 

72 
 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
Sl No. Name Designation 
1 Ms. Neetu Kumari Prasad Joint Secretary (Marine Fisheries) 
2 Shri Sagar Mehra Joint Secretary (Inland Fisheries) 
3 Shri Ajay Srivastava Economic Advisor 
4 Shri N. Ravi Sankar Director (CICEF) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the 
sitting convened in connection with the examination of the Subject ‘Development and 
Modernization of Fishing Harbours’ pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries). Thereafter, the representatives of 
the Department of Fisheries were called in. The Chairperson welcomed the 
representatives to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them of the provisions of 
Directions 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding confidentiality 
of the proceedings.  
 
3. After the introduction by the witnesses, a power -point presentation was made 
by the representative(s) of the Department of Fisheries. The Presentation inter -alia 
covered the following points: 
a) Achievements of the Indian Fisheries Sector. 
b) Marine Fisheries Resources and its Governance. 
c) Investment in Fisheries Sector. 
d) Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). 
e) Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah-Yojana (PMMKSSY). 
f) Central Schemes for Development of Fishing Harbours and Fish 
Landing Centres. 
g) Innovative Concepts of Fishing Harbours. 
h) Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours. 

73 
 
i) Social Security and Safety Net for Fishermen. 
j) Women led Development. 
k) Kisan Credit Card for Fishermen. 
l) Blue Ports Initiative of FAO. 
m) Central Institute of Coastal Engineering for Fishery (CICEF), Bangalore. 
4.  The Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised several issues/points 
as briefly mentioned below and sought clarifications from the Department. The points 
raised included, inter-alia: 
a) Harnessing the Deep -Sea Resources of the Country in the Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) beyond 12 Nautical Miles. 
b) Funding of fisheries projects through Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
model or through Bidding. 
c) Development of Inland waterways through dredging and promotion of 
Green Energy and Cage Fishing in Fisheries. 
d) Housing schemes for fishermen. 
e) Monitoring of fisheries projects implemented by States/UTs and fixing of 
responsibility for delay in execution of projects. 
f) Welfare schemes for Traditional Fishermen residing besides Rivers and 
Dams. 
g) Dissemination of information amongst the fishermen population 
regarding Schemes of the Department meant for the betterment. 
h) Identification of fishermen and increasing the corpus of accidental 
insurance given to fishermen. 
i) To develop a mechanism for monitoring of the spending of funds 
allocated to States by the Central Government and establishing a 
Coordination Committee to oversee time bound completion of projects 
by States/UTs. 
j) Issues related to Amrut Sarovars and their drying and measures to be 
taken in this direction. 
k)  To ensure that benefits of increasing exports of fishery products reach 
the actual fish farmers/fishers instead of middlemen. 
l) To address the issues of environmental pollution in fisheries sector. 

74 
 
m) Issues regarding tendering of Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours 
should be addressed and a Central Monitoring Committee should be 
constituted to oversee the same. 
n) Setting up of Climate Resilient Coastal Villages in the country to be fast 
tracked. 
o) Fast tracking the disbursement of compensation to fishers affected by 
cyclone Tauktae. 
p) To address the livelihood and compensation issues of families of 
fishermen who are lodged in foreign jails due to straying into international 
waters during fishing. 
q) Banning of illegal fishing activities such as LED fishing, Bull Trawling and 
encroachment of fishing waters by mafia.  
r) Cooperative Management Bodies to manage Fishing Harbours/Fish 
Landing Centres should have representation from all stakeholders along 
with public representative. 
s) Addressing the issues of Zhinga farming in Gujarat and its promotion. 
t) Setting up of fishery Universities/Colleges. 
u) Development of Brood Banks in the Country particularly in the State of 
Bihar and devising a scheme for rejuvenating the water bodies. 
v) Exploring the possibility of giving enforcement/punishment powers to 
district fisheries officers to address the issues such as encroachment of 
water bodies, contamination etc. 
w) To increase the reach and disbursement of Kisan Credit Card (KCC). 
x) To explore the possibility to extending benefits to fishermen on the lines 
of PM Kisan Samman Nidhi. 
y) To explore the possibility of transferring ownership of land in the names 
of fishermen who have been living on it for generations. 
z) Enhancing of financial benefits extended to fishermen during the fish ban 
season. 
5. The representatives of the Department responded to most of the queries raised 
by the Members.  
6. The Chairperson, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable 
information with the Committee on the Subject and directed them to furnish the 

75 
 
requisite information in writing on the points/items, which were not readily available 
with them to the Secretariat by 10th July, 2025, positively. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 (A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept separately.) 
 
 
  

76 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 18 th August, 2025 from 1500 hours to 1530 
hours in Committee Room No. 3, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
   2. Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
   3. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
   5. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
   6. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
7. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
8. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
9. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
10. Shri Murasoli S. 
11. Shri Dharambir Singh 
   12. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
   13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
   14. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
   15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
    
Rajya Sabha 
 
   16. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
   17. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
   18. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
   19. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
   20. Shri Madan Rathore 
   21. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
   22. Shri P.P. Suneer 
    
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
  

77 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee and expressed condolences on passing away of Shri Srinivasulu Gunda, 
Joint Secretary attached to the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for 
consideration and adoption the following Reports: 
 
(i) *xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
(ii) Draft Report on the subject “Development and Modernization of 
Fishing Harbours ”, pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries); 
(iii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
(iv) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
(v) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
(vi) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
(vii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
(viii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any 
modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present 
the Report to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report 