 
          STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2024-25) 
                 
         
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
          
         
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
              
 
 
Initiatives taken in Food Processing Sector under  
'Make In India' Program 
         
        
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
  
 
         
               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025 /Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
21 

 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2024-25) 
                 
         
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
          
         
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
              
 
Initiatives taken in Food Processing Sector under  
'Make In India' Program 
         
 
 
 
            
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                       20.08.2025 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                     20.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2025 / SHRAVANA, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COA No. 520 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 

iii 
 
 
<CONTENT> 
 Page 
No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) (v) 
Introduction (vii) 
PART – I 
CHAPTER- I An Overview of the Food Processing Sector 1 
 • Food Processing Sector-Key Segments 1 
• Growth of the Food Processing Industry 3 
• Projected growth of the Sector 3 
 • Growth drivers and opportunities 3 
 • Contributions to employment generation and 
opportunities 
4 
 • Contribution to Exports 5 
 • Fish processing and value chain 7 
 • FPI in India Vs other Countries -Comparative 
status/position 
9 
CHAPTER- II Policy Support to Food Processing Industries (FPI) 10 
• Foreign Direct Investment 10 
• Priority Sector Lending (PSL) 12 
• Challenges faced by MSMEs in accessing credit under 
PSL 
14 
• Special Food Processing Fund 15 
• Ease of Doing Food Business 15 
• Impact of measures taken under Ease of doing Business 18 
• Make in India- Food Processing Sector 19 
CHAPTER- III Implementation of various Schemes 21 
• Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 21 
• PMKSY- Alignment of objectives with Make in India 22 
• PMKSY- Sanctions, disbursements, projects costs, 
grants release, etc. 
22 
• Status on implementation of the projects 23 
• Setting up of Food Testing Laboratories (FTLs)- Status 23 
• Human Resource Institution- Skill component 24 
• Agro Processing Clusters (APCs) 24 
• Post Harvest Losses 25 
• Data on Cold Storage and Post Harvest logistics 27 
• Impact of Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme 
27 
• Creation of farm to retail chain network 28 
• R&D activities 28 

iv 
 
• Storage Capacity 29 
• Sanctions and beneficiaries under PMKSY 29 
• Number of registered food processing Units 30 
• SAMPADA Portal 30 
CHAPTER – IV Prime Minister -Formalisation of Micro Food Processing 
Enterprises (PMFME) 
31 
• PMFME- One District One Product (ODOP) 31 
• Common Infrastructure component – Capital subsidy 33 
• Sanctions and disbursements to the eligible beneficiaries 
under PMFME 
33 
CHAPTER V Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food 
Processing Industries (PLISFPI- since 2021-22) 
35 
• Components of the Scheme 35 
• Investments under the Scheme 36 
• Challenges in implementing PLISMBP 37 
• Data on applications under PLISFPI 38 
• Awareness creation 39 
• Incentive disbursement 39 
• Branding and Marketing support 40 
• Monitoring the Implementation of the Scheme 40 
• Digital initiatives for smooth implementation of three 
schemes 
41 
PART – II  
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 42-69 
ANNEXURES  
Annexure-I Details of Shrimp projects approved under Operation Greens 
Scheme-Long Term Intervention 
70 
Annexure-II Credit outstanding under PSL from 2019 -20 to 2023 -24 
(year-wise and bank group-wise) 
71 
Annexure-III Status of SPF as on 31st March 2025 72 
Annexure-IV Details of Nature of Penalties Imposed for Adulteration of the 
Food Products 
75 
Annexure-V Setting up of Food Testing Laboratories (FTLs) – Status 77 
Annexure-VI State wise Cold storages under PMKSY as on 31.05.2025 80 
Annexure-VII State-wise and Component wise details of projects approved 
under PMFME Scheme (as on 31.05.2025) 
81 
APPENDIX  
I. Minutes of the 26th Sitting of the Committee (2024-25) held on 13.06.2025 83 
II. Minutes of the 35th Sitting of the Committee (2024-25) held on 18.08.2025 86 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
 Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide 
Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025.  

vi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
3. Shri Ashwaghosh B. Lokhande - Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Paromita Kumar  - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing  (2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit this Report on their behalf, present this Twenty First Report on  the Subject 
‘Initiatives Taken in Food Processing Sector Under ‘Make in India’ Program’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing had selected the Subject for examination during 2024 -25.  Briefing on 
the Subject by the representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
was held at their Sitting on 13th June, 2025.   
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 18.08.2025. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries for appearing before the Committee and 
furnishing requisite information in connection with the examination of the Subject. 
 
  
            
       
 
NEW DELHI;                          CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
18 August , 2025                                                             Chairperson, 
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Agriculture 
            Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 

1 
 
PART - I  
CHAPTER - I  
 
 An overview of the Food Processing Sector  
 
    The Food Processing Sector (from here onwards referred to as  ‘the sector’) in 
India holds immense significance due to its pivotal role in linking the agricultural 
economy with industry. By transforming raw farm produce into value -added 
products, it not only enhances farmers’ incomes but also reduces post -harvest 
losses, ensures food security, creates employment, and strengthens the rural 
economy. As India aspires to become a global manufacturi ng hub, the 
development of the sector is  central to achieving inclusive growth, boosting 
exports, and fulfilling the vision of doubling farmers' incomes.  By promoting 
innovation and technological advancements, this industry supports food security, 
nutrition, and rural development, thereby aligning with the broader goals of the 
‘Make in India’ initiative and the vision of transforming India into a global food 
manufacturing hub. 
 
Food Processing Sector - Key segments   
1.2 The major key segments within Indian Food Processing Industry with 
respective contributions and future prospects are given as under: 
 
➢ Fruits and Vegetables Processing:   The fruits and vegetables 
processing sector are a dynamic landscape driven by evolving consumer 
preferences and technological advancements. This Sector includes 
categories such as canned fruits and vegetables, frozen products, juices, 
purees, and dried fruits, reflecting a growing global demand for 
processed varieties, particularly tropical and exotic fruit products. 
 
➢ Dairy Processing Sector:  India is the largest producer of milk globally, 
with an annual production of approximately 239.3 million metric tonnes in 
2023-24. The dairy sector contributes 5% of the national economy and 
employs over 80 million farmers. The dairy products market in India 
ranks third in the Asia Pacific region and is forecasted to grow 
substantially driven largely by household demand. 
 
➢ Indian Snack Market:    The Indian snack industry has witnessed 
significant growth over the past decade, driven by changing consumer 
preferences, urbanization, and increased disposable incomes. This 
growth is supported by India's diverse agricultural base, which provides a 
natural advantage in the production of various snack items. The market 
encompasses a wide range of categories, including traditional namkeens 
such as bhujia and sev, extruded snacks made from corn and rice, 
potato chips and wafers availabl e in multiple flavors, bakery snacks like 
cookies and crackers, health -oriented snacks targeting health -conscious 

2 
 
consumers, and ready -to-eat (RTE) snacks that require minimal 
preparation. 
 
➢ Meat and Poultry:  India hosts the world's largest bovine population and 
ranks second in egg production. The meat and poultry sector are crucial 
for meeting nutritional security and establishing India as a dominant 
player in the global meat processing industry. In 2023 -24, meat 
production reached 10.25 million tonnes, with egg production at 138.38 
billion eggs. The sector includes categories such as processed meat 
products like cold cuts and sausages, ready -to-cook  
and frozen items, and specialty products like organic and fortified eggs. 
The top five meat -producing states are Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, 
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, and Telangana. 
 
➢ Beverages:   The Indian beverage market encompasses both alcoholic 
and non -alcoholic segments. The alcoholic beverages market is 
projected to grow, driven by urbanization and changing consumer 
preferences. This segment includes traditional spirits like whiskey and 
rum, as well as a growing market for wines and craft brews.  Key 
categories in this segment include soft drinks, juices, energy drinks, 
bottled water, and functional beverages, reflecting increasing health 
consciousness among consumers. 
 
➢ Pet Food, Animal Feed/Fodder, and Aquaculture Feed: India is the 
fourth-largest producer of feed globally, with a significant portion of the 
supply coming from domestic production. The market includes categories 
such as pet food, poultry feed, cattle feed, and aquaculture feed, 
highlighting the diverse needs of livestock and companion animals in the 
country. 
 
➢ Bakery Industry: India's bakery industry was valued at 
approximately USD 13.8 billion in 2024. Key categories within the bakery 
sector include bread, cakes, pastries, cookies, and specialty items like 
high-protein and gluten -free products, reflecting changing consumer 
preferences and dietary trends. 
 
➢ Nutraceuticals:  In 2023, India accounted for 9.22% of the global 
nutraceuticals market, with demand particularly strong among the aging 
population concerned about heart health and obesity. Manufacturers are 
investing in R&D to explore new ingredients and protect intellectual 
property, while the rise of the internet has enhanced consumer 
awareness of chronic diseases and preventive measures. Technological 
advancements, especially in artificial intelligence (AI), are expected to 
enable personalized solutions, further propelling market growth. As 
health consciousness continues to rise, the nutraceuticals segment is set 
to play a vital role in the Indian food processing industry. 
 

3 
 
Growth of the Food Processing Industry   
 
1.3  The Food Proce ssing Industry (from here onwards referred to as ‘FPI’) in 
India has grown at an Average Annual Growth R ate (AAGR) of 6.55%, which is 
higher than the overall manufacturing sector’s growth rate. The Gross Value 
Added (GVA) by the sector has increased from ₹1.30 lakh crore in 2013 -14 to 
₹2.24 lakh crore in 2023 -24, now constituting nearly 8% of the manufacturing 
sector’s GVA. This su stained growth underscores the S ector’s importance as a 
bridge between agriculture and industry.  
 
1.4  The data on the contribution of the sector to GVA both in absolute numbers 
and also as percentage of manufacturing, for three years 2021 -22 to 2023-24, as 
furnished by MoFPI, is as follows:  
 
                                                                                 ( in Rs Lakh Crore) 
GVA  2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Food Processing Sector 1.90 2.08 2.24 
Share in Manufacturing 
(%) 7.40 8.28 7.93 
           Source: National Accounts Division, Central Statistics Office, Ministry of  
                           Statistics and   Programme Implementation 
 
 
Projected growth of the sector  
 
1.5  With regard to the projections for the sector’s growth over the next five to 
ten years, the MoFPI, in a written reply, submitted inter alia as under:  
 
“Over the past nine years, the Food Processing Industries has 
demonstrated robust growth, recording an average annual growth rate of 
6.55%, which is higher than the overall manufacturing sector’s growth 
rate…. The highest growth rate was observed during 2018 -19 (22.28%). 
The FPI sector is expected to grow at an average growth rate of around 
6.5% during next five to six years and achieve a GVA of around 3.3 lakh 
crores in 2030.” 
 
Growth drivers and opportunities  
 
1.6  MoFPI submitted inter-alia that the following factors may propel the growth 
of FPI in the coming years:    emerging opportunities are being targeted: 
 
➢ Large Consumption Economy: Rising incomes and living standards 
drive demand for convenient and safe processed foods. Increasing 
demand for Processed Foods, changing lifestyles and food habits are 
driving demand and creating employment opportunities.  
 
➢ Diverse and Large Raw material base: India is the world's largest 
producer of milk, spices, and pulses, and second -largest producer of 

4 
 
fruits, vegetables, and rice. This provides a vast raw material base for 
food processing industries. This diverse raw material base can help 
develop innovative food products. Some key sectors with opportunities 
include Fruits and Vegetables, Dairy Processing, Food Grain 
Processing, Poultry Processing, and Packaged Foods. 
 
➢ Increasing Contribution to GDP: The sector aims to increase its 
contribution to GDP in coming years.  
 
➢ Reducing Food Wastage: The industry aims to reducing food wastage 
and increasing the utilization of by -products and waste generated 
during food processing. India's post-harvest losses are substantial, with 
an estimated ₹1.53 trillion (USD 18.5 billion) worth of food lost 
annually. To mitigate this, the government has initiated various 
measures. Key Areas for Improvement include improving/expanding 
the Storage Infrastructure, Supply Chain Efficiency, Transp ortation and 
Training farmers and other stakeholders in the supply chain. 
 
Contribution to employment generation and opportunities  
 
 1.7  In terms of employment,  the sector is one of the largest organized 
manufacturing employers in the country. The number of per sons engaged in the 
registered Food Processing S ector has risen from 17.73 lakh in 2014 -15 to 22.96 
lakh in 2022 -23. The unincorporated segment, as per the latest survey, provides 
employment to 46.80 lakh workers, which is 13.89% of total employment in the 
unregistered manufacturing sector. The sector with over 42,803 registered and 2.3 
million unregistered units generates around 7 million jobs. 
 
1.8   Employment Opportunities: A study by the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries (MoFPI) estimates a net expected requirement of 13.4 lakh skilled 
human resources in 11 sub -sectors of the food processing industry by 2030. Key 
areas include Bread and Bakery products, Dairy Products, Fruits & Vegetables 
Processing, Ready -to-Eat & Ready -to-Cook Products along with Quality Control 
and Assurance. 
 
 1.9   The data on the contribution of the sector to employment generation and 
both in absolute numbers and also as percentage of manufacturing, for three 
years 2021-22 to 2023-24, as furnished by MoFPI, is as follows:  
 
Employment in 
numbers 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Food Processing Sector 
(in reg. enterprises) * 20,36,874 20,68,048 22,96,654 
Share in Manufacturing 
(%) 13.18 12.50 12.91 
Source: Annual Survey of Industries 
N.B. *In addition to registered units, 46.57 lacs are employed in un-incorporated units, 
           as per Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises, 2022-23. 

5 
 
Contribution to Exports  
 
1.10  India's processed food exports have grown from 13% to 23% of total agri -
food exports between 2014 –15 and 2023 –24, however, the country still lags 
behind global leaders like USA and China in processing capacity. The gap is more 
evident in technology adoption, where USA and China are leading with 
innovations like high-pressure processing and digital agriculture. In terms of value 
chain integration, India is supported by schemes like PMKSY, yet its integration is 
less developed compared to the USA’s corporatized model, China’s state -led 
modernization, and Brazil’s export-oriented focus. Thus, India needs to strengthen 
infrastructure, technology, and integration to compete globally. 
 
1.11 The data and details on the contribution of the sector to GVA, employment 
generation and  exports, both in absolute numbers and also as percentage of 
manufacturing, for three years 2021-22 to 2023 -24, as furnished by MoFPI, is as 
follows:  
 
(USD Million) 
Exports  2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
Food Processing Sector 13,078.36 10,881.81 10,097.97 
Share in Agriculture food  
exports (%) 
25.6 23.4 20.4 
 
 
1.12 MoFPI has submitted that on the export front, the Sector has shown 
remarkable progress. The share of processed food exports in agri -food exports 
has increased from 14.9% in 2017 -18 to 20.4% in 2024 -25, with the total value of 
agri-food exports reaching USD 49.43 billion in 2024 -25, accounting for over 11% 
of India’s total exports. The Government’s focus on infrastructure development, 
ease of doing business, and 100% FDI under the automatic route has attracted 
significant investment, further strengthening the sector’s capacity and 
competitiveness.     
 
1.13 The details of volume and value of processed food export from the country 
for the last five years as furnished by the Ministry are as follows: 
 
Year  Total Exports of processed 
 food from India (Value)  
in USD Million 
2020-21   8,565.60 
2021-22 10,412.82 
2022-23 13,078.36 
2023-24 10,881.81 
2024-25 10,097.97 
                                Source: DGCIS 
 
 

6 
 
1.14 The Committee desired to know the assessment of India’s potential with 
respect to processed food exports and Ministry’s plan, if any to  realise the 
potential, MOFPI submitted as under:  
 
“The export of processed food products from India has increased from             
USD 4959.44 million in 2014 -15 to USD 10,097.97 million in 2024 -25 
showing robust growth. The Indian processed food has huge potential for 
growth in coming years. No specific projections/ forecasts for growth of 
the exports of processed food products are made, however, the MoFPI 
through implementation of the Central Sector Scheme helps in creation of 
modern infrastructure with efficient supply chain management from farm 
gate to retail outlet. The Scheme not only provide a boost to the growth of 
Food Processing Sector in the country but also helps in enhancing the 
export of the processed foods. 
 
Apart from this, with the objective to boost investments and sourcing of 
Indian food products in global market, MoFPI organizes a Mega Event, 
called “World Food India” to showcase domestic Industry and provide it 
with collaborative opportunities with international stakeholders.  
 
Besides above, the allied Ministries/Departments and their Agencies such 
as Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of Commerce, APEDA, 
MPEDA, etc. also extend enabling support through their respective 
schemes like Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture, 
Agriculture Export Promotion Plan Scheme, National Agriculture Infra 
Financing Facility, Merchandise Exports from India Scheme (MEIS), 
Rebate of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP) etc.” 
 
 
1.15  The global regulations and standards applicable to the exports  of 
processed food as furnished by MoFPI is as under:   
 
“Global food export regulations focus on ensuring food safety, quality, and 
fair-trade practices. Major standards include the Codex Alimentarius 
standards for food hygiene and quality, HACCP for risk management, and 
ISO 22000 for food safety management systems.  India can improve its 
standards by  strengthening its Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI), adopting international standards, and focusing on quality 
control and certification.” 
1.16  The details of steps taken to ensure compliance with international quality 
standards for processed food products which facilitate the export of Indian 
processed foods to global markets, as furnished by MoFPI is as under:  
“The development of the food -processing sector in India has emphasized 
the importance of strengthening Quality Assurance and Food Testing 
Infrastructure to meet international standards. Compliance with global 

7 
 
quality standards has become essential for processed food products to 
remain competitive in international markets. To ensure this, the following 
steps have been implemented: 
i. Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure:  Under the 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY), the Food 
Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure component, which has 
been operational since 2005, focuses on the establishment and 
upgradation of quality control and food testing laboratories. These 
labs are crucial for ensuring the quality of food produced in India, 
both for domestic consumption and export. 
ii. FSSAI Compliance: According to the Food Safety and Standards 
(FSS) Act, 2006, all Food Business Operators (FBOs) and Food 
Processing Industries (FPIs) must obtain licenses or registrations 
for their food businesses. FBOs must comply with hygiene 
standards as mandated by FSSAI. Specific actions taken by FSSAI 
include: 
➢ Providing training through the Food Safety Training and 
Certification (FoSTaC) program. 
➢ Setting up Food Safety on Wheels (FSW), mobile food testing 
laboratories, to reach even the remotest parts of the country. 
➢ Conducting periodic surveillance of food products, particularly 
those prone to adulteration. 
➢ Implementing rapid food testing methods to reduce screening 
time and improve surveillance. 
iii. Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS):  The Bureau of Indian 
Standards, under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, has published 
various standards related to food hygiene and safety practices, 
which businesses are required to follow. 
These initiatives collectively ensure that processed food products meet 
international safety and quality standards, thereby facilitating exports to 
global markets.” 
 
 
Fish processing and value chain  
 
1.17 With regard to the measures taken to promote fish processing value 
addition and marketing under the Make in India, MoFPI inter- alia furnished the 
following reply: 
 
“..... 
The basic objective of the scheme is to ensure overall development of the 
food processing sector including fisheries & seafood processing in the 
country. The scheme aims to achieve the objective by providing incentives 
for creation of food processing & preservation infrastructure industries in 
the country.  
 

8 
 
Under Operation Greens scheme component of the PMKSY, the Ministry 
has identified the clusters for eligible crops, including 10 fruits, 11 
vegetables and shrimp. The shrimp clusters were identified based on data 
from the Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) for 
2018-19, considering states that contribute at least 5% of India's total 
shrimp production. Following this assessment, the identified cluster details 
were shared with the respective state governments for validation and to 
facilitate the inclusion of any overlooked districts/clusters. Based on this 
methodology, the Ministry has designated a cluster covering three districts- 
East Godavari, West Godavari, and Krishna in Andhra Pradesh.  All the 
component schemes of PMKSY including OG Scheme are demand driven 
in nature; the proposals under the scheme are invited through Expression 
of Interest (EOI) for setting up food processing units from all over India. 
The financial assistance is provided at the rate of 35% of the eligible 
project cost for projects in General Areas, and 50% for projects in Difficult 
Areas, as well as for projects involving SC/ST, FPOs (Farmer Producer 
Organizations), and SHGs (Self-Help Groups).  
 
Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities 
(CEFPPC) Scheme of PMKSY provides financial support in the form of 
grants-in-aid/ subsidy of maximum Rs. 5.00 crore for setting up of food 
processing units including fish processing in the country.  The scheme is a 
demand driven scheme. 
 
Applications under the scheme are invited online from potential investors / 
entrepreneurs depending on the availability of funds and also vacant slots 
through Expression of Interest (EoI) issued by Ministry from time to time.  
  
Scheme for Creation of Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters (APC).  
APC scheme guidelines has been revised on 25.04.2025 and under clause 
3.5 (d) of the revised guidelines it has been incorporated that -
  "Preference in sanction of proposal will (also) be given for   Setting up of 
clusters in Fisheries Sector notified under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampadha Yojana (PMMSY)" as per their indicative list.   Further, in 
scoring/assessment criteria, 05 marks have allocated for  "Setting up of 
APC in the clusters identified by DAC&FW (MIDH), APEDA, export-
oriented clusters identified by Ministry of Commerce, production and 
processing clusters in  Fisheries Sector notified under the Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampadha Yojana (PMMSY). "  This scheme is also demand 
driven scheme and applications are invited online from potential investors / 
entrepreneurs depending on the availability of funds and also vacant slots 
through Expression of Interest (EoI) issued by Ministry from time to time.   
EoI under APC scheme has been floated on 14.05.2025 and the last date 
of submission of applications is 15.07.2025. 
One of the food segment under PLISFPI is for marine segments in which 
eligible products are fish/ crustacean/ molluscs/ shrimps. One of the 
applicant under the scheme, namely, Gadre Marine Exports Private 
Limited is involved in processing and value addition of Surmi fish. The 
company has plants located at 4 locations i.e.  Ratnagiri Maharashtra, 

9 
 
Junagad Gujarat, Mangalore Karnataka, Balasore Odisha, which are 
covered under the Scheme. 
 
The details of shrimp projects approved under schemes of MoFPI as well 
as the list of ODOP for fish and Shrimp products under PMFME Scheme is 
attached at Annexure-I.”  
 
 
FPI in India Vs other countries – Comparative status /position  
 
1.18 In written response to the Committee’s query - how does India’s food 
processing capacity, technology adoption and value chain integration compares 
with that of other countries like the USA, China or Brazil, MoFPI stated inter alia as 
under :  
“…. 
 
Food Processing Capacity 
 
….. India's processing capacity has potential for growth, particularly in 
infrastructure such as cold storage and logistics. In contrast, the USA 
leads with a food processing industry followed by China. 
 
Technology Adoption 
 
The USA and China are at the forefront of technology adoption in food 
processing, utilizing advanced technologies such as high -pressure 
processing (HPP) and precision agriculture. The USA has high adoption 
rates of digital agronomy and automation, while China is rapidly growing 
its food processing capabilities. In comparison, India is making progress 
but has huge potential for growth. 
 
Value Chain Integration 
 
India's value chain integration is driven by Government initiatives like the 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), which supports cold 
chains and agro-processing clusters. The USA features a highly integrated 
agri-food value chain dominated by large agribusinesses, while China 
employs a state-led modernization strategy to enhance integration, though 
regional disparities remain. Brazil excels in export -oriented sectors but 
faces challenges in domestic integration due to complex regulations. 
Overall, while India is making strides in value chain integration, it still trails 
behind the more established systems in the USA, China, and Brazil.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER - II 
Policy support to FPI  
 
Foreign Direct Investment   
 The four key enablers furnished by MoFPI for attracting investments in FPI 
are as under: 
➢ “Liberal FDI Policy: 100% FDI permitted through automatic route for 
food processing sector 
➢ Export Potential: Processed food contributed 23.4% of agri -food exports 
in 2023-24 
➢ Infrastructure Development: Government initiatives like Agro-Processing 
Clusters, Cold Chain Infrastructure and etc. 
➢ Incentives & Schemes: Production Linked Incentives Scheme for Food 
Processing Industry (PLISFPI) and Agriculture Infrastructure Fund 
(AIF).” 
 
 
2.2 Before 2016 -17, 100% of FDI was allowed under the automatic route in 
food processing industries, barring trading. However, after that year, 100% FDI 
was permitted through the approval of the Government for trading, including e -
commerce concerning food products manufactured or made in India. 
 
2.3   The details of FDI inflows in the Food Processing Industries sector since 
2014-15, year-wise as furnished by the Ministry in its written reply are as under:  
 
Year FDI (in Rs. 
Crore) 
FDI (in USD 
Million)  
Source of FDI (name of the countries) 
2014-15 3,164.72 515.86 USA, France, Mauritius, Singapore, Japan 
2015-16 3,312.00 505.88 Mauritius, USA, Singapore, Italy, Cyprus 
2016-17 4,865.85 727.22 USA, Belgium, Mauritius, Singapore, Italy 
2017-18 5,835.62 904.90 Singapore, Mauritius, South Korea, Japan, 
Luxembourg 
2018-19 4,430.44 628.24 Singapore, Mauritius, USA, Japan, Netherland 
2019-20 6414.67 904.70 Belgium, Singapore, Cyprus, Mauritius, USA 
2020-21 2934.12 393.41 USA, Mauritius, Mexico, Singapore, 
Netherland  
2021-22 5290.27 709.72 Singapore, Mauritius, France, USA, Mexico 
2022-23 7194.13 895.34 Singapore, Mauritius, France, USA, Guernsey 
2023-24 5037.06 608.31 Singapore, British Virginia, Switzerland, 
Ireland, Australia 
2024-25 4557.27 540.76 Ireland, USA, Singapore, Mauritius 
*Total FDI inflow includes equity inflow, equity capital of unincorporated bodies, re -invested earnings, and 
other capital. Sector/State/Country-wise details are maintained only for equity component of FDI inflow.  
 
2.4 In written reply to a query about the reasons for fluctuations  in FDI inflows 
into the Food Processing Industries and the decline during the Financial Year 
2022-23 and 2023-24, MoFPI stated as under: 

11 
 
 
“The Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows have been weak, according to 
the Economic Survey 2024. This is mainly attributed to geopolitical 
conflicts, high borrowing costs, and global economic fracturing. The 
geopolitical developments and monetary policy changes across countries 
resulted in increased caution among investors, leading to moderate growth 
in FDI flows. Global FDI flows declined in 2023 compared to 2022. 
 
The decline in global FDI has impacted FDI flows to India. Net FDI inflows 
to India declined from USD 42.0 billion during FY23 to USD 26.5 billion in 
FY24. However, gross  FDI moderated only by 0.6 percent from USD 71.4 
billion in FY23 to just under USD 71 billion in FY24. The Economic Survey 
claimed that there was no change in investor interest in India. The 
contraction in net inflows was mainly due to repatriation/disinvestment due 
to many profitable exits. 
 
Globally also the net FDI inflows witnessed a moderation due to increased 
scepticism on account of domestic structural issues, uneven exposure to 
geopolitical conflicts, and the impact of monetary policy tightening.  The 
Economic survey has quoted the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD) stating that the global FDI decreased marginally 
by 2 percent to USD 1.3 trillion in 2023 from USD 1.4 trillion in 2022.  
 
With regard to India, overall FDI inflows have shown a temporary decline, 
this reflects global economic challenges rather than domestic barriers. India 
is proactively addressing execution -level challenges by simplifying 
approvals, strengthening infrastructure, and boosting investor confidence 
through single-window clearances etc.” 
 
2.5  The Government of India, as mentioned elsewhere in the report, has 
allowed 100% of FDI initially through automatic route in FPIs barring trading  and 
subsequently 100% FDI was permitted through the approval of the Government 
for trading, including e -commerce concerning food products manufactured or 
made in India to attract foreign investments and enhance growth potential of the 
Sector. About the future projections regarding FDI inflows, the Ministry furnished 
inter alia the following reply: 
 
“No specific projections and forecasts have been made for FDI inflows in 
FPI sector. However, through the implementation of schemes namely, 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), PM Formalisation of 
Micro Food Processing Enterprises Scheme (PMFME) and Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme (PLIS), Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(MoFPI) helps in creation of modern infrastructure with efficient supply 
chain management from farm gate to retail outlet for promotion, overall 
development and growth of FPI sector and also promoting more FDI in FPI 
Sector.” 
 
 

12 
 
2.6  The details of the successful FDI -backed projects, as shared by MoFPI , is 
as under:  
 
➢ PepsiCo (USA): In the last three years, PepsiCo has invested close to    
Rs. 3,500-4,000 crore in the Indian market. The company has invested in 
Uttar Pradesh, Assam and is planning to invest in Madhya Pradesh for a 
flavour manufacturing facility. 
➢ Ball Corporation (USA): Ball Corporation invested Rs 700 crore 
investment in Telangana which supplies aluminum cans to beer and soft 
drink majors. 
➢ Mars (USA): Mars Inc. has recently made significant investments in 
India, particularly focusing on expanding its pet food manufacturing and 
confectionery production. These investments include a Rs. 500 crore 
investment to strengthen pet food lines at the Siddipet (Telangana) plant 
and an additional Rs. 800 crore investment to expand a plant in 
Telangana 
➢ Barry Callebaut (Switzerland): The Company is expanding its India 
presence and has established its chocolate manufacturing facility in 
Rajasthan. 
➢ Nestlé (Switzerland): Nestlé India invested Rs . 900 crore in Odisha to 
open first factory in eastern India. The factory is slated to manufacture 
products from its foods (prepared dishes and cooking aids) portfolio. 
➢ Monin (France): A French gourmet Flavourings Company is investing      
Rs. 300 crore in India to establish its first manufacturing facility near 
Hyderabad.  
 
Priority Sector Lending (PSL)  
 
2.7  Food and agro -based processing unit and cold chain infrastructure have 
been classified under agriculture activities for Priority Sector Lending (PSL) as per 
the revised RBI Guidelines issued on 23.04.2015. All activities under agro and 
food processing are eligible for PSL coverage.  
 
 2.8.  In written reply to a query whether the inclusion of FPI under Priority Sector 
Lending (PSL) norms contributed to the growth of MSMEs and rural enterprises in 
the country, MoFPI submitted as under:  
 
“Inclusion of the Food Processing Industry (FPI) under Priority Sector Lending 
(PSL) norms has significantly boosted the growth of Micro, Small, and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs) and rural enterprises in India by facilitating access to 
affordable credit and fostering innovation. This has enabled the sector to 
expand, modernize, and develop infrastructure in designated food parks, 
ultimately supporting the "Make in India" vision. 
 
 
 

13 
 
 
2.9    The provisions on loans for food and agro processing units  contained in the 
PSL guidelines as furnished by MoFPI are as under :  
 
“(i) Agriculture: In terms of para 9.3.(iii) of the Master Directions on Priority 
Sector Lending (PSL) dated March 24, 2025, Loans for Food and Agro -
processing up to an aggregate sanctioned limit of ₹100 crore per borrower 
from the banking system are eligible for classification under ‘Agriculture’ 
category of PSL. 
 
(ii) MSME: In terms of para 10(ii) of the MD on PSL, all bank loans to 
MSMEs are eligible for classification under ‘MSME’ category of priority 
sector lending. This includes loans to MSMEs for ‘Food and Agro -
processing’ for which no per borrower loan limit has been prescribed.”  
 
 
2.10  In written reply to a query whether MoFPI has conducted any evaluation of 
PSL effectiveness, MoFPI submitted that no study  on the effectiveness of PSL on 
the Food Processing Sector has been conducted so far. 
 
2.11 With regard  to the maximum PSL loan limit per borrower and how the 
compliance of PSL is monitored, the MoFPI furnished the following reply: 
 
➢ Maximum PSL loan limit per borrower:  As per inputs provided for 
question (b) above, per borrower limit of is Rs 100 crore is applicable 
only for classification of loans to Food and Agro -processing under 
Agriculture category of PSL. Loans to MSMEs for Food and Agro -
processing can be classified under MSME category of PSL without any 
limit. 
➢ Monitoring of Compliance:  Compliance to PSL guidelines is 
monitored through quarterly and annual PSL returns submitted by 
banks to RBI. Further, the data reported by banks are subject to 
inspection by Department of Supervision (DoS), RBI. 
 
 
2.12  The data on credit outstanding under PSL from FY 2019 -20 to 2023-24 as 
furnished by MoFPI may be seen at Annexure-II.  
 
2.13  In response to a request to furnish the  details of loans provided to food 
processing industries under PSL in both rural and urban areas by major banks, 
Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs), and Microfinance Institutions (MFIs), 
MoFPI submitted as follows:  
“As reported by Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the segregated data 
pertaining to loans provided by banks to food processing industries under 
Priority Sector Lending (PSL) in both rural and urban areas is not available 
with Financial Inclusion & Development Department (FIDD), Central Office, 
RBI. The details of the bank loans provided to Food Processing Industries 

14 
 
under Priority Sector Lending as per the following category of banks during 
the last five years are as below: 
                                                                                                                                                          (Amount in Rs. Crore*) 
Banks As on 
March 2020 
As on 
March 2021 
As on 
March 2022 
As on 
March 2023 
As on 
March 2024 
PUBLIC SECTOR 
BANKS 
82209.14 87854.37 90966.51 99246.05 113814.35 
PRIVATE 
SECTOR BANKS 
41132.77 44666.24 53932.97  74545.86 101465.73 
FOREIGN BANKS 6787.55 8037.02 8227.39    7244.88 5927.09 
SMALL FINANCE 
BANKS 
 378.64 852.49 1426.34    2132.70 2707.89 
Total 130508 141410 154553 183169 223915 
Source: RBI; the data pertaining to loans provided to food processing industries under PSL by NBFCs 
and MFIs is not available with FIDD, Central Office, RBI. 
 
Challenges faced by MSMEs in accessing credit under PSL   
 
2.14   With regard to the challenges faced by MSME units in FPS in accessing 
Priority Sector credit and the measures taken to address these challenges, MoFPI    
furnished the following reply:  
“Access to credit is a cornerstone for growth in India’s food processing 
sector, which has vast potential to enhance the agricultural value chain, 
reduce wastage, and increase farmer incomes. Despite its recognized 
importance, financing remains a challenge for many food -processing 
businesses, particularly small and medium enterprises. 
 
….To enhance access to finance, regular meetings are held with lending 
banks, State Level Banking Committees (SLBCs), State Nodal Agencies 
(SNAs), and State Government Departments to minimize the issues faced 
by applicants.  
 
In addition, District Resource Persons (DRPs) have been appointed under 
the scheme to provide handholding support/guidance to micro food 
processing enterprises for project formulation, execution, access to credit, 
compliance with quality standards, and other statutory requirements. 
MoFPI primarily provides credit -linked financial assistance (capital 
subsidy) in the form of grants -in-aid to entrepreneurs selected based on 
an Expression of Interest (EoI) issued from time to time. These schemes 
are demand -driven and not region - or state -specific; they are 
implemented across the country. Some of the key steps/policy measures 
to mitigate challenges and achieve intended outcomes in the growth of 
the food processing sector inter alia are as follows: 
“A 100% income tax exemption is granted for profits derived from 
activities such as post -harvest value addition to agriculture by FPOs 
with annual turnover up to Rs. 100 crore. Additionally, 100% income tax 
exemption is allowed for new food processing units for a period of five 
years, a 100% deduction is provided for capital expenditure incurred on 
setting up and operating cold chain facilities and concessional import 

15 
 
duty is offered for plant and machinery under the project imports benefit 
scheme.” 
 
Special Food Processing Fund 
 
2.15  As per announcement in the Budget 2014 -15, a special fund of Rs. 2,000 
Crore has been set up in NABARD to provide affordable credit in designated Food 
Parks & food processing units to be set up in these parks.  The data on term loans 
sanctioned and  disbursed (as on 31.03.2025) under Special Food Processing 
Fund since its inception is as follows: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Scheme 
No. of 
Projects 
Sanction
ed 
Term Loan 
Sanctione
d 
No. of 
Projects 
for which 
funds 
disbursed 
Amoun
t of 
Disburs
ement 
(₹ Cr) 
% 
Disburs
ed 
No. of 
Projects 
Operatio
nalized 
1 Mega Food Park 
Project 
14 549.35 14 450.60 82.02 11 
2 Agro Processing 
Clusters 
9 92.07 9 82.10 89.17 8 
3 Individual 
Processing Units 
in Designated 
Food Parks 
14 204.30 14 143.66 70.32 11 
4 Industrial Food 
Parks (IFPs) 
3 333.99 3 153.85 46.06 0 
 Total 40 1179.71 40 830.21 70.37 30 
 * Please refer Annexure-II for the details of projects. 
 
 
2.16 The details of status of Special Food Processing Fund backed projects 
Scheme-wise are given by the Ministry in Annexure-III.  
 
Ease of Doing Food Business 
 
2.17 As a measure towards improving Ease of Doing Business, the Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) issued notification in January and  
October 2016 shifting product -by-product approval to ingredient and additive 
based approvals. 
 
2.18 In response to a query whether the shift to ingredient - and additive-based 
approvals by FSSAI has impacted the speed of product launches and FDI inflows , 
MoFPI submitted as under:  
 
“FSSAI has notified Food Safety and Standards (Approval of non -specified 
food and food ingredients) Regulations, 2017 on 11.09.2017, which lays 
down the rules and procedure for grant of prior approval of non -specified 
food and food ingredients. The regulation covers the following articles of 
food or food ingredients for which standards have not been specified in 
any regulation made under the FSS Act, 2006: 

16 
 
• Novel food or novel food Ingredients or processed with the use of 
novel technology; 
• New additives (Not listed in Food Safety and Standards Regulations 
(FSSR); 
• New processing aids including enzymes (Not listed in FSSR); 
• Articles of food and food ingredients consisting of or isolated from 
microorganisms, bacteria, yeast, fungi or algae; and,  
• Non-specified food including new botanical, new fruit or fruit  based 
product, probiotic and prebiotic and any other. 
 
The procedure for grant of prior approval for Non-Specified Food and Food 
Ingredients has been prescribed under Regulation 4 of Food Safety and 
Standards (Approval for Non -Specified Food and Food Ingredients) 
Regulations, 2017. Six Expert Committees (ECs) have been constituted 
under Regulation 4 (5) of FSS (Approval of non -specified food and food 
ingredients) Regulations, 2017 for examination or evaluation of 
applications received under FSS (NSF & FI) Regulations, 2017. These 
Expert Committees evaluates the applications and based on risk 
assessment recommends their opinion w.r.t. the particular application 
submitted by the applicant. 
 
The aforesaid regulation has helped the Food Business Operators and 
spurted the process of Food approvals.” 
 
2.19.  With regard to the details of nature of penalties imposed for adulteration of 
food products and the sufficiency or otherwise of extant penal provisions to deter 
adulteration, MoFPI submitted as under:  
 
“The FSS Act 2006 has the provision of graded penalties depending on the 
gravity of the offence and accordingly, civil penalties for minor offences 
and punishment for serious violations. The samples of food articles are 
drawn and analysed to verify their compliance with the laid down quality 
and safety parameters & other requirements under the Food Safety & 
Standards Act 2006 (FSS Act) & Food Safety & Standards Regulations 
(FSSR) made there under. Any non-compliance to the provisions under the 
Act and the Regulations, constitute ‘Non-Conformance’. The act further, 
has categorized Non-Conformance into: 
 
➢ Substandard 
➢ Misbranded 
➢ Extraneous Matter 
➢ Unsafe 
Vide sec 3(1)(a) of the FSS Act - “Adulterant” means any material which is 
or could be employed for making the food unsafe or sub -standard or mis -
branded or containing extraneous matter. 
 
In case of non -compliance as above, regulatory actions are taken in the 
form of punitive measures which comprise of penalties & punishment 

17 
 
depending upon the nature & gravity of the offence. These punitive 
actions, as stipulated under the act includes fine and imprisonment which 
are imposed by following the due procedure of launching Adjudication 
(civil) & Prosecution (Criminal), which are judicial proceedings in nature, at 
the appropriate court of law.” 
 
2.20 The details of the offences, penalties and nature of judicial proceedings 
Brief of these provisions may be seen at Annexure IV.  
 
2.21 MoFPI has st ated that in order to enhance the investment in Food 
Processing Sector, all the processed food items are exempted from the purview of 
licensing under the industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. In 
response to a query whether this initiative  aligns with the objectives of promoting 
ease of doing business in the Food Processing Sector, the Ministry furnished the 
following reply:  
 
“The exemption of all processed food items from the purview of licensing 
under the industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, is a 
significant policy initiative aimed at enhancing the Ease of Doing Business 
in the Indian Food Processing Sector. This initiative aligns with several key 
objectives that promote a more conducive environment for business 
operations. 
 
Alignment with the Objectives of Promoting Ease of Doing Business: 
Regulatory Simplification: By removing the mandatory licensing 
requirement under the IDR Act, 1951, the Ministry has effectively reduced 
regulatory requirements, particularly for micro, small, and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs), which form a substantial part of the unorganised 
food processing sector. This simplification encourages faster 
establishment and expansion of food processing businesses, allowing 
them to focus on production rather than compliance. 
 
Boost to Entrepreneurship: The policy aligns with the goals of Atmanirbhar 
Bharat Abhiyan by creating a more entrepreneur -friendly environment. It 
empowers micro-entrepreneurs to formalise their units and transition from 
the unorganised to the organised sector with fewer compliance burdens, 
thereby fostering a culture of entrepreneurship and innovation.” 
 
 
2.22 MoFPI has submitted that the following initiatives were taken to as part of 
ease of doing business:  
 
(i) The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is working completely on 
an online scheme management system “SAMPADA Portal” from 
receiving of proposals to release of grant - in-aid under the various 
component scheme of Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana 

18 
 
(PMKSY). A dashboard for MIS purposes has been created to 
facilitate real time monitoring of progress and key performance 
indicators. 
(ii) Separate online portals have been developed to cater to new schemes 
like Prime Minister -Formalisation of Micro Food Processing 
Enterprises (PMFME) and Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
applications.” 
  
Impact of measures taken under Ease of doing Business  
2.23 In response to queries  about the (i) effectiveness of the measures taken 
under ‘Ease of Doing Business ’; and, (ii) the time taken to approve applications 
which are found in order along with the steps taken to facilitate investment, MoFPI 
submitted as under:  
 
“No such evaluation regarding effectiveness of such measures has been 
done so far, by this Ministry. Ministry is having a separate portal “Nivesh 
Bandhu Portal” which is the investment portal under the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries, India. The portal is a one stop solution for all the 
investors who are looking to invest in India in the food processing sector. 
The portal highlights the steps to simplify the process of doing business in 
India, the market entry strategies and the regulatory frameworks that are 
involved in setting up the operations in India.” 
                                                                             
2.24  In response to a request to furnish the role played by National Single 
Window System (NSWS) in facilitating investments in the Food Processing Sector,  
MoFPI submitted the following reply: 
 
“The National Single Window System (NSWS) is a digital platform to guide 
in identifying and applying for approvals according to the business 
requirements. NSWS has enhanced ease of doing business in India's food 
processing sector by streamlining regulatory approvals and clearances 
across Central and State levels. It offers a unified digital platform where 
investors can access information, apply for approvals, track applications, 
and receive clearances from multiple departments without the need for 
physical interface. For the food processing industry, which often requires a 
range of licenses related to food safety, environmental compliance, land 
acquisition, and utilities, the NSWS has fostered a more investor -friendly 
environment. The portal hosts applications for approvals from 32 Central 
Ministries / Departments and 29 States & UTs.” 
 
 

19 
 
Make in India – Food processing sector  
 2.25. Government of India has accorded high priority to the sector under the 
‘make in India’ initiative, launched on 25 September, 2014  which seeks to position 
India as a global manufacturing and investment hub by creating a conducive 
environment for business, opening new sectors for investment, and fostering 
Public- Private Collaboration. With this vision Food processing Sector has been 
identified as one of the key priority areas due to its role in inclusive growth , 
employment generation, export promotion and enhancement of Framer’s incomes.  
 
2.26.  In written reply to a query - why the Food Processing Sector was declared a 
strategic sector under ‘Make in India’ Program, MoFPI submitted inter- alia as 
follows :-  
 
“The Food Processing Sector is a strategic sector under the ‘Make in India’ 
program because it is a key driver of inclusive economic growth, supports 
small-scale and rural enterprises, enhances value addition, boosts exports, 
and aligns with the national vision of doubling farmer incomes and 
positioning India as a global food processing hub. Further, India’s rich 
agricultural base and growing consumer demand adds to Food Processing 
Sector’s strategic importance. The Sector’s continued development, backed 
by robust policy support and targeted interventions, is essential for realizing 
India’s vision of sustainable and inclusive growth. Thus, the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries (MoFPI)  has implemented strategic 
interventions to attract investments, strengthen infrastructure, and promote 
domestic manufacturing across the value chain. ….” 
 
  
2.27 The g rowth trajectory drawn w.r.t. ‘Make in India’ initiative under Food 
Processing Sector in India, as furnished by MoFPI is as follows: 
 
“….The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has implemented 
strategic interventions to attract investments, strengthen infrastructure, and 
promote domestic manufacturing across the value chain. As part of this 
initiative, the Government has launched three major schemes —Pradhan 
Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), Production Linked Incentive 
Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI), and Pradhan Mantri 
Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME)…  
 
Events like World Food India 2024 have further helped showcase India’s 
potential in food processing and allied sectors, drawing global attention and 
partnerships. These comprehensive policy interventions are propelling the 
sector toward achieving Make in India goals—reducing agri-waste, boosting 
exports, increasing value addition, and creating sustainable livelihoods 
across the country. In this background, the FPI sector is expected to grow 
at an average annual growth rate of around 6.5% during next 5 -6 years and 
achieve a GVA of around 3.3 lakh crores in 2030.” 
 

20 
 
 
2.28 The key challenges being faced or anticipated under ‘Make in India’ in the 
Food Processing Sector and the corrective measures taken to address them, as 
furnished inter alia by MoFPI are as under:  
 
“…. 
The first challenge is the presence of informal units in FPI in the country. 
Most of the units involved in FPI are from informal sector and this leads to 
issues like unavailability of credit, etc.  Further, there is a major issue of 
lack of adequate infrastructure in the from cold chain and storage facilities. 
Lastly, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) also often lack access 
to the newest technology and modern processing equipment, which 
negatively impacts their ability to effectively compete with larger firms.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Implementation of various Schemes 
 
      MoFPI, as the nodal agency, has undertaken several initiatives to promote 
the sector, including formulation of favourable policies, rationalisation of tariffs, 
and implementation of targeted schemes such as: 
 
➢ Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) – (Central Sector 
Scheme): Aims to create modern infrastructure and efficient supply 
chains to reduce agri-waste and increase processing capacity. 
➢ Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry 
(PLISFPI) – (Central Sector Scheme) : Designed to boost domestic 
manufacturing and exports by incentivising investment in high -value 
and innovative food products. 
➢ Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises 
(PMFME) – (Centrally Sponsored Scheme) : Seeks to formalise and 
support micro food processing units through financial, technical, and 
business support, with a focus on One District One Product (ODOP). 
 
 
3.2 The above Schemes aim to strengthen the value chain, improve 
infrastructure, formalise the unorganised sector, and incentivise innovation and 
private investment in the country. Further, Invest India , the national investment 
promotion and facilitation agency has also contributed by assisting investors with 
regulatory facilitation, query resolution, and guidance in navigating the food 
processing ecosystem. 
 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samapada Yojana (PMKSY) 
 
3.3 Ministry has implemented Central Sector Umbrella Scheme - PMKSY since 
May, 2017 across the country including NER with an allocation of Rs. 6,000 
Crores for the period 2016 -20 co terminus with the 14th Finance Commission 
Cycle.  
 
 3.4 A new scheme "Operation Greens (OG)" was introduced in PMKSY in 
November, 2018 for integrated development of value/supply chain of tomato, 
Onion and Potato (TOP) crops in selected States on pilot basis with an outlay of 
Rs 500 Crores, which was subsequently extended to all notified crops and later to 
22 perishables. Continuation of restructured PMKSY during 15th Finance 
Commission cycle i.e. till 31.03.2026 has been approved with an allocation of Rs. 
5520 crores with following component schemes- 
 
➢ Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure  
➢ Creation/ Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities 
(Unit Scheme)  
➢ Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters  

22 
 
➢ Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure 
➢ Human Resources and Institutions –Research & Development 
➢ Operation Greens 
 
3.5 The component schemes of Mega Food Park, Creation of Backward & 
Forward Linkages, Human Resource & Institution - Promotional Activities, Skill 
Development & HACCP, a component of Food Safety and Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure have been discontinued in the 15th FC cycle with the provision of 
committed liability. 
 
PMKSY -Alignment of objectives with Make in India  
 
3.6 With regard to alignment of the objectives of the Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY) with the goals of the ‘Make in India’ initiative, MoFPI 
submitted as follows:  
 
“PMKSY is a demand -driven scheme. Under PMKSY Individuals including 
rural entrepreneurs as well as entity / organization such as Farmer 
producer Organisation (FPOs)/Farmer Producer Company (FPCs)/ Non -
Government Organisations (NGOs)/Public Sector Undertaking (PSUs) 
/Firms/Companies, etc. are eligible to avail benefits under the Scheme. 
 
To ensure equal opportunities across rural and urban areas Scheme 
awareness activities through National & State level awareness campaigns 
are conducted with the aim to enhance the awareness of general public and 
for their participation for availing benefits under the Schemes. 
 
Further, under Cold chain scheme and Operation Green scheme Farm 
Level Infrastructure (FLI) is mandatory part of the scheme, promoting rural 
entrepreneurship.” 
 
  
PMKSY-   Sanctions, disbursements, projects costs, grants release, etc. 
 
3.7 The data on projects sanctioned, completed, project cost, total grants 
released, farmers benefitted, etc, as furnished by MoFPI is as under:    
Name of 
Scheme 
Total Project 
Sanctioned 
Total Project 
Completed 
Total Project 
Cost of 
Completed 
Projects (Rs. 
in Cr) 
Total Grant 
Approval of 
Completed 
Projects (Rs. 
in Cr) 
Total Grant 
released to 
Completed 
Projects (Rs. 
in Cr) 
Processing & 
Preservation 
Capacity of 
Completed 
Projects 
(LMT) 
Farmers 
Benefited 
(Completed) 
Employment 
(Completed) 
MFP* 41 24 2754.33 1175.27 1072.55  28.61    60277 70343 
CC 398 288 7774.26 2126.33 2113.23 137.94 2750976 172800 
APC 76 22 592.07 184.04 142.46     6.72     81300 17133 
Unit 558 300 4684.73 1121.89 1061.59   66.26 53456 115417 
BFL* 61 53 605.79 143.31 138.44     7.39 388116 28958 
OG 45 10 376.71 122.02 114.76     2.45 19580 16122 
FTL 205 169 762.04 324.87 319.08 0 0 6253 
HRI-R&D 262 225 93.24 91.14 81.10 0 0 0 
HRI-
Skill* 
26 25 18.55 9 9.03 0 0 0 
Total 1672 1116 17661.72 5297.86 5052.35 249.36 3353705 427026 

23 
 
 
Status on implementation of the projects  
 
3.8 MoFPI submitted that out  of 1672 projects sanctioned under various 
components of PMKSY, only 1116 projects have been completed/operational. 
With regard to the delay in completion of projects, MoFPI submitted the following 
reply: 
  
“Out of the 1672 projects, some projects have been cancelled due to non -
compliance of relevant scheme guidelines and as on 31.05.2025 there are 
a total number of 1604 sanctioned projects under various component 
schemes of PMKSY out of which 1129 projects have been operationalized 
and remaining 475 projects are under various stages of implementation. 
 
  The delay in project implementation is attributed to multiple factors, 
including non -receipt of statutory clearances and approvals such as 
Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to Operate (CTO), approval of 
building/layout plans, change of land use (CLU), and fulfilment of pre -
disbursement conditions mandated by lending banks for term loan 
disbursement. Additionally, delays in obtaining FSSAI licenses and 
approvals from various government authorities —such as Revenue, Town 
Planning, Electricity, Water Supply, Pollution Control Board, and Licensing 
Authorities—also contribute significantly to the implementation lag. 
Furthermore, in some cases, delays in the procurement and supply of 
imported machinery also adversely affect the timely execution of projects.” 
 
 
Setting up of Food Testing Laboratories (FTLs) – Status   
  
3.9  Referring to the completion of  setting up of 169 out of 205 FTLs under the 
component ‘Setting Up/Upgradation of Food Testing Laboratories ’ the Committee 
sought to know (i) whether these projects are sufficient to meet the needs of the 
ever-growing Food Processing Industry in the country ; and, (ii) the status of the 
remaining 36 projects, MoFPI submitted as under:  
 
“As per  National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration 
Laboratories (NABL), there are total 617 NABL accredited food testing 
laboratories operational in the country. Out of 617 FTLs, 122 are 
Government owned and remaining 495 are Private owned.  An impact 
assessment of the scheme has been conducted by the YES Bank in 
February 2021. As per the study, “at 100% compliance by Food Business 
Operators (FBOs) and Hotel Restaurant and Catering/Café (HoRECA) 
segments towards food testing, the deficit in laboratories is estimated at 
more than 360 laboratories”. 
The status of 36 ongoing projects is placed at Annexure-V.” 
 
 

24 
 
Human Resource Institution – Skill component  
 
3.10 The Committee sought to know which skill development initiatives have 
replaced the Human Resource Institution –Skill (component scheme), and the  
measurable impact the 25 completed projects have had on employment 
generation and innovation. In response, the Ministry furnished the following reply: 
 
“Human Resources and Institution -Skill Development component scheme 
of PMKSY was intended only for extending financial assistance to the 
training partners/other eligible beneficiaries affiliated with FICSI (Food 
Industry Capacity and Skill Initiative), the Sector Skill Council for Food 
Processing and NSDC (National Skill Development Centre) – (i) for 
establishment of Skill Training Centres; and (ii) development of Course 
content/training modules in food processing.  
 
Further, the Ministry is implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
namely Prime Minister's Formalization of Micro Enterprises (PMFME) 
Scheme. The said Scheme has a capacity building training component, 
under which capacity building trainings are conducted by the State/UT 
Government. The capacity building trainings imparted under the Scheme 
are of short-term nature and do not fall within the ambit of skill development 
training norms of MSDE. 
 
Under Skill Development scheme 26 skill projects have been approved, out 
of which 25 are Training Centre Projects for establishing 36 skill training 
centres and 1 is the Course Content Project for developing 13 Job Roles in 
food processing sector. As on date, 25 Skill Projects have since been 
completed and 1 skill project is ongoing/under implementation.” 
 
Agro Processing Clusters (APCs)  
 
3.11 The Committee sought to know the effect of A PCs under PMKSY since 
2017 on the efficiency, inclusiveness, and rural outreach of the Food Processing 
Sector. In response, MoFPI furnished the following reply: 
 
“The main objective of the Scheme is to develop the modern infrastructure 
and common facilities to encourage group of entrepreneurs for setting up of 
food processing units based on cluster approach by linking groups of 
producers/farmers to the processors and markets through well -equipped 
supply chain with modern infrastructure. Clusters facilitate direct linkages 
between farmers, processors, and retailers, reducing layers in the supply 
chain, ensuring timely procurement, and processing. These clusters will 
help in reducing the wastage of the surplus produce and add value to the 
horticultural / agricultural produce, which will result in increase of income of 
the farmers and create employment at the local level.” 
 

25 
 
 
3.12 The details of the Scheme for Creation of Infrastructure for A PCs  furnished 
by the Ministry are as under: 
 
➢ Aims at development of modern infrastructure and common facilities to 
encourage group of entrepreneurs to set up food processing units 
based on cluster approach by linking groups of producers/farmers to 
the processors and markets through well -equipped supply chain with 
modern infrastructure; 
➢ Envisages a cluster of minimum 5 processing units with an investment 
of Rs. 25 Cr.; 
➢ Grant @ 35%/50% in general/difficult areas as well as for projects of 
SC, ST, FPO & SHGs, of eligible project cost up  to max of Rs. 10 
Crore per project; 
➢ Minimum 10 acres land is required either by purchase or on lease of 
50 years; and  
➢ Eligible organizations Farmer Producer Organisations/Cooperatives/ 
FPCs/SHGs/Government & private sector companies, processors, 
retailers etc. 
 
 
3.13  The Committee sought to know about the number of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) involved under PMKSY. In response, the Ministry 
furnished the following reply: 
 
“Under PMKSY a total of 1604 projects have been sanctioned and majority 
of them fall under the MSME category as per the M/o Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises notification dated 28.03.2025.” 
 
 
Post Harvest Losses  
 
3.14 In written response to a query whether there is verifiable / measurable 
evidence to show that under PMKSY there has been a decline in post -harvest 
losses, MoFPI furnished the following reply:   
 
“As per studies conducted by Indian Council for Agricultural Research – 
Central Institute of Post -Harvest Engineering & Technology (ICAR -
CIPHET), 2015 and NABARD Consultancy Service Pvt. Ltd (NABCONS), 
2022, Category wise absolute losses in physical quantity and monetary 
value and the estimated percentage of Harvest and Post -Harvest loss of 
various agricultural produce in India is as per Table 1 and Table 2 below: 

26 
 
 
Table 1: Category wise absolute losses in physical quantity and monetary value 
  
S.  
No. 
  
Category 
 Production (millio
n MT) 
Quantity lost 
(million MT) NA
BCONS (2020-21) 
Monetary lo
ss 
NABCONS 
(₹ 
in Crore) 
% Contribution 
of the total loss (in 
monetary 
value) 
1 Cereals 281.28 12.49 26000.79 17.02 
2 Pulses 21.55 1.37 9289.21 6.08 
3 Oilseeds 37.27 2.11 10924.97 7.15 
4 Fruits 90.82 7.36 29545.07 19.34 
5 Vegetables 164.74 11.97 27459.08 17.97 
  
6 
Plantation crops 
(including sugarc
ane) and spices 
  
426.13 
  
30.59 
  
16412.56 
  
10.74 
7 Livestock produce 
(milk, meat 
and fish) 
232.86 3.01 29871.41   
  
21.70 
Total 1254.65 68.90 149503.10 
8 Eggs* 122110 7363 3287.32 
  Grand Total 152790.42 
                       *For eggs, production in million numbers and price per eggs were taken” 
 
           Table -2  
    
Crops/Commodities 
Loss (%) 
As per ICAR-CIPHET 
Study (2015)* 
As per NABCONS 
study (2022)** 
Cereals 4.65 - 5.99 3.89-5.92 
Pulses 6.36 - 8.41 5.65-6.74 
Oil Seeds 3.08 - 9.96 2.87-7.51 
Fruits 6.70-15.88 6.02-15.05 
Vegetables 4.58-12.44 4.87-11.61 
Plantation Crops 
&Spices 
1.18-7.89 1.29-7.33 
Milk 0.92 0.87 
Fisheries (Inland) 5.23 4.86 
Fisheries (Marine) 10.52 8.76 
Meat 2.71 2.34 
Poultry 6.74 5.63 
Egg 7.19 6.03 
Source: *Report on Assessment of Quantitative Harvest and Post-Harvest Losses of  
 Major  Crops and commodities in India, 2015. **NABCONS Study 2022 
 
3.15  With regard to the contribution of P MKSY in reducing PHL, the Ministry 
stated inter- alia as under: 
 

27 
 
“….. 
Food irradiation facilitates in reduction of post-harvest losses and wastage 
of perishable farm produce by enhancing shelf life. Food irradiation units 
are assisted under the Integrated Cold Chain & Value Addition 
Infrastructure scheme, one of the component scheme of PMKSY. MoFPI 
has approved 16 numbers of project proposals for setting up of multi -
product food irradiation units across the Country till date. The total amount 
of Grants -in-aid of Rs. 112.99 Crore has been approved of which, Rs. 
68.38 Crore has been released.” 
 
 
3.16 Adding further, MoFPI submitted as under:  
 
“PMKSY is a big step towards creating Post harvest infrastructure for 
reducing losses, ensuring  better prices to farmers, creating off farm 
employment opportunities and value addition”  
 
3.17  About the measures taken to promote energy -efficient logistics, and its 
impact, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“As per the provisions under PMKSY component scheme guidelines, 
Project Implementation Agency (PIA) must comply with the requirements of 
Cold Chain infrastructure as per the directions of Ministry of Environment, 
Forest & Climate Change, Government of India. These requirements focus 
on the adoption of energy -efficient cooling systems that utilize Non -ODS 
(Non- Ozone Depleting Substances) and low GWP (Low Global Warming 
Potential) refrigerants with low environmental impact.” 
 
Data on Cold Storage and Post Harvest logistics  
 
3.18  The details of State -wise cold storage and post -harvest logistics facilities 
including identified horticulture States, as submitted by the Ministry is as follows :  
 
“The component schemes under PMKSY provide financial assistance in the 
form of grants-in-aid to entrepreneurs for setting up of food processing and 
preservation infrastructure which, inter -alia, includes cold storages for 
captive use and refrigerated vehicles to minimize post -harvest losses. The 
Ministry furnished the details of cold storage and post -harvest logistics 
facilities, State-wise including identified horticulture in Annexure-VI.” 
 
 
Impact of Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Scheme  
 
3.19 With regard to the impact of cold chain infrastructure on reducing the losses 
and wastage of crops, MoFPI further submitted that: 
 
“As per the Evaluation Study conducted and submitted to the Ministry by 
NABARD Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd. (NABCONS) in 2020 on “Impact 
of Units Implemented under Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value 

28 
 
Addition Infrastructure assisted by Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(MoFPI)”, it was highlighted that due to interventions of the Integrated Cold 
Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Scheme of Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries, While all sectors reported a slight decrease in the 
wastages, the fruit and vegetable sector has been most significantly 
impacted by the cold chain scheme. The dairy sector saw a decrease in 
wastage from 0.84 per cent to 0.13 per cent whereas in the fisheries sector 
the wastage decreased from 1.25 per cent to 0.38 per cent.” 
 
 
Creation of farm to retail chain network  
 
3.20 The Committee inquired on how the individual components of the PMKSY 
are contributing towards enhancing and reinforcing the farm-to-retail supply 
chain network. In response, the Ministry provided the following reply: 
 
“MoFPI through implementation of PMKSY, helps in creation of modern 
infrastructure with efficient supply chain management from farm gate to 
retail outlet across the country. The scheme not only provide a boost to the 
growth of food processing sector in the country but also helps in, inter alia, 
reducing wastage of agricultural produce, increasing the processing level 
and enhancing the export of the processed foods. With creation of Food 
Processing Infrastructure, the demand for Farm produce which is raw 
material for Food Processing increases leading to better prices to farmers 
and increasing farm gate profitability.” 
 
R&D activities  
 
3.21  When the Committee asked about the R&D initiatives that have been taken 
for processing, storage, innovation and sustainable packaging, the Ministry in their 
written reply have submitted as under:  
 
“The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing a Research 
and Development scheme, which is a component of Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY). 
 
Under the scheme, financial assistance as grant - in-aid is given to various 
Universities, IITs, Central/ State Government Institutions, Government 
funded Organizations, R&D laboratories and CSIR recognized R&D units in 
private sector to promote and undertake demand driven R&D work in the 
field of processed food sector for product & process development, design 
and development of equipment, improved storage, shelf-life, packaging etc.  
 
Government organizations/ Institutions/ Universities are eligible for 100% 
grant-in-aid for the cost of equipment, consumables and expenditure 
related to Junior Research Fellow/ Senior Research Fellow/ Research 
Associate, while private Organizations/ Institutions/ Universities are eligible 
for 50% grant-in-aid for the equipment cost in general areas and 70% grant-

29 
 
in-aid in difficult areas for conducting such research activities on 
reimbursement basis as per existing scheme guidelines. 
Under the scheme, 236 R&D project proposals have been approved under 
the R&D scheme from FY 2008 -2009 to till now. Of these, 225 R&D 
projects have been completed and 11 R&D projects are on-going. 
 
Since implementation of PMKSY (2016 -2017), the Ministry has approved 
80 Research and Development projects. Out of which, 69 R&D projects 
have been completed and 03 R&D projects are on-going.” 
    
Storage capacity  
 
3.22 While replying to a specific query of the Committee regarding the future 
plans of the Ministry with respect to storage capacity and how the storage and 
processing units relate, the Ministry explained to the Committee, as under: 
 
“Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY) is demand driven in 
nature and applications are invited through Expression of Interest (EoI) 
from all over country. Merit based approvals are given to the eligible 
proposals based on availability of funds. Further, under PMKSY cold 
storage as a part of food processing projects is established as per the 
requirement of processing capacity of that food processing unit for 
exclusive captive use. Standalone cold storages are not supported under 
any component scheme of PMKSY scheme.” 
 
Sanctions and beneficiaries under PMKSY  
 
3.23   Ministry, through its Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY), has 
so far, sanctioned a total of 1604 projects under different sub -schemes of PMKSY 
with total project cost of Rs. 30,943.43 crores, which are aimed to create 
processing & preservation capacity of 416.16 LMT/annum; benefiting about 50.29 
lakh farmers; creation of additional direct/indirect employment opportunities of 
7.30 lakh. 
 
3.24 With regard to the role of PMKSY in the development of Food Processing 
Sector, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“PMKSY supports the creation and expansion of the 
processing/preservation capacity through implementation of various 
component schemes. These schemes aim for the overall development of 
food processing sector, including creation of modern infrastructure with 
efficient supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet, reduce 
post-harvest losses and create higher value -addition, providing better 
returns to farmers, creation of employment opportunities, reducing wastage, 
increasing the processing level and enhancing the export of the processed 
foods.” 
 

30 
 
Number of registered food processing Units  
 
3.25 The total number of registered food processing units in Food Processing 
Sector as furnished by MoFPI is as under:  
 
“As per the report of Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) for the year 2022 -
23 were  42,801 whereas as per the latest report of Annual Survey of 
Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE), 2023 -24 the estimated 
number of establishments in un-incorporated sector were 22,89,058.” 
 
 
SAMPADA Portal  
 
3.26   When asked about the key features of the SAMPADA Portal and the details 
of proposals received under various component schemes of PMKSY, MoFPI 
furnished the following reply:  
 
“The SAMPADA Portal is an initiative by Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries, Government of India, to switch to electronic mode from physical 
mode so as to carry out the work of the Ministry in a paperless manner.   
This portal aims at disposal of work of the Ministry in transparent, smooth, 
time bound manner.  This portal serves as Centralized Database for all 
projects under PMKSY where in applications/documents are 
received/submitted online.  It enables monitoring, status tracking & impact 
assessment of projects by the Ministry as well as by the promoters. 
Under various component schemes of Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA 
Yojana (PMKSY), since the inception of the PMKSY i.e, 2017, 5380 
proposals have been received on the portal, out of which 1232 proposals 
have approved by the Ministry and suitable action in remaining cases is 
also taken.” 
3.27  With regard to the (i) role of real -time monitoring dashboard in the 
SAMPADA Portal; (ii) how it assists in tracking the progress of food processing 
projects; and, (iii) the achievement of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), the 
Ministry stated as under:  
“This portal serves as Centralized Database for all projects under PMKSY 
where in applications/documents are received online, status/movement of 
the projects/files can be monitored through the portal at various stages by 
the Ministry as well as by the promoters until the completion of the project. 
 
The portal provides key information like change in project cost, grant in 
aid, release of installments of grant in aid/subsidy etc. and also assists in 
tracking the progress of food processing projects and the achievement of 
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) by facilitating timely  monitoring and 
review of the ongoing projects.” 

31 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
 Prime Minister -Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises 
(PMFME) 
 
 As part of Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan, Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries (MoFPI) has launched an all India centrally sponsored "PM 
Formalisation of Micro food processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme" for 
providing financial, technical and business support for upgradation of existing 
micro food processing enterprises.  The Scheme was approved by the Union 
Cabinet on 20 May, 2020 and Guidelines for the Scheme was issued on 19 June, 
2020. It is to be implemented for a period of five years from 2020 -21 to 2024 -25 
with an outlay of Rs. 10,000 cr. for providing credit linked subsidy to 2,00,000 (two 
lakh) micro food processing units across the country. This Scheme will for the 
“Vocal for Local” mission of the Government. The Scheme has been extended for 
a period of one year up to 2025-26. 
 
 PMFME- One District One Product (ODOP) 
 
 4.2 PMFME Scheme adopts One District One Product (ODOP) approach to 
reap the benefit of scale in terms of procurement of inputs, availing common 
services and marketing of products. ODOP for the scheme will provide the 
framework for value chain development and alignment of support infrastructure. 
The ODOP product selected are either a perishable agri -produce, cereal -based 
product or a food product widely produced, Minor Forest Produce or traditional 
food products in a district and their allied sectors. The ODOPs are recommended 
by the States/UTs on the basis of agriculture production, number of micro food 
enterprises and SHGs/Cooperatives/Producer group engaged in processing of 
food product. The list of ODOP has been reconciled with the ODOFP list of 
MoA&FW. PMFME Scheme provides support to existing individual micro units for 
capital investment. New units, for both individual and groups would be supported 
for ODOP products. The scheme also envisages strengthening backward and 
forward linkages, provision of common facilities, incubation centres, training, R&D, 
marketing & branding, provision of which would primarily be for ODOP products. 
 
4.3  The Committee sought to know the specific activities undertaken by  MoFPI 
or other relevant bodies to promote ODOP products. In response, the Ministry 
informed that several awareness and promotional activities have been undertaken 
to enhance public understanding and participation under the PMFME Scheme, 
with a focus on promoting ODOP products. These include: 
 
“National & State level awareness campaigns such as Newspaper 
advertisement, Radio Jingles, Exhibitions & Expos, Millet Fairs, Buyer -
Seller Meets, district and block level workshops etc. More than 120 unique 

32 
 
ODOP products manufactured by the micro processing enterprises were 
showcased during World Food India 2024. By fostering entrepreneurship 
and supporting traditional food processing, the PMFME scheme has played 
a pivotal role in uplifting rural economies and promoting "Vocal for Local." 
The benefits and the impact of the scheme is showcased through many 
success stories of the scheme beneficiaries published in PMFME website 
and e-newsletter. 
 
Additionally, national print advertisement campaigns in regional languages 
have been launched, targeting publications from small to large -scale. The 
Ministry, in collaboration with State Governments, has also been organizing 
district-level awareness workshops to engage key stakeholders such as 
potential micro -food processing enterprises, bank representatives, district 
officials, and resource persons, ensuring they are well -informed about the 
PMFME Scheme. Moving forward, the Ministry plans to expand its efforts 
with continued pan -India campaigns, district -level workshops, exhibitions, 
and events, all aimed at maximizing reach and boosting participation in the 
PMFME Scheme at the regional level.” 
 
 
4.4  In response to a query how  ODOP helped in promoting the Make in India 
Initiative, the Ministry submitted the following reply: 
 
“ODOP approach is being followed under the PMFME Scheme to reap the 
benefit of scale in terms of procurement of inputs, availing common 
services and marketing of products.  
 
Under PMFME scheme units are supported in processing of ODOP as well 
as Non  ODOP. ODOP identifies unique products from each district, and 
PMFME provides financial, technical, and capacity -building support to 
micro-enterprises working on these products. This has strengthened the 
value chain of the product, supported in boosting local manufacturing, 
generates employment, and enhances value addition, aligning with Make 
in India's goal of strengthening domestic production. 
 
Under the Scheme, a total of 1 , 41,174  loans have been  sanctioned for 
micro food processing units through the Credit Linked Subsidy program, as 
on 31st May 2025. This initiative has successfully provided employment to 
4, 23,522  individuals. Additionally, seed capital assistance has been 
sanctioned for 3,41,608 SHG members.”                                                 
 
4.5  With regard to the scalability and value addition of food products across 
districts under ODOP program, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“MoFPI is extending credit linked subsidy to the interested individual/entity 
for upgradation of existing or setting up of new micro -food processing 
facility across the country, in accordance with the guidelines of Pradhan 
Mantri Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) 
scheme. Establishment of Common Infrastructure projects by 

33 
 
FPOs/SHGs/Cooperative/Govt. Entities; Seed Capital to SHG members; 
Marketing & Branding projects for ODOP; and Capacity Building through 
training institutions are also supported as per the PMFME scheme 
guidelines. 
Support is being provided for setting up of new/ upgradation of existing 
micro food processing enterprises for ODOP as well as Non ODOP 
Products.” 
 
4.6  With regard to the reasons for sanctioning of loans to only 1,38,947 lakh 
persons under credit linked subsidy support, PMFME (ODOP) programme which 
is less than fifty per cent of the total number of applications i.e. 3,27,300, MoFPI 
furnished the following reasons: 
 
“The major reasons for rejection of applications after submission are low 
quality of applications, non -compliance of mandatory documents and poor 
CIBIL/credit score. The bank sanctions the projects based on their policy, 
however Ministry regularly conducts meeting with lending banks and State 
Government. Also, raises the issue at the Department of Financial Services 
(DFS) level and in the State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) meetings. 
Regular Workshops, Seminars and awareness camps are being conducted 
at National, State and District level to increase the outreach and benefit of 
the scheme to the last mile beneficiaries.” 
 
Common Infrastructure component – Capital subsidy  
 
4.7 The details of technical, financial, branding support to incubation centres 
provided, the Ministry submitted the following reply: 
 
“Under the Common Infrastructure component of the PMFME Scheme,  
Credit linked capital subsidy @35% of the eligible project cost subject to 
maximum of Rs. 3 crore to support FPOs, SHGs, Cooperatives and any 
Government agency which have established or propose to establish food 
processing line along with common infrastructure/ value chain/ incubation 
centres for ODOP as well as Non ODOP processing.  The common 
infrastructure will also be available for other units and public to utilize on 
hiring basis for substantial part of the capacity. 
  
Till 31.05.2025, Ministry has approved 75 incubation centres with Grant in 
Aid of Rs. 205.36 Cr. The delegation of power to approve the proposals of 
Common infrastructure is given to the State/ UT Governments.” 
 
 
Sanctions and disbursements to the eligible beneficiaries under PMFME 
 
4.8 So far, a total of 1,41,174 loans have been sanctioned under the credit 
linked subsidy component of the PMFME scheme to individual beneficiaries, 
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Self Help Groups (SHGs) and Producer 

34 
 
Cooperative Societies. An amount of Rs 1154.49 crore has been released as seed 
capital assistance to 3,41,608 Self Help Group (SHG) members and 75 Incubation 
Centers have been approved for setting up of Incubation Centers to be set up in 
ODOP processing lines and allied product lines with an outlay of Rs 205.35 crore. 
4.9 About the portals catering to the scheme, MoFPI submitted that  
‘’ A dedicated online portal is in place for submission/approval/rejection of 
proposals under Centrally Sponsored Prime Minister's Formalisation of 
Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme i.e. 
pmfme.mofpi.gov.in. The portal also provides detailed information about 
the PMFME scheme, its guidelines, and tracking their application status in 
real time. No physical documents are required to be submitted by 
applicants.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
Production -Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industries 
(PLISFPI - since 2021 -22)  
 
    In order to support creation of global food manufacturing champions 
commensurate with India’s natural resource endowment and support Indian 
brands of food products in the international markets, Central Sector Scheme - 
“Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI)” 
was approved by Union Cabinet on 31.03.2021 with an outlay of Rs.10,900 crores.  
The Scheme is being implemented over a six -year period from 2021 -22 to 2026 -
27.  
 
5.2 Specific sectors with high growth potential and medium to large scale 
employment generation potential have been identified for providing support 
through the PLI scheme, which include ready -to-eat and ready -to-cook, marine 
products, fruits and vegetables, honey, indigenous contains ghee, mozzarella 
cheese, organic eggs and poultry meat. 
 
 Components of the scheme  
  
 5.3    The three components of the Scheme are-  
 
➢ Incentivising manufacturing of four major food product segments viz. 
Ready to Cook/ Ready to Eat (RTC/ RTE) foods including Millets based 
products, Processed Fruits & Vegetables, Marine Products and 
Mozzarella Cheese (Category-I). 
 
➢ The second component  is for incentivising production  of Innovative/ 
Organic products of SMEs (Category -II) across al the above four food 
product segments including free Range Eggs Poultry Meal and Egg 
products. 
 
➢ The third component relates to support for branding and marketing 
abroad (Category-III) to incentivise emergence of strong Indian brands 
for in-store Branding, shelf space renting and marketing.  
 
➢ PLI Scheme for Millets : A production Linked incentive Scheme for 
Millet based products (PLISMBP) was launched in 2022 -23 for a period 
of five years up to 2026 -27, to encourage the use of millets in 
RTC/RTE products and incentivising their sales.  
 
✓ “The selection under the Scheme was a one-time process. The 
Scheme guidelines were notified on 02.05.2021 and the Expression 

36 
 
of Interest (EoI) were also invited on 02.05.2021 under PLISFPI. 
Detailed guidelines for the Millet Based PLI Scheme were issued on 
24.06.2022 and Expression of Interest (EoI) for this new segment 
were invited on 27.06.2022, with last date of receipt of applications 
as 29.07.2022.  
 
✓ The scheme has reportedly generated employment for around 3.4 
lakh persons against the initial target of 2.5 lakhs. Also investment 
of Rs. 7641.16 Crore was initially envisaged against which 
investment of Rs. 9032 Crore has been reported.” 
 
Investments under the scheme 
 
5.4  The investment details are as follows:   
 
➢ These proposals have a committed investment of Rs.7641.16 crore; 
production of processed food worth Rs.8.29 Lakh crore; exports worth 
Rs.1.77 Lakh crore and generation of employment opportunities of 2.50 
Lakh till Year 2026-27.  
 
➢ Investment under the Scheme was to be completed by 31/03/2024. 
The Estimated investment was Rs.3310 crore, at the time of selection 
under PLISFPI, investment of Rs.7641.16 crore was approved to be 
implemented by 31/03/2024. The investment of Rs.8910 crore has 
been achieved by 31/03/2024. 
 
➢ The implementation of the scheme has promoted import substitution by 
Category-I companies. For example, two large companies viz. Nestle & 
HUL have substituted the tomato pulp/ puree imports and are procuring 
locally. 
 
➢ The Scheme has reportedly generated employment for more than 3.3 
Lakhs people. A total incentive of Rs 1521.806 Crore has been 
disbursed in 105 cases since inception of the scheme.   
 
➢ Ministry has incorporated “Millets” as one of the thrust areas under the 
scheme. It has approved 29 Millet based proposals for production -
linked incentive with an outlay of Rs.800 crore, which includes 
proposals from 8 large entities and 21 MSMEs. 
 
➢ Companies covered under various components of the PLI Scheme  and 
also the progress of the scheme since inception are as follows: 

37 
 
 
Sl. No. Plan Section Number of 
approvals 
Total 
1. Category- I RTE/RTC 12 53 
fruits and vegetables 27 
marine products 10 
mozzarella cheese 4 
2 Category- II Innovative  2 15 
 
  
organic 13 
3 Category- III  B&M 73 73 
4 PLISMBP large organizations 8 29 
PLISMBP MSME 21 
Total 170 170” 
   
Challenges in implementing PLISMBP 
 
5.5  On being asked by the Committee about how the  Ministry is addressing 
eligibility and setup challenges in Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Millet -
based Products (PLISMBP) and the details of steps that are being taken to reduce 
documentation and improve disbursement under PLISMBP, the Ministry furnished 
the reply as follows: 
 
“There have been no major eligibility and setup challenges in Production Linked 
Incentive Scheme for Millet -based Products (PLISMBP). To ensure effective 
implementation of the scheme following steps have been taken:  
 
User-Friendly Interface: The PLISFPI Portal is designed as a one -stop solution 
for all information related to the scheme. The Portal is used to file Quarterly 
Returns and filing Incentive Claims by the Applicants.  
 
Efficient Communication: Email communications for different categories has 
been established to facilitate information dissemination, quick responses, and 
issue resolution.  
 
Accessibility: The Ministry and PMA have dedicated teams to ensure easy 
access and prompt assistance. Additionally, PMA has assigned case officers to 
each selected applicant.  
 
Technical Support: A dedicated IT team is available at the PMA to address any 
technical issues with the PLISFPI Portal.  
 
Comprehensive Information: The Portal provides a wealth of information, 
including the selection process, applications received, selected applicants, 
investment locations, incentive claims, and bank guarantees.  
 
Weekly Meetings: Weekly Meetings are held with the PLI Beneficiaries to 
understand their concerns and resolve issues and dissemination of important 
updates regarding the Scheme.” 
 

38 
 
5.6 While replying to a specific query of the Committee regarding outreach and 
awareness steps taken to ensure equitable participation in PLISMBP, the Ministry 
replied that selection under PLISMBP was a onetime process which is carried out 
after various stakeholder consultations. Wide publicity was given at the time of 
inviting applications under the Scheme. 
 
5.7 In written response to a query how does the Scheme ensure the use of 
domestically grown produce and the outcomes thereof, MoFPI stated as under: 
 
“The Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry 
(PLISFPI) specify that the entire manufacturing process, including primary 
processing, of the food products eligible for coverage under the scheme 
must occur in India, with the exception of additives, flavors, and edible oils. 
This approach aims to benefit farmers by procurement of domestically 
grown agricultural products for the manufacturing process thereby 
increasing their income. Category -I companies have successfully 
substituted imports of tomato pulp and puree by sourcing locally, 
demonstrating the scheme's effectiveness in promoting domestic 
manufacturing.” 
 
Data on applications under PLISFPI  
 
5.8  The data on the number of applications received, approved, rejected, 
withdrawn under each category/segment of Production Linked Incentive Scheme 
for Food Processing Industries (PLISFPI) category and the steps taken for its 
effective implementation as furnished by MoFPI is as follows:  
 
Applications  Received  Rejected  Selected  
Did 
not 
accept Subjudice  Withdrawn  Live  
FY 20-21 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Fruits & 
Vegetables 40 7 33 4 1 1 27 
RTC/RTE 34 22 12 0 0 0 12 
Marine 
Products 11 0 11 0 0 1 10 
Mozzarella 
Cheese 6 2 4 0 0 0 4 
Innovative 62 60 2 0 0 0 2 
Organic 27 16 11 0 0 1 10 
Branding & 
Marketing 114 34 80 0 0 7 73 
FY 22-23 
  
  
Millet Large 
Entity 8 0 8 0 0 0 8 
Millet 
MSME 25 3 22 0 0 1 21 
Organic 
Round 2 9 6 3 0 0 0 3 
    336 150 186 4 1 11 170 
                                                                                                                                            
 
“To ensure effective implementation of the PLI scheme, various steps have 
been taken as under:  
 

39 
 
User-Friendly Interface: The PLISFPI Portal is designed as a one -stop 
solution for all information related to the scheme. The Portal is used to 
file Quarterly Returns and filing Incentive Claims by the Applicants.  
 
Technical Support: A dedicated IT team is available at the PMA (IFCI 
Ltd) to address any technical issues with the PLISFPI Portal.  
 
Comprehensive Information: The Portal provides a wealth of information, 
including the selection process, applications received,  selected 
applicants, investment locations, incentive claims, and bank guarantees.” 
 
 
5.9  With regard to the role of Industrial Finance Corporation of India Ltd (IFCI) 
in PLISFPI, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“The Scheme is being implemented through a Project Management 
Agency (PMA) which is responsible for providing secretarial, managerial 
and implementation support and carrying out other responsibilities as 
assigned by MoFPI from time to time. Industrial Finance Corporation of 
India Ltd (IFCI) has been engaged as PMA for the scheme. The 
performance of PMA is evaluated on the basis of scope of work prescribed 
through an MoU signed between MOFPI and IFCI Ltd.” 
 
Awareness creation  
 
5.10  With regard to the steps taken to create awareness about the Scheme 
among the general public l, MoFPI submitted as under:  
 
“Promotional Activities Section of MOFPI has a team for disseminating 
information about different schemes of the Ministry through social media 
among general public. During the event of World Food India 2024 
organised at Bharat Madapam, wide publicity was given to the schemes 
being implemented by MOFPI.” 
 
Incentive disbursement  
 
5.11 On the current status of incentive disbursement under the Scheme, the 
Ministry submitted that so far incentive amount of Rs. 1627.469 Crore has been 
disbursed as shown below:  
 
Segment Incentive Disbursed 
(₹ Crore) 
Processed Fruits & Vegetables 537.05 
Ready to Cook/ Ready to Eat 887.14 
Marine Products 139.22 
Mozzarella Cheese 32.02 
Organic Products 4.60 
Millets 27.44 
Total 1627.469 

40 
 
 
There has been delay in disbursement of ince ntives in some cases, where 
the applicants have not been  able to provide supporting documents to the 
satisfaction of PMA and the Ministry. In some cases, there has been delay 
in achieving the committed investment target and therefore the incentive 
disbursement has been put on hold.” 
 
Branding and Marketing support  
 
5.12  In regard to a specific query by the Committee on branding and marketing 
promotion under the Scheme, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“Under the PLISFPI, the Government provides financial in centives to 
promote Indian food brands abroad, supporting branding and marketing 
activities for Indian -branded consumer food products in global markets. 
Applicants are reimbursed 50% of their expenditure on branding and 
marketing abroad, capped at 3% of their annual food product sales or ₹50 
crore per year, whichever is lower.” 
 
Monitoring the implementation of the Scheme. 
 
5.13 On being asked by the Committee about how Quarterly Review Reports are 
used to monitor and improve implementation of the Scheme and the  major 
challenges faced in PLISFPI implementation and how is the Ministry addressing 
them, the Ministry stated a under: 
 
“The data reported through Quarterly Review Reports is assessed by the 
PMA (IFCI Ltd) while examining the incentive claims submitted by the 
applicants.  
 
 So far no audits or third -party evaluations have been conducted by the 
Ministry. However, NITI Aayog has mandated Indian Institute of 
Management, Ahmedabad (IIM -A) to conduct an impact assessment study 
of the PLISFPI; and the report is awaited.” 
 
5.14 With regard to the share of large and small food processing companies in 
the PLISFPI over the last five years as under: 
 
“The beneficiaries of the Scheme are a diverse mix of 132 companies, out 
of which 69 belong to MSME category. In addition, 40 MSMEs have 
invested as contract manufacturers of large companies under Category-I.” 
 
“As of March 31 st March, 2025, 170 applications from 132 companies were 
approved with Rs. 8910 crores invested and 3.4 lakh jobs created.” 

41 
 
 
5.15 About the portals catering to the scheme, MoFPI submitted that-  
 
“In PLI Scheme, there was only one -time selection process and all the 
applications were received over an online portal i.e. plimofpi.ifciltd.com. 
Further, claims for availing incentives by approved applicants are also 
submitted on the online portal.” 
 
 
Digital initiatives for smooth implementation of three schemes  
5.16 With respect to the challenges faced by small food processing business es 
in embracing digital  adoption and the details of steps taken by the Ministry to 
address these challenges, the Ministry furnished the following reply:  
“Ministry has made all the processes related to the release of grants 
simple, easy, and transparent through the online scheme management 
system. Separate Online portals have been developed for all its schemes 
PMKSY (www.pmksy.gov.in), PMFME (pmfme.mofpi.gov.in), and PLISFPI 
(plimofpi.ifciltd.com). The system captures the entire workflow starting from 
the stage of submission of proposals to project acceptance and thereafter 
facilitating grant release involving all the stakeholders namely Promoter, 
Project Execution Agencies, Project Management Agencies (PMAs), and 
Ministry and automates all the processes related to grant release. At every 
instance, email/SMS is automatically sent to the applicant about their 
status. The module facilitates online submission of application documents 
and its status tracking on a real -time basis. A helpline number including 
email-based queries & reply has also been provided to promoters for 
getting their resolutions, if any.” 
 
 

42 
 
PART - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Sectoral Overview 
 
1. Recognising the  critical role of food processing sector in 
the economy in terms of development  of agriculture and allied 
sectors, employment generation, usage of agriculture raw 
material for  producing value added products, etc, Govt of India 
during the last decade  has taken many path breaking policy  
initiatives such as (a) allowing Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in 
Food Processing sector (FPS); (b) including loans to FPS  under 
Priority Sector Lending (PSL ); (c)  Creating special fund for  
setting  up  of Mega Food Parks (MFPs) , Industrial Food Parks 
(IFPs), Agro Processing Clusters (APCs) , individual food  
processing units, etc; (d) identifying FPS as strategic sector its 
potential for inclusive growth, rural employment generation, 
value addition, and export promotion; and, (d) formulation and 
implementation of   various schemes viz. Prime Minister Kisan 
Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), Prime Minister Formalisation of Micro 
Enterprises, and PLI Scheme , as part of Make in India initiative ,   
for FPS.  These initiatives have resulted in (i) attracting Rs 53000 

43 
 
crores of FDI during the last decade, (ii) doubling of processed 
food products grom about US $ 5billion to more than US$ 10 
billion since 2014 -15 (iii) increase in employment in FPS  from 
17.73 lakh in 2014 -15 to 22.96 lakh in 2022 –23, (iv) rise in Gross 
Value Addition (GVA) from Rs. 1.90 lakh crore in 2021 –22 to Rs. 
2.24 lakh crore in 2023 –24, (v) maintaining a share of around 8% 
in the GVA of the overall manufacturing sector . In the light of the 
afore mentioned, the Govt Sector is projected to grow at an 
average annual rate of 6.5% over the next five to six years and 
reach a GVA of approximately Rs. 3.3 lakh crore by 2030.  
 In light of the above, the initiatives taken so far may be  
strengthened further, assess schemes and policies to see 
whether any course correction is required to  achieve the 
specified targets by 2030. T he Committee also  recommend the 
Ministry to  ensure effective Communication , coordination, 
consultations with all  the stakeholders including State 
Governments which may help in identifying region specific 
challenges, streamlining regulatory frameworks and facilitate 
timely interventions for boosting investment , employment, and 
innovation in the Food Processing Sector.  The succeeding paras 

44 
 
deal in detail with various aspects of the policies and schemes of 
the Government.   
Foreign Direct Investment in Food Processing  
2. With a view to give impetus to the growth of food 
processing sector in India, the Committee note that Govt has 
initially in 2016-17 allowed Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) under 
‘automatic route’ and subsequently in 2027 -18 100% FDI was 
permitted through the ‘approval of the Government ’ for trading, 
including e -commerce concerning food products manufactured 
or made in India .  Such an enabling policy to attract foreign  
investments resulted in foreign companies investing more  than 
Rs. 5 3,000 crore in Indian food processing industry since 2014 -
15.  Such huge investments, the Committee believe is the primary 
driver, apart from other initiatives of the Govt of India, in 
increasing employment opportunities and also growth witnessed 
in exports of food processing sector , which was discussed in 
detail else where in the report.  
   The committee note the Gov ernment’s FDI policy could attract 
marquee food  processing and beverage  companies namely 
Nestle, Pepsi, Mars and  other long-term investors from  US, 
Singapore, France, Japan, Italy, Switzerland, Australia, etc. It has 

45 
 
given fillip to local produce of agri commodities. The Committee 
appreciate that these Companies are using locally produced 
agricultural crops for making Ready to Eat/ Ready to Cook 
Products providing much needed support to the farmers. Further, 
these companies brought in food processing technologies which 
were not in India earlier. The moderation / decline in FDI  in the 
last two/ three years, the Committee note, is due to geopolitical 
situation and also the overall decline in foreign capital inflows all 
over the world and hence is temporary in nature and will stabilise 
in due course. They at the same time suggest the Govt quicken 
the approval processes for FDI proposals and specific time lines 
may be drawn to accord approvals for FDI proposals as this will 
act as an incentive for these companies. Further, provision of 
basic infrastructure may not be allowed to be an inhibiting factor 
for attracting FDI especially in the current geo political situation.    
 
Credit flow to FPS under Priority Sector Lending 
3. The Committee are  glad to note that the Government of 
India’s initiative to include lending to agro processing industries 
under Priority Sector Lending (PSL)  in 2015 is a decisive step in 
the right direction that contributed enormously to the growth pf 

46 
 
Food Processing Industry (FPI) in  India. The data furnished by 
the Ministry on lending by the three groups  of the commercial  
banks – Public, Private and Small Finance banks since 2020 
shows that the outstanding credit to the food processing sector 
has witnessed continuous increase from Rs. 82,209, Rs. 41,132 
and Rs.378 crore to Rs 1,13,814, Rs. 1,01,465   and Rs. 2707 crore 
in 2024 respectively.  The outstanding credit by foreign banks 
though witnessed continuous growth from  2020 to 2022, it saw 
decline in the rest two years 2023 and 2024.  The Committee while 
acknowledging and appreciating the initiatives of the Govt for 
enabling flow of credit to food processing industry which led to a 
massive increase of more than 70 % in outstanding credit to the 
sector i.e. from about Rs. 1,30,508 crores at the end of March in 
2020 to Rs . 2,23,915 crores at the end of March, 2024.  The 
Committee have no doubt that enabling credit flow to the sector 
has resulted in increase in employment and exports of the sector.  
 The Committee note that separate data is not maintained by 
Financial Inclusion & Development Department (FIDD) of RBI is 
not maintaining data on credit to the food processing units in 
rural and Urban areas separately . The Committee, in view of the 
objectives of the Prime Minister Formalisation of Micro 

47 
 
Enterprises ( PMFME) scheme  to bring the informal food 
processing units, which are predominantly in rural areas, into the 
formal sector, they believe maintenance of data on credit flows to 
food processing units in Urban and Rural areas is imperative. The 
Committee are further of the view that segregated data for urban 
and rural areas enables  the Govt for  reviewing the progress of 
the PMFME scheme in rural areas and also to have course 
correction, if any required in rural areas.     
 
4. In view of the huge impact that food processing industry on 
employment generation especially in rural areas and also 
exports, the access to the bank credit particularly in rural areas 
needs to be monitored. Further, as a decade has gone by since 
the inclusion of food processing sector under PSL, it may be 
desirable to have an impact assessment study  on the flow  of 
credit to food processing units especially in rural areas.      
 
Special Food Processing Fund – Need to improve utilisation 
 5. The Committee note that the Govt of India has set up a  
special fund of Rs. 2,000 Crore in NABARD in 2014 -15 to provide 

48 
 
affordable credit to  the food processing units to be set up mega 
Food Parks and also to the mega Food parks.  
     The data on term loans sanctioned and disbursed, as  on 
31.03.2025, out of the Special Food Processing (SFPF) shows that  
even  after a decade of its existence, (i) Rs. 1180 crore only out of 
Rs. 2000 crore, representing 59 % of the funds available could be 
sanctioned as term loans to Mega Food Parks (MFPs), Agro 
Processing Clusters (APC s), Individual food processing units in 
designated food parks and Industrial Food Parks (IFPs), (ii) Out of 
the term loans of Rs. 1179.79 crore sanctioned, Rs. 830 crore only 
was disbursed, representing 70.30 % of sanctions  till 30 March, 
2025. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific 
reasons for - 
(i)   far lower sanctions vis-a-vis available funds;  
(ii) lower disbursements vis-à-vis sanctions;  
(iii)  whether all the (a) 14  lender’s under MFPs, ( b) Nine 
APCs (c) 14 Individual Processing Units (IPUs) and three 
Industrial food parks (IFPs ), as given at annexure III, 
which availed credit from the fund are repaying the loans 
as per the terms and conditions of the loans and also 
whether they are operational to produce / process 

49 
 
products as per the agreed quantities maintaining 
prescribed quality, etc; and  
(iv)   the three IFPs not completing the projects even after 
two / three years of disbursing the funds?   
6.    The Committee also would like to be apprised of whether 
any third party audit of the fund was done and the detailed 
findings of such audit such as diversion, misutilisation / 
appropriation, if any, etc and also the measures taken / proposed 
to be taken to address the shortfalls in administering the funds 
and also whether fund has achieved its objectives for which it 
was set up with in a time frame drawn.  
 
Ease of doing Business – FSSAI regulations  
7. In addition to enabling the credit flow to and allowing 100% 
FDI in FPS, the Govt also took initiatives towards ease of doing 
business. For instance, Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) , the food sector  regulator, has  replaced product - 
by-product approval  with ingredient  and additive based 
approvals in 2017. Further FSSAI has  put in place rules and 
procedures for grant of prior approval of non -specified food and 

50 
 
food ingredients. The aforesaid regulation has helped the Food 
Business Operators and spurted the process of Food approvals.  
 
Ease of Doing Business - Exemption from licenses under IDR Act 
1951  
8.    Another significant policy initiative to attract investments 
into the FPS is exempting manufacturing /making processed food 
items from the purview of licensing under the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.  The Committee believe 
that this initiative aligns with the Objectives of Promoting Ease of 
Doing Business such as reducing regulatory requirements, 
particularly for micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) 
which form a substantial part of the unorganised food processing 
sector.  The Committee are  of the views that this may lead to 
faster establishment and expansion of food processing 
businesses, allowing them to focus on production rather than 
compliance. The Committee also feel that such a step will result 
in faster transition from the unorganised to the organised sector 
with fewer compliance burdens.  
 
 
 

51 
 
Ease of doing Business - Digital initiatives 
 9. The Committee observe that MoFPI has undertaken 
significant digital transformation by launching dedicated online 
portals for three major schemes - SAMPADA Portal for PMKSY, 
separate and exclusive portals for PMFME  and PLISFPI. These 
portals facilitate end -to-end online management of scheme 
applications, from proposal submission to the release of grant-in-
aid, and enable real -time monitoring of project progress and key 
performance indicators through integrated dashboards. The 
Committee have given to under stand that that these digital 
systems have improved transparency and accountability. Despite 
these advancements, the Committee find that delays in project 
implementation which are largely due to challenges in securing 
statutory clearances and approvals from multiple authorities, 
which are outside the direct purview of these scheme -specific 
portals. The Committee further note that the National Single 
Window System (NSWS), integrating 32 Central Ministries, is 
specifically designed to facilitate investor related clearances on a 
single portal, with transparency and accountability, enhancing 
ease of doing business exponentially. The Committee underscore 
that full and seamless integration of all relevant authorities with 

52 
 
NSWS is essential to unlock the Sector’s true growth potential. 
By ensuring that every regulatory clearance required for food 
processing projects is available through NSWS, the Ministry can 
substantially reduce project lead times, minimize bureaucratic 
hurdles, and create a truly investor -friendly environment. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take 
appropriate measures to ensure full integration of all relevant 
authorities with NSWS, promote its widespread adoption among 
stakeholders, rural areas, and establish robust monitoring and 
escalation mechanisms to realize the System’s best and most 
profitable outcomes for the Food Processing Sector. 
 
Ease of Doing Business- e commerce platforms  
10.  The Committee observe that e -commerce platforms are 
becoming increasingly important for the Food Processing 
Industry. They help businesses, especially Small and Micro 
Enterprises (SMEs), reach more customers across the country 
without the need for a physical store. By selling online, food 
processors can secure better prices for their products by cutting 
down on establishment costs, middlemen and can respond more 
quickly to consumer demands.  Open Network for Digital 

53 
 
Commerce (ONDC) , the Committee note, is an initiative by the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) 
is a digital platform designed to democratize e -commerce by 
enabling open networks for all aspects of the exchange of goods 
and services over digital or electronic networks. It envisions 
creating a level playing field for sellers, buyers, and service 
providers across India, particularly Small and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs). The Committee, while appreciating this 
initiative, are of the opinion that such e -commerce platforms 
could be a game changer for the Food Processing Industry.  They 
accordingly recommend that MoFPI take focused steps to raise 
awareness and increase the participation of MSMEs in e -
commerce platforms, especially in rural and semi -urban areas. 
Further, MoFPI may actively  encourage these enterprises to 
register and engage with platforms like ONDC to expand their 
market access reduce dependence on large platforms and 
improve their competitiveness and revenue opportunities. 
 
FPI- Food safety and quality standards   
11. The Committee observe that during the past five years, the 
number of food samples collected and tested by FSSAI has 

54 
 
steadily increased, indicating a strengthening of enforcement and 
monitoring activities. The Committee , however also  note with 
concern that the proportion of non -conforming samples, 
including those deemed unsafe, substandard, or with labelling 
and other violations, remains persistently high each year. While 
authorities have intensified actions against violators, with a rise 
in both civil and criminal proceedings, convictions, and penalties, 
the Committee believe that the ongoing prevalence of non -
conforming samples indicate a significant challenge in achieving 
full compliance with food safety standards. 
  Adulteration of Food is a serious concern in the country and 
has overarching effects on the general health and well-being of 
the population at large. In view of this, the Committee strongly 
recommend:   
(i) FSSAI to  intensify its efforts to enhance food safety 
compliance nationwide. This should include launching 
comprehensive awareness campaigns targeting food 
processing units and consumers alike, emphasizing 
the importance of food safety regulations and the 
serious consequences of non-compliance.  

55 
 
(ii) to ensure that there are an adequate number of 
personnel in this field and to support regular training 
and capacity -building initiatives for food safety, 
equipping them with the latest knowledge and tools is 
imperative for strict monitoring and effective 
enforcement.  
(iii) To explore the possibility of debarring/blacklisting 
individuals instead of units/factories who are engaged 
in adulteration and non -compliance with FSSAI 
rules/regulations.  
The Committee are of the firm opinion that ensuring highest 
standards of quality and safety of processed food items will 
certainly elevate the ‘Make in India’ brand, building trust among 
consumers worldwide. 
 
PMKSY- Scheme for ‘Setting Up/Upgradation of Food Testing 
Laboratories’ 
12. The Committee observe that out of 205 Food Testing Lab 
Projects sanctioned under the component Scheme for ‘Setting 
Up/Up gradation of Food Testing Laboratories’, only 169 have 
been completed so far, with 36 projects still pending due to 

56 
 
reasons related to delays in National Accreditation Board for 
Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL ), accreditation and 
administrative procedures. The Committee have been apprised 
that there are 617 NABL accredited food testing laboratories 
operational in the country, comprising 122 Government owned 
and 495 private owned labs. An impact assessment  carried out   
by YES Bank in February 2021, indicates that there remains a 
significant deficit of over 360 laboratories nationwide. The 
Committee note that this shortfall, along with delays in 
operationalizing sanctioned labs, poses a challenge to ensuring 
food safety, regulatory compliance, and supporting the growth of 
the Food Processing Industry.   In view of the above, the 
Committee - 
(i) would like to be apprised of the specific  corrective 
measures taken on the afore mentioned findings of Yes 
bank assessment study.   
(ii) recommend that priority be given for timely completion 
of all pending food testing lab projects by streamlining 
administrative and accreditation processes, especially 
for NABL certification 

57 
 
(iii) suggest to ensure that these labs are set up in regions 
with the greatest need and highest food processing 
capacity.  
(iv) recommend the Ministry to take steps for upgrading 
existing labs and enhance testing capacity and 
reliability, promote the use of mobile food testing labs 
and digital platforms to improve accessibility and 
efficiency, particularly for small and medium food 
enterprises in remote areas to mitigate the current gap 
in food testing infrastructure in the Food Processing 
Sector. 
  The Committee are of the considered  opinion that  
complying with the above suggestions /recommendations will 
instil confidence in the importers of Indian processed foods as 
far as safety and quality are concerned.  Stringent quality checks 
will enable the India’s Food Processing Industries to compete 
globally.   
 
PMKSY-  status on completion of the projects  
13. The Committee note that out of a total of 1,672 projects 
sanctioned under the various component schemes of PMKSY, 

58 
 
only 1,116 projects have been completed so far, reflecting a 
completion rate of about 67%. The Committee note significant 
variation in progress across the component schemes under 
PMKSY- Under the  component (i) ‘Integrated Cold Chain  and 
Value Addition Infrastructure’ 288 out of sanctioned 398 projects; 
(ii) Agro Processing Clusters (APC) 22 out of sanctioned 76 
projects; (iii)  ‘Operation Greens ’ only 10 out of sanctioned 45 
projects have been completed. The Committee further observe 
that the total cost of c ompleted projects stands at Rs. 17,661.72 
crore, with grants approved for Rs. 5,297.86 crore and only Rs. 
5,052.35 crore actually released, indicating a gap in fund 
disbursement. Completed projects have created a processing 
and preservation capacity of 249.36 lakh metric tonnes , 
benefiting over 33.53 lakh farmers, and generat ing 4.27 lakh jobs. 
The Committee are concerned to note that delays in project 
completion and timely fund release may be limiting the intended 
benefits of the Scheme to farmers and  scope for employment  
generation. In view of these observations, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should take steps to expedite the 
completion of pending projects, particularly under components 
where progress has been sluggish, and ensure the timely release 
of approved grants . The Committee further recommend the 

59 
 
Ministry to conduct regular review meetings and strengthened 
coordination with State-level agencies to resolve implementation 
bottlenecks and enhance the overall impact of PMKSY.  
 
Agro Processing Clusters 
14. The main objective of Agro Processing Clusters is to 
develop modern  infrastructure and common facilities to 
encourage group of entrepreneurs for setting up of food 
processing units based on cluster approach. The Committee note 
that under this Scheme, grants -in-aid are provided at 35% of the 
eligible project cost in general areas and 50% in difficult areas, as 
well as for projects led by Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled 
Tribes (ST), Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), and Self Help 
Groups (SHGs), with a maximum grant of Rs. 10 crore per project.  
As observed in the above para 13,  22 projects only  out of  76 
sanctioned could be completed so far even after a period of eight 
years, since the implementation of the Scheme  from the year 
2017. The Committee are glad to note that the completed projects 
have created a processing and preservation capacity of only 6.72 
lakh metric tonnes, benefiting 81,300 farmers, and generat ing 
17,133 jobs which is again very low given the Scheme’s potential. 
Considering these,  the Committee recommend that the Ministry 

60 
 
should promote greater participation of Farmer Producer 
Organizations (FPOs) in Agro Processing Clusters  to ensure 
success of the component.   
 
Study on Post-Harvest Losses 
15. The Committee note that the India’s Post -Harvest Losses 
are substantial and the percentage loss data on Post -Harvest 
Losses (PHL), based on Indian Council for Agricultural Research-
Central Institute of Post -Harvest Engineering and Technology 
(ICAR-CIPHET), and NABARD Consultancy Service Pvt. Ltd 
(NABCONS), 2022 study, show very high levels of losses in 
livestock, fruits, vegetables and cereals, with total losses across 
all categories amounting to Rs. 1.52 lakh crore. The Committee 
note that the Evaluation Study conducted by NABCONS in 2020 
was highlighted that due to interventions of the Integrated Cold 
Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Scheme of Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries, while all sectors reported a slight 
decrease in the wastages, the fruit and vegetable sector has been 
most significantly impacted by the cold chain scheme. The dairy 
sector saw a decrease in wastage from 0.84 per cent to 0.13 per 
cent whereas in the fisheries sector the wastage decreased from 
1.25 per cent to 0.38 per  cent. As the data is more than five years 

61 
 
old and since many developments took place in the  field, the 
Committee would like to have an updated data in this regard.  
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should 
explore the possibility of setting up of totally Government owned 
cold storages, value chain addition modern infrastructure and 
supply chain management in every district or such districts 
which have substantial potential for development of food 
processing units so as to address the issue of PHL in a concrete 
way. Government spending in this Sector will give a strong push 
in reducing PHL since most of the schemes of the Ministry are 
demand driven and require private initiative. 
 
Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of Micro Food Processing 
Enterprises (PMFME) 
 
16. The Committee note that the presence of informal units in 
FPI in the country is one of the main challenges in ‘Make in India’ 
under Food Processing Sector.  To address this challenge, the 
Govt of India has launched PMFME on  29 June 2020 with an 
outlay of Rs. 10,000 crores with the aim to provide credit -linked 
subsidy to two lakh micro food processing units  across the 
country, especially in the unorganized sector. The Scheme offers 

62 
 
financial, technical, and business support to help these 
enterprises join the formal economy and access Schemes of 
Food Processing Industries.  
    The Midterm Impact Evaluation study for PMFME scheme 
conducted by M/S BDO India LLP  revealed that a  total of  66,966 
projects have been established under the Scheme (86.6% by first-
time entrepreneurs), with 31,805 enterprises formalized which is 
far below the target of for malizing 2,00,000 enterprises. Further, 
in 2024 -25, loans were sanctioned to 50,875 beneficiaries under 
the Credit Linked Subsidy component, reflecting a decline from 
the previous year, the reasons being delays in subsidy release by 
State Governments . The Committee have taken note that the 
Ministry is addressing this challenge through regular meetings 
with banks and State Governments, raising issues at Department 
of Financial Services ( DFS) and State Level Bankers Committee  
(SLBC) meetings, and conducting awareness campaigns.  In view 
of this, the Committee recommend the Ministry to - 
(i) intensify engagement with lending institutions and 
State Governments to resolve subsidy and 
sanctioning issues, ensuring unint errupted credit and 
support to Micro Food Processing Enterprises. 

63 
 
(ii) set annual targets for formalisation of FPI units , 
strengthen District Resource Persons, simplify and 
digitize registration, and conduct targeted awareness 
campaigns.  
(iii) conduct regular monitoring and evaluation to 
maximize formalization of FPI units and expand 
access to credit and market opportunities. Addressing 
these bottlenecks will help achieve the ambitious 
targets of the PMFME Scheme and significantly further 
the ‘Make in India’ initiative. 
 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme for FPIs (PLISFPI) 
 
17. The Committee observe that the Production Linked 
Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI) is 
designed to ensure that manufacturers use domestically grown 
agricultural produce for eligible food products, which supports 
farmers’ incomes and reduces reliance on imports. The 
Committee note that this approach has already resulted in 
companies successfully replacing imported tomato products with 
locally sourced alternatives, demonstrating the scheme’s 
effectiveness in promoting domestic manufac turing. The 

64 
 
Committee appreciate the Ministry’s efforts to make the 
application process more accessible through a user -friendly 
online portal and the provision of technical support by the 
Project Management Agency (IFCI). However, the Committee are 
concerned by the low selection rate in the innovative segment, 
which indicates possible barriers for new and creative initiatives 
within the sector. In view of this, Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should take specific steps to identify and address 
obstacles faced by innovative projects, ensuring that the benefits 
of the scheme reach a wider range of stakeholders.  
 
Infrastructure Development and Value Chain Strengthening 
 
18. The Committee note that lack of adequate infrastructure in 
the form of cold chain and storage facilities is one of the main 
issues that are being faced under the ‘Make in India’ initiative in 
Food Processing Sector.  The Committee also observe that cold 
storage facilities play a pivotal role in minimizing post -harvest 
losses, extending the shelf life of agricultural produce, and 
ensuring food security in India. They are essential for supporting 
the country’s fast growing food processing sector, which is a key 
driver under the ‘Make in India’ initiative. The availability of 

65 
 
robust cold chain infrastructure enables value addition, enhances 
market access for farmers, and facilitates the integration of 
Indian agriculture with global supply chains. 
The analysis of the data reveals that (i) out of 1,604 projects 
approved only 1,129 projects have been completed nationally, 
creating 205.14 LMT of processing and 49.11 LMT of preservation 
capacity, (ii) certain States and Union Territories (such as 
Chandigarh, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, and several North Eastern 
States) still lag behind in both the number and capacity of cold 
storage facilities.  The Committee believe that there is a pressing 
need for the speedy augmentation of cold storage infrastructure 
across all regions, particularly in the States with high potential 
for agriculture produce and underserved areas, to support the 
ambitious ‘Make in India’ goals in the Food Processing S ector. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to accelerate 
project implementation by prioritizing the allocation of resources 
to low -coverage regions, and incentivize the adoption of 
advanced storage technologies.  
 
Export related issues Need for projections/targets   
19. The Committee note that MoFPI has neither projections nor 
set any targets for exports of processed foods. In absence of any 

66 
 
future projections or targets, the Committee believe, evaluation of 
export potential and the effectiveness of export promoting 
policies cannot be fairly eva luated. The Committee , therefore 
recommend that the relevant authorities establish clear and 
realistic future projections and targets for processed food 
exports, taking into account current market trends and ground 
realities. Setting such benchmarks will not only enable a fair 
assessment of export potential and the effectiveness of export 
promotion policies but will also instil a sense of accountability 
among the concerned agencies. Furthermore, well -defined 
targets and projections will provide a definitive direction for the 
sector, guiding strategic planning and resource allocation to 
maximize growth and competitiveness in the global market.  In 
addition to this, the Committee also desire the  Ministry to take 
steps for increasing the number of Quality Control Cells in agro -
processing clusters and units to ensure regular quality checks 
and strict compliance with standards which will help build trust in 
Indian processed food products and enhance the Sector’s ability 
to sustain export growth. 
 
 
 

67 
 
Adoption of Global Best Practices 
 
20. The Committee observe that while India’s Food Processing 
Sector has made notable progress in recent years especially with 
a rising share of processed food exports and significant 
employment generation, there is still considerable scope for 
improvement when compared to countries like the USA, China, 
and Brazil.  India is lagging behind in value chain integration, and 
technology adoption Vis-a-Vis developed countries . The   
Committee would like the Ministry to adopt / embrace advanced 
automation, sustainable packaging, stringent food safety 
standards, and robust supply chain management to improve 
efficiency of the sector.  
21.  The Committee also desire that the Ministry should 
establish a dedicated platform to facilitate the sharing of success 
stories and best practices among States and Union Territories.  
 
Research & Development in Food Processing Sector 
 
22. The Committee note that the Ministry has taken important  
steps to promote r esearch and development in the Food 
Processing S ector through the PMKSY R&D scheme, providing 

68 
 
financial support to universities, research institutions, and even 
private sector laboratories. Since 2008-09, 236 R&D projects have 
been approved, with most now completed. Further, under PMKSY 
(from 2016–17), 80 projects have been approved, of which 69 are 
finished and 3 are ongoing. The Committee also note that 
Government organizations, institutions, and universities are 
eligible for 100% grant -in-aid, while private organizations, 
institutions, and universities can receive 50% grant -in-aid for 
equipment costs in general areas and up to 70% in difficult areas, 
all on a reimbursement basis as per the scheme guidelines.  In 
this context, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
details of (i) patents – product or process filed and received; (ii) 
the commercialisation of the technologies developed; and (iii) 
royalty payments, if any received  in the areas of packaging, 
storage, etc.  
 
Processing of Damaged Potato Crops 
23. The Committee note that there are many instances specially 
in those regions where potato cropping is abundant, Potato 
farmers have to throw away their crop for want of right prices and 
or storage space at reasonable cost. The Committee observe that 

69 
 
many a time due to plummeting price in the market, the farmers 
are forced offload their crop at a loss.  The Committee therefore 
suggest the Ministry to take appropriate steps to redress the 
grievance.   
 Presently, the C ommittee note that Potato  crop is 
considered as a horticultural crop . They however, would like to 
know whether including potato into the category of food/cereals 
would have some bearing on the facilities and importance being 
given to the crop and, if so, the same may be apprised to the 
Committee at the earliest.   
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
18 August , 2025                                                             Chairperson, 
27th Shravana, 1947 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Agriculture 
            Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 

70 
 
 ANNEXURE-I 
Details of Shrimp projects approved under Operation Greens Scheme-Long Term 
Intervention 
 
S 
No. 
Name of 
Applicant 
Cluster/ 
District 
State Date of 
Approval 
Letter 
 Total 
Project 
Cost (₹ 
Crores) 
 Approved 
Grant (₹ 
Crores) 
 Grant 
Released 
(₹ Crores) 
Status 
1. Advishnu 
Marine Foods 
Private Limited 
East 
Godavari 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
09-11-2022  35.00 10.00 6.66 Ongoing 
2. Avanti Frozen 
Foods Private 
Limited 
Kakinada Andhra 
Pradesh 
16-11-2022  64.62 10.00  Ongoing 
3. Devi Fisheries 
Limited 
Kakinada Andhra 
Pradesh 
09-11-2022  105.50 15.00  Ongoing 
4. Rajyalakshmi 
Marine Exports 
Kakinada Andhra 
Pradesh 
09-11-2022  49.25 10.00 6.67 Ongoing 
5. Annam Marine 
Exports Private 
Limited 
Guntur Andhra 
Pradesh 
09-11-2022  51.00 10.00 3.33 Ongoing 
6. Milesh Marine 
Exports Private 
Limited 
Krishna Andhra 
Pradesh 
09-11-2022  34.85 10.00 3.23 Ongoing 
7. Alpha Marine 
Limited 
Nellore Andhra 
Pradesh 
09-11-2022  98.00 9.62 9.62 Completed 
8. Devi Sea Foods 
Limited 
West 
Godavari 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
16-11-2022  75.18 10.00  Ongoing 
9. Sandhya 
Marines 
Limited 
West 
Godavari 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
09-11-2022  72.10 10.00  Ongoing 
10. Summit Marine 
Exports Private 
Limited 
West 
Godavari 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
09-11-2022  55.60 9.84 9.84 Completed 
11. SMSEA 
Corporation 
LLP 
Visakhapa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
09-11-2022  52.27 10.00 6.66 Ongoing 
Total       693.37 114.46 46.01   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
Credit outstanding under PSL from 2019-20 to 2023-24 (year-wise and bank group-wise) 
(Amount in ₹Crores) 
Year 2023-24     2022-23     
2021-
2022     
2020-
2021     2019-2020     
Bank 
group 
Total 
PSL 
Outstan
ding 
Agricult
ure 
Outstan
ding 
Outstanding 
Loans to 
Food and 
Agro-
processing* 
Total PSL 
Outstandi
ng 
Agricult
ure 
Outstan
ding 
Outstandi
ng Loans 
to Food 
and Agro-
processin
g* 
Total 
PSL 
Outsta
nding 
Agricul
ture 
Outsta
nding 
Outst
andin
g 
Loan
s to 
Food 
and 
Agro-
proce
ssing
* 
Total 
PSL 
Outst
andin
g 
Agr
icul
ture 
Out
sta
ndi
ng 
Outstandi
ng Loans 
to Food 
and Agro-
processin
g* 
Total PSL 
Outstandi
ng 
Agricultur
e 
Outstandi
ng 
Outstanding 
Loans to 
Food and 
Agro-
processing* 
Foreign 
Banks 
278677.1
8 55452.57 5927.09 241943.78 52263.80 7244.88 
212248
.15 
55579.
81 
7646.
22 
2230
14.26 
516
53.1
3 7804.49 185496.34 51954.28 6581.23 
Public 
Sector 
Banks 
3401435.
87 
1530238.
82 113814.35 
3027760.5
3 
1352283.
34 99246.05 
275576
2.91 
120978
8.24 
9096
6.51 
2532
707.5
9 
112
556
5.90 87854.37 
2360275.0
3 975766.47 82209.14 
Private 
Sector 
Banks 
2609428.
46 
1042495.
39 101465.73 
2077470.1
9 
833447.7
8 74545.86 
183017
4.89 
692068
.25 
5451
4.14 
1609
349.3
1 
613
604.
73 44898.77 
1378088.4
1 575489.92 41339.09 
Small 
Finance 
Banks 
142047.1
9 38151.37 2707.89 88617.06 29571.12 2132.70 
70233.
96 
15993.
88 
1426.
34 
4653
2.11 
149
62.8
9 852.49 45986.22 15740.16 378.64 
*Note: Outstanding loans to Food And Agro Processing excludes loans classified under 
MSME category of PSL.          

72 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
Status of SPF as on 31st March 2025. ₹Crore 
Sr. 
No.  
Name of the Project  Location  Date of 
Sanction  
 Term Loan 
Sanctioned   
Disbursement  %  
Disbursed  
Remarks 
A  Mega Food Park Projects (MFPs)   
1 M/s Gujarat Agro 
Infrastructure Mega 
Food Park Pvt. Ltd.  
Surat, Gujarat  28.07.2015  37.91 36.39 95.99 A/c Closed 
2 M/s Pristine Mega 
Food Park Pvt. Ltd.  
Khagaria, Bihar  21.10.2015  46.54 31.29 67.23 A/c Closed 
3 M/s Cremica Food 
Park Pvt. Ltd.   
Una, HP  06.10.2015 
(Rs.32.94 cr) 
04.05.2020 
(Rs.7.28 cr)  
40.22 37.94 94.33 A/c Closed 
4 Punjab Mega Food 
Park by PAIC  
Ludhiana, 
Punjab  
06.11.2015  27.12 25.77 95.02 A/c Closed 
5 Mega Food Park by 
KINFRA 
Palakkad, 
Kerala  
27.10.2015  28.34 28.34 99.99 Fully 
Disbursed 
6 Haryana Mega Food 
Park by HSIIDC  
Sonepat, 
Haryana  
06.11.2015  71.02 65.07 91.63 A/c Closed 
7 M/s Avantee Mega 
Food Park Pvt. Ltd.  
Dewas, MP  27.11.2015  66.52 56.52 84.97 Under 
Implementation  
8 M/s Raagamayuri 
Agro Vet Pvt. Ltd.  
Mahabubnagar 
Telangana 
27.11.2015  46.89 10.00 21.33 A/c Closed 
9 MFP by TSIIC  Khammam, 
Telangana 
22.12.2015  28.83 10.07 34.93 A/c Closed 
10 M/s Indus Best Mega 
Food Park Pvt. Ltd.  
Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh 
15.03.2016  40.34 40.34 100.01 Fully 
Disbursed 
11 MFP by HAFED  Rohtak, 
Haryana  
09.09.2019 
(1st 
Revalidated 
upto 
08.09.2020, 
2nd 
Revalidation 
upto 
08.03.2021) 
55.00 54.88 99.78 Under 
Implementation 
12 MFP by MFICL, 
Govt. of Manipur  
Thoubal, 
Manipur  
26.11.2019  18.63 12.00 64.41 Under 
Implementation 
13 Meghalaya MFP North Garo 
Hills, 
Meghalaya 
13.09.2021 4.30 4.30 100.00 under 
implementation 
14 Tamil Nadu MFP Gangaikondan, 
Dist. 
Tirunelveli, 
Tamil Nadu 
24.03.2022 37.69 37.69 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 

73 
 
  Sub-Total Mega 
Food Parks  
    549.35 450.60 82.02   
B  Agro Processing Cluster (APCs)   
1 M/s Nimar Agro Park  Barwani, 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
18.07.2019  13.99 13.99 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
2 M/s Cuddalore 
Market Committee 
Cuddalore, 
Tamil Nadu 
23.10.2020 7.99 7.99 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
3 M/s Dharmapuri 
Market Committee 
Krishnagiri, 
Tamil Nadu 
23.10.2020 10.17 10.17 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
4 M/s Dindigul Market 
Committee 
Dindigul, Tamil 
Nadu 
23.10.2020 9.36 9.36 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
5 M/s Madurai Market 
Committee 
Madurai, Tamil 
Nadu 
23.10.2020 12.92 12.92 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
6 M/s Salem Market 
Committee 
Salem, Tamil 
Nadu 
23.10.2020 8.64 8.64 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
7 M/s Theni Market 
Committee 
Theni, Tamil 
Nadu 
23.10.2020 9.47 9.47 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
8 M/s Tiruvannamalai 
Market Committee 
Tiruvannamalai, 
Tamil Nadu 
23.10.2020 9.56 9.56 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
9 M/s Gama Biotech 
Farms  
N TR Dist, 
Andhra Pradesh 
08.08.2023 9.97 0.00 0.00 Documentation 
yet to complete 
  Sub-Total Agro 
Processing Cluster  
    92.07 82.10 89.17   
C  Individual Processing Units in DFPs (IPUs)   
1 M/s Patanjali Ayurved 
Limited – Honey 
Plant  
Haridwar, 
Uttarakhand  
07.07.2016  19.21 19.21 100.00 A/c Closed 
2 M/s Patanjali Ayurved 
Limited – 
Chyawanprash Unit  
Haridwar, 
Uttarakhand  
01.07.2016  17.59 17.59 100.00 A/c Closed 
3 M/s Dhansiri Nutrient 
Foods LLP  
Nalbari, Assam  13.09.2019 
Additional 
TL of Rs.3.54 
was 
sanctioned on 
31.12.2021   
14.00 14.00 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
4 M/s Allfun Foods 
(India) Pvt. Ltd  
Satara, 
Maharashtra  
05.03.2020  12.07 12.07 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
5 M/s Vitanosh 
Ingredients Pvt Ltd 
Surat, Gujarat  07.04.2020, 
17.01.2023 
(2.5)  
10.90 10.90 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
6 M/s Parwati Agro 
Product Private 
Limited 
Surat, Gujarat  28.08.2020, 
17.01.2023 
(4.975)  
11.97 11.97 100.00 Fully 
Disbursed 
7 M/s Aelea 
Commodities Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Surat, Gujarat 08.12.2020 18.00 18.00 100.00 A/c Closed 
8 M/s Agriva Naturals Cremica Food 
Park, Una, H.P 
04.02.2022 11.70 0.02 0.17 A/c Closed 

74 
 
9 M/s Go Green Surat, Gujarat 27.02.2023 3.50 3.50 100.00 under 
implementation 
10 M/s Euro India Fresh 
Foods Limited 
Navsari, 
Gujarat 
19.04.2022 10.10 3.33 32.97 under 
implementation 
11 M/s Miloni Foods Navsari, 
Gujarat 
19.04.2022 11.00 3.81 34.64 under 
implementation 
12 M/s Roshita Industries Satara, 
Maharashtra  
27.02.2023 9.26 9.26 100.00 under 
implementation 
13 M/s ADF Foods Ltd GAIMFPL, 
Surat Gujarat 
01.06.2023 35.00 0.00 0.00 Documentation 
yet to complete 
14 M/s Jackwin Foods 
Pvt Ltd 
Mehsana, 
gujarat 
31.10.2023 20.00 20.00 100.00 under 
implementation 
  Sub-Total FPUs in 
DFPs  
    204.30 143.66 70.32   
D Industrial Food Parks (IFPs)   
1 Manapparai Food 
Park by SIPCOT 
Tiruchirapalli, 
Tamil Nadu 
11.10.2022 110.15 47.62 43.23 under 
implementation 
2 Theni Food Park by 
SIPCOT 
Theni, Tamil 
Nadu 
11.10.2022 138.81 57.95 41.75 under 
implementation 
3 Tindivanam Food 
Park by SIPCOT 
Viluppurum, 
Tamil Nadu 
27.03.2023 85.04 48.28 56.77 under 
implementation 
  Sub-total IFPs     333.99 153.85 46.06   
 Grand Total    1179.71 830.21 70.37    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
 
 
Offences Maximum Penalty or 
Punishment 
Nature of 
judicial 
Proceeding 
50. Penalty for selling food not of the nature or 
substance or quality demanded.  
Rs. 5 Lakhs; Rs. 25000 
in case of petty FBO 
Civil 
51. Penalty for sub-standard food.  Rs. 5 Lakhs Civil 
52. Penalty for misbranded food Rs. 3 Lakhs Civil 
53. Penalty for misleading advertisement Rs. 10 Lakhs Civil 
54. Penalty for food containing extraneous matter Rs. 1 Lakh Civil 
55. Penalty for failure to comply with the directions 
of Food Safety Officer 
Rs. 2 Lakhs Civil 
56. Penalty for unhygienic or unsanitary processing 
or manufacturing of food 
Rs. 1 Lakh Civil 
57. Penalty for possessing adulterant Rs. 10 Lakhs Civil 
58. Penalty for contraventions for which no specific 
penalty is provided 
Rs. 2 Lakhs Civil 
59. Punishment for unsafe food – (i) does not result 
in injury 
Imprisonment for three 
months and fine upto Rs. 
3 lakh 
Criminal 
59. Punishment for unsafe food – (ii) non -grievous 
injury 
Imprisonment for one 
year and fine upto Rs. 3 
lakhs 
Criminal 
59. Punishment for unsafe food- (iii) grievous injury Imprisonment for six 
years and fine upto Rs. 5 
lakhs 
Criminal 
59. Punishment for unsafe food – (iv) death Imprisonment for seven 
years to life and fine upto 
Rs. 10 lakhs 
Criminal 
60. Punishment for interfering with seized items Imprisonment for Six 
months and fine upto Rs. 
2 lakhs 
Criminal 
61. Punishment Penalty for false information Fine upto Rs. 10 lakhs Civil 
62. Punishment for obstructing or impersonating a 
Food Safety Officer 
Imprisonment for three 
months and fine upto Rs. 
1 lakh 
Criminal 
63. Punishment / Penalty for carrying out a business 
without licence  
Fine upto Rs. 10 lakhs Civil 
64. Punishment for subsequent offences Twice the punishment, 
fine on daily basis upto 
Rs. 1 lakh, and 
Cancellation of License 
Civil or 
Criminal- 
depending on 
the nature of 
repeat offence 
65. Compensation in case of injury or death of 
consumer 
At least Rs 5 lakh if the 
person dies 
Up to Rs.3 lakh for 
serious injuries 
Up to Rs. 1 lakh for other 
injuries 
Civil 
67. Penalty for contravention of provisions of this 
Act in case of import of articles 
In addition to any 
penalty, under the 
provisions of the Foreign 
Trade (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1992 
(22 of 1992) and the 
Customs Act, 1962 (52 
of 1962), the defaulter 
 

76 
 
shall also be liable under 
this Act and shall be 
proceeded against 
accordingly under the 
described sections as 
above. 
69. Power to compound offences - from small food 
sellers like petty manufacturers, hawkers, or 
temporary stall holders 
 
a fine not more than Rs. 
1 Lakh by way of 
composition of the 
offence 
Civil 
* no offence, for 
which 
punishment of 
imprisonment 
has been 
prescribed 
under this Act, 
shall be 
compounded 
33. Punishment for contravening Prohibition order Rs. 3 Lakh Civil 
34. Punishment for contravening Emergency 
Prohibition order 
Imprisonment upto 2 
years and fine upto Rs. 2 
Lakh 
Criminal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

77 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
 
Setting up of Food Testing Laboratories (FTLs) – Status 
S 
No 
Proposal's 
Name 
District State Project 
Cost 
(Lakh) 
Date of PAC Date of 
Approval 
Letter  
Grant 
Appro
ved 
(Lakh) 
Due for 
completio
n 
Reasons 
for Delay 
1 The Energy 
and 
Resources 
Institute 
(TERI) 
(NER) 
Guwahat
i 
Assam 324.93 08-08-2016 21-09-2016 171.84 22.09.2018 Updated 
Status on 
Final 
Show 
Cause 
Awaited 
2 Jawaharlal 
Nehru 
Technologica
l University 
(JNTU), 
Annantpur, 
Chittoor 
Annantp
ur 
Andhra 
Prades
h 
1567.44 29-01-2019 15-02-2019 639.50 16.02.2021 NABL 
status 
awaited  
3 Indian 
Institute of 
Food 
Processing 
Technology 
(GMO)Up-
gradation 
Thanjavu
r 
Tamil 
Nadu 
145.84 23-08-2019 02-09-2019 114.70 03.09.2021 File 
under 
Submissi
on 
4 Maharaja 
Ranjit Singh 
Punjab 
Technical 
University,  
Bhatinda Punjab 289.14 23-08-2019 02-09-2019 253.12 03.09.2021 NABL 
status 
awaited  
5 Sher-e-
Kashmir 
University of 
Agricultural 
Sciences  
Shrinag
ar 
Jammu 
& 
Kashmi
r 
1460.85 10-12-2019 30-12-2019 736.84 01.06.2022 NABL 
status 
awaited  
6 MPEDA 
ELISA 
Laboratory, 
Contai  
Medinipu
r East 
West 
Bengal 
69.19 07-07-2020 05-10-2020 32.23 06.10.2022 NABL 
status 
awaited  
7 MPEDA 
ELISA 
Laboratory, 
Haroa  
24 
Pargana
s 
West 
Bengal 
70.96 07-07-2020 05-10-2020 32.67 06.10.2022 NABL 
status 
awaited  
8 Bombay Test 
House Pvt 
Ltd, Navi 
Mumbai,  
Thane (Up-
gradation) 
Thane Mahara
shtra 
504.62 19-03-2021 26-03-2021 207.00 27.03.2023 NABL 
status 
awaited  
9 Punjab 
Biotechnolog
y Incubator 
(Up-
gradation) 
SAS 
Nagar 
(Mohali) 
Punjab 804.64 19-03-2021 26-03-2021 497.00 27.03.2023 File 
under 
Submissi
on 
10 Value 
Premier Labs 
Private 
Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 
606.00 29-11-2022 22-12-2022 225.42 23.12.2024 File 
under 
Submissi

78 
 
Limited on 
11 Gram Tarang 
Foods 
Testing 
Laboratories 
Pvt Ltd 
Gajapati Odisha 691.20 29-11-2022 22-12-2022 310.70 23.06.2025   
12 Chennai 
Mettex Labs 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 
952.18 12-06-2023 27-06-2023 263.69 28.06.2025   
13 J & K Food 
Quality 
Control Lab 
for Skill 
Development
  
Pulwama Jammu 
& 
Kashmir 
1073.00 12-06-2023 27-06-2023 364.02 28.12.2026   
14 Trust well 
Lab 
Patna Bihar 1691.61 12-06-2023 27-06-2023 516.01 28.06.2025   
15 Aura 
Analytical 
Services Pvt 
Ltd 
Auranga
bad 
Mahara
shtra 
935.42 12-06-2023 27-06-2023 533.42 28.12.2026   
16 Bihar State 
Seed and 
Organic 
Certification 
Agency 
Patna Bihar 1996.78 12-06-2023 27-06-2023 538.31 28.06.2025   
17 Banjara 
Lambani 
Samaj  
Bangalor
e 
Karnata
ka 
1182.72 17-11-2023 21-11-2023 664.78 22.11.2025   
18 North 
Eastern Hill 
University 
West 
Garo Hill 
Meghala
ya 
2035.05 17-11-2023 21-11-2023 1021.0
9 
22.11.2025   
19 Startech 
Labs Private 
Limited 
Sangare
ddy 
Telanga
na 
1286.70 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 371.17 02.03.2026   
20 M/s First 
Source 
Laboratory 
Solutions 
LLP 
RangaR
eddy 
Telanga
na 
1558.70 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 655.23 02.03.2026   
21 Welzo 
Research & 
Development 
Pvt. Ltd 
Solan Himach
al 
Pradesh 
1340.30 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 772.12 02.09.2027   
22 Foodtech 
Consults 
India Private 
Limited 
Agra Uttar 
Pradesh 
1304.81 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 550.70 02.03.2026   
23 Nagaon 
Foods and 
Analysis 
Private 
Limited 
Nagaon Assam 1175.69 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 650.00 02.03.2026   
24 S. N. Pura 
Laboratory 
LLP 
Hooghly  West 
Bengal 
1128.51 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 642.46 02.03.2026   

79 
 
25 Intellab India Nagpur Mahara
shtra 
2714.85 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 801.33 02.03.2026   
26 Mediforce 
Research 
Private 
Limited 
Sirmour Himach
al 
Pradesh 
1373.80 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 808.01 02.09.2027   
27 Kalpana 
Chawla 
Computech 
Pvt. Ltd 
Karnal Haryana 1278.03 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 751.37 02.03.2026   
28 Eurofins 
Analytical 
Services 
India Private 
Limited 
Navi 
Mumbai 
Mahara
shtra 
1479.52 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 531.86 02.03.2026   
29 Angel 
Analytical 
Services LLP 
Thane Mahara
shtra 
1258.12 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 732.71 02.03.2026   
30 Bikaner 
Agrimarketin
g Private 
Limited 
Jaipur Rajasth
an 
1235.28 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 497.45 02.03.2026   
31 Mitra S. K. 
Private 
Limited (for 
upgradation) 
Kolkata West 
Bengal 
1272.30 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 459.75 02.03.2026   
32 Emminent 
Analytics 
SAS 
Nagar 
Punjab 1084.27 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 455.50 02.03.2026   
33 Shreeyan 
Research 
and 
Analytical 
Laboratories  
Panchkul
a 
Haryana 1084.27 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 447.05 02.03.2026   
34 Pious 
Laboratories 
Pvt. Ltd. (Up-
gradation) 
Indore Madhya 
Pradesh 
1216.34 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 404.50 02.03.2026   
35 SMS Labs 
Services 
Private 
Limited (Up-
gradation) 
Thiruvall
ur 
Tamil 
Nadu 
1016.14 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 393.28 02.03.2026   
36 National 
Science 
Vadodar
a 
Gujarat 1013.69 13-02-2024 01-03-2024 301.05 02.03.2026   
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
Statewise Cold storages under PMKSY as on 31.05.2025  
S. 
No 
State Approved 
Projects 
Completed/ 
Operational 
Processing 
(LMT/Annum) 
Preservation 
(LMT/Annum) 
No of Cold 
storages/ 
frozen 
storage/ CA/ 
MA 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
2 1 0.27 0.02 2 
2 Andhra Pradesh 77 39 10.66 2.11 37 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
12 2 0.11 0.03 1 
4 Assam 106 58 7.25 0.75 8 
5 Bihar 15 4 6.34 1.10 1 
6 Chandigarh 0 0 0.00 0.00 0 
7 Chhattisgarh 9 6 1.51 1.10 6 
8 Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman 
& Diu 
1 1 0.05 0.00 0 
9 Delhi 21 21 0.00 0.00 0 
10 Goa 2 2 0.06 0.00 0 
11 Gujarat 107 87 17.78 3.49 38 
12 Haryana 98 80 7.76 2.66 31 
13 Himachal Pradesh 44 35 2.77 1.18 27 
14 Jammu & Kashmir 40 30 1.72 0.27 16 
15 Jharkhand 2 2 0.00 0.00 0 
16 Karnataka 96 76 9.49 2.68 35 
17 Kerala 51 37 2.17 2.00 12 
18 Ladakh 0 0 0.00 0.00 0 
19 Lakshadweep 0 0 0.00 0.00 0 
20 Madhya Pradesh 52 30 6.41 1.91 17 
21 Maharashtra 246 175 66.41 7.55 98 
22 Manipur 8 4 0.00 0.09 5 
23 Meghalaya 10 6 0.12 0.00 0 
24 Mizoram 4 4 0.39 0.19 9 
25 Nagaland 6 2 0.32 0.03 3 
26 Orissa 28 12 1.87 0.67 8 
27 Puduchery 2 2 0.00 0.00 0 
28 Punjab 76 61 9.89 5.25 61 
29 Rajasthan 56 36 6.02 2.55 29 
30 Sikkim 1 1 0.00 0.00 0 
31 Tamil Nadu 145 105 9.51 1.38 62 
32 Telangana 68 36 8.18 1.63 16 
33 Tripura 9 9 1.10 0.30 1 
34 Uttar Pradesh 97 73 15.60 1.77 38 
35 Uttarakhand 59 50 6.75 4.86 64 
36 West Bengal 54 42 4.62 3.54 35 
  Total 1604 1129 205.14 49.11 660 

81 
 
ANNEXURE-VII 
 
State-wise and Component wise details of projects approved under PMFME Scheme (as on 31.05.2025) 
Total Assistance Approved under PMFME - As on 31.05.2025 
 S.No. State/UT Number of 
Micro 
Enterprises 
Approved 
Subsidy 
(in 
Crore) 
Number 
of SHG 
Members 
Approved 
Subsidy       
(in Crore) 
Number of 
Approved 
Incubation 
Centre 
Approved 
Subsidy (in 
Crore) 
Number 
of 
Approved 
B&M 
Projects 
Approved 
Subsidy 
(in 
Crore) 
Net 
Enterprises-
PMFME 
Total 
Subsidy 
under 
PMFME       
(in Crore)  
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
18 1.03 110 0.42 0 0.00 0 0.00 128 1.45 
2 Andhra Pradesh 7180 108.61 32831 124.27 2 6.11 2 0.78 40015 239.76 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
107 6.31 2524 6.56 0 0.00 0 0.00 2631 12.87 
4 Assam 3279 42.53 28603 82.70 1 2.75 0 0.00 31883 127.97 
5 Bihar 24122 542.58 24254 86.30 2 4.81 1 0.59 48379 634.28 
6 Chandigarh 5 0.21 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 5 0.21 
7 Chhattisgarh 1018 42.50 10914 14.13 2 5.50 0 0.00 11934 62.13 
8 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman & Diu 
11 0.37 13 0.02 0 0.00 0 0.00 24 0.39 
9 Delhi 295 7.22 0 0.00 2 4.67 0 0.00 297 11.89 
10 Goa 114 4.14 1361 4.94 1 2.03 1 1.04 1477 12.15 
11 Gujarat 755 48.34 7185 18.39 0 0.00 0 0.00 7940 66.74 
12 Haryana 1422 91.54 1453 5.28 0 0.00 1 2.71 2876 99.52 
13 Himachal 
Pradesh 
1841 44.48 15602 58.67 3 8.84 0 0.00 17446 111.99 
14 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
1509 31.03 879 3.12 3 7.80 0 0.00 2391 41.95 

82 
 
15 Jharkhand 3651 73.00 6139 20.64 0 0.00 0 0.00 9790 93.64 
16 Karnataka 6625 242.95 19042 74.87 14 32.17 3 3.12 25684 353.11 
17 Kerala 6802 173.94 6802 21.49 1 2.75 0 0.00 13605 198.17 
18 Ladakh 83 3.87 412 1.15 2 5.50 0 0.00 497 10.52 
19 Lakshadweep 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
20 Madhya 
Pradesh 
9754 323.12 13733 43.46 3 9.88 0 0.00 23490 376.46 
21 Maharashtra 24143 693.89 46553 166.06 3 7.27 2 1.25 70701 868.47 
22 Manipur 299 21.25 421 1.52 0 0.00 0 0.00 720 22.78 
23 Meghalaya 202 3.36 4285 13.06 0 0.00 0 0.00 4487 16.42 
24 Mizoram 42 1.63 2641 10.11 1 2.75 0 0.00 2684 14.49 
25 Nagaland 383 6.55 3797 6.90 1 2.43 0 0.00 4181 15.88 
26 Odisha 2206 64.29 28234 83.26 1 1.85 0 0.00 30441 149.40 
27 Puducherry 176 3.95 1424 5.43 0 0.00 1 1.58 1601 10.96 
28 Punjab 2754 237.33 1407 4.37 1 3.45 1 2.11 4163 247.25 
29 Rajasthan 1108 65.64 5277 18.67 8 23.11 0 0.00 6393 107.42 
30 Sikkim 62 1.63 1275 5.07 2 4.92 2 1.86 1341 13.48 
31 Tamil Nadu 15605 341.39 26385 100.53 4 8.78 1 0.15 41995 450.85 
32 Telangana 6953 95.19 23713 92.81 3 8.43 0 0.00 30669 196.43 
33 Tripura 205 4.99 3241 12.16 1 2.65 0 0.00 3447 19.80 
34 Uttar Pradesh 17329 628.53 8511 25.97 14 46.90 0 0.00 25854 701.41 
35 Uttarakhand 904 27.14 9349 31.27 0 0.00 0 0.00 10253 58.41 
36 West Bengal 212 12.42 3238 10.91 0 0.00 0 0.00 3450 23.33 
  Total 141174 3996.94 341608 1154.49 75 205.35 15 15.19 482872 5371.97 

83 
 
Appendix – I  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING BRANCH 
 
(2024-25) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 13th June, 2025 from 1130 hours to 1310 hours in 
Committee Room 3, Extension to Parliament House Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi. 
  
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Hon’ble Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
3. Shri Kuldeep Indora  
4. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
5.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
6. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
7. Shri Dharambir Singh 
8. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
9. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
2. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
3. Shri Madan Rathore 
4. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  Srinivasulu Gunda   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

84 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
  
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the 
Sitting convened for taking ‘ Briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries on the subject “Initiatives taken in Food Processing Sector 
under ‘Make in India’ Program” . Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries were called in. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of 
the M/o Food Processing Industries and apprised them of the provisions of Direction 55 (1) 
of the Direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of proceedings.  
 4. After introduction, a Power -Point Presentation was made by the representatives of 
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries which inter alia  included topics such as, 
Overview of Food Processing Sector, Schemes and Initiatives by the Ministry under ‘Make 
in India’ and Highlights of World Food India (WFI) event. 
5. The Committee raised several issues/points which are briefly mentioned below and 
sought clarification(s)/information from the representatives of the Ministry: 
i. Simplify documentation and reduce collateral requirements, streamline loan 
approvals and strengthen credit facilitation cells at district level. 
ii. Strengthen Rural Areas by assisting them to set up Processing units for 
seasonal products; 
iii. Promote export of seasonal fruits and value addition by export oriented 
workshops; 
iv. Explore value addition of Millet based products; 
v. Promote tie-ups with retail chains for branding and marketing of millet based 
products; 
vi. To deploy resource persons to brief Public Representation about the Scheme 
and monitoring of their implementation effectively in all districts; 
vii. Conduct training and workshops for SHGs, women entrepreneurs and FPOs 
and ensure publicity in local language; 
viii. Enforce strict time -bound implementation of Sanctioned Mega Food Parks 
and other infrastructure and monitor private players who delay projects after 
receiving subsidies; 
1.  Shri Sanjeev Chopra Secretary 
2.  Shri Minhaj Alam Additional Secretary 
3.  Shri Shyam Singh Negi Sr. Economic Advisor 
4.  Shri Preet Pal Singh Joint Secretary 

85 
 
ix. Undertake a district wise crop mapping and infrastructure need assessment 
to identify saturated regions and redirect schemes to underserved regions; 
x. Set up mandatory viability assessments before approving new clusters; 
xi. Allocation of budget to SC/ST/OBC population should be tantamount to their 
population percentage; 
xii. Prioritize cold storage and processing units in regions with high fruits and 
vegetable output; 
xiii. Promote export of seasonal fruits and value addition by export oriented 
workshops; 
xiv. Work towards better remuneration for Potato and reduce its wastage; 
xv. Promotion of Public Sector led Models in Food Processing Sector in the 
country; 
xvi. Implement PPP -based factories where private investors are not coming 
forward; 
xvii. To introduce performance based budgeting based on available demand and 
subsequent formation of clusters; 
xviii. Establish transparent monitoring mechanism to monitor post -sanction 
performance of established units and penalize the misuse of subsidy. 
xix. Conduct comparative global study related to Food Processing Sectors in 
countries like USA, China, Germany, Israel etc. 
6. The representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries responded to 
some of the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson, thereafter, thanked the 
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the subject and directed 
them to furnish the requisite information on points / items, which were not readily available 
with them, to the Committee Secretariat by 22nd June, 2025, positively. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept separately.) 

86 
 
Appendix – II  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 18 th August, 2025 from 1500 hours to 1530 hours 
in Committee Room No. 3, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi –Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
 3. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
 5. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
 6. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
7. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
8. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
9. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
10. Shri Murasoli S. 
11. Shri Dharambir Singh 
 12. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
 13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
 14. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
 15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
    
Rajya Sabha 
 
 16. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 17. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
 18. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
 19. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
 20. Shri Madan Rathore 
 21. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
 22. Shri P.P. Suneer 
 
 

87 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   -  Director  
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee and xxxxx. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption 
the following Reports: 
 
(i)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx;  
(ii) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx;  
(iii) Draft Report on the subject “Initiatives taken in the Food Processing 
Sector under ‘Make in India’ Program”, pertaining to Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries; 
(iv) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx;  
(v) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx; 
(vi) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx;  
(vii) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx; and 
(viii) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any  
modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Report to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 