 
 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
 
  
 
`PROMOTION OF CLIMATE RESILIENT FARMING’ 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Sixty-Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24)] 
 
 
 TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
  
 
   22 

 
 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
 
  
 
`PROMOTION OF CLIMATE RESILIENT FARMING’ 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Sixty-Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24)] 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on                 18.12.2025 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on    18.12.2025  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
COA No. 521 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi.  

 
 
<CONTENTS>  
 
 
 
 
  
Page No.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)…………………… iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)…………………… iv 
 INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………… vi 
CHAPTER - I REPORT……………………………………………… 1-16 
CHAPTER - II Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government…………………… 
 
17-59 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies…………………………… 
60-63 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………….. 
64-66 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited……………………………………………… 
 
67 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 19.09.2025 68-71 
APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Sixty -Eighth Report                    
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24) 
72 

 
iii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
 Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8 th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part -
II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025.  
 

 
iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde  
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
27.  Shri Madan Rathore 
28.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P . P . Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
 

 
v 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
      1.         Shri Dhiraj Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
      2.         Shri Maheshwar  - Director 
                 3.         Shri Sanjeev Kumar  - Under Secretary 
       4.         Shri Narender Kumar  - Assistant Committee Officer 
  

 
vi 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing, (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Twenty Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty -Eighth Report  
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2023-2024) on the Subject `Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare).  
2.  The Sixth -Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24) on the 
Subject `Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07 th February,2024.   The Action Taken 
Notes on the Report were received on 27.06.2024. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
19.09.2025. 
4.  An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty -Eighth Report                       
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
  15th December, 2025                                                                Chairperson, 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Agriculture 
                 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty-Eighth Report                          
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture  Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2023-24) on the subject  `Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming’              
(2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer Welfare (Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2024 and Laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2024, respectively. 
 
1.2 The Sixty -Eighth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (202 3-24) on the subject `Promotion of Climate 
Resilient Farming’ pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) contained 17 Observations/ Recommendations on the 
following aspects. 
  
 `Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming’ 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
 (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) 
Recommendation No. Recommendation 
1. Creation of Single Nodal Agency at National Level to Deal 
with Issues of Climate Change 
2. Nationwide implementation of Comprehensive and 
Integrated Approach to mitigate adverse impact of Climate 
Change on Agriculture- Implementation of NICRA Scheme in 
all Risk Prone Villages due to Climate Change 
3. Giving prominence to Village Panchayats to raise awareness 
about impact of Climate Change and its effects on Agriculture 
4. Role of Krishi Vigyan Kendras  (KVKs) and the need for 
transformation 
5. Ensuring Food and Nutritional Security for all 
6. Need for giving priority to Crop Diversification and Water 
conservation. 
7. Impetus to Research in Climate Smart Practices and Big 
Data Analytics 
8. Availability of Farm inputs and finance 
9. Promotion of Organic/Natural Farming 

 
2 
 
10. Upgradation/Digitization of Agriculture Markets 
11. Need for promotion of Forest conservation and Natural 
wetlands 
12. Promotion of Millets and Coarse grains 
13. Carbon market in Agriculture 
14. Availability of information regarding Latest Technological 
advances and conduct of training workshops for Farmers 
15. Reduction in emission of Green House Gases (GHG) from 
Agriculture in a time bound manner 
16. Increasing budgetary allocation for Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare 
17. Issue of Manpower in Research Institutes and bodies 
attached to Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
 
1.3  The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare) has furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 1 7 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
categorized as under: 
    (i)      Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
             
            Recommendations Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15     
 
Total- 14  
Chapter-II 
 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
    in view of the Government’s replies: 
         
     Recommendation Nos. 1                             
              Total- 01  
        Chapter-III 
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of  
  the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 16 and 17                       
Total-02 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited:  
         Recommendation -  NIL        Total-0 
Chapter-V  

 
3 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation 
of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the Government.  In cases where 
it is not possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation.  The Committee desire that further Action -taken Notes on the 
Observation/ Recommendations contained in Chapter - I and Final Action -taken 
Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report be furnished 
to them at an early date. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action -Taken by the Government of some of 
Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Nationwide implementation of Comprehensive and Integrated Approach to 
mitigate adverse impact of Climate Change on Agriculture - Implementation of 
NICRA Scheme in all Risk Prone Villages due to Climate Change. 
Recommendation No.2 
 
1.6 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
“Climate change impacts are not evenly distributed among different populations and 
countries. Developing countries, which heavily rely on the Agriculture and lack the necessary 
technologies and finances for risk management, face greater vulnerability to cli mate risks. 
Research has found that elevated temperatures have a more detrimental effect on the 
Agricultural growth in developing countries as compared to developed ones. Recent studies 
have demonstrated that Climate Change has resulted in a substantial de crease in the 
productivity growth of global Agriculture in the last five- six decades. With a more pronounced 
impact on developing countries, similar evidence has been reported for India, where climatic 
hazards have led to a substantive reduction in produc tivity growth, especially in low-income 
and agrarian States. The socio economic consequences of Climate Change’s negative 
impact on agriculture are also more significant for developing countries. Studies have 
indicated that climatic shocks have disproporti onately increased undernutrition and poverty 
rates in the South Asia and Sub -Saharan Africa compared to other regions of the world. 
Numerous other studies have also documented a significant decline in household income 
and consumption expenditure due to adverse rainfall shocks. 
The long -term consequences of repeated exposure to multiple risks can be 
devastating. They can deplete household savings, force the sale of assets, increase 

 
4 
 
indebtedness, discourage the adoption of new technologies and innovations, and degrade 
natural resources and ecosystem services. There are concerns that, without mitigation and 
adaptation measures, poor farmers may find it difficult to fully recover from t he impacts of 
climatic shocks and remain trapped in a cycle of low-income, debt, and poverty. The adverse 
impacts of Climate Change on Agriculture and Agriculture-based livelihoods can be reduced 
by implementing comprehensive and integrated approaches. The se approaches include 
technological advancements in agriculture, meteorology, information and communication, 
data sciences, and the incorporation of traditional farming practices. Depending on risk 
aversion, resource availability, and access to information  and finances, farm households 
adopt various measures to manage climate risks. Extensive analysis of adaptation literature 
has shown that integrating scientific innovations with traditional practices is a strong strategy 
for enhancing productivity, sustain ability, and resilience in smallholder -dominated agrarian 
economies. 
Against this backdrop, the Committee desire that NICRA (National Innovations in 
Climate Resilient Agriculture) Scheme should be implemented in all identified risk 
prone/vulnerable villages to empower the farmers and shield them from the vagaries of 
natural events & meteorological incidents and thus enabling them to usher in a new era of 
financial security.” 
1.7 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
 “The National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project is being 
implemented in 151 risk prone districts covering 448 villages. However, the objectives of 
NICRA are to conduct strategic research on adaptation and mitigation, technology 
demonstration and capacity building. Considering the fact that agriculture sector is highly 
vulnerable to climate change and to achieve food security, focus is given to the adaptation 
practices which in turn provides climate resilience to the small and marginal farmers and 
vulnerable sections of the society. The ICAR under NICRA identified  310 districts are risk 
prone to climate change. The ICAR has developed several technologies to build climate 
resilience in all the agriculturally predominant districts of the country. The salient 
achievements under ICAR are as follows: 
(i)  ICAR has developed resilient varieties in different crops tolerant to climatic stresses 
to improve the food grain production in the face of changing climate. Since 2014, a 
total of 2279 varieties have been released out of which 1888 are climate resilient  
varieties which includes 429 abiotic stress tolerant varieties. 

 
5 
 
(ii)  Sixty-eight location-specific climate resilient technologies have been developed and 
popularized for wider adoption among the farming communities. 
(iii)  Agricultural contingency plans for 650 districts have been prepared and State 
officials have been sensitized for preparedness through 57 State -level interface 
meetings during the past eight years. Agricultural contingency plans have been 
made available o nline for policy makers to take decisions in the event of delayed 
monsoons and other extreme weather events. 
(iv)  District level risk and vulnerability assessment of Indian agriculture to climate 
change has been prepared which is useful for several Ministries/ Departments for 
prioritizing resources towards developmental programs. 
(v)  Based on vulnerability assessment, climate resilient technologies are being 
demonstrated on farmer’s fields in 151 clusters covering 454 villages. 
(vi)  A total of 74 IFS models including 8 integrated organic farming system models 
suitable for 26 States/UTs have been developed under AICRP IFS/AINP -OF and 
are being scaled through various schemes such as NMSA, IFC and State plan 
schemes. These IFS models are designed such a way that nutritional requirements 
such as carbohydrate, protein, fat and minerals are available within the farming 
system for the family. Bio-fortified varieties are also integrated wherever suitable. 
All the districts are being covered for promotion of sustainable agriculture practices 
under National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) through various schemes. The 
Mission aims to evolve and implement strategies to make Indian agriculture more resilient to 
the changing climate. NMSA was approved for three major components i.e. Rainfed Area 
Development (RAD); On Farm Water Management (OFWM); and Soil Health Management 
(SHM). Subsequently, new programmes such as namely Soil Health Card (SHC), 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Mission Organic Value Chain Development in 
North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER), Per Drop More Crop, National Bamboo Mission (NBM) 
etc. were also included. 
To protect the farmers from climate hazards, Government has introduced flagship yield 
based Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) along with weather index based 
Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) from Kharif 2016. The 
scheme aims at supporting sustainable production in agriculture sector by way of providing 
financial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out of unforeseen natural 

 
6 
 
calamities, adverse weather incidence and to help in stabilize the income of farmers to ensure 
their continuance in farming. Comprehensive risk insurance to farmers is provided against 
unpreventable natural calamities such as drought, dry-spells, flood, hailstorm, inundation etc. 
under the scheme for entire crop cycle including pre-sowing to post harvest losses.  
IMD runs an operational Agrometeorological Advisory Services (AAS) viz., Gramin 
Krishi Mausam Sewa (GKMS) scheme specifically for the benefits of farming community in 
the country. Under the scheme, medium range weather forecast for next 5 days at district and 
block level and also subsequent week Met Sub-division wise rainfall and temperature forecast 
are generated by IMD. Based on the forecast, 130 Agromet Field Units (AMFUs), located at 
State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), institutes of Indian Council o f Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) and Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) etc., prepare Agromet Advisories on every 
Tuesday and Friday for the districts under their jurisdiction and communicate to the farmers 
to take decision on day-to-day agricultural operations. IMD will be providing weather & climate 
information as well as Agromet advisories to support NICRA Scheme of MoA&FW.” 
 
1.8 The Committee  in their Report  had recommended that NICRA (National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture) Scheme should be implemented in all 
identified risk prone/vulnerable villages to empower the farmers and shield them from 
the vagaries of natural events & meteorological incidents and thus enabling them to 
usher in a new era of financial security. The Department in its Action Taken Reply has 
submitted that all the districts are being covered for promotion of sustainable 
agriculture practices under National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) 
through various schemes and the Mission aims to evolve and implement strategies to 
make Indian agriculture more resilient to the changing climate.   The Department has 
also submitted that to protect the farmers from climate hazards, Government has 
introduced flagship yield based Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) along with 
weather index based Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) 
from Kharif 2016. The Department has further s ubmitted that IMD runs an operational 
Agrometeorological Advisory Services (AAS) viz., Gramin Krishi Mausam Sewa 
(GKMS) scheme specifically for the benefits of farming community in the country. 
Under the scheme, medium range weather forecast, Sub -division wise rainfall and 
temperature forecast for next 5 days at district and block level and subsequent week 
are generated by IMD. The Committee are of the considered opinion that Climate 

 
7 
 
Change is a reality which needs to be accepted and tackled in such a manner that its 
effects become minimal. The Committee opine that technological advance  in 
agriculture, meteorology, information & communication, data sciences need to be 
incorporated/integrated alongside modern & traditional farming practices to transform 
the agriculture sector.  
B. Ensuring Food and Nutritional Security for all 
Recommendation No. 5. 
 
1.9 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
 “At the core of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) lie objectives to terminate 
the state of hunger, accomplish food security, and enhance nutrition. The issue of food 
security remains of utmost importance for India, within its roster of developmental concerns 
as a result of the nation's comparably elevated levels of economic advancement. Achieving 
and sustaining Food and Nutritional security remains a challenge for India, the world's most 
populous Nation. In the last three decades or so, India has tr ansitioned itself from a food 
deficit nation to a self sufficient food producing nation. In this context, merely achieving 
satisfactory levels of food production is not sufficient to guarantee a nation's food security. 
The National Food Security Act (NFSA) 2013 aims to provide for food and nutritional security 
by ensuring access to adequate quantities of quality food at affordable prices to the most 
vulnerable segments of the Society through various Schemes and Programmes. 
The primary issue encountered in Indian agriculture pertains to the insufficiency of 
productivity. The Nation necessitates an escalated level of public investment in the 
advancement and dissemination of crop varieties that exhibit heightened tolerance towards 
fluctuations in temperature and precipitation, while also being more proficient in water and 
nutrient utilization. The Committee are of the considerate view that Agri cultural Policy ought 
to prioritize the enhancement of crop productivity, while concurrently formulating safety nets 
to effectively cope with the associated risks posed by Climate Change. 
The introduction of the POSHAN Abhiyan (Nutrition Mission) in March 2018 by the 
Government of India has reoriented the national focus on nutrition. This initiative aims to 
enhance productivity and ensure food security for individuals as well as their famil ies and 
communities. Poor nutrition is a major risk factor in non communicable diseases (NCD). The 
Committee strongly recommend that latest technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Big 

 
8 
 
Data Analytics etc. may be utilized to ensure food and nutritional security for the masses 
especially vulnerable sections of the society, rural population in fulfilment of Sustainable 
Development Goals and for overall growth of the Agriculture sector.” 
 
1.10 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated: -  
“The National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) provides for coverage of up to 75% of 
the rural and up to 50% of the urban population for receiving highly subsidized foodgrains 
under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), which at Census 2011 comes to abo ut 
81.35 crore. The Coverage under the Act is substantially high to ensure that all the vulnerable 
and needy sections of the society get its benefit. The Central Government issues advisories 
to all the States/Union Territories from time to time to identif y all eligible and poor persons/ 
households including vulnerable Sections of the Society for inclusion under the NFSA. States 
are undertaking updation of their beneficiary database so that bogus ration cards get deleted 
and better targeting of rightful ben eficiaries is ensured. Thus, deletion of ineligible 
beneficiaries and addition of eligible beneficiaries under the Act is a continuous process. 
To meet the challenges of sustaining domestic food production in the face of changing 
climate, the Government is implementing National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture 
(NMSA). NMSA is one of the Missions within the National Action Plan on Climate Change  
(NAPCC) which aims to evolve and implement strategies to make Indian agriculture more 
resilient to the changing climate and to sustain increase in production. The Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) under Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government 
of India has launched a flagship network project namely National Innovations in Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). The project aims to study the impact of climate change on 
agriculture including crops, livestock, horticulture and fishe ries and to develop and promote 
climate resilient technologies in agriculture which will address vulnerable areas of the country 
and the outputs of the project will help the districts and regions prone to extreme weather 
conditions like droughts, floods, f rost, heat waves, etc. to cope with such extremes. The 
salient achievements under ICAR are as follows: 
(i)  ICAR has developed resilient varieties in different crops tolerant to climatic stresses 
to improve the food grain production in the face of changing climate. Since 2014, a 
total of 2279 varieties have been released out of which 1888 are climate resilient  
varieties which includes 429 abiotic stress tolerant varieties. 

 
9 
 
(ii)  Sixty-eight location-specific climate resilient technologies have been developed and 
popularized for wider adoption among the farming communities. 
(iii)  Agricultural contingency plans for 650 districts have been prepared and State officials 
have been sensitized for preparedness through 57 State -level interface meetings 
during the past eight years. Agricultural contingency plans have been made available 
online for policy makers to take decisions in the event of delayed monsoons and other 
extreme weather events. 
(iv)  District level risk and vulnerability assessment of Indian agriculture to climate change 
has been prepared which is useful for several Ministries/ Departments for prioritizing 
resources towards developmental programs. 
(v)  Based on vulnerability assessment, climate resilient technologies are being 
demonstrated on farmer’s fields in 151 clusters covering 454 villages. 
(vi)  A total of 74 IFS models including 8 integrated organic farming system models 
suitable for 26 States/UTs have been developed under AICRP IFS/AINP-OF and are 
being scaled through various schemes such as NMSA, IFC and State plan schemes. 
These IFS models ar e designed such a way that nutritional requirements such as 
carbohydrate, protein, fat and minerals are available within the farming system for 
the family. Bio-fortified varieties are also integrated wherever suitable. 
Recognizing the centrality of food security within the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs), the government has prioritized comprehensive strategies aimed at eradicating 
hunger, ensuring food security, and enhancing nutrition across the nation. 
Mission Saksham Angamvadi and Poshan 2.0 (Mission Poshan 2.0):  The 
Government of India has placed malnutrition at the forefront of its agenda, implementing the 
ambitious Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan2.0 (MissionPoshan2.0) with unwavering 
determination. In the 15th Finance Commission, components of nutritional support for children 
below the age of 6years, pregnant women and lactating mother, Adolescent Girls (14 -
18years); Early Childhood Care and Education (3-6years); Anganwadi infrastructure including 
modern, upgraded Saksham Anganwadi, POSHAN Abhiyaan and Scheme for Adolescent 
Girls have been reorganized under Mission Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 (Mission 
Poshan2.0). MissionPoshan2.0 focuses on Maternal Nutrition, Infant and Young Child 
Feeding Norms, Treatment of MAM/SAM and Wellness through AYUSH practices to reduce 
wasting and under-weight prevalence besides stunting and anemia. It shifts the focus from 

 
10 
 
addressing caloric sufficiency alone to prioritizing improved health, wellness, and immunity 
through micronutrient sufficiency, all underpinned by well-defined strategies. 
The objectives of Poshan 2.0 are as follows: 
•  To contribute to human capital development of the country  
•  Address challenges of malnutrition 
•  Promote nutrition awareness and good eating habits for sustainable health and 
well- being; and  
•  Address nutrition related deficiencies through key strategies. 
Poshan Abhiyaan plays a vital role in achieving SDGs 2 i.e., Zero Hunger aims to end 
hunger, achieve food security, improve nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture. 
Poshan Abhiyaan focuses on addressing malnutrition, a key aspect of achieving zero 
hunger. Through initiatives like the Supplementary Nutrition Programme, the 
government is striving to provide comprehensive nutrition support to vulnerable groups, 
including children, pregnant women, lactating mothers, and adolescent girls. 
Supplementary Nutrition Programme: Under Supplementary Nutrition Programme, 
nutrition support is provided to the children (including severely malnourished children) up to 
the age of 6years, pregnant women, lactating mothers, and adolescent girls (14-18 years) in 
the aspirational districts including those in Assam and North -Eastern States for 300 days in 
a year. Under this programme, Take Home Ration (THR) and Hot Cooked Meal (HCM) is 
provided to the beneficiaries by the States/UTs in accordance with the nut ritional norms 
contained in Schedule-II of the National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013. 
Recently, in order to address the challenge of malnutrition more effectively, nutrition 
norms contained in Schedule -II of the NFSA have been revised and notified on 25.01.23 to 
make them more comprehensive in terms of both quantity and quality. The emphasi s is on 
including micronutrients and promoting dietary diversity. The revised norms advocate for the 
provision of quality protein, healthy fats, and 7 (seven) essential micronutrients such as 
calcium, zine, iron, dietary folate, Vitamin A, Vitamin B6, and V itamin B12. Further, this 
Ministry has also suggested that to the extent possible, provision of animal source foods 
(such as fresh milk) and seasonal whole fresh fruits be included in the food rations to further 
improve diet diversity, protein quality and available micro nutrients such as calcium, vitamin 
B12, vitamin B6 etc. WCD has also recommended that eggs may be included in the 
"Recommended Food Baskets" in order to improve protein quality and provide adequate 

 
11 
 
amounts of Vitamin B12. However, for beneficiaries not consuming eggs, equivalent amount 
of milk/nuts & seeds may be given. Further, WCD has recommended that jaggery may be 
used instead of sugar as it is rich in micro nutrients and prevents anaemia. 
Under Wheat Based Nutrition Programme (WBNP), more emphasis is being given on 
the supply of millet for preparation of THR and HCM at Anganwadis for Pregnant Women, 
Lactating mothers and children below 6 years of age, as millet are highly nutritious and are  
known to have high nutrient content which includes protein, essential fatty acid, dietary fiber 
and micro nutrients such as B-Vitamins, calcium, iron, zinc, folic acid and others thus helping 
to tackle anaemia and other micro nutrient deficiencies common among women and children. 
As per the Scheme Guidelines issued for Mission Saksham Anganwadi & Poshan 2.0, millet 
needs to be mandatory supplied at least once a week and suitably integrated in THR and 
HCM in a palatable form. 
The Ministry of Women & Child Development (MWCD) remains dedicated to 
leveraging the potential of technology -driven solutions to advance the goals of food and 
nutritional security, particularly among vulnerable sections of society and rural populations. 
IT systems have been leveraged to strengthen and bring about transparency in nutrition 
delivery support systems at the Anganwadi centers. The 'Poshan Tracker' application was 
rolled out on 1 March, 2021 as an important governance tool and under POSHAN Abhiyaan, 
for the first time, a digital revolution was ushered in when the Anganwadi Centres were 
equipped with mobile devices to key in data in the Poshan Tracker app. The Poshan Tracker 
facilitates monitoring and tracking of all AWCS, AWWs and beneficiaries on  defined 
indicators. Technology under Poshan Tracker is being leveraged for dynamic identification of 
stunting, wasting, under-weight prevalence among children. The mobile application has also 
facilitated digitization and automation of physical registers u sed by AWWs that helps in 
improving their quality of work. Poshan Tracker is available in 24 languages including Hindi 
and English. It has facilitated near real time data collection for Anganwadi Services such as, 
daily attendance, Provision of Hot Cooked Meal (HCM)/Take Home Ration (THR), Growth 
Measurement, Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE), etc. The App also offers 
counseling videos on key behaviours and services which help disseminate messages on birth 
preparedness, delivery, post-natal care, breastfeeding and complementary feeding.” 
 
1.11  The Committee in their Report had recommended that latest technologies such 
as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Big Data Analytics etc. may be utilized to ensure food and 
nutritional security for the masses especially vulnerable sections of the society, rural 

 
12 
 
population in fulfilment of Sustainable Development Goals and for overall growth of 
the Agriculture sector. The Department in its Action Taken Reply has submitted that 
the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) provides for coverage of up to 75% of the 
rural and up to 50% of the urban population for receiving highly subsidized foodgrains 
under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), which at Census 2011 comes to 
about 81.35 crore. The Coverage under the Act is substantially high to ensure that all 
the vulnerable and needy sections of the society get its benefit. The  Department has 
also submitted that the Central Government issues advisories to all the States/Union 
Territories from time to time to identify all eligible and poor persons/ households 
including vulnerable Sections of the Society for inclusion under the NFSA . The 
Department in its Action Taken Reply has further submitted that the Government of 
India has placed malnutrition at the forefront of its agenda, implementing the 
ambitious Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 (Mission Poshan 2.0) with unwavering 
determination and in the 15th Finance Commission, components of nutritional support 
for children below the age of 6 years, pregnant women and lactating mother, 
Adolescent Girls (14 -18years); Early Childhood Care and Education (3 -6years); 
Anganwadi infrastructure including modern, upgraded Saksham Anganwadi, POSHAN 
Abhiyaan and Scheme for Adolescent Girls have been reorganized under Miss ion 
Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 (Mission Poshan2.0). Mission Poshan 2.0 
focuses on Maternal Nutrition, Infant and Young Child Feeding Norms, Treatment and 
Wellness of Mothers and Infants through AYUSH practices to reduce wasting and 
under-weight preva lence besides stunting and anaemia. It shifts the focus from 
addressing caloric sufficiency alone to prioritizing improved health, wellness, and 
immunity through micronutrient sufficiency, all underpinned by well -defined 
strategies. The Committee are of the considered opinion that use of latest technologies 
such as AI, Big Data Analytics would not only enhance the reach  of the Schemes to 
vulnerable sections of the Society  but also go a long way in fulfilment of Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) thereby ensuring overall growth of the Agriculture sector 
which in turn will positively impact the country’s GDP growth. 
  

 
13 
 
Increasing budgetary allocation for Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
Recommendation No. 16. 
1.12  The Committee had observed/ recommended:-   
“Agriculture sector in India is now at the cusp of a transformation backed by Union  
Government initiatives such as Digital Public Infrastructure, Agriculture Infrastructure Fund 
schemes and so on. The scalability of these Schemes needs to be enhanced so that their 
impact is more tangible and areas across the country start getting benefit s simultaneously. 
The Committee feel that without adequate financial support and backing by the government, 
most of the Schemes will not be able to create the desired impact. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that budgetary allocation of the Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare needs to be enhanced to boost public spending in Agriculture 
& Allied Sectors, to tackle issues related to Climate Change as India is among the top ten 
countries to be affected by extreme meteorological events, to train farmers and FPOs in the 
latest technological advances to combat adverse impact of phenological events, to ensure 
farm inputs across the length and breadth of the country, invest mo re in research in farm 
methods and technologies & related demands of Allied Sectors and so on.” 
 
1.13 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
“Government of India is committed to the welfare of farmers and Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is accordingly implementing comprehensive range of central 
sector as well as centrally sponsored schemes and programmes for the welfare of farmers in 
the country. These schemes encompass entire spectrum of agriculture including credit, 
insurance, income support, infrastructure, crops including horticulture, seeds, mechanization, 
marketing, organic and natural farming, farmer collectives, irrigation, extension, procurement 
of crops from far mers at minimum support prices, digital agriculture etc. The total budget 
allocation for DA&FW for the FY 2024-25 has witnessed an increase of 1.73% in comparison 
to FY 2023 -24. The budget allocation at BE level for FY 2024 -25 is Rs. 117528.80 crore, 
whereas BE 2023-24 was Rs. 115531.79 crore. 
The budgetary allocation for Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) 
depends upon the various factors including amount of scheme approved, their previous 
years‟ expenditures under the schemes, absorption capacity of the Department and the 
actual requirement of funds depending upon progress of scheme and overall fiscal situation 

 
14 
 
of Govt. during the respective financial years.  The allocation of budget for various schemes, 
including RKVY, is worked out by Budget Division of MoA&FW.” 
1.14  The Committee in their Report had recommended that budgetary allocation of 
the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare needs to be enhanced to boost public 
spending in Agriculture & Allied Sectors, to tackle issues related to Climate Change as 
India is among the top ten countries to be affected by extreme meteorological events, 
to train fa rmers and FPOs in the latest technological advances to combat adverse 
impact of phenological events, to ensure farm inputs across the length and breadth of 
the c ountry, invest more in research in farm methods and technologies & related 
demands of Allied Sectors and so on. The Department in its Action Taken Reply ha s 
submitted that the budgetary allocation for Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare (DA&FW) depends upon the various factors including amount of scheme 
approved, their previous years expenditures under the schemes, absorption capacity 
of the Department and the actual requirement of funds depending upon progress of 
scheme and overall fiscal situation of Govt. during the respective financial years.  The 
Department has further submitted that t he allocation of budget for various schemes, 
including RKVY, is worked out by Budget Division of MoA&FW .  The Committee is of 
the considered view that public spending in Agriculture needs to be enhanced not only 
to boost farm productivity, increase credit, insurance and infrastructure facilities but 
also for overall growth of the country’s economy and GDP. The Committee after 
considering the reply of the Department emphasise that, given Agriculture’s role as the 
largest livelihood provider in the country and its significant contribution to the economy 
and other sectors through backward and forward linkages, enhanced budgetary 
allocation to the Department of Agricultu re & Farmers Welfare would be highly 
beneficial.  Such support could help ensure that agriculture receives due importance, 
while also strengthening the scalability of ongoing schemes and making their impact 
more tangible. Hence, the Committee reiterate the ir earlier recommendation in the 
matter. 
 
Issue of Manpower in Research Institutes and bodies attached to Ministry of Agriculture 
& Farmers Welfare 
Recommendation No. 17 
1.15 The Committee had observed/ recommended: - 

 
15 
 
“A robust and strategic knowledge system is imperative for the identification, 
formulation, planning, and execution of policy-driven measures, while upholding the requisite 
rate of economic growth. This strategic knowledge system, aimed at informing and supporting 
actions sensitive to climate change, must encompass several objectives. These objectives 
entail addressing climate science through  modelling specific to regions; evaluating various 
technological scenarios and alternatives to meet national objectives; harnessing international 
cooperation and enhancing our endeavo urs to select and develop new technologies for 
adaptation and mitigation; and ensuring the bridging of knowledge gaps. It is of utmost 
importance to sustain the vitality of the knowledge enterprise that addresses Climate Change 
issues through the promotion of human and institutional capacity -building. Such measures 
are indispensable in the crafting of policy responses and implementation approaches at the 
national level and in providing inputs for negotiations at the international for a by designated 
Departments. The role of Research Institutes in sustaining the vitality of knowledge systems, 
ICAR in the present context, is of immense importance in combating the effects of Climate 
Change. Manpower is the most important asset of any organization and more so, in the case 
of research institutes such as ICAR, Coconut Development Board (CDB) and so on.  
The Committee note that the Posts are lying vacant in certain crucial Research 
Institutes like Coconut Development Board (CDB), Central Institute of Fisheries Training 
(CIFT) and Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI), etc. The Committee feel 
that the Recruitment Processes need to be expedited and Officials appointed to increase the 
efficiency of the functioning of all the Research Institutes.” 
 
1.16 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated: - 
“Government makes all the efforts for timely filling up of the vacant posts through 
recruitment as well as promotion. It is a continuous process and  regular monitoring of the 
retirements and completion of tenures is done and accordingly, requisitions for filling up the 
vacancies are sent in advance to recruiting agencies.” 
 
1.17 The Committee had desired to sustain the vitality of the knowledge enterprise 
that addresses Climate Change issues through the promotion of human and 
institutional capacity-building as such measures are indispensable in the crafting of 
policy responses and implementation approaches at the national level and in providing 
inputs for negotiations at the international fora by designated Departments . The 

 
16 
 
Committee had recommended that the Recruitment processes for posts lying vacant 
in certain crucial Research Institutes like Coconut Development Board (CDB), Central 
Institute of Fisheries Training (CIFT) and Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute 
(CMFRI), etc. need to be expedited and Officials be appointed to increase the efficiency 
of the functioning of all the Research Institutes.  In its Action Taken Reply, the 
Department has submitted that the Government makes all the efforts for timely filling 
up of the vacant posts through recruitment as well as promotion which is a continuous 
process and regular monitoring of the retirements and completion of tenures is done 
and accordingly, requisitions for filling up the vacancies are sent in advance to 
recruiting agencies.  The Committee after taken note of the reply of the Department 
emphasise that filling vacancies in significant numbers within the concerned 
Departments is imperative for strengthening the efficiency of Research Institutes 
under its mandate.  The Committee are of the view that expediting the recruitment 
process would enable these Research Institutes to contribute more effectively to the 
process of nation building.  In this context, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation on the matter. 
  
 
 
  

 
17 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Nationwide implementation of Comprehensive and Integrated Approach to mitigate 
adverse impact of Climate Change on Agriculture - Implementation of NICRA Scheme 
in all Risk Prone Villages due to Climate Change 
Recommendation No. 2 
Climate change impacts are not evenly distributed among different populations and 
countries. Developing countries, which heavily rely on the Agriculture and lack the necessary 
technologies and finances for risk management, face greater vulnerability to cli mate risks. 
Research has found that elevated temperatures have a more detrimental effect on the 
Agricultural growth in developing countries as compared to developed ones. Recent studies 
have demonstrated that Climate Change has resulted in a substantial de crease in the 
productivity growth of global Agriculture in the last five- six decades. With a more pronounced 
impact on developing countries, similar evidence has been reported for India, where climatic 
hazards have led to a substantive reduction in produc tivity growth, especially in low-income 
and agrarian States. The socio economic consequences of Climate Change’s negative 
impact on agriculture are also more significant for developing countries. Studies have 
indicated that climatic shocks have disproporti onately increased undernutrition and poverty 
rates in the South Asia and Sub -Saharan Africa compared to other regions of the world. 
Numerous other studies have also documented a significant decline in household income 
and consumption expenditure due to adverse rainfall shocks. 
The long -term consequences of repeated exposure to multiple risks can be 
devastating. They can deplete household savings, force the sale of assets, increase 
indebtedness, discourage the adoption of new technologies and innovations, and degrade 
natural resources and ecosystem services. There are concerns that, without mitigation and 
adaptation measures, poor farmers may find it difficult to fully recover from the impacts of 
climatic shocks and remain trapped in a cycle of low-income, debt, and poverty. The adverse 
impacts of Climate Change on Agriculture and Agriculture-based livelihoods can be reduced 
by implementing comprehensive and integrated approaches. These approaches include 
technological advancements in agriculture, meteorology, information and commu nication, 

 
18 
 
data sciences, and the incorporation of traditional farming practices. Depending on risk 
aversion, resource availability, and access to information and finances, farm households 
adopt various measures to manage climate risks. Extensive analysis of adaptati on literature 
has shown that integrating scientific innovations with traditional practices is a strong strategy 
for enhancing productivity, sustainability, and resilience in smallholder -dominated agrarian 
economies. 
Against this backdrop, the Committee desire that NICRA (National Innovations in 
Climate Resilient Agriculture) Scheme should be implemented in all identified risk 
prone/vulnerable villages to empower the farmers and shield them from the vagaries of 
natural events & meteorological incidents and thus enabling them to usher in a new era of 
financial security. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project is being 
implemented in 151 risk prone districts covering 448 villages. However, the objectives of 
NICRA are to conduct strategic research on adaptation and mitigation, technology 
demonstration and capacity building. Considering the fact that agriculture sector is highly 
vulnerable to cli mate change and to achieve food security, focus is given to the adaptation 
practices which in turn provides climate resilience to the small and marginal farmers and 
vulnerable sections of the society. The ICAR under NICRA identified 310 districts are risk 
prone to climate change. The ICAR has developed several technologies to build climate 
resilience in all the agriculturally predominant districts of the country. The salient 
achievements under ICAR are as follows: 
(i)  ICAR has developed resilient varieties in different crops tolerant to climatic stresses 
to improve the food grain production in the face of changing climate. Since 2014, a 
total of 2279 varieties have been released out of which 1888 are climate resilient  
varieties which includes 429 abiotic stress tolerant varieties. 
(ii)  Sixty-eight location-specific climate resilient technologies have been developed and 
popularized for wider adoption among the farming communities. 
(iii)  Agricultural contingency plans for 650 districts have been prepared and State officials 
have been sensitized for preparedness through 57 State -level interface meetings 
during the past eight years. Agricultural contingency plans have been made available 

 
19 
 
online for policy makers to take decisions in the event of delayed monsoons and other 
extreme weather events. 
(iv)  District level risk and vulnerability assessment of Indian agriculture to climate change 
has been prepared which is useful for several Ministries/ Departments for prioritizing 
resources towards developmental programs. 
(v)  Based on vulnerability assessment, climate resilient technologies are being 
demonstrated on farmer’s fields in 151 clusters covering 454 villages. 
(vi)  A total of 74 IFS models including 8 integrated organic farming system models 
suitable for 26 States/UTs have been developed under AICRP IFS/AINP-OF and are 
being scaled through various schemes such as NMSA, IFC and State plan schemes. 
These IFS models a re designed such a way that nutritional requirements such as 
carbohydrate, protein, fat and minerals are available within the farming system for 
the family. Bio-fortified varieties are also integrated wherever suitable. 
All the districts are being covered for promotion of sustainable agriculture practices 
under National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) through various schemes. The 
Mission aims to evolve and implement strategies to make Indian agriculture more resilient to 
the changing climate. NMSA was approved for three major components i.e. Rainfed Area 
Development (RAD); On Farm Water Management (OFWM); and Soil Health Management 
(SHM). Subsequently, new programmes such as namely Soil Health Card (SHC), 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Mission Organic Value Chain Development in 
North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER), Per Drop More Crop, National Bamboo Mission (NBM) 
etc. were also included. 
To protect the farmers from climate hazards, Government has introduced flagship yield 
based Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) along with weather index based 
Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) from Kharif 2016. The 
scheme aims at supporting sustainable production in agriculture sector by way of providing 
financial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out of unforeseen natural 
calamities, adverse weather incidence and to help in stabilize the income of farmers to ensure 
their continuance in farming. Comprehensive risk insurance to farmers is provided against 
unpreventable natural calamities such as drought, dry-spells, flood, hailstorm, inundation etc. 
under the scheme for entire crop cycle including pre-sowing to post harvest losses.  

 
20 
 
IMD runs an operational Agrometeorological Advisory Services (AAS) viz., Gramin 
Krishi Mausam Sewa (GKMS) scheme specifically for the benefits of farming community in 
the country. Under the scheme, medium range weather forecast for next 5 days at district and 
block level and also subsequent week Met Sub-division wise rainfall and temperature forecast 
are generated by IMD. Based on the forecast, 130 Agromet Field Units (AMFUs), located at 
State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), institutes of Indian Council o f Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) and Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) etc., prepare Agromet Advisories on every 
Tuesday and Friday for the districts under their jurisdiction and communicate to the farmers 
to take decision on day-to-day agricultural operations. IMD will be providing weather & climate 
information as well as Agromet advisories to support NICRA Scheme of MoA&FW.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I of this Report.  
 
Giving prominence to Village Panchayats to raise awareness about impact of Climate 
Change and its effects on Agriculture 
Recommendation No. 3 
The most challenging political issue in the Climate Change policy arises from the 
inadequate acknowledgement and recognition of the changing climate by Village Panchayats 
or Local Self -governing Bodies. An enlightened or aware Sarpanch will act as a force 
multiplier and in turn educate the farmers who are the front line warriors about the effects of 
Climate Change on Agriculture and the need for adoption of Climate Resilient practices. The 
farmers need to be enlightened clearly that the impact of climate ri sks could transmit along 
the Supply or Value chains from genetics to end -consumption, affecting the efficiency and 
sustainability of the entire chain and the livelihoods of chain actors. 
Until a village Sarpanch is made aware of the need to align the development strategies 
of a Gram Panchayat with the goal of adapting agriculture to climate variability, any efforts 
made at higher levels of governance may not yield the desired outcomes. The institution of a 
Panchayat possesses the ability to leverage funds from a multitude of Govt. schemes. Funds 

 
21 
 
provided under Govt. Schemes can be utilized in adaptation and mitigation strategies for 
enhancing Climate Resilience by working on agro forestry and plantation, soil & water 
management, creation of water ponds/reservoirs and so on. Workshops containing 
information for Beginners, Medium and Advance Level Training and Refresher courses for 
Village Sarpanchs and Panchayats on Climate Change issues need to be conducted on a 
regular basis at District, Regional and National Level to keep them attuned to the 
developments happening worldwide. National/regional Level ranking of villages adopting best 
Climate Resilient practices may be started and those topping the charts may be felicitated to 
motivate others to follow the suit. 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that to enhance awareness regarding 
impact of Climate Change on Agriculture, in villages especially among the farming community 
and Village Sarpanchs, messages may be broadcast on social media platforms extensive ly 
in Hindi, English as well as in vernacular languages across the country. Focus on 
dissemination of these informative messages regarding impact of Climate Change on 
Agriculture in remote areas with sub optimal connectivity and border areas may be given 
prominence so that farmers residing there do not remain oblivious about the adverse impact 
of Climate Change and adopt essential adaptative and mitigative practices. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Ministry of Panchayat Raj (MoPR) disseminates, weather forecasts of IMD for 
preparedness to deal with floods during monsoon season. The ministry intends to outreach 
Sarpanch of Gram Panchayat to give weather warnings. All the apps and portal links of I MD 
like Mausam, Umang, Meghdoot, etc. are used for dissemination. IMD‟s Panchayat Mausam 
Sewa application on daily weather forecast data at the block level is integrated with eGram 
Sawaraj portal of MoPR. The eGram Sawaraj portal is being used by all the D istricts/ blocks 
and Gram panchayats. Unified mobile app MAUSAM was launched on 15th Jan 2024 on the 
occasion of commencement of 150 years of services of IMD. In addition to English, it supports 
12 Indian languages and aims to provide accurate, reliable, real time weather information and 
forecast for every hour to 7 days to users. With convenient GIS based weather maps, it 
provides all weather services to users including weather forecasts and warnings, Rain alerts, 
Cyclone alerts, Lightning alerts, Radar an d Satellite products, forecast along National 
Highway, railways, aviation and agro meteorological advisory services among others. User 
can be proactively warned of impending severe weather events based on location of the user. 

 
22 
 
The mobile app caters to the need of all categories of services including urban, power, 
health, hydrology, environment, agriculture, surface, transport, aviation, navigation and 
tourism sectors. The mobile app provides specialized services on current weath er including 
temperature, humidity, wind, rainfall, sunrise/sunset, moonrise/moonset and AQI. MAUSAM 
app is freely available on mSevaAppStore, Google Play store, Apple App store. 
The ICAR has collaborated with Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
Government of India to link KVKs with Common Service Centres (CSCs) for extending the 
reach of KVKs up to Panchayat level. Accordingly, 3.5 lakh CSCs have been linked with t he 
KVKs for providing technological solutions to the farmers visiting CSCs with agriculture 
related technological problems. Besides, KVKs are using ICT social media platforms like 
WhatsApp and Facebook to disseminate technological information including those mitigating 
adverse impact of Climate Change. Moreover, 151 KVKs, implementing Technology 
Demonstration Component of National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture, have 
formed Village Climate Risk Management Committees in 151 clusters of villages  involving 
panchayat representatives and farmers for planning and monitoring implementation of climate 
resilient technologies. 
 
The National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj (NIRD&PR), 
Hyderabad is a premier institute under MoRD is in intended to have capacity building 
programmes in climate resilient agriculture to the farmers in collaboration with ICAR. The 
main objective of the institute is systematic observation and analysis of disasters to improve 
measures relating to prevention, mitigation, preparedness, emergency response and 
recovery. Besides, mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) as a policy objective in all 
developmental efforts encompassing the measures needed to achieve objective and 
developing a culture of disaster resilience and climate change adaptation strategies. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
Role of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) and the need for transformation 
Recommendation No. 4. 
The Committee note that significant contribution has been made by the KVKs (Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras) towards the overall enhancement of farmers' quality of life. These 

 
23 
 
contributions include in the areas of income generation, agricultural productivity, the 
introduction of state -of-the-art technologies, approaches to resource conservation, the 
promotion of organic farming, diversification of agricultural activities, Traini ng Programmes 
for rural youth and farm women to foster entrepreneurial endeavours, the development of 
integrated farming systems, models for climate -resilient agriculture, and the utilization of 
information and communication technology (ICT) for effective dissemination of information. It 
is an established fact, as revealed by field -based stakeholder analysis, that the presence of 
a KVK in each district has led to tangible progress in the Agrarian sector. This progress is 
attributed to the provision of a Single Window Platform that offers technology and services - 
within easy reach of all stakeholders. 
The Committee think that time has arrived wherein infrastructural and technological 
facilities in KVKs need a boost to enable them to cater training to farmers in the latest 
technological Agrarian practices. The record keeping of KVKs especially in regard to records 
of training being imparted to the Farmers, also needs to be spruced up. KVKs should resort 
to data analytics to ensure that all farmers are imparted training in the relevant fields. The 
KVKs need to utilize Artificial Intelligence and other late st innovations to act as Knowledge 
Centres where information/Knowledge can be imparted in Vernacular languages too, through 
online mode 24 x7 as and when queries are raised by the farmers. These changes will revamp 
the existing system and KVKs will usher in a new version KVK 2.0 fully equipped and geared 
to meet not only the challenges of Climate Change but other exigencies too, as and when the 
need arises. These changes will also enable KVKs to provide courses in Capacity Building 
Programmes for Farmers and Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs). 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
KVKs are mandated for frontline extension which act as a bridge between research 
organizations and the main extension system operated by different development departments 
of the State Governments. Considering the role and resources of a KVK, it caters to t he 
requirement of the selected farmers of the district and provide capacity development support 
to State Development Departments. The coverage of entire district is the responsibility of 
development departments of State Governments. They bridge the gap between the National 
Agricultural Research System (NARS) and the farming community, disseminating knowledge 
and promoting cutting-edge agricultural practices. 

 
24 
 
The Government is supporting for need based infrastructure creation in KVKs. The 
KVKs imparted training to about 21.56 lakh farmers during 2023 -24 on latest agricultural 
practices by organizing 69 thousand training programmes. These training programs included 
skill development under “Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture” and National Skill 
Qualification Framework aligned training courses. KVKs have also been entrusted with 
providing technological backstopping to the FPOs. During 2023 -24, the KVKs p rovided 
technological backstopping to 1866 FPOs by organizing 2340 training programmes with 
participation of 85291 members. The farmers are informed about the schedules of such 
training programmes through Newsletter of KVKs,  advertisement in newspaper, 
Notice/Bulletin Board of KVKs, website, messages on mobile of farmers, social media, 
announcement about training programmes during village level programmes, etc. The 
interested farmers approach to attend the training programmes.  Besides, training 
programmes a re also conducted on the demand of farmers‟ groups, Farmers Producer 
Organizations, etc. Different organizations also nominate farmers/ farmers‟ groups for 
training. Records of the training programmes are maintained by the KVKs. 
The KVKs use ICT and social media to reach large number of farmers. The ICAR has 
created an online Platform KisanSarathi for two-way communication with farmers for solving 
their field problems through latest technologies including climate resilient ones. F armers 
registered on this platform are able to ask questions and get answers in their own language. 
A total of 1.91 crore farmers of 2.82 lakh villages are registered on KisanSarathi. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
Ensuring Food and Nutritional Security for all 
Recommendation No. 5. 
At the core of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) lie objectives to terminate 
the state of hunger, accomplish food security, and enhance nutrition. The issue of food 
security remains of utmost importance for India, within its roster of developmental concerns 
as a result of the nation's comparably elevated levels of economic advancement. Achieving 
and sustaining Food and Nutritional security remains a challenge for India, the world's most 
populous Nation. In the last three decades or so, India has tran sitioned itself from a food 

 
25 
 
deficit nation to a self sufficient food producing nation. In this context, merely achieving 
satisfactory levels of food production is not sufficient to guarantee a nation's food security. 
The National Food Security Act (NFSA) 2013 aims to provide for food and nutritional security 
by ensuring access to adequate quantities of quality food at affordable prices to the most 
vulnerable segments of the Society through various Schemes and Programmes. 
The primary issue encountered in Indian agriculture pertains to the insufficiency of 
productivity. The Nation necessitates an escalated level of public investment in the 
advancement and dissemination of crop varieties that exhibit heightened tolerance towa rds 
fluctuations in temperature and precipitation, while also being more proficient in water and 
nutrient utilization. The Committee are of the considerate view that Agricultural Policy ought 
to prioritize the enhancement of crop productivity, while concurrently formulating safety nets 
to effectively cope with the associated risks posed by Climate Change. 
The introduction of the POSHAN Abhiyan (Nutrition Mission) in March 2018 by the 
Government of India has reoriented the national focus on nutrition. This initiative aims to 
enhance productivity and ensure food security for individuals as well as their famil ies and 
communities. Poor nutrition is a major risk factor in non communicable diseases (NCD).  
The Committee strongly recommend that latest technologies such as Artificial 
Intelligence, Big Data Analytics etc. may be utilized to ensure food and nutritional security for 
the masses especially vulnerable sections of the society, rural population in fulfilment of 
Sustainable Development Goals and for overall growth of the Agriculture sector. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) provides for coverage of up to 75% of 
the rural and up to 50% of the urban population for receiving highly subsidized foodgrains 
under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), which at Census 2011 comes to abo ut 
81.35 crore. The Coverage under the Act is substantially high to ensure that all the vulnerable 
and needy sections of the society get its benefit. The Central Government issues advisories 
to all the States/Union Territories from time to time to identify  all eligible and poor persons/ 
households including vulnerable Sections of the Society for inclusion under the NFSA. States 
are undertaking updation of their beneficiary database so that bogus ration cards get deleted 
and better targeting of rightful bene ficiaries is ensured. Thus, deletion of ineligible 
beneficiaries and addition of eligible beneficiaries under the Act is a continuous process. 

 
26 
 
To meet the challenges of sustaining domestic food production in the face of changing 
climate, the Government is implementing National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture 
(NMSA). NMSA is one of the Missions within the National Action Plan on Climate Change  
(NAPCC) which aims to evolve and implement strategies to make Indian agriculture more 
resilient to the changing climate and to sustain increase in production. The Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) under Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government 
of India has launched a flagship network project namely National Innovations in Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). The project aims to study the impact of climate change on 
agriculture including crops, livestock, horticulture and fishe ries and to develop and promote 
climate resilient technologies in agriculture which will address vulnerable areas of the country 
and the outputs of the project will help the districts and regions prone to extreme weather 
conditions like droughts, floods, f rost, heat waves, etc. to cope with such extremes. The 
salient achievements under ICAR are as follows: 
1.  ICAR has developed resilient varieties in different crops tolerant to climatic stresses 
to improve the food grain production in the face of changing climate. Since 2014, a 
total of 2279 varieties have been released out of which 1888 are climate resilie nt 
varieties which includes 429 abiotic stress tolerant varieties. 
2.  Sixty-eight location-specific climate resilient technologies have been developed and 
popularized for wider adoption among the farming communities. 
3.  Agricultural contingency plans for 650 districts have been prepared and State officials 
have been sensitized for preparedness through 57 State -level interface meetings 
during the past eight years. Agricultural contingency plans have been made available 
online for policy makers to take decisions in the event of delayed monsoons and other 
extreme weather events. 
4.  District level risk and vulnerability assessment of Indian agriculture to climate change 
has been prepared which is useful for several Ministries/ Departments for prioritizing 
resources towards developmental programs. 
5.  Based on vulnerability assessment, climate resilient technologies are being 
demonstrated on farmer‟s fields in 151 clusters covering 454 villages. 
6.  A total of 74 IFS models including 8 integrated organic farming system models 
suitable for 26 States/UTs have been developed under AICRP IFS/AINP-OF and are 
being scaled through various schemes such as NMSA, IFC and State plan schemes. 

 
27 
 
These IFS models are designed such a way that nutritional requirements such as 
carbohydrate, protein, fat and minerals are available within the farming system for the 
family. Bio-fortified varieties are also integrated wherever suitable. 
Recognizing the centrality of food security within the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs), the government has prioritized comprehensive strategies aimed at eradicating 
hunger, ensuring food security, and enhancing nutrition across the nation. 
Mission Saksham Angamvadi and Poshan 2.0 (Mission Poshan 2.0) : The 
Government of India has placed malnutrition at the forefront of its agenda, implementing the 
ambitious Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan2.0 (MissionPoshan2.0) with unwavering 
determination. In the 15thFinance Commission, components of nutritional support for children 
below the age of 6years, pregnant women and lactating mother, Adolescent Girls (14 -
18years); Early Childhood Care and Education (3-6years); Anganwadi infrastructure including 
modern, upgraded Saksham Anganwadi, POSHAN Abhiyaan and Scheme for Adolescent 
Girls have been reorganized under Mission Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 (Mission 
Poshan2.0). MissionPoshan2.0 focuses on Maternal Nutrition, Infant and Young Child 
Feeding Norms, Treatment of MAM/SAMand Wellness through AYUSH practices to reduce 
wasting and under-weight prevalence besides stunting and anemia. It shifts the focus from 
addressing caloric sufficiency alone to prioritizing improved health, wellness, and immunity 
through micronutrient sufficiency, all underpinned by well-defined strategies. 
The objectives of Poshan2.0 are as follows: 
•  To contribute to human capital development of the country  
•  Address challenges of malnutrition 
•  Promote nutrition awareness and good eating habits for sustainable health and 
well- being; and  
•  Address nutrition related deficiencies through key strategies. 
Poshan Abhiyaan plays a vital role in achieving SDGs 2 i.e., Zero Hunger aims to end 
hunger, achieve food security, improve nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture. Poshan 
Abhiyaan focuses on addressing malnutrition, a key aspect of achieving zero h unger. 
Through initiatives like the Supplementary Nutrition Programme, the government is striving 
to provide comprehensive nutrition support to vulnerable groups, including children, pregnant 
women, lactating mothers, and adolescent girls. 

 
28 
 
Supplementary Nutrition Programme: Under Supplementary Nutrition Programme, 
nutrition support is provided to the children (including severely malnourished children) up to 
the age of 6years, pregnant women, lactating mothers, and adolescent girls (14-18 years) in 
the aspirational districts including those in Assam and North -Eastern States for 300 days in 
a year. Under this programme, Take Home Ration (THR) and Hot Cooked Meal (HCM) is 
provided to the beneficiaries by the States/UTs in accordance with the nut ritional norms 
contained in Schedule-II of the National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013. 
Recently, in order to address the challenge of malnutrition more effectively, nutrition 
norms contained in Schedule -II of the NFSA have been revised and notified on 25.01.23 to 
make them more comprehensive in terms of both quantity and quality. The emphasi s is on 
including micronutrients and promoting dietary diversity. The revised norms advocate for the 
provision of quality protein, healthy fats, and 7 essential micronutrients such as calcium, zine, 
iron, dietary folate, Vitamin A, Vitamin B6, and Vitamin B12. Further, this Ministry has also 
suggested that to the extent possible, provision of animal source foods (such as fresh milk) 
and seasonal whole fresh fruits be included in the food rations to further improve diet diversity, 
protein quality and availab le micro nutrients such as calcium, vitamin B12, vitamin B6 etc. 
WCD has also recommended that eggs may be included in the "Recommended Food 
Baskets" in order to improve protein quality and provide adequate amounts of Vitamin B12. 
However, for beneficiaries not consuming eggs, equivalent amount of milk/nuts & seeds may 
be given. Further, WCD has recommended that jaggery may be used instead of sugar as it 
is rich in micro nutrients and prevents anemia. 
Under Wheat Based Nutrition Programme (WBNP), more emphasis is being given on 
the supply of millet for preparation of THR and HCM at Anganwadis for Pregnant Women, 
Lactating mothers and children below 6 years of age, as millet are highly nutritious and are  
known to have high nutrient content which includes protein, essential fatty acid, dietary fiber 
and micro nutrients such as B-Vitamins, calcium, iron, zinc, folic acid and others thus helping 
to tackle anaemia and other micro nutrient deficiencies common among women and children. 
As per the Scheme Guidelines issued for Mission Saksham Anganwadi & Poshan 2.0, millet 
needs to be mandatory supplied at least once a week and suitably integrated in THR and 
HCM in a palatable form. 
The Ministry of Women & Child Development (MWCD) remains dedicated to 
leveraging the potential of technology -driven solutions to advance the goals of food and 
nutritional security, particularly among vulnerable sections of society and rural populations. 

 
29 
 
IT systems have been leveraged to strengthen and bring about transparency in nutrition 
delivery support systems at the Anganwadi centers. The 'Poshan Tracker' application was 
rolled out on 1 March, 2021 as an important governance tool and under POSHAN Abhiyaan, 
for the first time, a digital revolution was ushered in when the Anganwadi Centres were 
equipped with mobile devices to key in data in the Poshan Tracker app. The Poshan Tracker 
facilitates monitoring and tracking of all AWCS, AWWs and beneficiaries on defined 
indicators. Technology under Poshan Tracker is being leveraged for dynamic identification of 
stunting, wasting, under-weight prevalence among children. The mobile application has also 
facilitated digitization and automation of physical registers  used by AWWs that helps in 
improving their quality of work. Poshan Tracker is available in 24 languages including Hindi 
and English. It has facilitated near real time data collection for Anganwadi Services such as, 
daily attendance, Provision of Hot Cooke d Meal (HCM)/Take Home Ration (THR), Growth 
Measurement, Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE), etc. The App also offers 
counselling videos on key behaviours and services which help disseminate messages on 
birth preparedness, delivery, post-natal care, breastfeeding and complementary feeding. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of this Report.  
 
Need for giving priority to Crop Diversification and Water conservation 
Recommendation No. 6 
 Diversification and modification of crop species and variety portfolios are commonly 
employed strategies by farmers to address environmental and socio economic variability and 
to effectively respond to transformative shifts, such as climate change. Despite the 
undeniable importance of crop diversity in enabling agro ecosystems for successful 
adaptation to climate change as current public policies and development  interventions offer 
inadequate assistance in promoting crop diversification. The Committee feel that 
understanding the dynamics of alterations in the crop portfolios of farmers, the intricate 
interaction between climate and other factors that drive these changes, and the 

 
30 
 
consequences for the food security, nutrition, and income of farmers assumes paramount 
importance in providing valuable insights for agricultural decision -making, which is primarily 
crucial in designing feasible approaches for enduring adaptation in a swif tly evolving global 
context. The Committee recommend that as Crop Diversification is an efficient tool in ensuring 
food security, enhancing soil fertility, controlling pests & diseases, brings about yield stability 
and more importantly, mitigate effects of  Climate Change and hence it should be actively 
promoted by the Ministry and all possible assistance rendered to farmers in pursuance of the 
same across the country. 
 Better management of water resources must be a key feature of sustainable 
Agriculture. Water Supply Management Options such as new storages and water harvesting 
are important, especially in the water -stressed regions of North -western India. Water use 
efficiency in Agriculture needs to be enhanced. India’s irrigation infrastructure needs to be 
upgraded; particular attention needs to be given to north -western India, the country’s food 
basket that is prone to climate -induced droughts. Despite the benefits of drip irrigation, it is 
still largely adopted for high -value horticultural crops. To enhance the area under micro and 
drip irrigation, the government needs to take a nuanced stance on the subsidy on electricity 
for drawing water for irrigation purposes, whi ch has been a major contributor to declining 
groundwater levels, towards the adoption of Drip Irrigation techniques. 
 In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly recommend the use of latest 
technologies such as Artificial algorithms, which will optimize irrigation schedules, conserve 
water and minimize environmental impact, particularly in the light of growing water  scarcity 
issues. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Crop Diversification Programme is being implemented in Original Green Revolution 
States viz: Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar Pradesh under RKVY since 2013-14 to divert 
the area of water guzzling paddy crop to alternate crops like pulses, oilseeds, coarse cereals, 
nutri cereals, cotton and agro forestry. 
 
Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) is operation under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas  
Yojana (RKVY) in the Original Green Revolution States of Punjab, Haryana and Western 
Uttar Pradesh since 2013-14 to diversify paddy area towards less water requiring crops like 

 
31 
 
oilseeds, pulses, coarse cereals/nutri -cereals, cotton and agro forestry. CDP has been 
extended to tobacco growing states of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal to encourage 
tobacco growing farmers to shift to alternate crops/cropping system w.e.f. 2015-16. Presently, 
the programme is being implemented in the districts having more than 50,000 hectares‟ 
paddy area to give more emphasis to divert paddy area in the states of Punjab, Haryana and 
Uttar Pradesh. The following objectives are expected to achieve through implementation of 
CDP in the Original Green Revolution States: 
• To demonstrate and promote improved production technologies of alternate crops 
for diversion of paddy cultivation. 
•  To restore soil fertility through cultivation of leguminous crops that generate heavy 
biomass and consume lesser nutrients. 
Under this scheme, assistance is provided to the farmers on cluster demonstrations of 
alternate crops, farm mechanization & value addition, site- specific activities and contingency, 
awareness training, implementation and monitoring etc. as per approved co st norms under 
any of the centrally sponsored scheme/state scheme by the implementing states. The 
scheme is implemented through State Governments with the approval of the State Level 
Standing Committee (SLSC). 
Crop diversification is given importance by ICAR under AICRP on Integrated Farming 
Systems by identifying the suitable alternative cropping systems for various farming systems. 
Cropping system Atlas having first and second pre -dominant cropping systems hav e been 
developed. Pilot Project for crop diversification is initiated in 75 districts to train the extension 
agents and farmers on crop diversification by including pulses, oilseeds, millets and 
vegetables. 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) has been implemented since 1st 
July, 2015 jointly by Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Water 
Resources, Department of Land Resources, and Department of Rural Development. The 
scheme aims  at end -to-end solutions in irrigation requirement, viz. water sources, and 
distribution network and farm level in order to double the farmers‟ income. It comprises of 
four components, namely (i) Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP), (ii) Har  Khet 
Ko Paani, (iii) Watershed Development and (iv) Per Drop More Crop. Micro Irrigation (MI) is 
an integral component of PMKSY to maximize water use efficiency at field level and ensuring 

 
32 
 
„Per Drop-More Crop‟ (PMKSY-PDMC). This Scheme is being implemented by Ministry of 
Agriculture under PMKSY (PDMC). Micro -irrigation technologies viz. drip and sprinkler 
systems are experimented at different locations. Drip systems resulted in saving of abo ut 
40% water and 30% increase in yield compared to the surface irrigation methods. Whereas, 
the sprinkler system resulted in 20% water saving and 15% increase in yield compared to 
surface irrigation. PDMC also promotes aautomation in the Micro Irrigation Systems for ease 
of operation with minimal or no manual intervention thereby achieving greater efficient use of 
Micro Irrigation Systems by the beneficiaries.  Water use efficiency means bringing more area 
under irrigation per unit water and more crop per drop. Till date, the country has achieved 
bringing 16 million ha. of agriculture land under micro irrigation. 
Central Government has formulated National Water Policy 2012 which inter alia 
contains provisions for rainwater harvesting like incentivizing revival of traditional water 
harvesting structures by States, encouraging rainwater harvesting to increase availab ility of 
utilizable water in urban and industrial areas, preference to urban and rural domestic water 
supply from surface water in conjunction with groundwater and rainwater, etc. The National 
Water Policy has been sent to all States/UTs for appropriate action. 
Water being a State subject, steps for augmentation, conservation and efficient 
management of water resources are primarily undertaken by the respective State 
Governments. In order to supplement the efforts of the State Governments, Central 
Government provides technical and financial assistance to them through various schemes 
and programmes. 
In order to effectively implement the rainwater harvesting across the country, the 
Government undertakes various activities in the form of special drives, schemes and 
programmes. Some of the major steps taken by Government of India in this regard are as 
follows: 
(i)  Jal Shakti Abhiyan -I (JSA -I) was conducted in 2019 in 1,592 blocks out of 2,836 
blocks in 256 water stressed districts of the country and was expanded as “Jal Shakti 
Abhiyan: Catch the Rain” (JSA:CTR) in 2021 with the theme “Catch the Rain Where 
it Falls When it Falls” to cover all the blocks of all districts (rural as well as urban 
areas) across the country. “Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain” (JSA:CTR) -2022 
campaign, the third in the series of JSAs, was launched on 29.03.2022 to cover all 
the blocks of all districts (rural as well as urban areas) across the country. Jal Shakti 
Abhiyan: Catch the Rain 2023, 4th in the series of JSA, has been launched on 

 
33 
 
04.03.2023. Rainwater harvesting is one of the major components of the campaign. 
States/UTs have been advised to actively participate in JSA:CTR 2023 and have also 
been suggested to undertake rain harvesting activities under JSA:CTR. 
(ii)  Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(WDC-PMKSY) has got rainwater harvesting as one of the activities under its Natural 
Resource Management (NRM) component. 
(iii)  The scheme of Surface Minor Irrigation (SMI) and Repair, Renovation & Restoration 
(RRR) of Water Bodies have multiple objectives like expanding cultivable area under 
assured irrigation by improvement and restoration of water bodies inter alia 
increasing ground water recharge and revival of lost irrigation potential. 
(iv)  Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Groundwater - 2020 has been prepared by 
Central Ground Water Board in consultation with States/UTs which is a macro level 
plan indicating various structures for the different terrain conditions of the country. 
(v)  Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) while granting No Objection Certificates 
(NOCs) for ground water abstraction envisages that the proponents shall install roof 
top rain water harvesting & recharge systems in the project area. 
(vi)  Government of India has launched Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) in 2015 which focuses on development of basic urban 
infrastructure especially water supply & access to tap connection to every household 
in 500 cities. In wat er supply sector, ULBs/State may take up projects related to 
new/augmentation/rehabilitation of water supply system; rejuvenation of water bodies 
for water supply, rainwater harvesting and recharge of ground water etc. Further, 
AMRUT 2.0 has been launc hed in 2021 which covers all the statutory towns of the 
country to ensure universal coverage of water supply. It envisages rejuvenation of 
water bodies, urban aquifer management, promote recycle & reuse and rainwater 
harvesting to augment freshwater resources. 
(vii)  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
includes water conservation and water harvesting structures as one of the activities 
under its natural resource management (NRM) component.  
(viii)  The Mission Amrit Sarovar was launched on National Panchayati Raj Day on 24th 
April, 2022 as a part of celebration of Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav with an objective to 

 
34 
 
conserve water for future. The Mission is aimed at developing and rejuvenating 75 
water bodies in each district of the country. 
Geospatial technology for targeting water harvesting structures in watershed systems 
were standardized and the existing WHS were rejuvenated to enhance storage capacity. 
Research on fertigation technologies in fruit and vegetable crops resulted in 25% savi ng in 
fertilizers compared to conventional method of fertilizer application. IoT enabled integrated 
sensing systems are developed and tested for judicious irrigation scheduling in different 
crops. Groundwater modeling system was used for simulation of grou ndwater depth under 
future scenarios for judicious groundwater management.  Artificial groundwater recharge 
technologies using recharge shafts and for abandoned wells were being developed and 
tested to augment groundwater recharge. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
Impetus to Research in Climate Smart Practices and Big Data Analytics 
Recommendation No. 7 
 Climate Change is anticipated to modify pest behavior, specifically in terms of 
infestation levels, resistance and resurgence, and the emergence of novel pests in response 
to altered climatic conditions. Numerous research studies have examined the influence of 
climate change on Indian Agriculture using diverse datasets and estimation methods. In the 
realm of biological science, controlled experiments are often employed to quantitatively 
assess the effects of weather parameter fluctuations, particularly temperature, on crop yields. 
With all other factors held constant, these controlled conditions expose crops to varying 
temperature levels, enabling the determination of the extent of yield reduction. 
 The Committee having noticed the importance of modern technologies in agriculture, 
do recommend that Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare should give top priority to the 
advancement of research in emerging areas of Climate Science in order to develo p 
technologies that encompass pest surveillance and forecasting systems, simulation 
modelling, and big data analytics, among others. The implementation of digital agriculture, 
utilizing ICT (Information and Communication Technology) and emerging technologi es, has 
the potential to play a crucial role in facilitating the adoption of various climate smart 
interventions. Emphasizing agricultural research and innovation is necessary to ensure the 

 
35 
 
efficient utilization of resources such as water and nutrients, carbon sequestration, and the 
assessment of Greenhouse Gas emissions from the Agricultural sector. This requires an 
augmented allocation of budgetary support and the establishment of collabora tions and 
partnerships. Therefore, the Committee further recommend that the Ministry/Department 
should ensure sufficient allocation for this purpose from the resources available with them. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute under ICAR (ICAR -IASRI) has 
developed AI based mobile app for disease and pest identification in crops entitled   AI-DISC 
(Artificial Intelligence -based Disease Identification System for Crops) (available at 
stores:https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ai.ai_disc) play using deep 
learning techniques. This work was carried out under the world bank funded Na tional 
Agricultural Higher Education Project (NAHEP) component 2 ‘Investment in ICAR Leadership 
for Agriculture Higher Education’ and ICAR-NASF (ICAR-National Agriculture Science Fund) 
funded project `Artificial intelligence based mobile app for identification and advisory of maize 
diseases and insect pests’.  In this work, ICAR IASRI has collected numerous images of crops 
related to disease and insect -pests and created a national -level image database, National 
Image Base for Plant Protection (NIBPP) approx. 3.5 lakhs digital images of crops from 
across the country. The dataset contains images of 53 crops for 145 diseases and 146 insect-
pests.  For easy image data collection, ICAR-IASRI has developed a mobile application aka 
National Image Base for Plant Protection (NIBPP) through which the images were collected 
and validated under the supervision of domain experts. Using the image dataset of NIBPP, 
ICAR-IASRI developed several deep learning -based disease  identification models for 20 
crops comprising 54 diseases (such as: major diseases of Rice, wheat, Maize, Tomato, 
Mustard etc.) with an average accuracy of classification accuracy of more than 95 -98%. For 
developing the disease detection deep learning mod els, ICAR-IASRI applied several state -
of-the-art architectures such as Inception, MobileNet, DenseNet, EfficientNet, etc. in a fine  
tuned manner. Best performing models were selected for deployment in the server. AI-DISC 
in which the developed deep learning models were integrated. The AI -DISC mobile app has 
been duly certified as a technology by ICAR in 2023 (certificate ID: ICAR -AED I ASRI-
Technology-2023-004). Using the mobile application, the user can just upload an image of 
the crop and get the results on the mobile screen within seconds along with the recommended 
management practices. The AI based Pest and Disease Identification of multiple diseases on 
the same plant or physiological disorders is envisaged which  aims to systematically identify, 

 
36 
 
classify, quantify, and predict crop protection related problems through deep learning 
techniques and integration of models in the National Pest Surveillance System (NPSS) 
mobile app developed by Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare. 
Pilot studies on use of wireless sensor networks, sensor -based irrigation scheduling 
and use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) for detecting pests and diseases is under progress. 
Depending on the budget availability, these pilot scales will be further extended for large scale 
demonstrations. Under NICRA, integrated simulation modelling using IPCC, AR6 climate 
change projections (CMIP6) were used to predict the future climate change impact on various 
crop yields and livestock. Global climate models (GCM) and r egional climate models (RCM) 
were used under various climate change scenarios. Artificial intelligence and IoT based solar 
powered surface and sub-surface drip irrigation for irrigation scheduling in chilliin which soil 
moisture sensor unit, ET sensors and  crop water sensors were installed for scheduling the 
irrigation. 
Drones were being used on large scale for spraying pesticides and liquid fertilizers. 
The drones were supplied to KVKs and capacity building on use of drones was imparted to 
the farmers and KVK staff. Hyper spectral airborne remote sensing using AVIRIS-NG is used 
for precise estimation of rice growth parameters such as LAI and high resolution multispectral 
remote sensing using Sentinel 2A for detection and spread of invasive pest species in maize, 
sorghum and chilies. The pest and disease forecast models ha ve been developed for spot 
blotch of wheat and leaf blast of rice. 
 Remote sensing approaches are also used for estimating above and below ground 
carbon which is useful for carbon credit in agriculture. Further, software SQI CAL was 
developed for rapid calculation of soil quality index. A proposal for developing deep learning-
based AI models for plant recognition and stress detection from plant digital imageries and 
also an app -based interface tool for real time diagnostics, decision management and 
management is under consideration. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
  

 
37 
 
Availability of Farm inputs and finance 
Recommendation No. 8 
 Climate Change is the most defining challenge for Agriculture, human development 
and ecological well being in the 21st century. Climate Change has forced farmers to use 
adaptative and mitigation methods to lessen the impact. The Committee do recommend that 
seeds of Climate Resilient Varieties may be provided to the farmers and accordingly, Seed 
Hubs need to be promoted on a large scale and indigenous breeds in Animal Husbandry may 
be made available alongwith necessary food supplements at affordable prices.  Climate 
Resilient varieties may be popularized be it Horticulture or Fisheries. These Climate Resilient 
varieties would ultimately help in reduction of GHG emissions and pave for enhanced 
agricultural yields too in uncertain times. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In order to make quality seeds affordable to farmers, Government ensures fixation of 
uniform breeder seed price in consultation with ICAR for minimization of the seed production 
cost in case of foundation and certified seed. Furthermore, Government provide s financial 
assistance to different States and Government Seed Producing Agencies for production and 
distribution of seeds and for other interventions related to seed sector viz. National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM), Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), 
Rashtriya Krishi VikasYojana (RKVY), Sub-Mission on Seeds and Planting Materials (SMSP) 
etc. so as to make quality seed affordable and available to the farmers in timely manner. The 
following steps are being taken up by DA&FW to ensure  availability of quality seed to the 
farmers: 
1.  State Governments has been preparing Seed Rolling Plan for three years in advance 
to estimate the requirement of seed in their State and distribute seed production 
targets accordingly to different Seed Production Agencies. This system ensures 
timely availability of required quantity of seed to the farmers in different States. 
2.  State Governments are placing their Breeder Seed indent in different crops one year 
in advance for systematic breeder seed production. After production the Breeder 
Seed is allotted to State Governments and Seed Producing Agencies for further 
multiplication into foundation and certified seed and its distribution to the farmers. 

 
38 
 
3.  For any unforeseen climatic condition, a National Seed Reserve is established in 
different States for creating Seed Reserve every year which is having short, medium 
duration and stress tolerant varieties seeds. 
The Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying is implementing Rashtriya  Gokul 
Mission (RGM) with the aim of development and conservation of indigenous bovine breeds, 
genetics upgradation of bovine population and enhancement of milk production and 
productivity of bovines. Under the scheme the following major steps have been tak en for 
development and conservation of indigenous bovine breeds: 
(i)  Implementation of Nationwide Artificial Insemination Programme for enhancing 
artificial insemination coverage using semen of high merit bulls including semen of 
high genetic merit bulls of indigenous breeds. Under the programme, quality Al 
services are delivered free of cost at farmers doorstep. 
(ii)  Implementation of In-vitro Fertilization (IVF) for faster genetic upgradation of bovine 
population including indigenous breeds of cattle and buffaloes. 
(iii)  Progeny testing and Pedigree selection: Organized Progeny Testing and Pedigree 
selection is implemented in the country to produce high genetic merit bulls. 
(iv)  Sex sorted semen production for indigenous breeds of cattle along with other bovine 
breeds has been initiated in the country. Sex sorted semen is important for production 
of female calves with 90% accuracy. 
 Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder development aims towards strengthening of fodder 
seed chain to improve availability of certified fodder seed required for fodder production and 
encouraging entrepreneurs for establishment of fodder Block/Hey Bailing/Silage Ma king 
Units through incentives. 
 Under Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), Centers of 
Excellence (CoEs) are being established in various States through Bilateral Cooperation or 
Research Institutes. These CoEs serve as demonstration and training centres for latest 
technologies in the field of horticulture. These CoEs also serve as source of planting material 
for fruits and vegetable seedlings for protected cultivation and used for transfer of technology 
and knowhow in diverse areas, viz., Post -Harvest management, Irrigation and Fertigation, 
Plant protection, Introduction of New Varieties, Pollination etc. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 

 
39 
 
 
Promotion of Organic/Natural Farming 
Recommendation No. 9. 
 Organic Farming have the potential to contribute to the mitigation of climate change 
through two main mechanisms. Firstly, by minimizing the release of Green House Gases 
(GHGs), and secondly, by sequestering Carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere within 
the soil. The impact of Traditional Agricultural Practices on Global Warming is significantly 
impacted by the application of synthetic Nitrogen Fertilizers and the presence of high levels 
of Nitrogen in soil. In contrast, Organic Agriculture is capable of sustaining itself with Nitrogen. 
Mixed organic farms engage in highly efficient recycling of manures from livestock and crop 
residues through the process of composting. Additionally, Leguminous Crops contribute an 
ample amount of nitrogen, particularly on  stockless organic farms where it serves as the 
primary source. 
 The emission levels of Nitrous Oxide are directly correlated to the concentration of 
easily accessible mineral Nitrogen in soil. Following the application of fertilizers, high rates of 
emission are observed, displaying significant variability. However, in Organic Agriculture, the 
prohibition of mineral Nitrogen and the decreased number of livestock units per hectare 
substantially de crease the concentration of easily available mineral nitrogen in soil, 
consequently resulting in reduced N2O emissions. The implementation of diversified crop 
rotations with the use of green manure enhances soil structure and diminishes the release of 
Nitrous Oxide and organically managed soils possess improved aeration and significantly 
lower levels of mobile Nitrogen concentrations, both of which lead to decreased emissions of 
Nitrous Oxides. 
 The Committee strongly feel that as Organic Farming/ Natural Farming has the 
potential to reduce GHG emissions, enhance soil fertility and strengthen Climate resilience, 
hence Ministry should help farmers adapt to Climate Change by promoting Organic Farming 
through research and extension services. Government Schemes such as Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana(RKVY), National Mission on Natural Farming, MOVCD -NER(Mission Organic 
Value Chain Development for North East Region),One District One Product(ODOP) are steps 
taken in the right direction. The Committee recommend that inputs at affordable prices may 
be made available to the farmers, latest technologies such as AI and IoT (Internet) of Things 
used extensively in the certification process and awareness may be c reated among various 
stakeholders, be it farmers or consumers, by using social media platforms too, regarding the 

 
40 
 
benefits of Organic/natural Farming which would go a long way in not only increasing the 
prosperity of farmers, but also, improve health of common man and more importantly, mitigate 
effect of Climate Change. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Government has been promoting organic farming on priority in the country since 2015-
16 through the schemes of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas  Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic 
Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER). Both the schemes stress 
on end -to-end support to farmers engaged in organic farming i.e. from production to 
processing, certification and marketing and post-harvest management. Training and Capacity 
Building are integral part of the scheme. Incentives to farmers for producing and using organic 
fertilizers/manure are inbuilt in these schemes as on-farm and off-farm organic inputs. Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) is provided to the farmers for using organic inputs including organic 
fertilizers. PKVY is being implemented in all the States other-than North Eastern (NE) States 
across the country whereas MOVCDNER scheme is being implemented exclusively in the 
NE States. 
Under PKVY, an assistance of Rs.50,000 per ha for a period of three years is provided 
to States including States of Tamil Nadu & Rajasthan for promotion of organic farming to 
cover different components like Training & Capacity Building, Data Management, PGS 
Certification, Value Addition, Marketing and Publicity. Out of this, assistance of Rs. 31,000 
per ha for a period of three years is provided to farmers through DBT for on - farm /off –farm 
organic inputs. Whereas under MOVCDNER, an assistance of Rs. 46,57 5/ha for 3 years is 
provided for creation of FPO, support to farmers for organic inputs, quality seeds/ planting 
material and training, hand holding and certification. Out of this, assistance @ Rs. 32500/ ha 
for 3 years is provided to farmers for off -farm /on –farm organic inputs under the scheme 
including Rs. 15,000 as DBT to the farmers and Rs. 17,500 for the planting material to be 
given to the farmers by State Lead Agency (SLA) in kind. 
In view of the increasing demand of organic farming products of India in the global 
market, Government is facilitating value addition, certification and marketing. As per 
requirement of International market, Government has initiated third party certificati on under 
National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP). Organic farming research undertaken 
through All India Network Programme on Organic Farming resulted in development of 
package of practices for organic farming in 76 cropping systems suitable to 16 states. These 

 
41 
 
packages are being scaled through the developmental schemes of Union and State 
Governments. Eight integrated organic farming system models suitable for 7 states have also 
been developed and are being popularized in the States of Meghalaya, Kerala, Tamil Na du 
and Sikkim. Quantification of ecosystems services from organic farming in 5 districts of Uttar 
Pradesh namely Meerut, Bulandshahr, Aligarh, Mirzapur and Hamirpur have been made 
using capital approach such as Natural, produced, human and social aspects. Natural capital 
approach included estimation of carbon sequestration, GHG emission assessment using the 
IPCC co-efficient, agro-diversity etc. Organic farming promotion resulted in better ecosystem 
services including the increased carbon sequestration, red uced greenhouse gas emissions 
and soil health contributing positively for the environmental protection. Natural farming study 
initiated from 2020 at 20 locations in 16 states covering 8 major cropping systems. 
Capacity building including awareness on organic and natural farming are being 
undertaken regularly to update the knowledge of various stakeholders on organic and natural 
farming. Tools such as Internet of things (IoT), machine learning and Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
based analysis of data/information and translation of scientific information in to local 
languages are also explored for wider reach of stakeholders in dissemination of organic 
farming technologies developed and natural farming knowledge. 
Dedicated Portal on Natural Farming with training material, instructional videos and 
facility for peer -to-peer learning by MANAGE and NITI Aayog has been developed. 
Sensitization and training of 2.5 lakh SHG members under Livelihood Mission on Natural 
Farming was imparted. Besides, 50 Radio Programs, 123 “ChaupalCharcha” and 213    “Hello 
Kisan” Programs conducted for awareness generation which benefitted about 65 lakh 
farmers. A 10 -minute Video film in 14 regional languages developed and telecasted on 
national network through multiple platforms, KVKs and Gram Panchayats with more than 10 
crore viewership. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
  

 
42 
 
Upgradation/Digitization of Agriculture Markets 
Recommendation No. 10. 
Since independence, India has traversed a long journey in agriculture marketing but 
still numerous problem such as fragmented and non -compressed value chains that involve 
numerous intermediaries, the lack of transparency in price discovery mechanisms and t he 
absence of scientifically advanced storage and logistics systems etc remain a big challenge 
to overcome. Agricultural market reforms were introduced through Agricultural Produce 
Market Committee (APMC) Act, 2003, which were enacted by State Governments.  The 
reforms encompasses several key aspects, including the facilitation of direct trading between 
farmers and buyers, promotion of contract farming, the encouragement of private sector 
involvement in constructing market infrastructure, such as warehousing , cold chains, and 
other logistical systems, and the move towards establishing a unified national market. The 
virtual market platform, e NAM (National Agriculture Market), since its inception in April 2016, 
has been consistently enhanced in terms of new technology, innovation, the enhancement of 
transparency in transactions, digital payments, and user-friendly attributes. In July 2022, the 
e-NAM platform, through the introduction of the Platform of Platforms (PoPs) as a 
comprehensive unified structure, has served as a Single platform for all stakeholders in the 
value chain, including farmers, Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), e -platform service 
providers, transport service providers, quality assaying service providers, value addition, 
processors, exporters, Fintech, storage, etc. Various service platforms have been enlisted 
under the following 10 service categories on the Platform of Platforms(PoP) module, namely 
Quality Assaying, Transportation, Warehousing, Fin -tech, Trading platforms, Agri advisory, 
Market information, Institutional buyers, Sorting and grading, and Agri input aggregators. 
 Having analyzed the spectrum of this phenomenon in holistic spectrum, the Committee 
are of the considerate view that disruptive technological solutions in the agricultural marketing 
sphere is the need of the hour. Measures need to be taken to ensure that participants in these 
markets can assess each other's credibility by way of providing ratings to each other which 
in turn is visible to other users which will significantly enhance transparency and enhance the 
reputation of the system. Similarly, digitizat ion of entire FPOs may be done which would 
enable the traceability of produce back to individual farmers. In addition, Intelligent Vision 
Capabilities may also be devised to pave the way for the sorting of fruits, vegetables, and 
staples based on buyer spe cifications. The Committee desire that Fintech products that 
integrate warehousing with Credit and Insurance need to be developed, technological 

 
43 
 
advancements need to be deployed to offer modular and energy-efficient storage systems at 
the farm level at affordable prices and a combination of machine learning data systems, 
blockchain, IoT and sensors utilized to create end-to-end traceability within the Food Supply 
Chains. The Committee do feel that all Agricultural markets across the country may be linked 
to e -NAM portal at the earliest to ensure seamless transactions and to create a win -win 
situation for both the farmers who can sell their produce to fetch good prices and the buyers 
who purchase produce of their choice at competitive rates. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) recognizes the urgent need 
for innovative technical solutions within the agricultural marketing sector. The e-NAM platform 
is keeping pace with required marketing ecosystem, which will progress towards de veloping 
like an Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC) integrating there with service providers. 
e-NAM (National Agriculture Market) mobile app is now integrated with ONDC platform. The 
idea and vision is to provide farmers choice for multiple buyers an d multiple marketing 
platforms so as to realize best discovered price in competitive and transparent manner. 
Expansion and consolidation of e -NAM platform across country and across the service 
providers will further benefit the farmers and ease the doing of business.  
It is important to note that there are ongoing plans to implement a rating system for 
service providers based on feedback from the service takers. The FPO Module, which is an 
integral part of the e -NAM initiative, aims to facilitate the digitalization proc ess for FPOs, 
ultimately enhancing their efficiency and reach. By May 31, 2024, a total of 3803 FPOs had 
been registered, engaging in trade transactions amounting to 94,856 MT and 2.5 crores in 
numbers (betel leaf and coconut), with a cumulative value of Rs 168.57 crores.  
Financial assistance is being extended through the e -NAM scheme to equip 
stakeholders with advanced technological capabilities for tasks such as sorting, grading, and 
quality assessment of agricultural products. Efforts are underway to establish a mutually  
beneficial environment for all parties involved by bridging the gap between service takers 
(farmers, FPOs, traders) and service providers (fintech, warehousing, traceability, ancillary 
services) through the utilization of the e -NAM PoP module. Out of the total 1389 mandis 
integrated into the e -NAM platform, 129 mandis were successfully integrated in October 
2023, showcasing significant progress in the initiative.  

 
44 
 
In order to decentralize the fund sanctioning power to meet local requirements and 
give liberty to States/ UTs to decide upon and to expand the e NAM operation beyond APMC 
markets yards, the operational guidelines of e NAM have been modified, to achieve th e 
ultimate goals as envisaged under the scheme to enhance the income of farmers. 
 [Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
Need for promotion of Forest conservation and Natural Wetlands 
Recommendation No. 11. 
Forests are the best shield against Climate Change and act as carbon sinks. Their role 
in segregating and absorbing carbon from the atmosphere is non pareil. They form the first 
line of defence against Climate Change and hence need to be given utmost promi nence. 
Forests have long been part of Indian society & culture and have been eulogized for their 
importance in human lives. 
Wetlands, such as swamps and marshes, are renowned for being ecosystems 
abundant in wildlife, making them some of the most bio diverse habitats on Earth. These 
wetlands possess shallow waters and thrive plant life, providing sustenance for a wide array 
of organisms ranging from insects to water fowls and so on. These wetlands, along with lakes, 
rivers, and other aqueous environments worldwide, face i mminent threats. Many of these 
areas have fallen victim to pollution and degradation, a consequence of both climate change 
and human development. Safeguarding and rehabilitation of Natural habitats is not only 
imperative for the preservation of biodiversit y but also as a means to combat the climate 
crisis. In November 2022, the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands elevated the prominence of 
wetlands and underscored their pivotal role in attaining the Sustainable Development Goals, 
which serve as humanity's blueprint for a more promising future. The subsequent month , at 
the United Nations Biodiversity Conference, countries achieved a groundbreaking agreement 
to protect nature. This accord encompassed a provision to restore a minimum of 30 percent 
of deteriorated inl and water bodies and to preserve healthy freshwater ecosystems in an 
equitable manner. 
It is noteworthy that coastal and freshwater wetland ecosystems harbour a significant 
percentage of the world's biodiversity. In particular, peatlands, a distinct type of vegetated 

 
45 
 
wetland, possess the capacity to store twice as much carbon as the entirety of the world's 
forests. Despite these remarkable attributes, wetlands have been subjected to drainage for 
agricultural purposes or to facilitate infrastructure development over the past two centuries. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that as Forests and wetlands are of 
profound ecological significance, concerted efforts are imperative to safeguard these 
invaluable habitats which would overtly and covertly assist Agriculture to stand up agains t 
extreme phenological events. The rights of forests communities also need to be taken care 
of while formulating policies. Also, the goals and vision of Sub -Mission on Agroforestry and 
Green India Mission need to be popularized and advertised more prominen tly to create 
awareness among different stakeholders, seeds & saplings provided at affordable rates to 
Farmers especially in High Risk Prone Areas/Districts affected or likely to be affected from 
Climate Change and even financial incentives be provided to them to make these 
Programmes a success and as such will ensure farmers with additional source of income 
which is an avowed objective of the present Government policies. The Committee desire that 
sustainable forest management needs to be done in an integra ted and inclusive manner, 
while combating climate change and using biodiversity in a sustainable way. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
India is a signatory to the Ramsar Convention on wetlands, which defines wetlands 
as, "areas of marsh, fen, peatland or water, whether natural or artificial, permanent or 
temporary, with water that is static or flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine 
water the depth of which at low tide does not exceed six metres". Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) has notified the Wetlands (Conservation and 
Management) Rules, 2017 under the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 as 
a regulatory framework for conservation and management of wetlands in India. This is a 
significant step to conserve, manage and maintain the ecological character of the wetlands 
without restricting the wise use that includes sustainable  agriculture. These rules fortify the 
legal framework for environmental concerns and strengthen the institutional framework 
through State/UT Wetlands Authorities and a National Wetlands Committee. 
MoEF&CC implements a centrally sponsored scheme namely, the National Plan for 
Conservation of Aquatic Ecosystems (NPCA) for conservation and management of wetlands, 
including Ramsar Sites, in the country on cost sharing basis between Central Government 

 
46 
 
and respective State/UT Governments. The scheme aims at holistic conservation and 
restoration of wetlands, besides improvement in biodiversity and ecosystems. It promotes 
mainstreaming of wetlands in developmental programming with States by supporting 
formulation and implementation of integrated management plans, capacity building and 
research. Currently, India has 80 Ramsar Sites covering approx. 1.33 million ha. It is the 
second largest in Asia and fourth in the world in terms of total number of Ramsar Si tes in a 
country. 
Acknowledging the importance of Ramsar Sites in India, MoEF&CC launched the Amrit 
Dharohar initiative during June 2023. The goal of Amrit Dharohar is 'to promote unique 
conservation values of Ramsar Sites'. The purpose is to maintain a healthy and effectiv ely 
managed network of Ramsar Sites which provide water and food security; buffer the 
landscape from floods, droughts, cyclones, and other extreme events; generate local 
employment and support livelihoods; provide habitats for species of local, national an d 
international conservation significance; maintain and enhance carbon sinks; and conserve 
and celebrate rich cultural heritage. Amrit Dharohar is being implemented focusing on four 
main components such i.e. Species and Habitat Conservation, Wetlands Livel ihood, Nature 
Tourism and Wetlands Carbon. Wetlands, including peatlands are critical for preventing and 
mitigating the effects of climate change, preserving biodiversity, minimizing flood risk, and 
ensuring safe drinking water. They can act as long-term carbon sinks, preserving atmospheric 
CO2 in their sediments at high -rate intensities for centuries. All together the wetlands store 
almost one third of the world's total carbon. In this regard, MoEF&CC in collaboration with the 
knowledge partners is develop ing a Standard Operating Procedure for assessing carbon 
stock in wetlands. Further, MoEF&CC organized a workshop during 14th-15thFebruary 2024 
on 'Developing a Programme for Peatlands in India' for establishing a peatland assessment 
framework in India incl uding definition and classification of peatlands across the country. 
Based on the outcomes of the workshop, MoEF&CC is currently developing a peatland map 
of India to facilitate conservation measures in the identified sites. 
National Agroforestry Policy in 2014, aims to enhance productivity, profitability, and 
sustainability through this agroecological land use system. Agroforestry integrates trees, 
crops, and livestock, addressing food, nutrition, energy, employment, and envi ronmental 
challenges. This aligns with global commitments like the Paris Agreement, Bonn Challenge, 
UN Sustainable Development Goals, United Nations Convention on Combating 
Desertification (UNCCD), Doubling Farmers Income, Green India Mission and more.     Sub-

 
47 
 
Mission on Agroforestry (SMAF) was launched in the year 2016 -17 to encourage tree 
plantation on farm land with the aim of “Har Medh Par Ped”, along with crops/ cropping system 
to help the farmers get additional income. Sub -Mission on Agroforestry (SMAF) wa s 
implemented from 2016-17 to 2021-22. Presently, the restructured Agroforestry Component 
is being implemented under the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and focuses on Quality 
Planting Material. Agroforestry is known to have the potential to mitigate the climate change 
effects through microclimate moderation, conservation of natural resources and creation of 
an additional source of livelihood and income opportunities. The scheme is implemented with 
objectives to encourage and expand tree plantation in a complementary and integrated 
manner with crops to improve productivity, additional / income generation and improved 
livelihoods of rural households, especially the small farmers.  
National Mission for a Green India (GIM) is one of the eight missions outlined under 
the National Action Plan on Climate Change. It aims at protecting, restoring, and qualitatively 
and quantitatively enhancing India's forest and tree cover. The Mission's i nterventions focus 
on the forest and non-forest areas equally, through a landscape approach and are undertaken 
in the selected landscapes under different categories. These categories include plantation on 
moderately dense forest showing degradation. eco re storation of degraded open forests, 
restoration of grasslands, rehabilitation of shifting cultivation areas, restoring scrub lands, 
ravine reclamation, restoration of abandoned mining areas, farmers land including current 
fallows, shelterbelt plantation, H ighways/rural roads/canals/tank bunds. The Mission is 
implemented through Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs) through a proactive 
participation of the communities and different stakeholders. So far, Rs. 909.82 Crores have 
been released to the 18 Stale/UTs for taking up the GIM activities in the selected landscapes 
and so far 1.55 lakh Ha has been taken up for creation of plantation in these States/UTs. 
 [Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
Promotion of Millets and Coarse grains 
Recommendation No. 12. 
 The proposition of Indian Government to designate 2023 as the International Year of 
Millets(IYM) has been well acknowledged by the United Nations. The International Year of 

 
48 
 
Millets (IYM 2023) presents an occasion to enhance awareness regarding the nutritional and 
health advantages of millets, while also directing policy focus towards their cultivation in 
adverse and evolving climatic conditions. Millets possess the capacity t o thrive in arid lands 
with minimal resources and exhibit resilience towards climate variations. Consequently, they 
offer an ideal solution for nations seeking to augment self -sufficiency and diminish reliance 
on imported cereal grains. 
 The Committee note that unlike rice and wheat, which thrive in irrigated environments, 
millets flourish in marginal ecologies, which expand the range of options available for swift 
and adaptable adaptation in the face of uncertain future conditions. These coarse grains need 
to be part of Public Distribution System which would encourage farmers to do their cultivation. 
 The Committee express happiness over the fact that the due importance given to 
coarse grains within policy frameworks by the Government, would yield benefits for both 
human health and the Climate since they require lesser amount of pesticides and fertiliz ers, 
enhance crop diversity and also provide protection against soil erosion. The Committee 
strongly feel that farmers who switch from growing traditional crops like rice and wheat to 
millets or coarse grains, need to be given financial protection as incentives for initial two years 
minimum to boost their confidence. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The year 2023 was celebrated as International Year of Millets (IYM), the Government 
of India is implementing a multi stakeholder approach with focus on strategies to enhance 
production and productivity, consumption, export, strengthening value chain, brand ing, 
creating awareness for health benefits etc. The first Global Event for IYM was organised by 
the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare on 18th March 2023. The occasion was 
graced by the Prime Minister of India wherein IYM engraved stamp and curre ncy coin were 
also launched. As part of the event, participants from 100 countries including six Agriculture 
Ministers from leading millet producing/ exporting countries, international organizations, 
scientists, Padma Awardees, farmers, FPOs, international  companies etc. participated. 
Moreover, a global level Exhibition -cum-Buyer-Seller Meet (BSM) in collaboration with 
APEDA was organized with focus on millets with participation of domestic and international 
exporters for promotion of millets. Several other  stakeholders such as farmer producer 
companies/ farmers, self -help groups, schools, agri -universities, Krishi Vigyan  Kendras 
(KVKs), gram panchayats, cooperative institutions, hotel management schools, Yuva 

 
49 
 
kendras, Anganwadi, Indian embassies, Ministry of Railways and diaspora, etc. also 
participated in the event online. 
Government is providing R&D support to Research Institutions for popularizing 
nutritious millets. ICAR-Indian Institute of Millets Research (IIMR), Hyderabad is undertaking 
various research projects related to shelf -life, food standards, database developme nt etc. 
funded under NFSM. Central Food Technological Research Institute (CSIR -CFTRI) is 
undertaking R&D projects to tackle the bottlenecks in millet processing, value addition and 
product development. Under the Pradhan Mantri Formalization of Micro Food P rocessing 
Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme of Government of India, CSIR-CFTRI, Mysuru has conducted 
several training and skill development programmes to enhance competitiveness of existing 
individual micro-enterprises, including millet based industries in the un organized segment. 
Under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas  Yojana - Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture and Allied 
Sectors Rejuvenation (RKVY -RAFTAAR) program a Centre of Excellence for Processing 
Millets and incubation centre is being set up consisting of around 8 processing lines dedicated 
to millets. These lines will help in obtaining quality primary and secondary products with 
enhanced shelf -life. ICMR -National Institute of Nutrition is conducting R&D activities on 
millets such as on nutritional values of vari ous processed and cooked millets, efficacy of 
cooked millet diet, effect of finger millet based dietary supplementation.  
Shree Anna are also included under the Poshan Abhiyan of the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development. Further, the Ministry of Food and Public Distribution has revised its 
guidelines to increase the procurement of Shree Anna under the Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS), Integrated Child Development S ervices (ICDS) and Mid -Day Meal. The 
Ministry has also advised the State Governments and Union Territories to increase the 
procurement of Shree Anna. An Export Promotion Forum dedicated to promotion of S hree 
Anna in the international market has been set up to facilitate promotion, marketing and 
development of Shree Anna exports from India. Under the Eat Right campaign, the Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is creating awareness to promote the use of 
Shree Anna as part of a healthy and varied diet. 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is implementing a Sub -
Mission on Nutri-Cereals (Millets) under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) in all districts 
of 28 States & 2 Union Territories viz. Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. The Nutri -Cereals 
(millets) such as Sorghum (Jowar), Pearl Millet (Bajra), Finger Millet (Ragi/Mandua), Minor 
Millets i.e., Foxtail Millet (Kangani/Kakun), Proso Millet (Cheena), Kodo Millet (Kodo), 

 
50 
 
Barnyard Millet (Sawa/Sanwa/ Jhangora), Little Millet (Kutki) and two Pseudo Millets Buck -
wheat (Kuttu) and Amaranthus (Chaulai) are covered under NFSM programme.  
Under NFSM–Nutri Cereals, the incentives are provided to the farmers, through the 
States/UTs, on crop production and protection technologies, cropping system based 
demonstrations, production & distribution of certified seeds of newly released 
varieties/hybrids, Integrated Nutrient and Pest Management techniques, improved farm 
implements/tools/resource conservation machineries, water saving devices, capacity building 
of farmers through trainings during cropping season, organizing events/workshops, 
distribution of seed minikits, publicity through print and electronic media etc. 
In addition, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has approved the 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry for Millet based products 
(PLISMBP) for implementation during 2022 -23 to 2026-27 with an outlay of Rs. 800 cror es. 
The Pradhan Mantri Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFM FE) 
Scheme, launched under the Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan is currently being implemented in 
35 States and Union Territories (UTs). Government is also popularizing Agri -Infrastructure 
Fund Scheme to invite farmers/ FPOs /Entrepreneurs to avail the benefit of interest 
subvention on loans up to 2 crores for setting up primary processing units in millets (Shree 
Anna). To encourage farmers to take up millet cultivation, higher Minimum  Support Prices 
(MSP) to Jowar, Bajra and Ragi has been announced. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
Carbon market in Agriculture 
Recommendation No. 13. 
The escalating global population has led to an increased demand for food, 
consequently resulting in the emission of Carbon dioxide from agricultural activities, which 
continues to have a detrimental impact on the environment. Over the previous decade, there 
has been a notable increase in interest and discourse encompassing carbon markets, 
indicating the potential for a robust global market for carbon and emissions. In India, both the 
Public and Private sectors have continued to establish standards for emissions reduction and 
advance efforts in Voluntary Carbon Markets (VCM), scrutiny of carbon market practices and 

 
51 
 
the associated climate impact has intensified. Specialized carbon markets that cater to 
farming and agricultural activities are emerging, garnering growing interest from farmers, the 
Private sector, and Governments worldwide. 
Although agriculture is a contributing factor to this issue, it also possesses the potential 
to be part of the solution. In the developed nations, as custodians of the land and agricultural 
resources, farmers and ranchers are actively engaging in carbon se questration through the 
implementation of sustainable practices in soil management, crop cultivation, livestock 
rearing, and agroforestry. 
Conversely, Private Sector investments in carbon markets are gaining traction and are 
primarily driven by three factors namely –(i) Legal obligations (ii) Voluntary goals, such as 
corporations, industrial entities, or municipal operations aiming to fulfill publicly stated 
environmental targets (iii) Shareholder or consumer expectations. 
The government plays a crucial role in establishing protocols and certifying 
mechanisms to accurately verify efforts in carbon offsetting. 
The growth of the Carbon Market will necessitate the involvement of various 
stakeholders viz. farmers, industry and so on. Alternatively, in certain cases, the Committee 
feel that offerings that fail to promote collaboration or support a transparent, consi stent, 
efficient, and high-quality Carbon Market in Agriculture will become obsolete in the next phase 
of Carbon Market expansion, while those who successfully mitigate current uncertainties 
could derive significant benefits and generate substantial impact. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has recently released a Framework for the 
voluntary carbon markets in the agriculture sector in India which would support in 
development of a market -based mechanism to incentivize and finance sustainable 
agricultural practices that can contribute to climate change mitigation and build climate 
resilience. By participating in voluntary carbon markets, farmers and landowners can earn 
revenue from the sale of carbon credits to companies and individuals who are looking to offset 
their carbon emissions. This revenue thus generated can be used for scaling up of 
sustainable agricultural practices, leading to a virtuous cycle of increasing carbon 
sequestration, reducing emissions, and promoting climate resilient agriculture . Voluntary 

 
52 
 
carbon markets also provide an opportunity for private sector and individuals to take 
responsibility for their carbon emissions and invest in projects that have positive impact on 
the environment and local communities. In the long run, this would contribut e to sustainable 
development goals, support rural livelihoods, and promote climate resilience. Various 
sustainable agricultural practices being adopted by the farming community in India have 
potential to generate carbon credits through improving soil carbo n content and its 
sequestration thus leading to the reduction of GHG emissions and generation of carbon 
credits to farmers. The ministry and various development partners/ organizations are actively 
involved in promoting sustainable agricultural practices a cross the country through their 
programs / projects / schemes. In order to ensure additional income to the farmers through 
adoption of sustainable practices, the partners both governmental and non -governmental 
have a definite role to play. 
The major objective of VCM framework is to create awareness and capacity building 
among the farming community, motivating farmers to continue sustainable agricultural 
practices. Accordingly, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (MoA&FW) has invited 
proposals for pilot projects on carbon credits through the adoption of sustainable practices 
from ICAR institutes, State Agricultural Universities and CG Institutes. Accordingly, a detailed 
work plans for capacity building in the institutes identified for implementing pilot projects have 
been prepared. The work plan involves activities such as finalization of the Pilot Project 
Concept Note, Validation of the Pilot project under Carbon Standards and Methodology 
development for Voluntary Carbon Markets.  
These projects will help in reducing the emissions and sequestration of carbons 
through different sustainable agricultural practices and thereby mitigating the effect of climate 
change in agriculture sector. The standards and methodologies developed by ICA R 
institutions will help in establishing transparency, credibility, and consistency in the carbon 
offset market. The pilot carbon project development process will consist of several stages, 
including project design, registration, implementation, monitoring, verification, and issuance. 
Each stage plays a crucial role in ensuring the generation of high-quality carbon credits.  
 At the simplest level, the agricultural sector consists of two major stakeholders – 
producers, i.e., farmers, and consumers. However, a granular look at the Indian agricultural 
sector reveals multiple categories on the producer end, each with varied intere sts and 
challenges. All these stakeholders must actively participate to ensure the success of a 
voluntary carbon market in the agriculture sector. Aggregating bodies such as Farmer 

 
53 
 
Producer Organisations (FPOs), Community-Based Organisations (CBOs), SHGs (Self Help 
Groups), Water User Associations (WUAs) and Non -Governmental Organisations (NGOs) 
play an important role in creating awareness on VCM development in the country.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
Availability of information regarding Latest Technological advances and conduct of 
training workshops for Farmers 
Recommendation No. 14 
The implementation of AI (Artificial intelligence) in agriculture holds immense potential 
to revolutionize the industry by increasing productivity, reducing costs, promoting 
sustainability, and addressing the challenges posed by climate change and resource scarcity. 
AI is reshaping every aspect of agriculture be it increased productivity, enhanced efficiency, 
promotion of sustainability, and reduction of waste. AI will assist the industry in adapting to 
climate change by analyzing historical climate data to  predict weather patterns, thereby 
optimizing water usage and reducing emissions. 
AI-powered farm management software will streamline farming operations by 
integrating data from various sources, optimizing resource allocation, and enhancing 
productivity and profitability. The integration of AI and computer vision into self -driving 
machines will revolutionize agriculture by automating essential tasks such as ploughing, 
planting, and harvesting. This transformation promises heightened productivity, reduced 
labour costs, and optimized resource utilization. AI -driven analytics and decision s upport 
systems will aid farmers in making informed choices by processing extensive amounts of 
data, including weather patterns and soil conditions.  Through the incorporation of AI, plant 
health sensors will enable real -time monitoring of crops, detecting diseases, nutrient 
deficiencies, and pest infestations for timely intervention. Drones and robots equipped with 
AI capabilities will provide precise insights into crop conditions and perform labour-intensive 
tasks, thereby reducing the requirements for manual labour. AI will assist the industry in 
adapting to climate change by analyzing historical climate data to predict weather patterns, 
thereby optimizing water usage and reducing emissions. 

 
54 
 
The Committee strongly feel that the integration of AI with the Internet of Things (IoT) 
will automate and optimize farming operations, leading to higher yields, resource 
conservation, enhanced sustainability and AI will enhance the resiliency of agricultural supply 
chains by providing predictiv e insights, optimizing logistics, and reducing wastage & also 
expedite agricultural biotechnology by accelerating breeding processes and facilitating gene 
editing techniques to develop more resilient and high -performing crops. Therefore, the 
Committee do recommend that Farmers and FPOs may be trained in KVKs and other relevant 
training institutes in all latest adaptative and mitigative technologies providing them the 
essential know how thereby enabling to use these fo r their own betterment and in larger 
societal & national interests. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Government has taken various initiatives to spread awareness among farmers about 
latest and modern agriculture technology in farming. In this regard, support is being provided 
to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms under Agricultural Technolog y 
Management Agency (ATMA) for dissemination of latest and modern agricultural technologies 
in different thematic areas to increase agricultural production through extension activities viz. 
Farmers Training, Demonstrations, Exposure Visits, Kisan  Mela, Mob ilization of Farmers 
Groups and Setting up of Farm Schools. Agri -Clinics and Agri-Business Centres (AC&ABC) 
Scheme aims to supplement the efforts of public extension through creating gainful self -
employment opportunities for unemployed candidates possessing qualification in agriculture 
and allied subjects for dissemination of information in latest and modern agricultural 
technologies. 
Four Extension Education Institutes(EEIs) established on regional basis at Nilokheri 
(Haryana); Hyderabad (Telangana); Anand (Gujarat) and Jorhat (Assam) to cater to the 
training needs of middle -level field extension functionaries working under agriculture  and 
allied departments of States/UTs of respective regions to equip them with information on 
latest and modern technology for dissemination to the farmers. Short duration Skill Training 
(7 days) of Rural Youth (STRY) scheme imparts short term skill traini ng to rural youths and 
farmers on latest & modern technology on agriculture and allied areas. The National Institute 
of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE) is implementing STRY across the country 
through State Agricultural Management & Extension Tra ining Institutes (SAMETIs), ATMA 
and Krishi Vigyan Kendras.  

 
55 
 
Diploma in Agricultural Extension Services for Input Dealers (DAESI) is of one year 
(expanded to 48 weeks) regular course with an objective to impart education in agriculture 
and other allied areas to the Input Dealers so that they can establish linkage to their business 
with extension services including information on latest & modern technology, besides 
discharging regulatory responsibilities enjoined on them. Skill Training Courses in agriculture 
and allied areas of minimum of 200 hrs for rural youth and farmers are conducted through 
the wide network of training institutes to create a pool of skilled manpower and promote 
wage/self-employment among rural youth and farmers. 
Government has finalized the core concept of India Digital Ecosystem of Agriculture 
(IDEA) framework which would lay down the architecture for the federated farmers‟ database. 
Further, the databases related to the schemes governed by the Department have be en 
integrated. The IDEA would serve as a foundation to build innovative agri -focused solutions 
leveraging emerging technologies to contribute effectively in creating a better Ecosystem for 
Agriculture in India. This Ecosystem would help the Government in effective planning towards 
increasing the income of farmers in particular and improving the efficiency of the Agriculture 
sector as a whole. Under National e -Governance Plan in Agriculture (NeGP -A), ministry 
supports State(s)/ UT(s) for implementing project s on use of modern technologies like 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), Robotics, Drones, Data Analytics, Block 
Chain etc. 
Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) is being implemented w.e.f 
April,2014.The scheme aims at 'reaching the unreached' by bringing to the small and 
marginal farmers in the core and giving the benefits of farm mechanization, by Promoting 
'Custom Hiring Centers', creating hubs for hi-tech & high value farm equipments, distribution 
of various agricultural equipments, creating awareness among stakeholders through 
demonstration and capacity building activities, and ensuring performance - testing and 
certification at designated testing centers located all over the country.  
The Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) has also compiled more than 100 
mobile apps developed by ICAR, State Agricultural Universities and Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
and uploaded on its website. These mobile apps developed in the areas of crops, horticulture, 
veterinary, dairy, poultry, fisheries, natural resources management and integrated subjects, 
offer valuable information to the farmers, including package of prac tices, market prices of 
various commodities, weather related information, advisory services, etc. 

 
56 
 
Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) is implemented for creating post -harvest 
management infrastructure and community farming assets to help enhanced productivity and 
minimize post-harvest losses. The primary processing centers and sorting and grading units 
established under the scheme is helping farmers to realize 20 -25% better price for their 
produce. Custom Hiring Centers and projects of smart and precision farming infrastructure 
established under the scheme is contributing towards pacing up the farm mechanization and 
technology adoption in agriculture sector and also helping in boosting productivity. 
A Centre for Climate Change has been set up at Bankers Institute of Rural 
Development, Lucknow by NABARD in July 2018. As a part of the Centre, a number of 
training programmes are organised every year, which cater to the requirements of various 
stakeholder institutions. Since 2020 -21, BIRD regularly conducts training programmes on 
"Climate Resilient Agriculture & Livelihoods" exclusively for NGOs and FPOs. The 
programme has also been converted into a free e -learning module, which is available on 
BIRD's website. As National Nodal Training Institute, BIRD also regularly organizes capacity 
building programmes for FPOs under MoAFW scheme for promotion and formation of 10,000 
FPOs, wherein inputs on latest technological developments are shared with the participants 
(FPO members & CBBO representatives) through lectures and exposure visits. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
Reduction in emission of Green House Gases (GHG) from Agriculture in a time bound 
manner 
Recommendation No. 15 
 India is a signatory to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), as well as its Kyoto Protocol (KP) and the Paris Agreement (PA). As a participant 
in the UNFCCC, India regularly submits its National Communications (NCs) and Biennial 
Update Reports (BURs) to the UNFCCC, which include a National G reenhouse Gas (GHG) 
inventory, containing information on Methane emissions. Under the Paris Agreement, India 
has submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), which does not impose any 
Sector-specific mitigation obligation or action. However, Ind ia remains steadfast in its 
commitment to formulating and implementing measures to address climate change. 

 
57 
 
 The Committee are optimistic that nationwide implementation of National Mission on 
Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA), which incorporates Climate -Resilient practices that 
contribute to significant Methane reduction in rice cultivation be accorded priority. The  
technologies such as System for Rice Intensification(SRI) and Direct Seeded Rice(DSR) 
developed by Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) under the National Innovations 
in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) Project, aimed at mitigating methane emissions from 
rice cultivation be made available provided across the country. System for Rice 
Intensification(SRI), has the potential to increase rice yield by 36 -49% while using 22 -35% 
less water than conventional methods while Direct Seeded Rice(DSR) re duces methane 
emissions by eliminating the need for raising nurseries, puddling, and transplanting. 
 National Livestock Mission, being implemented by Department of Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying (DAHD), which includes initiatives for breed improvement and balanced 
rationing, by feeding livestock with high -quality balanced rations, which helps reduce 
methane emissions from the livestock sector needs to implemented expeditiously. 
 The production of green fodder, silage making, chaff cutting, and total mixed ration 
under the National Livestock Mission being promoted by the Union Government, with the aim 
of reducing methane emissions from livestock, needs to be implemented at a faste r pace 
nationwide, at the earliest. 
 Initiatives such as the 'Gobar Dhan' (Galvanizing Organic Bio -Agro Resources) - 
Scheme and the New National Biogas and Organic Manure Programme incentivize the 
utilization of cattle waste, while also promoting the production of clean energy in villages. The 
Gobar Dhan Scheme which specifically supports the recovery and conversion of 
biodegradable waste into resources, leading to a reduction in Methane emissions needs to 
be more popularized across the country for the benefit of farmers as well as the societ y at 
large. The Committee strongly recommend that while formulating and implementation 
Schemes to reduce GHG(Green House Gases) emissions, legitimate interests of vulnerable 
sections and those communities/segments residing in remote areas, also need to be given 
priority and safeguarded. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Agriculture has not been considered as a sector under mitigation by India and 
adaptation is priority in agriculture for India. Agriculture sector in the country is highly 

 
58 
 
vulnerable to climate change, and the need to enhance climate actions to bring resilience, 
without compromising on food security and livelihoods is recognized. 
India has submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) for the period of 
2021-2030 under the Paris Agreement. In INDC, it was clarified that India is not bound to any 
sector specific mitigation obligation or action, including in agriculture sector. India's goal is to 
reduce overall emission intensity and improve energy efficiency of its economy over time and 
at the same time protecting the vulnerable sectors of economy and segments of our society. 
In India, livestock and paddy are prime sources of GHG emissions from the agriculture 
sector, followed by emissions from soil. However, overall contribution to net total emissions 
is not significant. 
India is primarily agrarian and dependence on agriculture is high for livelihood of more 
than half of the population. Agriculture sector has high level of vulnerability to changing 
climate. Erratic monsoon and increased frequency of mid-season droughts have emerged as 
an important productivity constraint besides high intensity rains being received in traditionally 
low rainfall regions of the country. Livestock as part of the Integrated Farming System (IFS) 
brings income stability, improved livelihoods and household nutrition. 
In view of the above national circumstances, India avoids inclusion of sectoral target 
particularly for mitigation / reducing emission targets in agricultural sector. 
India's NDC commitments and other climate change related commitments are being 
met through the implementation of the NAPCC. The primary principle that guides the NAPCC 
is Protecting the poor and vulnerable sections of society through an inclusive and sustainable 
development strategy, sensitive to climate change. Other principles are as follows – 
• Achieving national growth objectives through a qualitative change in direction that 
enhances eco -logical sustainability, leading to further mitigation of greenhouse gas 
emissions.  
• Devising efficient and cost-effective strategies for end use Demand Side Management.  
• Deploying appropriate technologies for both adaptation and mitigation of greenhouse 
gases emissions extensively as well as at an accelerated pace. 
• Engineering new and innovative forms of market, regulatory and voluntary 
mechanisms to promote sustainable development. 
• Effecting implementation of programmes through unique linkages, including with civil 
society and local government institutions and through public- private-partnership.  

 
59 
 
• Welcoming international cooperation for research, development, sharing and transfer 
of technologies enabled by additional funding and a global IPR regime that facilitates 
technology transfer to developing countries under the UNFCCC. 
 Keeping in view the challenges from changing climate, Government of Government 
has launched and implemented many schemes and programs to scale up India's climate 
actions. The schemes under NMSA aim to build resilience to agriculture against climate 
change with a focus on welfare of farmers. The schemes include Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
Samman Nidhi (PM KISAN); Rainfed Area Development (RAD); Per Drop More Crop 
(PDMC); Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY); Crop Residue Management; Agro 
forestry; Soil Health C ard and National Bamboo Mission (NBM). Besides NMSA, other 
schemes such as Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana (PMKMY); Pradhan Mantri Fasal 
Bima Yojana (PMFBY); Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF); Namo Drone Didi; Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana; National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and Sub- Mission on Seed and 
Planting Material (SMSP) are being implemented in the ministry to address risk mitigation 
due to adversities of climate change. The schemes under NMSA are mainly meant for climate 
adaptation. Th ese schemes also have co -benefits of mitigation. Therefore, the schemes 
formulated and implemented are focused towards climate change adaptation rather than 
addressing the GHG reductions in agriculture. 
 The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare, Government of India launched a flagship network project 'National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture' (NICRA). The project aims to develop and 
promote climate resilient technologies in agriculture which will address vulnerable areas of 
the country and the outputs of the project will help the districts and regions prone to extreme 
weather conditions like droughts, floods, frost, heat waves, etc. to cope with such extremes. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
  

 
60 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Creation of Single Nodal Agency at National Level to deal with issues of Climate 
Change 
Recommendation No. 1 
  Several studies have now unequivocally established that the phenomenon of climate 
change has a detrimental effect on crop yields and agricultural productivity. The impact can 
be negated by implementing both modern and traditional adaptation measures, with the 
necessary Institutional and Policy support. Every Ministry/Department is mandated to prepare 
a Disaster Management Plan under Sections 36/37 of Disaster Management (DM) Act, 2005. 
Accordingly, Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare also prepar e a National 
Agriculture Disaster Management Plan (NADMP) to include key aspects of Disaster Risk 
Reduction (DRR) that addresses Climate Change adaptation and sustainable development 
goals related to the Agriculture Sector. However, a unified command at the National Level is 
required for having seamless coordination among various Ministries, acting dynamically as 
and when the situation so requires, take swift decisions on urgent issues effecting Agriculture 
coming under the ambit of several ministries viz. Ministry of Science & Technology, Ministry 
of Earth Sciences, Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change.  
Making any single Ministry as the Nodal Agency to deal with Climate Change in 
Agriculture would not be able to create the desired impact as it cannot use its powers 
effectively over other Ministries/Departments or do seamless liaisoning with different Stat e 
Governments or take swift decisions nor it can be held responsible for the Subjects lying 
under the jurisdiction of other Ministries/Departments which a National Level Authority with 
unified command can do or achieve.  
The Committee, therefore, are of the firm view that the issues pertaining to ground 
water, Meteorological events and advisories, Agro advisories and other overlapping areas 
related to Agriculture or covertly connected with it, require the need for a Nation al Authority, 
especially in times of calamitous events & extreme phenological events to work in close 
cooperation with various stakeholders including State Governments and their Agencies and 
take swift decisions and to deal with all Climate Change issues holistically.  

 
61 
 
The Committee are further of the considered view in this regard that issues related to 
Climate Change and its effects impacting Agriculture needs to be handled by a single 
Authority at the National level on the pattern of National Disaster Management 
Authority(NDMA)which can be named as National Agriculture Disaster Management 
Authority(NADMA). The Committee further desire that the proposed NADMA may consist of 
experts having rich experience in the relevant fields for the purpose. This will not only 
enhance dynamism in decision making but also fix accountability which is presently missing 
in the system. The Committee again express their suggestion that formation of NADMA will 
act as a catalyst and game changer and enhance the responsive mechanism of the 
government. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
On Parliamentary Standing Committee's observations at page-79 of the report, it may 
be stated that National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) is a statutory body mandated 
under Disaster Management Act 2005. NDMA works on various climate-related hazards (heat 
wave, cold wave, lightning etc.) and non  climate-related hazards (earthquakes, tsunamis) 
especially on drought management in agriculture.  The NDMA has given due focus on 
Agriculture and Agriculture related disasters in the National Disaster Managemen t Plan 
(NDMP) 2019. The nodal Ministry for climate change is Ministry of Environment Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEFCC) while for drought is Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(MoAFW). Following the ratification of Paris Agreement, the Inter- Ministerial Apex Committee 
for Implementation of the Paris Agreement (AIPA) was established by MoEFCC to prepare 
the coordinated response on Climate Change. AIPA ensures that India meets its 
commitments under Paris Agreement including Nationally Determined Contr ibutions (NDC). 
Hence, creating another nodal authority may lead to be duplication of efforts. 
National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM) under National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA), Ministry of Home Affairs is dealing with agriculture related 
disasters. National Agriculture Disaster Management Plan (NADMP) has been prepared by 
NIDM to address the key aspects of disaster risk reduction in agriculture sector. Besides this, 
under the National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA), a flagship network 
project of ICAR aimed at developing climate resilient varieties for differe nt biotic and abiotic 
stresses in major crops, developing and popularizing climate resilient technologies for wider 
adoption among farming communities and prepare District Agricultural Contingency Plans 

 
62 
 
(DACP) to sensitize the state officials for preparedness to face aberrant weather conditions. 
India Meteorological Department (IMD) is providing all kinds of weather information and 
Agromet advisories as per the requirement. 
The NDMA in collaboration with National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) and the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare is implementing Drought Mitigation Plans 
(DMPs) for 12 drought-prone states, which are to be supported through the resources of the 
National Disaster Mitigation Fund (NDMF), as recommended by the XV Finance Commission. 
The NDMA is hand holding the States to develop long term drought mitigation plans to 
address the challenges posed by successive droughts through a standard template, duly  
approved by Ministry of Home Affairs. These plans include area -specific farming systems, 
improvements in surface and ground water management, promoting efficiency of water use, 
agro-forestry schemes and solar energy installations. The DMPs received from t he States 
have been evaluated by a Technical Advisory Committee led by NDMA and are under 
consideration of SC-NEC for approval. 
The Government has already put in place institutional mechanisms for coordination 
and overseeing the implementation of climate action. The Prime Minister's Council on Climate 
Change (PMCCC) has been constituted, as an institutional arrangement for managing issues 
pertaining to and arising from climate change. The Hon'ble Prime Minister of India is the 
Chairman of the PMCCC. The keys tasks carried out by the PMCCC are: 
i.    Evolve a coordinated response to issues relating to climate change at the 
national level; 
ii.   Provide oversight for formulation of action plans in the area of assessment, 
adaptation and mitigation of climate change; 
iii.    Periodically monitor key policy decisions; 
iv.   And additionally provide guidance on international negotiations. The composition 
of the PMCCC is inter-ministerial and also has representation of experts. 
The Executive Committee on Climate Change (ECCC) has been constituted for 
assisting the PMCCC in evolving a coordinated response to issues relating to climate change. 
Chaired by the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister, the ECCC monitors all climate 
change missions and other initiatives on climate change by the Government of India. 

 
63 
 
The Apex Committee for Implementation of Paris Agreement (AIPA), was set up in 
November 2020, just before the implementation of the Paris Agreement commenced on 1st 
January 2021. The AIPA has been set up to specifically work for ensuring a coordinated 
response on climate change matters that protects the country's interests and ensures that 
India is on track towards meeting its climate change obligations under the Paris Agreement 
including its nationally determined contribution. The composition of the AIPA i s inter -
ministerial, chaired by Secretary, MoEFCC and with representation from all line ministries of 
Government of India, pertaining to climate change. The AIPA also coordinates activities and 
carries out detailed examination of climate change related iss ues through experts or by 
consulting organizations, and reports to the ECCC. 
As an institutional arrangement for managing domestic climate action; Under the 
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the MoEFCC has been appointed 
as the nodal Ministry to deal with matters related to Climate Change. The MoEF&CC assists 
the PMCCC and ECCC as the Secretariat in their work by coordinating with relevant central 
Ministries, Departments, States, Union Territories and other relevant stakeholders. 
The Government is implementing National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) 
which provides an overarching policy framework for all climate actions. The NAPCC 
encompasses nine missions in the specific areas of Solar Energy, Enhanced Energy 
Efficiency, Sus tainable Habitat, Water, Sustaining the Himalayan Eco -system, Strategic 
Knowledge for Climate Change, Green India, Sustainable Agriculture and Human Health. 
These specific areas tackle core issues pertaining to climate change, outlining steps to 
simultaneously advance India's development and climate change related objectives of 
adaptation and mitigation. 
The Ministry anchoring the respective national mission is responsible for the 
implementation and laying down the budget provisions and actionable priorities for it. The 
Missions are under various stages of implementation, including planning, formulation of  
policies and strategies, and preparing the budgetary allocation for implementation. A thorough 
update and revision of the national missions have been undertaken to align them with India's 
NDC and emerging scientific knowledge.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024]  

 
64 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Increasing budgetary allocation for Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
Recommendation No. 16 
 Agriculture sector in India is now at the cusp of a transformation backed by Union 
Government initiatives such as Digital Public Infrastructure, Agriculture Infrastructure Fund 
schemes and so on. The scalability of these Schemes needs to be enhanced so that their 
impact is more tangible and ar eas across the country start getting benefits simultaneously. 
The Committee feel that without adequate financial support and backing by the government, 
most of the Schemes will not be able to create the desired impact. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that budgetary allocation of the Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare needs to be enhanced to boost public spending in Agriculture 
& Allied Sectors, to tackle issues related to Climate Change as India is among the top ten 
countries to be affected by extreme meteorological events, to train farmers and FPOs in the 
latest technological advances to combat adverse impact of phenological events, to ensure 
farm inputs across the length and breadth of the country, invest mo re in research in farm 
methods and technologies & related demands of Allied Sectors and so on. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Government of India is committed to the welfare of farmers and Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is accordingly implementing comprehensive range of central 
sector as well as centrally sponsored schemes and programmes for the welfare of farmers in 
the country. These schemes encompass entire spectrum of agriculture including credit, 
insurance, income support, infrastructure, crops including horticulture, seeds, mechanization, 
marketing, organic and natural farming, farmer collectives, irrigation, extension, procurement 
of crops from farmers at minimum support prices, digital agriculture etc. The total budget 
allocation for DA&FW for the FY 2024-25 has witnessed an increase of 1.73% in comparison 
to FY 2023 -24. The budget allocation at BE level for FY 2024-25 is Rs. 117528.80 crore, 
whereas BE 2023-24 was Rs. 115531.79 crore. 

 
65 
 
The budgetary allocation for Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) 
depends upon the various factors including amount of scheme approved, their previous 
years‟ expenditures under the schemes, absorption capacity of the Department and the 
actual requirement of funds depending upon progress of scheme and overall fiscal situation 
of Govt. during the respective financial years. The allocation of budget for various schemes, 
including RKVY, is worked out by Budget Division of MoA&FW. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of this Report.   
 
Issue of Manpower in Research Institutes and bodies attached to Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
A robust and strategic knowledge system is imperative for the identification, 
formulation, planning, and execution of policy-driven measures, while upholding the requisite 
rate of economic growth. This strategic knowledge system, aimed at informing and supporting 
actions sensitive to climate change, must encompass several objectives. These objectives 
entail addressing climate science through  modelling specific to regions; evaluating various 
technological scenarios and alternatives to meet national objectives; harnessing international 
cooperation and enhancing our endeavors to select and develop new technologies for 
adaptation and mitigation; an d ensuring the bridging of knowledge gaps. It is of utmos t 
importance to sustain the vitality of the knowledge enterprise that addresses Climate Change 
issues through the promotion of human and institutional capacity -building. Such measures 
are indispensable in the crafting of policy responses and implementation  approaches at the 
national level and in providing inputs for negotiations at the international for a by designated 
Departments. The role of Research Institutes in sustaining the vitality of knowledge systems, 
ICAR in the present context, is of immense imp ortance in combating the effects of Climate 
Change. Manpower is the most important asset of any organization and more so, in the case 
of research institutes such as ICAR, Coconut Development Board (CDB) and so on.  

 
66 
 
The Committee note that the Posts are lying vacant in certain crucial Research 
Institutes like Coconut Development Board (CDB), Central Institute of Fisheries Training 
(CIFT) and Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI), etc. The Committee feel 
that the Recruitment Processes need to be expedited and Officials appointed to increase the 
efficiency of the functioning of all the Research Institutes. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Government makes all the efforts for timely filling up of the vacant posts through 
recruitment as well as promotion. It is a continuous process and  regular monitoring of the 
retirements and completion of tenures is done and accordingly, requisitions for filling up the 
vacancies are sent in advance to recruiting agencies. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F.No. 5-5/2022-NRM-CC FTS-107597 dt. 27th June, 2024] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I of this Report.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
67 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  New Delhi                                                                             Charanjit Singh Channi 
 15th December, 2025                  Chairperson 
 24 Agrahayana, 1947(Saka)                               Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
      Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
68 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19th September, 2025 from 1103 hrs. to 1335 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 1, First Floor, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe (EPHA), 
New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
4.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
5.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
6.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
7.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
8.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
9.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.    Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11.    Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
12.    Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
13.    Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
14.    Shri Madan Rathore 
15.    Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
16.    Shri P. P. Suneer 
 
  
Secretariat 
 
1.        Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2.        Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3.        Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 
69 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the following Draft 
Subject Reports and Draft Action Taken Reports: 
(i) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(ii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx* 
(iii) Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 68th Report of the Committee 
on the Subject ‘Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming’  pertaining to Ministry 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
presented during 17th Lok Sabha;  
(iv) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(v) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(vi) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(vii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*, and 
(viii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*. 
 
3.  xxxxx      xxxxx         xxxxx  xxxxx      xxxxx*    
 
4. The Committee also adopted the draft Action Taken Reports on 68 th Report on the 
subject ‘Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming’, xxxxxx with modifications as suggested in 
Annexure I, xxxxxx. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Reports to Parliament.   
 
5. xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  
 
  
 
* Matter not related to this report. 

 
70 
 
  
Annexure-I 
During the Sitting held on 19.09.2025, the Members made the following suggestions to 
be incorporated into the Sixty-Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24) on the 
subject `Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming’ (2023 -24) pertaining to the Ministry 
of Agriculture & Farmer Welfare (Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare):- 
  
Page no. 
of the 
Draft 
Report 
Comments on Para 
No. 
Original Comments  Modification incorporated  
14 1.14 The reply of the 
Department does not 
seem to be convincing. 
Given the fact that 
Agriculture is the largest 
livelihood provider in the 
country and its impact on 
the economy & growth in 
other Sectors through its 
backward and forward 
linkages is gigantic, the 
Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation 
to enhance budgetary 
allocation to Department 
of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare to ensure that 
Agriculture gets its due 
importance and 
legitimate sha re thereby 
improving the scalability 
of the ongoing schemes 
and making their impact 
more tangible. 
  The Committee after 
considering the reply of the 
Department emphasise 
that, given Agriculture’s role 
as the largest livelihood 
provider in the country and 
its significant contribution to 
the economy and other 
sectors through backward 
and forward linkages, 
enhanced budgetary 
allocation to the 
Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare would be 
highly beneficial.  Such 
support could help ensure 
that agriculture receives 
due importance, while also 
strengthening the 
scalability of ongoing 
schemes and making their 
impact more tangible. 
Hence, the  Committee 
reiterate their earlier 
recommendation in the 
matter. 
 

 
71 
 
15 1.17   The Committee note that 
the reply given by the 
Department is not 
convincing and is not 
factually correct. Had so 
been the case as cited in 
the Action Taken Reply of 
the Government, 
vacancies in such huge 
numbers would not have 
existed in the aforesaid 
Departments. The 
Committee opine that the 
Department should 
expedite the process of 
Recruitment in the 
Research Institutes 
under its Mandate to 
enhance the efficiency of 
these Institutes so that 
they are able to 
contribute effectively in 
the process of Nation 
building. Hence, the 
Committee reiterate their 
earlier stance in the 
matter.  
 
The Committee after taken 
note of the reply of the 
Department emphasise that 
filling vacancies in 
significant numbers within 
the concerned Departments 
is imperative for 
strengthening the efficiency 
of Research Institutes under 
its mandate.  The Committee 
are of the view that 
expediting the recruitment 
process would enable these 
Research Institutes to 
contribute more effectively to 
the process of nation 
building.  In this context, the 
Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation on 
the matter. 
 
  
  

 
72 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY -EIGHT REPORT (17 th LOK SABHA) 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2023-24) 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations       17 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government  
     Para Nos. 2,3, 4, 5, 6,7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15    
            Total  14 
              Percentage 82.35% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies 
      Para Nos. 1  
                                                                                                        Total  01 
              Percentage   5.89% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee                         
 
  Para No.  16 and 17          Total  02 
                                                                                             Percentage  11.76% 
 
(v)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited:  
 
  Recommendation NIL 
                                                                                                         Total   00 
Percentage: 00.00% 
 
 