 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING)  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
(DEMAND No. 44) 
 
 
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
         
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
24 

 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL  
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PREOCESSING 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
(DEMAND No. 44) 
 
 
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                    18.12.2025 
 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on       18.12.2025 
 
 
 
 
         
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December 2025 / Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


 
COA No. 523 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001. 
  

 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) …………………….. iii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) …………………….. iv 
Introduction ……………………………………………………….. vi 
Chapter I Report…………………………… 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government 
16 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
30 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
31 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
39 
 ANNEXURE  
Annexure-I Total vaccination performance reducing the gap under the 
programme 
43 
Annexure-II Physical Target and achievement under “National 
Programme for Dairy Development” scheme 
44 
Annexure-III Total number of States and UTs supported under the 
ESVHD-MVU, funds released 
45 
Annexure-IV Minutes of the Thirty Seventh sitting of the Committee held 
on 19.09.2025 
47 
 APPENDIX  
Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the Observations 
/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25)  
51 
 
 
 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 (2024-25) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025. 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde  
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
27.  Shri Madan Rathore 
28.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
  

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Sonia Gupta   - Committee Officer 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing, having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Twenty-Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
(2024-25)  on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying). 
 
2. The Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2024-25)’ pertaining to Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) was presented in Lok Sabha and laid on 
the table of the House on 17.12.2024. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were 
received on 17.03.2025 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on            
19th September, 2025. 
 
4.  An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
15th December, 2025                            Chairperson 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)                         Standing Committee on Agriculture 
                   Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying), which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2024 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 17th December, 2024. 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying) has furnished Action-taken Replies in respect of all the 13 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
scrutinized and thereafter categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 5, 6, 7,10, 11, 12 and 13 
Total 08  
Chapter - II  
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply: 
Recommendation No.                   NIL 
Total 00 
Chapter – III 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Nos.  2, 4, 8 and 14 
Total 04 
Chapter – IV 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation Nos.  3 and 9  
Total 02  
Chapter - V  
 

2 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance be given by the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying) to implement the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Department to implement the 
Recommendations in letter and spirit, for any reason, the matter should be 
intimated, in writing, to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation.                  
The Committee also desire that further Action-taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and the Final Action-taken Replies to the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action-taken by the Government on some of 
the Observations / Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.   Sectoral Analysis of Budget Allocations 
      (Recommendation No. 2) 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under: - 
 
 "The Committee observe that there has been drastic reductions in the budget 
allocated to Small Livestock Institutes, Breed Improvement Institutes and Veterinary 
Council of India to the extent of 11%, 37% and 54%, respectively, during the year 2024 -
25 vis-a-vis those of 2023-24. It may be seen that Small Livestock Institutes viz. Central 
Poultry Development Organizations, Central Sheep Breeding Farm, Regional Fodder 
Stations etc. play a pivotal role in the implementation of the policies of the Government 
with respect to poultry. Similarly, Breed Improvement Institutes such as Central Cattle 
Breeding Farms, Central Frozen Semen Production and Training Institute and Central 
Herd Registration Units produce genetically superior bull calves, quality frozen semen 
from High Genetic Merit Bulls (HGM) and for identification and location of superior 
germplasm of indigenous breeds of cattle and buffaloes, so as to meet the requirement 
of HGM bulls and frozen semen doses in the country. These organizations are also 
playing important role in training of manpower in frozen semen technology and training of 
farmers and entrepreneurs in farm management. Veterinary Council of India has the 
mandate of regulating veterinary practices and maintaining uniform standards of 

3 
 
veterinary education through Minimum Standard of Veterinary Education Regulations in 
all veterinary institutes across the country. The Committee note that there is shortage of 
specialized and trained manpower in Veterinary Services in the country and number of 
recognized Veterinary Colleges in the country has increased to just 58 from 26 since1984. 
Reduction in Budgets of such important institutes is bound to hamper their performance 
in their related fields. Overall, the Department has been allocated an 18% increase in 
Budgetary Allocation at BE 2024-25 as compared to RE 2023-24. The Committee feels 
that such drastic reduction in budget allocations to various sectors of Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying should be avoided as all sectors are equally important growth and 
development of Livestock sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should uniformly distribute increase in budget allocations to various sectors 
under it and avoid drastic reductions in budget of any Sector as said reductions hamper 
their on-going activities and schemes implementation." 
 
  
1.6 In its Action taken reply, the Department has stated as under: - 
 
“i. The Department acknowledges the Committee's observation regarding the 
reductions in the budget allocations for Small Livestock Institutes, Breed 
Improvement Institutes, and the Veterinary Council of India for the year 
2024-25, in comparison to the allocations made in 2023-24. 
 
ii. Regarding the budget allocation to the Breed Improvement Institutes, it is 
noted that for FY 2023-24, an initial budget estimate of Rs. 60 Cr. was 
allocated. Of this, Rs. 9.08 Cr. was earmarked for the Central Cattle 
Breeding Farm (CCBF) and the Central Frozen Semen Production & 
Training Institute (CFSP&TI) located at Hesserghata, which are now part of 
the Centre of Excellence for Animal Husbandry (CEAH) thereby leaving Rs. 
52.92 Cr. for the six CCBFs and four CHRS. During FY 2023-24, final 
expenditure incurred was Rs.37.15 Cr. against final allotment of Rs.37.99 
Cr. During the FY 2024-25, there is allotment of B.E. of Rs. 37.72 Cr. and 
RE is fixed at Rs 38.00 Cr. which is slightly more than last year's final 
expenditure. Therefore, taking into account lot of retirement of staff over the 
years and separate budget allotment to CEAH and less expenditure on the 
three farms, there is no reduction in the allotment of budget to the Breed 
Improvement Institutes and works of the BII’s have not hampered. In fact, 

4 
 
more funds are made available for taking up infrastructural works and also 
for induction of new germplasm. Further, for the FY 2025-26, an amount of 
Rs 50 cr. has already been allocated at BE stage for FY 2025-26.” 
 
1.7 Taking note of the reduction in budget allocations to various sectors of 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying like Small Livestock Institutes, Breed 
Improvement Institutes and Veterinary Council of India, the Committee had 
recommended that the Department should uniformly distribute increase in budget 
allocations to various sectors under it and avoid reductions in budget of any Sector 
as said reductions hamper their on-going activities and schemes implementation. 
Although the Department has stated that there is no reduction in allotment of 
budget to the Breed Improvement Institutes and their work have not been 
hampered due to support of additional budget from Centre of Excellence for Animal 
Husbandry (CEAH), sufficient explanation has not been provided for reduction in 
the budgets for Veterinary Council of India and Small Livestock Institute.                            
A reduction in the budget of Veterinary Council of India may impact infrastructure 
development, training capacity and the availability of veterinary professionals, 
thereby affecting efforts to address the shortage of qualified practitioners.                         
It may also have implications for research in animal health and disease control 
within Animal Husbandry Sector of the country.  
 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Department must ensure a balanced distribution of budgetary increase across 
various sectors under its purview and maintain consistency in allocations, so that 
ongoing activities and schemes implementations are not affected.  
B.   Underutilization and surrendering of Re-appropriated Funds 
       
 (Recommendation No. 4)  
 
 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed / recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee observe that huge amount of funds have been surrendered 
by the Department during the Financial Years 2022-23 and 2023-24 to the tune of 
Rs. 1580 crores and 1307 crores, respectively. The percentage utilization of funds 
with respect to RE for the years 2022-23 and 2023-24 stood at 77.3% and 83.25%, 
respectively resulting in surrendering of 22.70% and 16.75% of the RE allocations. 

5 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that while on one hand the Department has 
been continuously requesting for increase in budgetary allocations, on the other it 
has been surrendering huge amount of funds to the Government continuously for 
the last two years.  
 
 The Committee observe that funds have been re-appropriated out of 
Livestock Health and Disease Control Programme to other schemes viz Rashtriya 
Gokul Mission (RGM), Infrastructure Development Fund (IDF), Dairy Development 
and National Livestock Mission (NLM). Although the Department has re-
appropriated funds to the said schemes at RE stage, these could not be utilized 
fully during 2023-24. The reason for re-appropriation is given as reduction in RE 
stage allocation in the budget. But the schemes like Infrastructure Development 
Fund and National Livestock Mission have no reduction in RE stage allocations 
vis-å-vis BE stage allocations and schemes like Rashtriya Gokul Mission and Dairy 
Development have in fact increased allocation at RE stage vis-å-vis BE stage 
allocations during 2023-24. The Committee are inquisitive as to the reason for the 
positive re-appropriation to the said schemes when schemes themselves have RE 
stage allocations which are either same as BE or higher than BE allocations under 
their budget head. In view of this, the Committee requires the Department to 
apprise the Committee of the reasons for such re-appropriations and recommend 
that the Department make concerted efforts for proper utilization of allocated funds 
in future." 
 
 
1.9 In its Action taken reply, the Department has stated as under: - 
"i.  The Department acknowledges the Committee's concern regarding the 
significant amount of funds surrendered during the Financial Years 2022-
23 and 2023-24. The utilization of funds for the years 2022-23 and 2023-24 
stood at 77.3% and 83.25%, respectively. The Department recognizes the 
importance of efficiently utilizing allocated funds and agrees with the 
Committee's concern regarding the surrender of such large sums. 
 
ii. With reference to the surrender of funds and re-appropriation during these 
financial years, the Department would like to submit that the implementation 
of the new Fund Flow Mechanism (SNA/CNA) and delayed compliance by 
States/UTs affected the timely release of funds in installments, leading to 

6 
 
lower utilization. Additionally, the prolonged procurement process by the 
States resulted in a reduced demand for recurring expenses, affecting 
overall fund utilization. These factors contributed to the surrender of funds 
despite the Department’s efforts to ensure optimal utilization. 
 
iii. Further, a new budget head ‘Subsidies,’ was introduced in both the 
Infrastructure Development Fund (IDF) and the National Livestock Mission 
(NLM) as per the requirements of the Programme Division, for which a token 
supplementary grant was obtained. To facilitate the release of funds under 
this newly created head, re-appropriation was carried out using the 
available savings within the grant. 
 
iv. Under the Rashtriya Gokul Mission (RGM) scheme, the need for a new 
object head called ‘Subsidies’ was identified, which resulted in higher 
allocations at the RE 2023-24 stage compared to the BE 2023-24. This new 
object head was introduced to support entrepreneurial activities under the 
scheme. Similarly, the same object head was created under the Dairy 
Development scheme to facilitate activities related to the Dairy through 
Cooperatives component of the scheme. 
 
v. The Department is taking necessary steps to improve fund utilization by 
streamlining the fund flow mechanism as per DoE guidelines, strengthening 
coordination with States/UTs, and enhancing the planning and execution of 
schemes to ensure efficient utilization of allocated funds in the future." 
 
1.10 Observing that there was re-appropriation of under-utilised funds out of 
Livestock Health and Disease Control Programme to other schemes viz Rashtriya 
Gokul Mission (RGM), Infrastructure Development Fund (IDF), Dairy Development 
and National Livestock Mission (NLM) despite no reduction in RE stage allocation 
to the said schemes, the Committee required the Department to apprise them about 
the reasons for such re-appropriations and recommended that the Department 
make concerted efforts for proper utilization of allocated funds in future. The 
Department in its Action Taken Reply has given the reason of the implementation 
of the new Fund Flow Mechanism (SNA/CNA) and delayed compliance by 

7 
 
States/UTs affecting the timely release of funds in installments, leading to lower 
utilization and the prolonged procurement process by the States resulting in a 
reduced demand for recurring expenses, affecting overall fund utilization. The 
Committee are already aware of said reason as the Department has given same 
reply in earlier examination of Demand for Grants. Further, the Committee observe 
that, wherein the Department has stated that, “re-appropriation was carried out 
using the available savings within the grant”, it is underutilization of funds owing 
to delay in release of funds, however, further clarification on this aspect be 
provided for better understanding the fund utilization process. Further, the 
Committee are of view that the new fund flow mechanism is for ensuring efficiency 
and promptness in funds disbursal. However, in the instant case it is actually 
causing delays. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the Department 
identify the issues causing delays in implementation and adoption of new fund flow 
mechanism by States/UTs and apprise the Committee of steps taken to address the 
same to ensure timely release of funds to State as well as full utilization under the 
scheme. Further, although the Department has acknowledged that it has taken 
steps to improve fund utilization but has not elaborated on the same. In view of 
foregoing, the Committee may also be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Department to improve fund utilization. 
 
 
C.   Underutilization of allocated funds under Livestock Health and Disease 
Control Proqramme (LH&DC) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed / recommended as under: - 
 
“The Committee are dissatisfied to note that the actual expenditure under 
the LH&DC Scheme is drastically falling short of the amount allocated to it even at 
RE stage year after year with the Department utilizing only 57% funds in the year 
2022-23 and 69% of funds during the year 2023-24. The Committee feel that funds 
are sought after taking into consideration all the factors affecting their utilization. 
Surrender of funds, year after year, will have negative impact on achievement of 
the targets fixed. It is, therefore, reiterate that all relevant factors be taken into 

8 
 
consideration to avoid surrendering of the funds. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of actions taken by the Department in this regard.” 
 
1.12 In its Action taken reply, the Department has stated as under: - 
 “ 
Year NADCP - Reasons 
for Shortfall in 
expenditure over 
scheme allocation 
LHDC – Reasons for 
Shortfall in 
expenditure 
Action Taken 
2022-23 Revised procedure of 
release the fund 
under CNA model. 
States were having 
huge unspent balance 
including funds for 
MVU procurement 
from previous 
releases under 
NADCP & ESVHD-
MVU.  
Non availability of 
sufficient quantity of 
quality FMD & PPR 
vaccine up to 
November 2023 & 
August, 2023 
respectively.  
Due to emergence 
and spread of exotic 
diseases like LSD & 
ASF, priority was 
given for vaccination 
& control measures 
against these 
diseases.  
Introduction of New 
Fund Flow 
Mechanism 
(SNA/CNA) and 
delayed compliances 
by the States/UTs 
hampered release of 
funds in instalments. 
Substantial time was 
taken by the states in 
procurement process, 
thus recurring 
expenses were not 
demanded. 
 
The States were sensitized to 
follow and implement the 
SNA Model for the centrally 
sponsored components of the 
Livestock Health and Disease 
Control Programme 
(LH&DCP) during the Review 
Meetings, and the States 
have complied with this 
guidance. Furthermore, as 
per the latest instructions 
from the Department of 
Expenditure (MoF) for the 
financial year 2024-25, all 
identified States are now 
adhering to the SNA 
SPARSH Model. 
 
2023-24 Unspent balances of 
Rs.700 Cr. (Yr. 2022-
23) were utilized in the 
FY 2023-24. 
Supply of quality 
vaccine increased 
from 20.24 Cr. in 
2022-23 to 36.05 Cr. 
in 2023-24.  
Application of vaccine 
increased from 16.18 
Cr. in 2022-23 to 
30.64 Cr. in 2023-24. 
Due to issues in the 
4123 code and 
unspent balances 
lying with the states 
limited funds were 
released to MVUs. 
All MVUs were not 
operational. 
 
The issue of separate code 
for LH&DCP for centrally 
sponsored components was 
resolved in coordination with 
Ministry of Finance. 
The States were reviewed 
time to time for procurement 
and operationalization of 
sanctioned 4340 nos. of 
MVU. Accordingly, as on date 
4016 MVUs are operational. 

9 
 
 
 
 
(b) To address the issue of underutilization of funds under the Livestock Health 
and Disease Control Scheme, the Department has taken the following steps: 
 
 
a. Ensuring accurate budget allocations based on realistic needs assessments. 
b. Streamlining the process for quicker disbursal to prevent delays. 
c. Enhancing monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to track fund usage. 
d. Training staff and stakeholders to manage and utilize funds effectively. 
 
 
(c) Based on the above, the RE 2024-25 and BE 2025-26 are both fixed at              
Rs. 1980 crore. On 5th March 2025 Cabinet has approved the Revision of Livestock 
Health and Disease Control Programme (LHDCP) for total outlay of the scheme at 
Rs.3,880 crore for two years i.e. 2024-25 and 2025-26.” 
 
 
1.13 Noting that the actual expenditure under the Livestock Health and Disease 
Control Programme (LH&DCP) is consistently falling short of the amount allocated 
at RE stage year after year, with the Department utilizing only 57% funds during the 
year 2022-23 and 69% of funds during the year 2023-24, the Committee asked the 
Department that it may be apprised of action taken by the Department to avoid 
underutilization and surrendering of the funds. The Department has given the 
reason of the implementation of the new Fund Flow Mechanism (SNA/CNA) and 
delayed compliance by States/UTs affecting the timely release of funds in 
installments and thus resulting in underutilization and underperformance of the 
Scheme, which the Committee are already aware as the Department has given the 
same reason in earlier examination of Demand for Grants, as well. The Committee 
again reiterates that the Department may accord priority to the scheme of Livestock 
Health and Disease Control Programme (LH&DCP) both in terms of expenditure 
and recovering performance of scheme parameters in terms of targets set and 
achieved and apprise the Committee of the steps being taken by the Department to 
further improve fund utilization and minimize the need for surrendering the funds 
in future. 
  

10 
 
 
D. Physical performance of National Proqramme on Dairy Development (NPDD) 
       
 (Recommendation No. 9) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed / recommended as under: - 
 
     "The data on cumulative achievement vis-a-vis targets fixed under Component 
'A' "National Programme for Dairy Development (NPDD)', commenced in Feb-
2014, shows that the achievements fell far short of the targets given. A target for 
setting up of 6,766 Bulk Milk Coolers (BMC) with a capacity of 16712.5 Kilo Liters 
(KL) was given. Against these targets, 5,104 BMCs with 11,214 KL capacity only 
were set up, representing a shortfall of 24.57% and 39.90% in number of units of 
BMCs and their capacity, respectively. Similarly, there is a shortfall of 21.58% in 
achieving the fixed for Automatic Milk Collection units (AMCU) & Data Processor 
& Milk Collection Units (DPMCU). In the case of provision of Electronic Milk 
Adulteration Testing Machine also the shortfall is more, as against a target of 
12,505 machines 'units, achievement is only 6,266 i.e. a shortfall of 50%of the 
target. The Committee while appreciating the progress made in certain categories, 
express concern at the huge shortfalls seen in providing and setting up of 
Automatic Milk Collection units (AMCU) and Data Processor & Milk Collection 
Units (DPMCU) and also Bulk Milk Coolers (BMCs) and recommend that 
appropriate steps be taken to fulfill the targets at the earliest. The Committee 
further recommend that under component 'B' of NPDD, some provision may be 
made for providing interest free loans to landless, small and marginal farmers for 
owning 01 to 04 cows/buffaloes, as feasible. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of actions taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
 
1.15 In its Action-taken reply, the Department has stated as under: - 
 
“(a)    Under National programme on Dairy Development (NPDD) scheme, projects 
are approved for implementation in 2-3 years and accordingly financial and 
physical targets are fixed. The physical targets mentioned in the note are the EOP 
(end of project) target and will be achieved by the end of financial year 2025-26 
i.e. by 31.03.2026 (NPDD scheme implementation period).   
 
 

11 
 
 
(b)    The latest figure of achievements under the 3-category mentioned above is 
as follows: 
 
S. No. Parameter Target (EOP) 
(Till 
31.03.2026) 
Achievement 
(Till 
31.12.2024) 
% 
Achievement 
1. Bulk 
Milk 
Coolers 
No. of BMC 7039  5382 76.46 
Capacity of BMC 17014.50 13208.44 77.63 
2. Automatic Milk Collection 
units 48925 38398 78.48 
3. Electronic Milk Adulteration 
Testing Machine 4922 3789 76.98 
 
 It may be seen from the above table that more than 75% of the approved EOP 
targets have been achieved by the States on all the parameters. The State-
wise updated status is attached at Annexure-II. 
(c) Both at the National level and regional level review meeting have been 
conducted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (AHD) to ensure speedy 
implementation of the projects. About 22 State Level Technical Management 
Committee meetings under the chairmanship of Additional Chief Secretary/Pr 
Secretary of the State Animal Husbandry Department have been conducted 
to review the project implementation under the scheme.  
 
(d) Department will continue monitoring the progress of the scheme and ensure 
achieving targets fixed before the end of the scheme implementation period.  
 
(e) Component 'B' of NPDD: The activities covered under component B are in 
compliance to the Memorandum of Agreement signed between Government 
of India, Government of Japan and Japan International Cooperation Agency 
(JICA). Hence, it is not feasible to provide interest free loan to landless, small 
and marginal farmers for owning 01 to 04 cows/buffaloes under component 
B of NPDD." 
 
1.16 While appreciating the progress made in certain categories, the Committee 
expressed concern at the considerable shortfalls in setting up of Automatic Milk 
Collection units (AMCU) and Data Processor & Milk Collection Units (DPMCU) and 
also Bulk Milk Coolers (BMCs) and recommended that the appropriate steps be 
taken to fulfill the targets at the earliest. The Committee further recommended that 
under component 'B' of National Programme for Dairy Development (NPDD), some 
provision may be made for providing interest free loans to landless, small and 

12 
 
marginal farmers for owning 01 to 04 cows/buffaloes, as feasible and be apprised 
of actions taken by the Department in this regard. The Department has stated that 
both at the National level and regional level review meeting have been conducted 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (AHD) to ensure speedy implementation of 
the projects and in 22 State Level Technical Management Committee meetings 
under the chairmanship of Additional Chief Secretary/Pr Secretary of the State 
Animal Husbandry Department have been conducted to review the project 
implementation under the scheme. However, the latest data provided in action 
taken replies still shows a shortfall of around 50% in installation of electronic 
adulteration testing unit across various states, which is especially concerning 
under present environment of milk adulteration. The Committee again reiterates 
that the Component ‘A’ under NPDD may be accorded utmost priority and 
appropriate steps be taken to fulfill the targets at the earliest. Further, the 
Committee again recommend that some provision may be made for providing 
interest free loans to landless, small and marginal farmers for owning 01 to 04 
cows/buffaloes, under such scheme of the Department, as suitable for the said 
purpose. 
 
 
E.   Addressing the Menace of Stray Bovine Animals 
       
 (Recommendation No. 14) 
 
1.17 The Committee had observed / recommended as under: - 
 
     "The Committee appreciates the efforts of Department to control the birth of 
male bovine off springs using sex sorted semen techniques whereby female calves 
are born with 90% accuracy rate. However, the Committee feels that there is also 
need to prevent further growth of stray cattle from already existing livestock 
population of 193.46 Million Cattle and 109.85 Million Buffaloes. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that some incentive/subsidy may be provided to farmers 
and farm laborers for taking care of cattle and buffaloes which are past their 
economic utility in addition to increasing fund allocation for promotion of Gaushalas 
across country with farmers having a choice to either avail services of Gaushala 
or avail government incentive/subsidy for taking care of their non-productive 
bovine animals." 
 

13 
 
 
 
1.18 In its Action-taken reply, the Department has stated as under: - 
 
“Department through the Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) is engaging in 
providing fund to the recognized animal welfare organizations / Gaushalas who 
are sheltering the stray/injured /sick animals in their shelter. The AWBI is 
implementing the following financial assistance schemes: 
 
 
 
(i) Regular Grant: 
Under the regular grant, the AWBI gives financial assistance to the 
recognized Animal Welfare Organizations as regular grants towards 
Maintenance/Repairs of Rescue Home for animals, Construction of Water 
Troughs/Facilities, Rescue operation during natural calamities including 
maintenance of stray animals, Purchase of Medicine for animals, Purchase 
of Medical Equipment, Establishment charge- cost of engaging Veterinary 
Doctors, SPCA inspectors, Veterinary Assistants, Compounders, 
Ambulance Drivers etc., Creation of infrastructure of generation of bio –gas, 
bio-fertilizers and electricity from bio-gas plant (maximum 25% of total 
Regular Grant Sanctioned), Purchase of Fodder, Fodder storage (Chara / 
Bhusa  Godown). The regular grant is being given on the basis of no. of 
animals sheltered / treated / rescued by the Animal Welfare Organization 
duly verified by the Animal Husbandry Department. 
 
 
(ii) Scheme for Shelter House for looking after the animals:  
The objective of this scheme is to establish and maintain shelter houses for 
distressed animals in the country. Primarily, Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs) and Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
(SPCAs) are given grants for construction of boundary walls, shelter, water 
tank, drains, in-house dispensary, medical equipment, contingencies etc. 
for a maximum grant of Rs.22.50 lakhs excluding 10% of contribution from 
AWOs.  
 
 
(iii) Scheme for Provision of Ambulance Services to Animals in Distress: 
Under this scheme the animal welfare organizations are funded for 
purchase of suitable vehicles for animal ambulance for rescue and also for 

14 
 
providing emergency services to animals in distress. Animal Welfare 
Organizations are assisted to the extent of 90% of the cost of a suitable 
vehicle, modification, equipment and fitting thereon. The maximum amount 
of grant-in-aid is limited to Rs.3.50 lakhs for purchase of vehicle and Rs.1.00 
lakhs for equipment and fitting thereon. 
 
 
(iv) Scheme for Relief to Animals during Natural Calamities and 
Unforeseen circumstances: 
Under this scheme, financial assistance is extended to AWOs, State 
Governments/UTs, local bodies as an immediate requirement for provision 
of fodder, the adequate shelter, medical attention etc., for providing relief to 
the animals affected during natural calamities in the form of flood, drought, 
earthquake etc., as well as for relief of animals rescued from illegal 
transportation, slaughter, circuses etc." 
 
 
 
1.19 Observing the need to prevent further increase in the number of stray cattle 
in the country in view of existing livestock population of 193.46 million Cattle and 
109.85 million Buffaloes, the Committee had recommended that some 
incentive/subsidy may be provided to farmers and farm laborers for taking care of 
cattle and buffaloes which are past their economic utility in addition to increasing 
fund allocation for promotion of Gaushalas across country with farmers having a 
choice to either avail services of Gaushala or avail government incentive/subsidy 
for taking care of their non-productive bovine animals. The Department in their 
Action Taken Replies has given the details of the Schemes for taking care of stray 
animals in general, which also seem like a secondary support, given miniscule 
budget allocation of Rs. 10 crores to Animal Welfare Board of India and casts doubt 
on the ability of the Board to implement the schemes for all stray animals with such 
small budget. The Department has not provided reply to the recommendation of 
the Committee for providing incentive/subsidy to farmers and farm labourers, 
specifically present owners of such bovine animals, for taking care of cattle and 
buffaloes which are past their economic utility. The Committee, therefore, in line 
with their earlier recommendation, recommend the Department to take up the 
matter, in consultation and coordination with the State Governments, for 

15 
 
increasing fund allocation for promotion of Gaushalas across country and devise 
some mechanism for providing some incentive/subsidy to farmers and farm 
laborers for taking care of cattle and buffaloes which are past their economic utility, 
thus, giving farmers a choice to either avail services of Gaushala or avail 
government incentive/subsidy for taking care of their non-productive bovine 
animals. 
 
__________ 
  

16 
 
 
CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Contribution of the Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sectors to the National 
economy vis-å-vis proportion of Budgetary Allocation  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note that the livestock sector grew at an impressive Compound 
Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 7.38 per cent at constant prices from 2014-15 to 2022- 
23. The contribution of livestock to the total GVA (at constant prices) in agriculture and 
allied sectors increased from 24.32 per cent in 2014-15 to 30.38 per cent in 2022- 23. In 
2022-23, the livestock sector contributed 4.66 per cent of the total GVA, significantly 
boosting the per capita availability of milk, eggs, and meat. The percentage share of the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying in the total central outlay, however, 
remained more or less stagnant at 0.08-0.09 % since 2020-21.  
 The trend of overall growth of the Allied Sector being higher in comparison to the 
Agriculture Sector over the last few years clearly shows the consistency and potential of 
the Allied Sector in not just augmenting farmers' income but also contributing towards the 
national economy. The Committee while expressing concern at this trend of stagnation of 
share of budget allocation towards Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector recommend 
the Department to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to increase the allocations 
towards the Department in line with increase in the Central Government budget thereby 
according due importance to the Animal Husbandry and Livestock Sector which it 
deserves given huge impact it has on low-income strata of society. The Committee further 
recommend that Livestock Sector be declared as Special Sector. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of actions taken by the Department in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT  
i. Department acknowledges the Committee’s observations regarding the growth 
and contribution of the Animal Husbandry and Dairying sectors to the national 
economy, as well as the concerns raised about the stagnation of budgetary 
allocation. The Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying identifies the critical 

17 
 
role of the livestock sector in enhancing farmers' incomes, ensuring nutritional 
security, and driving rural economic growth of low-income strata of society. 
ii. The department also acknowledges the Committee’s recommendation to 
recognize the Livestock Sector as a Special Sector and necessary deliberations at 
different levels within and outside the organization will be pursued with relevant 
stakeholders to explore the feasibility and benefits of such a designation. 
 
iii. Department is continuously monitoring and reviewing the progress of 
implementation of the programmes/schemes in the States/UTs through National 
Review Meetings, Regional Review Meetings, Field Visits, Video Conferences etc. 
and is pressing hard on the States/UTs to liquidate the pending Utilization 
Certificates and effective implementation of schemes for promotion and 
development of animal husbandry and dairying sector across the country with 
focus on production and trade. The Department has also been continuously taking 
up the matter with Ministry of Finance to enhance budget allocation and approvals. 
 
iv. As per Budget announcement in Interim Budget 2024-25, it was emphasized that 
a comprehensive programme for supporting dairy farmers will be formulated on 
the success of existing schemes such Rashtriya Gokul Mission, National Livestock 
Mission, and Infrastructure Development Funds for dairy processing and animal 
husbandry. Department has further proposed to revise the outlay of two main 
schemes of the sector i.e. NPDD and RGM augmenting the provision in current 
15th Finance Commission (FC) cycle. 
 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
 
 
Rashtriya Gokul Mission (RGM) 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Scheme on Rashtriya Gokul Mission (RGM) was started in December 2014 
with the objective of (i) enhancing productivity of bovines and increasing milk production 
in sustainable manner using advanced technologies; and, (ii) to promote indigenous cattle 
and buffaloes rearing and their conservation in a scientific manner. Its components have 
been revised and realigned from the year 2022-23 to focus on Breed Improvement, 
production and productivity of Indigenous Cattle Breeds. While appreciating the progress 
made by the Department under this Scheme regarding overall expenditure, the 
Committee observe an expenditure of Rs 2132.54 crore has been made under the 

18 
 
scheme upto 2023-24 out of total allocation of Rs 2400 crores. Thus, the balance of                  
Rs 268 crore is allocated during 2024-25 as RE stage allocation vis-a-vis BE stage 
allocation of Rs. 700 crores. The Department has effectively Rs. 268 crore to spend on 
the Rashtriya Gokul Mission scheme during the year 2024-25 out of Rs. 700 crore, it 
planned on spending for the said scheme. 
 The Department informed the Committee that it was yet to submit a proposal for 
increased financial allocation for the scheme to the Finance Ministry. As per operational 
Guidelines for Rashtriya Gokul Mission Scheme, it is envisaged to increase average 
productivity of bovines from 1924 Kg Per Animal Per Year (5.34 Kg/Day) to 3000 Kg Per 
Animal Per Year (8.0 Kg/Day) by 2025-26. The Average Rate of Productivity for the 
combined figure for Non-Descript/indigenous Cows and Buffaloes achieved in 2022-2023 
was 4.75 kg/Day. Being in penultimate year (2024-25) and not having sufficient funds to 
spend on the Scheme, when major target of increasing bovine productivity is yet to be 
achieved to the targeted level, casts doubts as to whether the Department will be able to 
achieve the desired targets. The Committee feels that in view of huge outlays under said 
schemes, the Department should have submitted proposal for increasing fund allocation 
to the scheme in total well in advance and not have waited for fully exhausting the 
balances in the middle of financial year. Moreover, when the Department has been 
allocated Rs. 700 crore for the scheme at BE stage of budget allocations that should 
amount to automatic enhancement in fund allocation to the scheme by subtracting the 
amount left under original allocation for entire duration of the scheme [Rs. 2400 + Rs. 432 
Crore (700- 268)]. In view of encouraging implementation of the Rashtriya Gokul Mission 
scheme and not to have scheme performance suffer on account of this oversight by the 
Department, the Committee recommend that the remaining amount of BE stage allocation 
(Rs. 700 crore) may be considered for allocation to the Department at the RE stage as 
well, in respect Of Rashtriya Gokul Mission scheme. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of actions taken by the Department in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT  
i. The Rashtriya Gokul Mission was restructured/ realigned in July 2021 under 
Development Programmes with the approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA) for implementation from 2021-22 to 2025-26. The allocated sum of 
Rs. 2400 crore has been nearly exhausted before the end of this period due to 
successful implementation of the scheme and high demand from the States. 

19 
 
ii. The interim Budget 2024-25 announced initiation of a comprehensive scheme for 
supporting dairy farmers, and also the targets for extending dairy production under 
White Revolution 2.0 necessitate enhanced activities for improving productivity.  
iii. Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) meeting held on 20.11.2024 
recommended that DAHD may continue implementing Rashtriya Gokul Mission 
with certain modifications with additional outlay of ₹1000 crores, that is total outlay 
of ₹3400 crores during 15th Finance Commission cycle, from 2021-22 to 2025-26. 
Accordingly, approval is sought from the Cabinet for additional funding of ₹1000 
crore for Rashtriya Gokul Mission for the years 2024-25 and 2025-26, within the 
15th Finance Commission cycle. 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
 
Procurement of Mobile Veterinary (MVUs) under Livestock Health and Disease 
Control Proqramme (LH&DC) 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Livestock Health and Disease Control Programme was formulated with the 
aim of providing financial assistance to States and UTS to effectively tackle issues of 
livestock health. The major activities supported are vaccination against Foot and Mouth 
Disease (FMD), Brucellosis, Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR) and Classical Swine 
Fever (CSF). With the aim to deliver last mile delivery of Veterinary Health Services 
through Mobile Veterinary Units, the Central Government provides 100% financial 
assistance to the States/UTs towards procurement and customization of MVUs to 
strengthen veterinary health services in far flung areas at farmer's doorstep. Mobile 
Veterinary Units (MVUs) under the scheme are provided at the rate of I MVU 
approximately for one lakh Livestock population. The Committee are glad to note that the 
Department operationalized 4016 MVUs against 4335 sanctioned MVUs across the 
country which amounts to 92.64% of the sanctioned units. It is however, not clear as to 
why states/UTs such as Punjab, Telangana, of Delhi, Odisha Lakshadweep, A&N Islands, 
have not procured any MVUs for the purpose despite sanctioning to these states/UTs. 
Similarly, UTS such as Daman, Diu & Dadra Nagar (DD&DNH) and Chandigarh have not 
been sanctioned any MVUs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for 
the same. 

20 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT  
 
i. The Department appreciates the Committee's recognition of the efforts under the 
Livestock Health and Disease Control Programme, which aims to provide financial 
assistance to States and UTs to address livestock health issues. This includes key 
activities such as vaccination against Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), Brucellosis, 
Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR), and Classical Swine Fever (CSF). A significant 
component of the program is the delivery of veterinary health services through 
Mobile Veterinary Units (MVUs), which are supported by the Central Government 
through 100% financial assistance for procurement and customization. This 
initiative aims to enhance veterinary services in remote areas, ensuring that 
veterinary care reaches farmers at their doorsteps. 
 
ii. It may be noted that, according to the approval from the Department of Expenditure 
(DoE), the maximum number of Mobile Veterinary Units (MVUs) is capped at 4,340 
units. The Union Territories of Daman & Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and 
Chandigarh have not submitted proposals for the requirement of Mobile Veterinary 
Units (MVUs). The Government of NCT of Delhi has been sanctioned three (03) 
MVUs, which have already been procured; however, these are yet to be 
operationalized. In the case of the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir, the 
Central Government is bearing the recurrent expenditure for 44 MVUs procured by 
the Union Territory. The Union Territory/States of Lakshadweep, Odisha, Punjab, 
and Telangana have returned the funds released after sanction due to respective 
State matter. The Andaman & Nicobar Islands has received the allocated funds in 
the financial year 2024-25 for the procurement of five (05) MVUs. Total number of 
States and UTs supported under the ESVHD-MVU, funds released is attached as 
Annexure-III. 
 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
 
  

21 
 
 
Non Fulfillment of Vaccination Tarqets Under Livestock Health and Disease Control 
Proqramme (LH&DC) 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
 The data on vaccination shows that the Department is falling short of vaccination 
targets (Para 2.40). The Department stated the reasons ranging from vaccination batches 
failing quality control testing, empanelment delays of vaccine manufacturers, population 
livestock already declined due to disease outbreaks, etc. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken against the suppliers whose supplies have failed in quality 
control testing. Further, the Committee also recommend that realistic targets may be fixed 
for the purpose after taking into consideration all the relevant factor. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of actions taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT  
 
i. Vaccination against Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), Brucellosis, Peste des Petits 
Ruminants (PPR) and Classical Swine Fever (CSF) is covered under 100% 
central assistance under Livestock Health and Disease Control Programme 
(LHDCP) for all States and Union Territories.  
 
ii. As gathered from States/UTs, cumulative vaccination till date (February 2025), 
109.13 crore, 4.57 crore, 22.00 crore, 0.69 crore vaccine has been done against 
FMD, Brucellosis, PPR and CSF respectively. The last FMD-Round IV vaccination 
completed has covered more than 96% vaccination coverage (24.84 crore).  
Further, FMD Rounds V and VI are ongoing in various States with nearly 16.54 
Crores and 2.42 Crores vaccinations done respectively.  
 
iii. As per the recommendation of fixing realistic targets, it may be stated that the 
benchmark initially for targets was 19th Livestock Census. However, after few 
rounds of vaccination, the targets are reviewed based on the vaccinations done 
on previous rounds and as per the estimates given by the States. 
 
iv. The coverage percentage of vaccination program has increased, and the gaps 
have been narrowed down by ensuring timely supply of quality tested vaccines 
for FMD, Brucellosis, PPR and CSF along with awareness generation among 
stakeholders. 

22 
 
v. Further, the vaccine manufacturers whose vaccines failed to comply with the 
specifications, were asked to recall the unused vaccines and replace the entire 
vaccine doses. Penalty was also imposed for short supply on those 
manufacturers/ suppliers who failed to replace the requisite doses as per tender 
terms and conditions. 
 
vi. Financial support is provided to Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)- 
National Institute of Foot and Mouth Disease (NIFMD)-Bhubaneswar, ICAR- 
Indian Veterinary Research Institutes (IVRI)-Bareilly, ICAR-IVRI-Bengaluru, 
ICAR- National Institute of Veterinary Epidemiology and Disease Informatics 
(NIVEDI)-Bengaluru and Chaudhary Charan Singh National Institute of Animal 
Health-Baghpat for FMD related activities. 
 
vii. Data related to registration of livestock using ear-tags and vaccination is uploaded 
on Bharat Pashudhan portal. Total vaccination performance reducing the gap 
under the programme are at Annexure-I. 
 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
Massive Breed Development Proqramme 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 Committee noted that genetic upgradation programme being implemented by the 
Department are not as per the growing demand of livestock and livestock products in the 
country. There is urgent need to increase pace of genetic upgradation of livestock 
population in the country. Therefore, Committee recommend that Massive Breed 
Development programme may be initiated by the Government across the country with 
higher allocation, whereby top 5% elite female progeny be selected for breeding to create 
bulls and cows for the future and genetic engineering may be done in such a way that it 
lead to birth of female calves with 100% accuracy. The Department shall implement the 
scheme on mission mode in a time bound manner. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 The recommendation of the Committee is noted by the Department. In this regard, 
the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying has established sex sorted semen 
production facilities and implementing Accelerated Breed Improvement Programme using 

23 
 
sex sorted semen with the aim to produce female calves up to 90% accuracy thereby 
enhancing milch cattle population and breed improvement. Government has launched 
indigenously developed sex sorted semen technology to deliver sex sorted semen at 
reasonable rates to farmers. Further, to propagate elite animals of indigenous breeds, 
Department has established 22 IVF laboratories. The IVF technology has important role 
in genetic upgradation of bovine population in single generation and to deliver technology 
at reasonable rates to farmers Government has launched IVF media. Furthermore, to 
select High Genetic Merit (HGM) animals and to accelerate genetic improvement of cattle 
and buffaloes, the Department has developed unified genomic chips-Gau Chip for 
indigenous cattle and Mahish Chip for buffaloes-specifically designed for initiating 
genomic selection of high genetic merit animals of indigenous breeds in the country. 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
 
Implementation of National Fodder Mission 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
 Committee notes that integrated approach is not adopted by the Department to 
enhance availability of quality feed and fodder in the country. Department should focus 
towards attaining the self-sufficiency in feed and fodder availability for 53.5 crore livestock 
population in the country. Fodder is having a very important contribution to the productivity 
in the Livestock sector for which efforts are required to be made by the Department to 
increase land coverage for fodder cultivation, improving forest and pasturelands, 
development of high nutritive new fodder varieties and availability of good quality certified 
seeds. With increased availability of green fodder cost incurred by farmers on milk 
production will be decreased substantially and dependence of farmers on cattle feed will 
also be reduced. This will increase profit margins of dairy farmers by about 25%. Further 
the use of anti-biotic may also be regulated under it as that affects milk production and 
quality. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government may initiate 
comprehensive National Fodder Mission with a definite target of ensuring self-sufficiency 
in availability of feed and fodder in the country and also include under it regulations for 
use of anti-biotics in the Cattle industry making antibiotic use strictly based on prescription 
by registered Veterinarian. The Committee recommends that sufficient budget should be 
made available by the Government for initiating comprehensive scheme National Fodder 
Mission in the country. 

24 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT  
 
i. Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying is implementing Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) National Livestock Mission (NLM) with a Sub Mission 
on Feed and Fodder Development since 2014-15. The said scheme was realign in 
the year 2021-22 and is further modified in the year 2024 to increase land coverage 
for fodder cultivation, improving forest and pasturelands, development of high 
nutritive new fodder varieties and availability of good quality certified seeds. 
ii. The following components are being implemented by the Government: 
a. Assistance for quality fodder seed production. 
b. Entrepreneurial activities in feed and fodder for Infrastructure development 
related to Hay/Silage/Total Mixed Ration(TMR)/ Fodder Block and storage 
of fodder 
c. Fodder Production from Non Forest Wasteland/rangeland/Non arable 
lands. 
d. Fodder Production from Forest Lands. 
e. Establishment of seed processing and grading infrastructure under 
Entrepreneurial activities. 
iii. There is no separate budgetary allocation for the Sub Mission. The funds released 
under the component Assistance for Quality Fodder Production since 2021-22 is 
as under:- 
Year  Funds released (Rs in crores)  
2021-22 100.44 
2022-23 159.99 
2023-24 156.07 
2024-25 (as on 25.2.2025) 220.31 
 
iv. As on date approx 1.03 Lakh tons quality fodder seeds has been produced under 
component Assistance for Quality Fodder Seeds Production of NLM since 2021-
22. This would cover approx.20.63 lakh hectare with expected production of 
1134.65 lakh Mt of quality nutritious green fodder in the country. 
v. In addition, under the Entrepreneurship Development Programme of NLM an 
amount of Rs.10.84 cr has been released for 116 no of Silage and Total Mixed 
Ration (TMR) plants with expected production of 4.34lakh MTPA of Silage. 

25 
 
vi. As per the provisions under "THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940 (23 of 
1940)” and Rules ,1945 made thereunder, the import, manufacture, distribution 
and sale of drugs and cosmetics including antibiotics are regulated by Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO), Directorate General of Health 
Services, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. Further, to 
address the issues related to the antimicrobial resistance (AMR), the Department 
of Animal Husbandry and Dairying (DAHD) issued advisory to all States/UTs for 
judicial use of antibiotics and use of alternative medicine such as Ayurveda, 
Homeopathic formulation. 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
Entrepreneurship Development in all areas of Animal Husbandry Sector  
 
Recommendations No.12  
 
Committee note that Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying is 
implementing entrepreneurship development schemes but still all the livestock species 
and all sectors of Animal Husbandry are not covered under these schemes. Promoting 
Entrepreneurship will have a multiplier effect to create wealth ensuring quality services at 
doorstep of farmers. Therefore, the Committee recommend that Government should 
immediately initiate massive entrepreneurship development programme covering all 
sectors of animal husbandry including dairy, small ruminants, poultry, piggery, delivery of 
services etc. The Government should make available sufficient budget for initiation of 
massive entrepreneurship development programme. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
i. The Department acknowledges the Committee's observation regarding the 
coverage of entrepreneurship development schemes. Department is already 
implementing several entrepreneurship development activities through various 
schemes. 
ii. The Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairy, Government of India is 
implementing the National Livestock Mission Scheme since 2021, under which 
entrepreneurship components for establishment of Rural Poultry, sheep, goat, pig 
farms and feed and fodder are implemented. Under the entrepreneurship 
components, the eligible entities are individuals, Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs), Self-Help Groups (SHGs), Joint Liability Groups(JLGs), Farmer 
Cooperative Organizations (FCOs) and Section 8 companies are provided 50% 
subsidy for establishment of poultry, sheep, goat, pig and feed and fodder 
entrepreneurship. 

26 
 
iii. Recognizing the need to expand coverage, in February 2024, additional species 
of significant economic and cultural importance-camel, horse, and donkey-were 
included under the NLM EDP. Furthermore, seed grading infrastructure activity 
was introduced to enhance fodder availability, ensuring better nutritional support 
for livestock. The following activities of different unit size are eligible under NLM 
Entrepreneurship Scheme:  
a. Establishment of Parent Farm, Hatchery, brooder cum mother unit of Rural 
poultry birds with minimum 1000 parent layers for production of Hatching 
Eggs and Chicks.  
Poultry Unit Size (Female + Male) Max amount of capital subsidy 
1000 + 100  25 lakhs 
 
b. Establishment of sheep and goat breeding farm with minimum 100 female 
and 05 male and in its multiple as follows:- 
Goat/ Sheep Unit Size (Female + 
Male) 
Max amount of capital subsidy 
100 +5 10 lakhs 
200+10 20 lakhs 
300+15 30 lakhs 
400+20 40 lakhs 
500+25 50 lakhs 
 
c. Establishment of Pig breeding farm with minimum 50 sow and 05 boar and 
100 females and 10 males. The maximum subsidy ceiling for different 
components varies from Rs. 15.00 lakh to Rs. 30.00 lakh. 
 
Pig Unit Size (Female + Male) Max amount of capital subsidy 
50 Sows + 5 Boars 15 lakhs 
100 Sows + 10 Boars 30 lakhs 
 
d. Establishment of fodder value addition units such as preparation of 
Hay/Silage/Total Mixed Ration (TMR)/ Fodder Block and seed grading 
infrastructure. The maximum subsidy ceiling is Rs. 50.00 lakh. 
 
e. Establishment of Camel, Horse and Donkey breeding farm 

27 
 
Horse Unit Size (Female + Male) Max amount of capital subsidy 
10 mare/broodmare + 2 stallion 50 lakhs 
 
Donkey Unit Size (Female + Male) Max amount of capital subsidy 
50 female+ 5 Male 50 lakhs 
 
Camel Unit Size (Female + Male) Max amount of capital subsidy 
10 female + 1 male 
(for pastorals) 
3 lakhs 
10 female + 1 male 5 lakhs 
50 female + 5 male 25 lakhs 
100 female + 10 male 50 lakhs 
 
iv. To further broaden the entrepreneurial ecosystem, the Government continues to 
expand the scope of existing schemes, ensure adequate budget allocations based 
on demand, and enhance outreach mechanisms. To simplify the application 
process and ensure seamless submission, tracking, and approval of proposals, 
the Udyamimitra Portal has been developed. This digital platform enhances 
accessibility, reduces paperwork, and provides real-time status updates, making 
the process more efficient and applicant-friendly. Additionally, the Department of 
Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD) has developed a comprehensive dashboard 
to ensure transparency, efficiency, and real-time monitoring of projects under the 
scheme. This dashboard provides stakeholders with instant updates on approvals, 
fund disbursement, and project implementation, enabling data-driven decision-
making and timely interventions. 
v. The DAHD is also providing ₹105 lakh to each States for setting up of Help Desk, 
Awareness creation for the Entrepreneurship Programme. Further, the 
Department is using various social media platforms for promoting 
entrepreneurship programme for which the DAHD has engaged dedicated social 
media team. Apart from the efforts made, the Department has entered into an MoU 
with Transform Rural India Foundation (TRIF) who are participating in the NRLM 
programme for promotion of EDP programme along with the other schemes of the 
Department. The Pashu sakis, MAITREE and AHELP are engaged in the training 
programme. Also, the DAHD has issued a Joint Declaration with the Ministry of 
Rural Development for promotion of various schemes of the Department. 

28 
 
vi. Under the Rashtriya Gokul Mission (RGM), the Department has developed an 
entrepreneurship model for the establishment of Breed Multiplication Farms 
(BMF). This initiative is designed to address the general shortage of high genetic 
merit (HGM) heifers by providing a capital subsidy to interested entrepreneurs for 
the construction of cattle sheds, procurement of elite bull mothers, and necessary 
equipment.  
vii. Under the Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund (AHIDF), it has 
been approved for incentivizing investments by individual entrepreneurs, private 
companies, MSME, Farmers Producers Organizations (FPOs) and Section 8 
companies to establish (a) the dairy processing and value addition infrastructure, 
(b) meat processing and value addition infrastructure, (c) Animal Feed Plant, (d) 
Breed Improvement technology and Breed Multiplication Farm (e) Animal Waste 
to Wealth Management (Agri Waste Management) and (f) Setting up of Veterinary 
Vaccine and Drugs Manufacturing facilities. 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
 
Livestock Insurance Scheme 
 
Recommendations No.13  
 
Committee note that Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying is covering 
livestock insurance under Centrally Sponsored Scheme National Livestock Mission due 
to insufficient budget provision under the scheme only 1% of the livestock population is 
under the coverage of livestock insurance. Looking towards the risk of more than 10 crore 
engaged in Animal Husbandry activities the committee recommends that Government 
should immediately initiate massive livestock insurance scheme to bring 53.5 crore 
livestock population under the ambit of this scheme. The recommends that higher 
allocation may be made available by the Government for implementation of livestock 
insurance scheme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT  
i. For promotion of the livestock sector, it is important that along with providing more 
effective measures for disease control and improvement of genetic quality of 
animals, a mechanism of assured protection to the farmers and cattle owners is 
required against the eventual losses of such animals.  
ii. For this Department is implementing an activity called Livestock Insurance under 
National Livestock Mission (NLM) which is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme in all 
the districts of the country with an objective to manage and mitigate risk and 

29 
 
uncertainties by providing protection mechanism to the farmers & cattle owners 
against any eventual loss of their animals due to death. 
iii. DAHD is implementing the activity centrally and at the State level it is being 
implemented through the State/UTs Animal Husbandry Departments. It includes 
insurance of indigenous / crossbred milch animals, pack animals (Horses, Donkey, 
Mules, Camels, Ponies and male animals of Cattle/Buffalo) and other livestock 
(Goat, Sheep, Pigs, Rabbit, Yak and Mithun) are covered under the purview of the 
Livestock Insurance. Benefit of subsidy is restricted to 10 cattle units per 
household all animals except for pig and rabbit, where the benefit will be remained 
restricted for 5 cattle units (1 cattle unit=10 small animals). In case of sheep, goat, 
pig and rabbit, the benefit of subsidy is restricted based on “Cattle Unit‟ and one 
cattle unit is equal to 10 animals i.e. for sheep, goat, pig and rabbit. For this 
purpose, “household” will be defined on the same lines as adopted under Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.  
iv. Under NLM, no. of cattle insured has increased from 207708 in 2023-24 to 346786 
in 2024-25. At the Regional review meeting held for 2025-26, it has been insisted 
that states increase allocation under livestock insurance. The beneficiary share of 
all categories (Gen/SC/ST) has been brought down to 15% from earlier share of 
20-50% depending upon the caste and region of settlement. The rest 85% will be 
shared by the Central and State share in the ratio 60:40 for states other than 
Himalayan and North-eastern region and 90:10 for the Himalayan and North-
Eastern region. 
v. Premium Rates are as under: 
 One-year: 4.5% (normal areas), 5.5% (NER/Himalayan States). 
 Two-year: 8% (normal areas), 9% (NER/Himalayan States). 
 Three-year: 11% (normal areas), 11.5% (NER/Himalayan States). 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 

30 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
–NIL– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

31 
 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Sectoral Analysis of Budget allocations 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
 The Committee observe that there has been drastic reductions in the budget allocated 
to Small Livestock Institutes, Breed Improvement Institutes and Veterinary Council of India to 
the extent of 11%, 37% and 54% , respectively, during the year 2024-25 vis-a- vis those of 
2023-24. It may be seen that Small Livestock Institutes viz. Central Poultry Development 
Organizations, Central Sheep Breeding Farm, Regional Fodder Stations etc. play a pivotal role 
in the implementation of the policies of the Government with respect to poultry. Similarly, Breed 
Improvement Institutes such as Central Cattle Breeding Farms, Central Frozen Semen 
Production and Training Institute and Central Herd Registration Units produce genetically 
superior bull calves, quality frozen semen from High Genetic Merit Bulls (HGM) and for 
identification and location of superior germplasm of indigenous breeds of cattle and buffaloes, 
so as to meet the requirement of HGM bulls and frozen semen doses in the country. These 
organizations are also playing important role in training of manpower in frozen semen 
technology and training of farmers and entrepreneurs in farm management. Veterinary Council 
of India has the mandate of regulating veterinary practices and maintaining uniform standards 
of veterinary education through Minimum Standard of Veterinary Education Regulations in all 
veterinary institutes across the country. The Committee note that there is shortage of 
specialized and trained manpower in Veterinary Services in the country and number of 
recognized Veterinary Colleges in the country has increased to just 58 from 26 during 1984. 
Reduction in Budgets of such important institutes is bound to hamper their performance in their 
related fields. Overall the Department has been allocated an 18% increase in Budgetary 
Allocation at BE 2024-25 as compared to RE 2023-24. The Committee feels that such drastic 
reduction in budget allocations to various sectors of Animal Husbandry and Dairying should be 
avoided as all sectors are equally important growth and development of Livestock sector. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the Department should uniformly distribute increase in 

32 
 
budget allocations to various sectors under it and avoid drastic reductions in budget of any 
Sector as said reductions hamper their on- going activities and schemes implementation. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
i. The Department acknowledges the Committee's observation regarding the reductions 
in the budget allocations for Small Livestock Institutes, Breed Improvement Institutes, 
and the Veterinary Council of India for the year 2024-25, in comparison to the allocations 
made in 2023-24. 
 
ii. Regarding the budget allocation to the Breed Improvement Institutes, it is noted that for 
FY 2023-24, an initial budget estimate of Rs. 60 Cr. was allocated. Of this, Rs. 9.08 Cr. 
was earmarked for the Central Cattle Breeding Farm (CCBF) and the Central Frozen 
Semen Production & Training Institute (CFSP&TI) located at Hesserghata, which are 
now part of the Centre of Excellence for Animal Husbandry (CEAH) thereby leaving Rs. 
52.92 Cr. for the six CCBFs and four CHRS. During FY 2023-24, final expenditure 
incurred was Rs.37.15 Cr. against final allotment of Rs.37.99 Cr. During the FY 2024-
25, there is allotment of B.E. of Rs. 37.72 Cr. and RE is fixed at Rs 38.00 Cr. which is 
slightly more than last year's final expenditure. Therefore, taking into account lot of 
retirement of staff over the years and separate budget allotment to CEAH and less 
expenditure on the three farms, there is no reduction in the allotment of budget to the 
Breed Improvement Institutes and works of the BII’s have not hampered. In fact, more 
funds are made available for taking up infrastructural works and also for induction of 
new germplasm. Further, for the FY 2025-26, an amount of Rs 50 Cr.  has already been 
allocated at BE stage for FY 2025-26. 
 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.7 of Chapter I of this Report. 
  

33 
 
Underutilization and Surrendering of Re-appropriated Funds 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
 The Committee observe that huge amount of funds have been surrendered by the 
Department during the Financial Years 2022-23 and 2023-24 to the tune of Rs. 1580 crores 
and 1307 crores, respectively. The percentage utilization of funds with respect to RE for the 
years 2022-23 and 2023-24 stood at 77.3% and 83.25%, respectively resulting in surrendering 
of 22.70% and 16.75% of the RE allocations. The Committee are concerned to note that while 
on one hand the Department has been continuously requesting for increase in budgetary 
allocations, on the other it has been surrendering huge amount of funds to the Government 
continuously for the last two years.  
 
 The Committee observe that funds have been re-appropriated out of Livestock Health 
and Disease Control Programme to other schemes viz Rashtriya Gokul Mission (RGM), 
Infrastructure Development Fund (IDF), Dairy Development and National Livestock Mission 
(NLM). Although the Department has re-appropriated funds to the said schemes at RE stage, 
these could not be utilised fully during 2023-24. The reason for re-appropriation is given as 
reduction in RE stage allocation in the budget. But the schemes like Infrastructure 
Development Fund and National Livestock Mission have no reduction in RE stage allocations 
vis-å-vis BE stage allocations and schemes like Rashtriya Gokul Mission and Dairy 
Development have in fact increased allocation at RE stage vis-å-vis BE stage allocations 
during 2023-24. The Committee are inquisitive as to the reason for the positive re-appropriation 
to the said schemes when schemes themselves have RE stage allocations which are either 
same as BE or higher than BE allocations under their budget head. In view of this, the 
Committee requires the Department to apprise the Committee of the reasons for such re-
appropriations and recommend that the Department make concerted efforts for proper 
utilization of allocated funds in future. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT  
 
i. The Department acknowledges the Committee's concern regarding the significant 
amount of funds surrendered during the Financial Years 2022-23 and 2023-24. The 
utilization of funds for the years 2022-23 and 2023-24 stood at 77.3% and 83.25%, 
respectively. The Department recognizes the importance of efficiently utilizing allocated 

34 
 
funds and agrees with the Committee's concern regarding the surrender of such large 
sums. 
 
ii. With reference to the surrender of funds and re-appropriation during these financial 
years, the Department would like to submit that the implementation of the new Fund 
Flow Mechanism (SNA/CNA) and delayed compliance by States/UTs affected the timely 
release of funds in installments, leading to lower utilization. Additionally, the prolonged 
procurement process by the States resulted in a reduced demand for recurring 
expenses, affecting overall fund utilization. These factors contributed to the surrender 
of funds despite the Department’s efforts to ensure optimal utilization. 
 
iii. Further, a new budget head ‘Subsidies,’ was introduced in both the Infrastructure 
Development Fund (IDF) and the National Livestock Mission (NLM) as per the 
requirements of the Programme Division, for which a token supplementary grant was 
obtained. To facilitate the release of funds under this newly created head, re-
appropriation was carried out using the available savings within the grant. 
 
iv. Under the Rashtriya Gokul Mission (RGM) scheme, the need for a new object head 
called ‘Subsidies’ was identified, which resulted in higher allocations at the RE 2023-24 
stage compared to the BE 2023-24. This new object head was introduced to support 
entrepreneurial activities under the scheme. Similarly, the same object head was 
created under the Dairy Development scheme to facilitate activities related to the Dairy 
through Cooperatives component of the scheme. 
  
v. The Department is taking necessary steps to improve fund utilization by streamlining 
the fund flow mechanism as per DoE guidelines, strengthening coordination with 
States/UTs, and enhancing the planning and execution of schemes to ensure efficient 
utilization of allocated funds in the future. 
 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.10 of Chapter I of this Report 
 

35 
 
Underutilization of allocated funds under Livestock Health and Disease Control 
Proqramme (LH&DC) 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Committee are dissatisfied to note that the actual expenditure under the LH&DC 
Scheme is drastically falling short of the amount allocated to it even at RE stage year after 
year with department utilizing only 57% funds in the year 2022-23 and 69% of funds during the 
year 2023-24. The Committee feel that funds are sought after taking into consideration all the 
factors affecting their utilization. Surrender of funds, year after year, will have negative impact 
on achievement of the targets fixed. It is, therefore, reiterate that all relevant factors be taken 
into consideration to avoid surrendering of the funds. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of actions taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Year NADCP - Reasons for 
Shortfall in 
expenditure over 
scheme allocation 
LHDC – Reasons for 
Shortfall in 
expenditure 
Action Taken 
2022-23 Revised procedure of 
release the fund under 
CNA model. 
States were having 
huge unspent balance 
including funds for MVU 
procurement from 
previous releases 
under NADCP & 
ESVHD-MVU.  
Non availability of 
sufficient quantity of 
quality FMD & PPR 
vaccine up to 
November 2023 & 
August, 2023 
respectively.  
Due to emergence and 
spread of exotic 
diseases like LSD & 
Introduction of New 
Fund Flow Mechanism 
(SNA/CNA) and 
delayed compliances 
by the States/UTs 
hampered release of 
funds in instalments. 
Substantial time was 
taken by the states in 
procurement process, 
thus recurring 
expenses were not 
demanded. 
 
The States were sensitized to follow 
and implement the SNA Model for the 
centrally sponsored components of 
the Livestock Health and Disease 
Control Programme (LH&DCP) 
during the Review Meetings, and the 
States have complied with this 
guidance. Furthermore, as per the 
latest instructions from the 
Department of Expenditure (MoF) for 
the financial year 2024-25, all 
identified States are now adhering to 
the SNA SPARSH Model. 
 

36 
 
Year NADCP - Reasons for 
Shortfall in 
expenditure over 
scheme allocation 
LHDC – Reasons for 
Shortfall in 
expenditure 
Action Taken 
ASF, priority was given 
for vaccination & 
control measures 
against these diseases.  
2023-24 Unspent balances of 
Rs.700 Cr. (Yr. 2022-
23) were utilized in the 
FY 2023-24. 
Supply of quality 
vaccine increased from 
20.24 Cr. in 2022-23 to 
36.05 Cr. in 2023-24.  
Application of vaccine 
increased from 16.18 
Cr. in 2022-23 to 30.64 
Cr. in 2023-24.  
Due to issues in the 
4123 code and unspent 
balances lying with the 
states limited funds 
were released to 
MVUs. 
All MVUs were not 
operational. 
 
The issue of separate code for 
LH&DCP for centrally sponsored 
components was resolved in 
coordination with Ministry of Finance. 
The States were reviewed time to 
time for procurement and 
operationalization of sanctioned 
4340 nos. of MVU. Accordingly, as on 
date 4016 MVUs are operational. 
 
i. To address the issue of underutilization of funds under the Livestock Health and 
Disease Control Scheme, the Department has taken the following steps: 
e. Ensuring accurate budget allocations based on realistic needs assessments. 
f. Streamlining the process for quicker disbursal to prevent delays. 
g. Enhancing monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to track fund usage. 
h. Training staff and stakeholders to manage and utilize funds effectively. 
ii. Based on the above, the RE 2024-25 and BE 2025-26 are both fixed at Rs. 1980 crore. 
On 5th March 2025 Cabinet has approved the Revision of Livestock Health and Disease 
Control Programme (LHDCP) for total outlay of the scheme at Rs.3,880 crore for two 
years i.e. 2024-25 and 2025-26. 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.13 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
Addressing the Menace of Stray Bovine Animals 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts of Department to control the birth of male bovine 
off springs using sex sorted semen techniques whereby female calves are born with 90% 
accuracy rate. However, the Committee feels that there is also need to prevent further growth 
of stray cattle from already existing livestock population of 193.46 Million Cattle and 109.85 
Million Buffaloes. Therefore, the Committee recommend that some incentive/subsidy may be 
provided to farmers and farm laborers for taking care of cattle and buffaloes which are past 
their economic utility in addition to increasing fund allocation for promotion of Gaushalas across 
country with farmers having a choice to either avail services of Gaushala or avail government 
incentive/subsidy for taking care of their non-productive bovine animals." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 “Department through the Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) is engaging in providing 
fund to the recognized animal welfare organizations / Gaushalas who are sheltering the 
stray/injured /sick animals in their shelter. The AWBI is implementing the following financial 
assistance schemes: 
 
(i) Regular Grant: Under the regular grant, the AWBI gives financial assistance to the 
recognized Animal Welfare Organisations as regular grants towards 
Maintenance/Repairs of Rescue Home for animals, Construction of Water 
Troughs/Facilities, Rescue operation during natural calamities including maintenance 
of stray animals, Purchase of Medicine for animals, Purchase of Medical Equipment, 
Establishment charge- cost of engaging Veterinary Doctors, SPCA inspectors, 
Veterinary Assistants, Compounders, Ambulance Drivers etc., Creation of infrastructure 
of generation of bio –gas, bio-fertilizers and electricity from bio-gas plant (maximum 
25% of total Regular Grant Sanctioned), Purchase of Fodder, Fodder storage (Chara / 
Bhusa Godown). The regular grant is being given on the basis of no. of animals 

38 
 
sheltered / treated / rescued by the Animal Welfare Organization duly verified by the 
Animal Husbandry Department. 
 
(ii) Scheme for Shelter House for looking after the animals: The objective of this 
scheme is to establish and maintain shelter houses for distressed animals in the 
country. Primarily, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and Society for 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCAs) are given grants for construction of boundary 
walls, shelter, water tank, drains, in-house dispensary, medical equipment, 
contingencies etc for a maximum grant of Rs.22.50 lakhs excluding 10% of contribution 
from AWOs.  
 
(iii) Scheme for Provision of Ambulance Services to Animals in Distress: Under this 
scheme the animal welfare organizations are funded for purchase of suitable vehicles 
for animal ambulance for rescue and also for providing emergency services to animals 
in distress. Animal Welfare Organizations are assisted to the extent of 90% of the cost 
of a suitable vehicle, modification, equipment and fitting thereon. The maximum amount 
of grant-in-aid is limited to Rs.3.50 lakhs for purchase of vehicle and Rs.1.00 lakhs for 
equipment and fitting thereon. 
 
(iv) Scheme for Relief to Animals during Natural Calamities and Unforeseen 
circumstances:  Under this scheme, financial assistance is extended to AWOs, State 
Governments/UTs, local bodies as an immediate requirement for provision of fodder, 
the adequate shelter, medical attention etc., for providing relief to the animals affected 
during natural calamities in the form of flood, drought, earthquake etc., as well as for 
relief of animals rescued from illegal transportation, slaughter, circuses etc." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.19 of Chapter I of this Report. 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER - V 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
Effective monitoring of implementation of the schemes  
Recommendation No. 3 
 The Committee note that there exist multi layered monitoring mechanism to monitor 
implementation of various Programmes, Schemes and Projects such three stage monitoring 
Committees at the State Level and two committees at the Central Level etc. Despite such 
elaborate monitoring mechanisms at Central, State and Implementation level, the Committee 
observe that funds allocated even at RE stage continue to remain unutilised and surrendered. 
While appreciating the Department for engaging third party audit system in form of National 
Level Monitors comprising of retired Government/ Govt. undertaking officers at the level of 
Deputy Secretary and above for carrying out field visits and submitting reports, the Committee 
hope that such third-party audit system will impart, improve transparency and accountability 
and effectiveness in implementation of the schemes, projects and programmes. The 
Committee hope that such an impartial Third-Party Audit will go a long way in realizing the 
intended outcomes in quality and quantitative terms. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the qualitative difference that such a third-party audit brought in the effective 
implementation of the projects, schemes, etc. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
i. The Department appreciates the Committee’s recognition of the multi-layered 
monitoring mechanisms in place to oversee the implementation of various programs, 
schemes, and projects, including the three-stage monitoring committees at the State 
level and the two committees at the Central level. These mechanisms are designed to 
ensure effective implementation, timely monitoring, and transparent tracking of 
allocated funds. However, the Department acknowledges the concern raised by the 
Committee regarding the unutilized and surrendered funds even at the Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage. 
 

40 
 
ii. Evaluation of the programme at the end of 2023-24 and at the end of five year period 
(2026-27) would be carried out by an independent third-party agency. The programme 
shall also be subject to audit as per extant Government of India procedures. 
Additionally, Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD) engaged National 
Level Monitors (NLM) to empower the effectiveness of independent monitoring of key 
departmental programs. 
 
iii. The Department recognizes that despite the establishment of a comprehensive 
monitoring and evaluation framework, the need for independent, on-ground oversight 
became evident, which led to the introduction of the National Level Monitors (NLM). The 
National Level Monitors (NLMs), with their in-depth understanding of the Department’s 
programs and objectives, play a crucial role in maintaining transparency, accountability, 
and efficiency. The Department has established a comprehensive monitoring and 
evaluation framework, which includes regular progress reports, a dedicated 
management information system, and periodic review meetings. Despite these 
measures, the need for independent, on-ground oversight became evident, prompting 
the introduction of the National Level Monitor scheme. This initiative ensures impartial, 
transparent, and objective assessments of program performance at the state level.  
 
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
Physical performance of National Proqramme on Dairy Development (NPDD) 
Recommendation No. 9 
 The data on cumulative achievement vis- a-vis targets fixed the under Component 'A' 
"National Programme for Dairy Development (NPDD)', commenced in Feb-2014, shows that 
the achievements fell far short of the targets given. A target for setting up of 6,766 Bulk Milk 
Coolers (BMC) with a capacity of 16712.5 Kilo Litres (KL) was given. Against these targets, 
5,104 BMCs with 11,214 KL capacity only were set up, representing a shortfall of 24. 57% and 
39.90% in number of units of BMCs and their capacity, respectively. Similarly, there is a 
shortfall of 21.58% in achieving the fixed for Automatic Milk Collection units (AMCU) & Data 
Processor & Milk Collection Units (DPMCU). In the case of provision of Electronic Milk 
Adulteration Testing Machine also the shortfall is more, as against a target of 12,505 machines 
'units, achievement is only 6,266 i.e. a shorffall of 50%of the target. The Committee while 

41 
 
appreciating the progress made in certain categories, express concern at the huge shortfalls 
seen in providing and setting up of Automatic Milk Collection units (AMCU) and Data Processor 
& Milk Collection Units (DPMCU) and also Bulk Milk Coolers (BMCs) and recommend that 
appropriate steps be taken to fulfill the targets at the earliest. The Committee further 
recommend that under component 'B' of NPDD, some provision may be made for providing 
interest free loans to landless, small and marginal farmers for owning 01 to 04 cows/buffaloes, 
as feasible. The Committee would like to be apprised of actions taken by the Department in 
this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
i. Under National programme on Dairy Development (NPDD) scheme, projects are 
approved for implementation in 2-3 years and accordingly financial and physical targets 
are fixed.  The physical targets mentioned in the note are the EOP (end of project) target 
and will be achieved by the end of financial year 2025-26 i.e. by 31.03.2026 (NPDD 
scheme implementation period).   
 
ii. The latest figure of achievements under the 3-category mentioned above is as follows: 
S. 
No. 
Parameter Target (EOP) 
(Till 
31.03.2026) 
Achievement 
(Till 
31.12.2024) 
% 
Achievement 
1. Bulk Milk 
Coolers 
No. of BMC 7039  5382 76.46 
Capacity of BMC 17014.50  13208.44 77.63 
2. Automatic Milk Collection units 48925  38398 78.48 
3. Electronic Milk Adulteration Testing 
Machine 4922 3789 76.98 
 
 It may be seen from the above table that more than 75% of the approved EOP targets 
have been achieved by the States on all the parameters. The State-wise updated status is 
attached at Annexure-II. 
iii. Both at the National level and Regional level review meeting have been conducted 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (AHD) to ensure speedy implementation of the 
projects. About 22 State Level Technical Management Committee meetings under the 
chairmanship of Additional Chief Secretary/Pr Secretary of the State Animal Husbandry 

42 
 
Department have been conducted to review the project implementation under the 
scheme.  
iv. Department will continue monitoring the progress of the scheme and ensure achieving 
targets fixed before the end of the scheme implementation period.  
v. Component 'B' of NPDD: The activities covered under component B are in compliance 
to the Memorandum of Agreement signed between Government of India, Government 
of Japan and Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). Hence, it is not feasible 
to provide interest free loan to landless, small and marginal farmers for owning 01 to 04 
cows/buffaloes under component B of NPDD.  
[Letter No. G-29012/1/2025-Budget (E-33554) dated 17.03.2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.16 of Chapter I of this Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
15th December, 2025                            Chairperson 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)                         Standing Committee on Agriculture 
                   Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
 
 

43 
 
Annexure-I 
Total vaccination performance reducing the gap under the programme 
 
 
 
Animals 
Vaccinated 
in FMD 
Round IV 
Animals 
Vaccinated 
in FMD 
Round V 
(ongoing) 
Animals 
Vaccinated 
in FMD 
Round VI 
(ongoing) 
Animals 
Vaccinated 
against 
Brucellosis 
Animals 
Vaccinated 
against PPR 
Round I 
Animals 
Vaccinated 
against PPR 
Round II 
Animals 
Vaccinated 
against 
CSF 
Round I 
Animals 
Vaccinated 
against 
CSF 
Round II 
Progress of 
vaccination 
mentioned in 
4th report of 
standing 
committee on 
agriculture, 
animal 
husbandry 
and food 
processing 
21,13,30,176 5,35,73,039 Not 
mentioned 4,23,46,856 15,19,38,427 2,17,66,205 49,05,771 10,85,612 
Present status 24,84,36,177 16,54,08,488 2,41,62,190 4,57,03,235 16,56,88,311 5,42,87,033 51,41,962 18,00,600 

44 
 
 
Annexure-II 
Physical Target and achievement under “National Programme for Dairy Development” 
scheme 
(As on 31.12.2024) 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
Bulk Milk Cooler (BMC) 
Automatic Milk 
Collection Unit & 
Data Processor & 
Milk Collection Unit  
Electronic 
Adulteration 
Testing unit 
EOP Target Achievement EOP 
Target Achievement EOP 
Target 
Achieve-
ment No. Capacity 
(KL) No. Capacity 
(KL) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 150 750.00 31 155.00 9690 2654 283 73 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 13 9.50 0 0.00 0 0 2 0 
3 Assam 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 
4 Bihar 72 199.00 72 199.00 6342 6533 617 620 
5 Chhattisgarh 29 58.00 29 58.00 36 43 56 56 
6 Goa 57 43.50 0 0.00 127 0 19 0 
7 Gujarat 2245 8087.50 2026 7109.00 5226 4284 4389 82 
8 Haryana 50 39.00 59 48.00 464 513 1 1 
9 Himachal Pradesh 47 86.00 25 49.00 367 335 11 11 
10 Jammu & Kashmir 66 267.00 58 275.00 2402 2136 96 96 
11 Jharkhand 48 108.00 13 26.00 610 339 0 0 
12 Karnataka 760 2229.00 411 1182.00 6879 5195 2186 1018 
13 Kerala 117 425.00 108 392.50 2449 1910 0 0 
14 Madhya Pradesh 294 291.00 201 181.00 1186 990 149 149 
15 Maharashtra 95 199.50 69 149.00 568 568 75 75 
16 Manipur 115 23.00 38 8.40 128 61 1 1 
17 Meghalaya 153 76.50 61 28.94 164 81 105 3 
18 Mizoram 23 11.50 9 4.50 71 46 3 3 
19 Nagaland 31 16.00 28 14.50 0 0 3 3 
20 Odisha 43 119.00 37 107.00 1079 877 151 150 
21 Pondicherry 25 44.50 15 14.50 95 95 0 0 
22 Punjab 527 721.50 441 606.00 2999 2586 1267 1165 
23 Rajasthan 1259 1509.00 927 1072.50 3396 2975 2369 2240 
24 Sikkim 231 73.50 225 73.10 546 588 2 2 
25 Tamil Nadu 485 1531.00 463 1423.00 8235 5039 732 569 
26 Telangana 87 81.50 20 18.00 1937 1874 3 0 
27 Tripura 11 11.50 11 11.50 150 150 9 9 
28 Uttar Pradesh 0 0.00 0 0.00 210 196 8 8 
29 Uttarakhand 2 2.00 1 1.00 2604 2528 36 19 
30 West Bengal 4 2.00 4 2.00 100 100 1 1 
  Grand total 7039 17014.50 5382 13208.44 58060 42696 12574 6354 
 *EOP-End of Project (Till 31.03.2026) 

45 
 
Annexure-III 
Total number of States and UTs supported under the ESVHD-MVU, funds released 
S. 
No. States No. of MVUs 
Sanctioned 
No. of MVUs 
Operational 
Total fund sanctioned 
& released (Amount in 
Lakh) as on 05.03.2025 
1 A&N Islands 5  0 160.00 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 340 340 9327.97 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 25 25 605.84 
4 Assam 159  159 5452.72 
5 Bihar 307  307 5461.62 
6 Chhattisgarh 163  163 3898.54 
7 Delhi 3  0 48.00 
8 Goa 2  2 25.80 
9 Gujarat 127  127 1577.74 
10 Haryana 70  70 1598.43 
11 Himachal 
Pradesh 44 44 873.95 
12 Jammu & 
Kashmir 6 50 1333.72 
13 Jharkhand 236  236 3776.00 
14 Karnataka 275  275 8898.74 
15 Kerala 29  29 724.01 
16 Ladakh 9  9 200.80 
17 Lakshadweep 9 0 144.00 
18 Madhya 
Pradesh 406 406 13481.21 
19 Maharashtra 80  80 1560.73 
20 Manipur 33  33 528.00 
21 Meghalaya 17  17 465.15 
22 Mizoram 26  26 757.09 
23 Nagaland 16  16 396.31 
24 Odisha 181  0 2896.00 
25 Puducherry 4  4 86.64 
26 Punjab 70  0 1120.00 
27 Rajasthan 536  536 13861.15 
28 Sikkim 6  6 295.24 
29 Tamil Nadu 245  245 4473.76 
30 Telangana 100  0 1600.00 

46 
 
S. 
No. States No. of MVUs 
Sanctioned 
No. of MVUs 
Operational 
Total fund sanctioned 
& released (Amount in 
Lakh) as on 05.03.2025 
31 Tripura 13  13 330.49 
32 Uttar Pradesh 520 520 16708.48 
33 Uttarakhand 60  60 2786.90 
34 West Bengal 218  218 5434.94 
  Total 4340  4016 110889.97 
 
 
 
  

47 
 
Annexure-IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19th September, 2025 from 1103 hrs. to 1335 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 1, First Floor, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe (EPHA), 
New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
4. Shri Kuldeep Indora 
5. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
6. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
7. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
8. Shri Dharambir Singh 
9. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
12. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
13. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
14. Shri Madan Rathore 
15. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
16. Shri P. P. Suneer 
 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  – Deputy Secretary 
 

48 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Subject 
Reports and Draft Action Taken Reports: 
(i) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(ii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(iii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*;  
(iv) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(v) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(vi) Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 4th Report of the Committee on the Demands 
for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) presented during 18th Lok 
Sabha; 
(vii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*, and 
(viii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*. 
 
 
3.  xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx* 
 
4. The Committee also adopted the xxxxx*, 4th and xxxxx* Report on DFG (2024-25) and 
xxxxx* Report on DFG (2025-26) with modifications as suggested in Annexure xxxxx*, II, xxxxx* 
and xxxxx*, respectively. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present 
the Reports to Parliament.   
 
5.  xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx* 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
____________________ 
*Matter note related to this report. 
  

49 
 
Annexure-II to Annexure-IV  
 During the Sitting held on 19.09.2025, the Members made the following 
suggestions to be incorporated into the ATR on 4th Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
on the Demands for Grants (2024-25) pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) (DAHD): - 
 
Page No. 
of the Draft 
Report 
Comments 
on Para No. 
Original Comments Modification incorporated 
4 1.7  drastic 
 
 they have not given any 
explanation 
 
 exacerbating shortage of 
qualified professionals. 
 
 The budget reduction of 
Veterinary Council of India 
will certainly affect the 
availability of Veterinary 
Practitioners by hindering 
infrastructure development, 
training capacity and overall 
strength of veterinary 
professionals, exacerbating 
shortage of qualified 
professionals. It will also 
affect research in health and 
disease control of animals in 
Animal Husbandry Sector of 
the country.  
 
 
 The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that budget 
may be uniformly distributed 
to various sectors and avoid 
drastic reductions in budget 
of any particular sector.  
 Deleted 
 
 sufficient explanation has not 
been provided 
 
 Deleted 
 
 
 A reduction in the budget of 
Veterinary Council of India 
may impact infrastructure 
development, training capacity 
and the availability of 
veterinary professionals, 
thereby affecting efforts to 
address the shortage of 
qualified practitioners.               
It may also have implications 
for research in animal health 
and disease control within 
Animal Husbandry Sector of 
the country.  
 
 
 
 The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the 
Department must ensure a 
balance distribution of 
budgetary increase across 
various sectors under its 
purview and maintain 
consistency in allocations, so 
that ongoing activities and 
scheme implementation are 
not affected.  
 
6-7 1.10  Further, the Committee are 
not satisfied with the replies 
of the Department wherein it 
has stated that, “re-
appropriation was carried out 
using the available savings 
 Further, the Committee 
observe that, wherein the 
Department has stated that, 
“re-appropriation was carried 
out using the available savings 
within the grant”, it is 

50 
 
within the grant” and labelled 
underutilization of funds 
owing to delay in release of 
funds as savings. 
underutilization of funds owing 
to delay in release of funds, 
however, further clarification 
on this aspect be provided for 
better understanding the fund 
utilization process. 
9-10 1.13  drastically 
 apprise the Committee of 
objective steps taken in this 
regard 
 consistently 
 apprise the Committee of the 
steps being taken by the 
Department to further improve 
fund utilization and minimize 
the need for surrendering the 
funds in future. 
12 1.16  huge 
 concerted efforts may be 
made to ensure there is no 
lapse in achievement of 
targets by the Department 
 
 considerable 
 appropriate steps be taken to 
fulfill the targets at the earliest. 
14-15 1.19  The reply of the Department 
is completely silent about 
taking any steps on 
 
 The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to the 
Department that some 
incentive/subsidy may be 
provided to farmers and farm 
laborers for taking care of 
cattle and buffaloes which are 
past their economic utility in 
addition to increasing fund 
allocation for promotion of 
Gaushalas across country 
with farmers having a choice 
to either avail services of 
Gaushala or avail 
government 
incentive/subsidy for taking 
care of their non-productive 
bovine animals.  
 
 The Department has not 
provided reply to 
 
 
 
 The Committee, therefore, in 
line with their earlier 
recommendation recommend 
the Department to take up the 
matter, in consultation and 
coordination with the State 
Governments, for increasing 
fund allocation for promotion 
of Gaushalas across country 
and devising some 
mechanism for providing some 
incentive/subsidy to farmers 
and farm laborers for taking 
care of cattle and buffaloes 
which are past their economic 
utility, thus, giving  farmers a 
choice to either avail services 
of Gaushala or avail 
government incentive/subsidy 
for taking care of their non-
productive bovine animals. 
 
 
 
  

51 
 
APPENDIX  
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT (18th LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2024-25)  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              13 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Recommendation Nos.  1, 5, 6, 7,10, 11, 12 and 13 
Total          08    
Percentage                    61.5% 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Recommendation No.     NIL         
Total                     00 
Percentage                     00.00% 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Recommendation Nos.  2, 4, 8 and 14 
Total            04 
Percentage                                      30.7% 
 
(v) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Recommendation Nos.        3 and 9     
Total                     02  
Percentage                     15.38% 
 