  
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND 
FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)' 
 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)} 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER 2025 / AGRAHAYANA, 1947(SAKA) 
 
25 

 
  
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)' 
 
 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)} 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2025 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER 2025 / AGRAHAYANA, 1947(SAKA)  

 
  
COA No. 524 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 

 
  
 
<CONTENTS> 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25) iii 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) iv 
INTRODUCTION vi 
CHAPTER I Report  1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government 14 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 35 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 36 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 43 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 37th Sitting of the Committee held on 19.09.2025 44 
APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
(2024-25). 
49 
 
 
  

 
iii  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part -II, Para No. 3117 dated 
13.08.2025.  
  

 
iv  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde  
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
27.  Shri Madan Rathore 
28.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
  

 
v  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 3. Shri Ashwaghosh B. Lokhande - Under Secretary 
 4. Smt. Paromita Kumar   - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
  

 
vi  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (202 5-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Twenty Fifth  Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024 -25) on 
'Demands for Grants (2024-25)' pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024 -25) on Demands for Grants (2024 -25) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2024. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were 
received on 21st March, 2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
19th September, 2025. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
15 December, 2025                                     Chairperson, 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Agriculture 
                Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 

 
1  
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report ( Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Hus bandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on 'Demands for Grants (2024 -25)' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries which was presented to the Lok Sabha and Laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2024. 
 
1.2    The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has furnished Action Taken 
Replies in respect of all the 12 Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report. These have been categorized as under: 
 
•  Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government:  
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12 
Total – 09 
Chapter II 
•  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's Reply 
Total – 00 
Chapter-III 
•  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Action Taken Replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 1, 2, 8  
Total – 03 
Chapter-IV 
•  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the  Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL 
Total-NIL 
Chapter-V 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance would be given by the 
Ministry to implement the observations/recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter may be 
reported to the Committee with the reasons for non -implementation. The 
Committee desire that further Action -Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter - I of this Report be 
furnished to them at an early date.  

 
2  
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.  Underutilization of allocated resource 
 Recommendation No. 1 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows: — 
 
“The allocations and expenditure pattern of the Ministry since 2018 -19 
shows that despite reduction of funds at RE vis-a-vis BE (except in 2020-21), 
the actuals fell short of REs of the respective years. The average utilization 
of funds allocated at RE stage stood at 80.11% since 2018 -19. For the year 
2024-25, the Ministry allocated a total of Rs. 4,019 Crore including Rs. 4,016 
Crore in the Revenue Section and Rs. 2.54 Crore in the Capital Section.  
However, there is a recovery of Rs. 729 Crore under the he ad of AIDF; 
therefore, the net budgetary provision is of Rs. 3,290 Crore. The Committee 
also note that against the Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs. 3,290 Crore the actual 
expenditure (as on 11 th November 2024) is Rs. 995.89 Crore. The Ministry, 
however, have proposed a Revised Estimate (RE) of Rs. 3,399.17 Crore for 
2024-25 which is Rs. 109.17 Crore more than the BE. Out of RE, the 
utilization stood at Rs. 995.89 Crore, as on 11/11/2024, which stands at Rs. 
995.89 Crore, representing only 30% (approx.) of the RE . Rest 70% of RE 
will have to be spent in the next 4/5 months. This in turn means the Ministry 
has to spend amounts higher than the amounts in percentage terms 
prescribed by the Department of Expenditure in the last two quarter of the 
financial years. The Committee, therefore suggest that provisions be made at 
least at RE stage taking into consideration the ground realities so that funds 
given at RE are not surrendered.” 
1.6  In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated: - 
“The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for making 
efforts for optimum utilization of funds. 
The Ministry is closely monitoring implementation and expenditure for 

 
3  
improving level of utilization of allocated budget under various schemes of 
the Ministry viz. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), Prime 
Minister Formalization of Micro Food  Processing Enterprises (PMFME) and 
Production-Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLIS).” 
1.7 The Committee had noted that while the Ministry has stated that efforts 
are being made for optimum utilization of funds, the reply remains general and 
does not specifically address the issue concerning the formulation of Revised 
Estimates (RE) based on a realistic assessment of ground -level progress. The 
Committee had earlier suggested that the Ministry align the RE with actual 
fund utilization on the ground to avoid the surrender of unutilized funds at the 
end of the financial year. However, the Ministry’s reply lacks clarity regarding 
the actionable steps being taken to ensure the judicious preparation of RE in 
future. The Committee, therefo re, reiterate their recommendation that 
budgeting at the RE stage should be realistic and firmly grounded in actual 
fund utilization, and desire to be apprised of the concrete measures 
undertaken in this regard. 
B.  Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY)  
Recommendation No. 2  
 
1.8  The Committee had observed/recommended as follows: — 
“The C ommittee note that Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana 
(PMKSY) is a comprehensive scheme launched by the Government of India 
with an approved outlay of Rs. 5,520 Crore aimed at boosting the food -
processing sector. The Scheme is designed to create modern infrastructure 
and enhance supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet. The 
scheme aims to benefit FPOs, Cooperatives/FPCs/SHGs/Government & 
Private Sector Companies, processors and retailers. The Committee observe 
that the actual expenditure during the last two financial years, 2022 -23 and 
2023-24, was 83.49% and 89.42 % of respective RE allocation. The 
Committee also note that the budgetary allocation for the Scheme has been 
reduced by Rs. 200 to Rs. 729 Crore for 2024 -25 from Rs. 923 Crore in 2023 -
24. Against this reduced Budget Estimate, only about 34% of it has been 

 
4  
utilized, as on 11.11.2024, during the current financial year. The remaining 
66% of RE has to be spent in the last half of the financial year which may 
amount to violation of Department of Expenditure Guidelines prescribing 
quarterly expenditure ceilings, probably by obtaining exemption from DoE.  
In regard to the reasons for the underutilization of funds, the Ministry 
has stated that PMKSY is a demand -driven scheme, and fewer projects have 
been received under the SCSP/TSP/NER heads, limiting fund disbursement 
under these categories. The Ministry ha s also mentioned that funds are 
released only after the submission of necessary documents, and due to the 
gestation period of 18 to 30 months for projects, combined with delays in 
obtaining statutory clearances, full utilization of funds has not been achie ved. 
For the reduction of the Budget Estimate for 2024 -25, the Ministry have stated 
that no sufficient number of release proposals have been expected during 
2024-25. They have also stated that no fresh Expressions of Interest (EoI) 
issued in most of the sub -schemes of PMKSY, except the present EOI issued 
for inviting proposals for Irradiation units under the Cold Chain Scheme, has 
also been a reason. 
The Committee express their concern over the underutilization of the 
allocated funds under the Scheme. They are also surprised over the reduction 
of the Budget Estimate for 2024 -25 as they were expecting that the Ministry 
would come up with solution for better utilization of funds. Though PMKSY is a 
good initiative with novel objectives, considering the reduction in the Budget 
Estimate for 2024 -25 as well as its low utilization so far, the Committee feel 
that the budgetary forecasting of the Scheme needs a revisit. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should examine all the aspects of this 
Scheme, hold discussions with the stakeholders, and make a fair assessment 
of the needs and requirements of the sector to reinvigorate this important 
Scheme. The Committee suggest that the reasons for lack of response from 
the intended beneficiaries under SCSP/ TSP/NER heads be obtained, 
analyzed and the appropriate action including the change in Terms and 
Conditions (T&Cs) applicable under these heads be re visited, if required, to 
utilize fully the budgeted funds for these disadvantaged sections and intended 

 
5  
beneficiaries. “ 
1.9 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated: - 
“The implementation schedule for the food processing projects under 
PMKSY is as prescribed in the scheme guidelines of the respective 
component schemes. In exceptional circumstances, for the reasons beyond 
the control of the promoter(s), the implementation period may be extended 
with the approval of Project Approval Committee (PAC). 
 Delays in the implementation of the projects are due to various reasons, such 
as the non -receipt of statutory clearances/approvals from state and other 
concerned government authorities, including Consent to Establish (CTE), 
Consent to Operate (CTO), building/layout plans, Change of Land Use (CLU), 
FSSAI license, and the fulfilment of pre -disbursement conditions by lending 
banks for term loan disbursements. These factors have contributed to delays 
in project implementation, leading to lower -than-expected di sbursements. 
Furthermore, the Ministry releases the final tranche of the grant only after the 
completion of the project. 
 Budget allocated under BE & RE 2024 -25 is after realistic assessment of the 
projects expected to be completed during the Financial year. However, as 
against the RE of Rs. 629.8 Crore for 2024 -25, as on date (06.03.2025), Rs. 
421.96 Crore (67.19 % of RE) has already been utilized and Rs. 170 Crore is 
also in pipeline and may be utilized by the end of March 2025. 
The Ministry is making incessant efforts to utilize the funds by efforts as 
mentioned below: 
a) Ministry and the Project Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged under 
component schemes of PMKSY are  interacting regularly with the Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs) of approved projects and are assisting 
them in timely implementation. 
b) Regular review meetings, virtual verifications and physical site inspections 
of projects are being conducted by the Ministry and PMAs to ensure the 

 
6  
smooth and timely completion of the projects. 
c) Ministry on the request of PIAs, also takes up the matter with the 
concerned State/UT Governments and their agencies for smooth and 
timely implementation. 
d) Under the PMKSY scheme, project proposals are invited from time to time 
across the country including remote or underdeveloped areas by floating 
Expression of Interests (EoIs) on the Ministry’s website. For wider publicity 
of the component schemes under PMKSY, it is also circulated through 
Press Information Bureau (PIB) and leading national and regional 
newspapers. Individuals including small farmers as well as entity/ 
organization such as FPOs/FPCs/NGOs/PSUs/Firms/Companies, etc. are 
eligible to avail benefits under the scheme. 
Under the scheme of Promotional Activities of MoFPI, Ministry has provided 
financial assistance to various eligible organizations for organizing 60 events 
such as seminar, workshop, conference, exhibitions etc. across the country 
during the year 2024 to create awareness among stakeholders including  small 
farmers and Farmers Producers Organization (FPO)  on various schemes of 
the Ministry. 
In order to generate proposals under the SCSP/STP/NER heads, it is 
submitted that the Ministry on 27.07.2023 floated a special EOI for 
SC/ST/NER category. Ministry had received 179 proposals in the said EOI out 
of which 48 proposals were approved. 
Third party assessment for impact evaluation study of component schemes of 
PMKSY i.e., APC & CEFPPC is under process.” 
1.10 The Committee have noted the Ministry’s reply outlining the reasons for 
delays in fund utilization under PMKSY and the steps taken to improve  
implementation through regular review meetings with Project Implementing 
Agencies (PIAs). While these efforts are acknowledged, the Committee are of 
the view that the Ministry has not provided specific details on the steps taken 
to assess the needs and requirements of the sector, nor on the review of 

 
7  
budget forecasting of the Scheme, as previously recommended. Additionally, 
although the Ministry has undertaken awareness activities for stakeholders, it 
has not provided any information regarding the feedback received from them 
to further strengthen the Scheme. 
2. The Committee appreciate the Ministry’s initiative to gen erate proposals 
under the SCSP/ TSP/NER categories by floating a special EOI , however, they 
find the Ministry’s response incomplete. The reply does not furnish the 
reasons for the low number of approvals out of the total applications received, 
and it is also silent on the Committee’s recommendation to review the terms 
and conditions applicable  under the SCSP/ TSP/NER heads to address the 
issue of low participation. 
3. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the 
Ministry needs to take more focused and result -oriented measures to enhance 
the implementation and impact of the PMKSY Scheme and ensure better 
utilization of funds for the disadvantaged sections and intended beneficiaries. 
The Committee would further desire to be apprised of the outcomes of the 
third-party assessment and impact evaluation study of the PMKSY Scheme. 
C. Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry 
(PLISFPI) 
Recommendation No. 8 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows: — 
“The Committee note that the Production Linked Incentive Scheme for 
Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI) was launched to support creation of 
global food manufacturing champions commensurate with India’s natural 
resource endowment and support Indian brands of food products in th e 
international markets with an outlay of Rs. 10,900 Crore. The Scheme would 
be implemented over a six -year period from 2021 -22 to 2026 -27. The BE for 
2023-24 was Rs. 1530 Crore which was reduced to Rs. 1150 Crore at RE and 
the actual utilization was  Rs. 590.50 Crore which was only 51.34% of the RE. 
The scrutiny of the utilization of the allocated resources reveals that against 
the total outlay of Rs. 10,900 Crore, Rs. 1,101.31 Crore only i.e. 12% of the 

 
8  
total outlay only could be utilized during the last three year. The Ministry have 
stated that the underutilization is primarily due to a lower number of claims 
received than anticipated. Also, a number of claims were not entertained, as 
they were incomplete and lacked essential documentation. Additionally, some 
applicants were unable to meet the minimum Compound Annual Growth Rate 
of 10%. As suggested elsewhere in the other schemes, the Committee are of 
the view that if any of the T&Cs are hampering the pro gress, the Ministry in 
consultation with the stakeholders may explore the possibility of changing 
them to ensure the allocated funds are used for the purpose. The Committee 
further feel that, there is a need to simplify and streamline the entire procedure 
of applying the Scheme. Further, appreciating the Ministry for extending the 
Scheme to cover Millet -based products, the Committee desire that more such 
initiatives may be explored under the Scheme. The Committee suggest that 
the export policies that favour  small and micro food processing industries be 
encouraged. 
1.12 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated: - 
“To ensure effective implementation of the PLI scheme, various steps have 
been taken as under: 
• User-Friendly Interface:  The PLISFPI Portal is designed as a one -stop 
solution for all information related to the scheme. The Portal is used to file 
Quarterly Returns and filing Incentive Claims by the applicants. 
• Efficient Communication:  Email communications for different categories 
has been established to facilitate information dissemination, quick 
responses, and issue resolution. 
• Accessibility: The Ministry and PMA have dedicated teams to ensure easy 
access and prompt assistance. Additionally, PMA has assigned case 
officers to each selected applicant. 
• Technical Support:  A dedicated IT team is available at the PMA to 
address any technical issues with the PLISFPI Portal. 

 
9  
• Comprehensive Information: The Portal provides a wealth of information, 
including the selection process, applications received, selected applicants, 
investment locations, incentive claims, and bank guarantees. 
• Weekly Meetings: Weekly Meetings are held with the PLI Beneficiaries to 
understand their concerns and resolve issues and dissemination of 
important updates regarding the Scheme.” 
1.13 The Committee have noted the steps taken by the Ministry, as outlined in 
its reply, for the effective implementation of the Production Linked Incentive 
Scheme for Food Processing Industries (PLISFPI). While these measures are 
appreciable, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry’s rep ly does not 
adequately address their recommendation regarding the revision of the 
Scheme’s Terms and Conditions which may be hindering its progress , if any, it 
does not indicate whether any consultations with stakeholders have been held 
in this regard. Furthermore, the Committee observe that the Ministry’s reply is 
silent on the suggestions made earlier to simplify and streamline the 
application process, inclusion of additional product categories beyond millets, 
and also promoting export policies that support small and micro food 
processing enterprises. In view of the above, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation for a more policy -oriented and inclusive approach that  
comprehensively addresses all these aspects, in order to strengthen the 
implementation and overall impact of the PLISFPI Scheme. 
 
D. Pradhan Mantri Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises 
Scheme (PMFME) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows: — 
“The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri  Formalisation of Micro Food 
Processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme is pivotal for fostering the growth 
and development of the micro food processing sector in India. This sector, 
predominantly unorganized, plays a crucial role in rural economies by 
providing employment and livelihoods to millions. The Committee also note 

 
10  
that this sector not only contributes to reducing poverty and boosting rural 
development but also enhances food safety standards and promotes 
entrepreneurship, thereby playing a significant role in achieving the broader 
economic and social goals of the country. The Committee, however, note that 
the fund utilization under PMFME was not very impressive during 2021-22 and 
2022-23 as the Budget Estimate was considerably revised downward at the 
RE stage and that too could not be fully utilized at the end of the respective 
financial years. However, the Committee also note that the financial 
performance of the Scheme improved considerably during 2023 -24 as the 
Budget Estimate of Rs. 639.05 Crore was enhanced to Rs. 800 Crore at the 
RE stage and the actual utilization was Rs. 779.09 Crore which was more than 
97% of RE. Similarly, out of the Budget Estimate of Rs. 879.5 Crore for 2024 -
25, Rs. 700.88 Crore has been utilized till 10.11.2024. The Committee express 
their satisfaction over the considerable improvement in utilization of the funds 
meant for the scheme. The Committee also feel that there is still vast scope 
for the growth of this Scheme as our country has a large and diverse 
agricultural base, which provides a rich supply of raw materials. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that measures such as the organization of 
localized outreach and awareness campaigns in local languages, the 
simplification of application procedures and documentation requirements, and 
the strengthening of partnerships with local banks and  microfinance 
institutions to provide easier access to credit, should be taken sincerely for the 
further growth of this Scheme.”  
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted: -  
“To raise awareness about the PMFME Scheme at the grassroots level and 
effectively address regional diversity, the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries, Government of India, has undertaken various initiatives. These 
efforts include nationwide radio campaigns in regional languages, broadcasted 
across national, community and private radio stations to ensure widespread 
coverage. Additionally, national print advertisement campaigns in regional 
languages have been launched, targeting publications from small to large-
scale. The Ministry, in collaboration with State Governments, has also been 

 
11  
organizing district -level awareness workshops to engage key stakeholders 
such as potential micro -food processing enterprises, bank representatives, 
district officials, and resource persons, ensuring they are well informed about 
the PMFME Scheme.  
PMFME MIS Portal has been designed for easy process for submission 
of applications. The portal is online for submission of all the applications and 
no physical documentation is required under the scheme. The Detailed Project 
Report is inbuilt in the system and is generated automatically upon filling and 
submission of all the details along with documents, by the applicants.  
The Scheme also engages District Resource Persons (DRPs) at the 
district or regional level to provide hand -holding support to micro food 
processing enterprises which includes assisting micro enterprises in preparing 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), securing bank loans, providing training, 
upgradation of the units, obtaining necessary regulatory approvals, ensuring 
hygiene standards etc. 
PMFME Scheme's benefits are applicable on the loans availed from all 
Scheduled Commercial Banks registered by Reserve Bank of India. In 
addition, Micro Finance Institutions such as National Cooperative 
Development Corporation (NCDC) and StreeNidhi have also been onboarded 
to provide support for easier access of credit to the beneficiaries. Regular 
follow-up/ review meetings with all the Lending Banks, State Level Bankers 
Committee (SLBC) Meetings and representatives at State and District level 
are being conducted to ensure smooth implementation of the scheme.” 
1.16 The Committee have noted the various steps taken by the Ministry to 
improve the implementation of the PMFME Scheme, as outlined in its reply , 
particularly the awareness campaigns and the simplification of the application 
process through the PMFME MIS Portal. The Committee also appreciate the 
engagement of District Resource Persons (DRPs) to provide hand -holding 
support to micro food processing enterprises. In addition, the Committee 
commend the Ministry’s efforts to onboard microfinance institutions su ch as 
NCDC and StreeNidhi, as well as the conduct of regular review meetings with 

 
12  
lending institutions to facilitate access to credit. 
2. However, the Committee are of the view that the reply  lacks clarity on 
the actual effectiveness of these measures at the ground level, particularly 
with respect to digital accessibility for micro -entrepreneurs and the ease of 
availing credit in rural and remote areas. The Committee also observe that the 
Ministry has not articulated any forward looking strategy for scaling up the 
Scheme, despite earlier recommendations and in view of India’s vast and 
diverse agricultural base. In the absence of a proactive plan for expansion, 
they believe that the  Scheme will fail to achieve a substantial increase in 
capital investment outlay required for growth within the country’s agricultural 
landscape. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to adopt a 
comprehensive and forward -looking approach to upscale the Scheme, 
including stronger partnerships with local and cooperative banks, so as to 
unlock the full potential of the micro food processing sector. The Committee 
further desire to be apprised of the outcomes and impact of all measures 
undertaken by the Ministry at the ground level, as discussed above. 
 
E. Measures to reduce wastage of agriculture produce 
Recommendation No. 12  
 
1.17  The Committee had observed/recommended as follows: — 
“The Committee note that one of the objectives of Pradhan Mantri 
Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) is reducing wastage of agricultural produce. 
They may be apprised of the specific measures/strategies put in place to 
reduce system wide wastages in agricultural/ horticulture produce”. 
1.18 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted: -  
“Implementation of PMKSY helps in creation of modern infrastructure 
with efficient supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet across 
the country. The scheme not only provides a boost to the growth of food 
processing sector in the country but also helps in, inter -alia, reducing wastage 
of agricultural produce, increasing the processing level and enhancing the 

 
13  
export of the processed foods.” 
1.19  The Committee noted the Ministry’s reply and recognize the role of 
PMKSY in creating infrastructure for the Food Processing Sector, thereby 
contributing to waste reduction at the processing level. The Committee, 
however, observe that the Ministry has not indicated in its reply any specific 
measures or strategies for reducing wastage in agricultural and horticultural 
produce, as earlier desired in the recommendation. In view of this, the 
Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry should outline a comprehensive 
action plan that can serve as a practical model  for addressing food waste 
challenges and fostering sustainability in agricultural and horticultural 
produce. The Committee would further desire to be apprised of the concrete 
measures undertaken in this regard.  

 
14  
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
1. Underutilization of allocated resources  
The allocations and expenditure pattern of the Ministry since 2018 -19 shows 
that despite reduction of funds at RE vis-a-vis BE (except in 2020-21), the actuals fell 
short of REs of the respective years. The average utilization of funds allocated at RE 
stage stood at 80.11% since 2018-19.  For the year 2024-25, the Ministry allocated a 
total of Rs. 4,019 Crore including Rs. 4,016 Crore in the Revenue Section and Rs. 
2.54 Crore in the Capital Section. However, there is a recovery of Rs. 729 Crore 
under the head of AIDF; therefore, the net budgetary provision is of Rs. 3,290 Crore. 
The Committee also note that against the Budget E stimate (BE) of Rs. 3,290 Crore 
the actual expenditure (as on 11 thNovember 2024) is Rs. 995.89 Crore. The Ministry, 
however, have proposed a Revised Estimate (RE) of Rs. 3,399.17 Crore for 2024 -25 
which is Rs. 109.17 Crore more than the BE. Out of RE, the utilization stood at  Rs. 
995.89 Crore, as on 11/11/2024, which stands at Rs. 995.89 Crore, representing only 
30% (approx.) of the RE. Rest 70% of RE will have to be spent in the next 4/5 
months. This in turn means the Ministry has to spend amounts higher t han the 
amounts in percentage terms prescribed by the Department of Expenditure in the last 
two quarter of the financial years. The Committee, therefore , suggest that provisions 
be made at least at RE stage taking into consideration the ground realities so that 
funds given at RE are not surrendered. 
Reply of the Government: 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for making efforts 
for optimum utilization of funds. 
The Ministry is closely monitoring implementation and expenditure for improving 
level of utilization of allocated budget under various schemes of the Ministry viz. 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), Prime Minister Formalization of 
Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) and Production -Linked Incentive 
Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLIS). 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 

 
15  
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I 
of this Report. 
2. Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY) 
 The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana  (PMKSY) 
is a comprehensive scheme launched by the Government of India with an approved 
outlay of Rs. 5,520 Crore aimed at boosting the food-processing sector. The Scheme 
is designed to create modern infrastructure and enhance supply chain management 
from farm gate to retail outlet. The scheme aims to benefit FPOs, 
Cooperatives/FPCs/SHGs/Government & Private Sector Companies, processors and 
retailers. The Committee observe that the actual expenditure during the last two 
financial years, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24, was 83.49% and 89.42 % of respective RE 
allocation. The Committee also note that the budgetary allocation for the Scheme 
has been reduced by Rs. 200 to Rs. 729 Crore for 2024 -25 from Rs. 923 Crore in 
2023-24. Against this reduced Budget Estimate, only about 34% of it has been 
utilized, as on 11.11.2024, during the current financial year. The remaining 66% of 
RE has to be spent in the last half of the financial year which may amount to violation 
of Department of Expenditure Guidelines prescribing quarterly expenditure ceilings, 
probably by obtaining exemption from DoE. 
In regard to the reasons for the underutilization of funds, the Ministry have 
stated that PMKSY is a demand -driven scheme, and fewer projects have been 
received under the SCSP/TSP/NER heads, limiting fund disbursement under these 
categories. The Ministry have also mentioned that funds are released only after the 
submission of necessary documents, and due to the gestation period of 18 to 30 
months for projects, combined with delays in obtaining statutory clearances, full 
utilization of funds has not been ach ieved. For the reduction of the Budget Estimate 
for 2024-25, the Ministry have stated that no sufficient number of release proposals 
have been expected during 2024 -25. They have also stated that no fresh 
Expressions of Interest (EoI) issued in most of the sub -schemes of PMKSY, except 
the present EOI issued for inviting proposals for Irradiation units under the Cold 
Chain Scheme, has also been a reason. 

 
16  
The Committee express their concern over the underutilization of the allocated 
funds under the Scheme. They are also surprised over the reduction of the Budget 
Estimate for 2024 -25 as they were expecting that the Ministry would come up with 
solution for better utilization of funds. Though PMKSY is a good initiative with novel 
objectives, considering the reduction in the Budget Estimate for 2024 -25 as well as 
its low utilization so far, the Committee feel that the budgetary forecasting of the 
Scheme needs a revisit. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should examine all the aspects of this Scheme, hold discussions with the 
stakeholders, and make a fair assessment of the needs and requirements of the 
sector to reinvigorate this important Scheme.  The Committee suggest that the 
reasons for lack of response from the intended beneficiaries under SCSP/STP/NER 
heads be obtained, analysed and the appropriate action including the change in 
Terms and Conditions (T&Cs) applicable under these  heads be revisited, if required, 
to utilize fully the budgeted funds for these disadvantaged sections and  intended 
beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government: 
The implementation schedule for the food processing projects under PMKSY 
is as prescribed in the scheme guidelines of the respective component schemes. In 
exceptional circumstances, for the reasons beyond the control of the promoter(s), the 
implementation period may be extended with the approval of Project Approval 
Committee (PAC). 
 Delays in the implementation of the projects are due to various reasons, such 
as the non-receipt of statutory clearances/approvals from state and other concerned 
government authorities, including Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to Operate 
(CTO), building/layout plans, Change of Land Use (CLU), FSSAI license, and the 
fulfilment of pre -disbursement conditions by lending banks for term loan 
disbursements. These factors have contributed to delays in project implementation, 
leading to lower -than-expected di sbursements. Furthermore, the Ministry releases 
the final tranche of the grant only after the completion of the project. 
 Budget allocated under BE & RE 2024 -25 is after realistic assessment of the 
projects expected to be completed during the Financial year. However, as against 

 
17  
the RE of Rs. 629.8 Crore for 2024 -25, as on date (06.03.2025), Rs. 421.96 Crore 
(67.19 % of RE) has already been utilized and Rs. 170 Crore is also in pipeline and 
may be utilized by the end of March 2025. 
The Ministry is making incessant efforts to utilize the funds by efforts as mentioned 
below: 
e) Ministry and the Project Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged under 
component schemes of PMKSY are interacting regularly with the Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs) of approved projects and are assisting them in 
timely implementation. 
f) Regular review meetings, virtual verifications and physical site inspections of 
projects are being conducted by the Ministry and PMAs to ensure the smooth and 
timely completion of the projects. 
g) Ministry on the request of PIAs, also takes up the matter with the concerned 
State/UT Governments and their agencies for smooth and timely implementation. 
h) Under the PMKSY scheme, project proposals are invited from time to time across 
the country including remote or underdeveloped areas by floating Expression of 
Interests (EoIs) on theMinistry’s website. For wider publicity of the component 
schemes under PMKSY, it is also circulated through Press Information Bureau 
(PIB) and leading national and regional newspapers. Individuals including small 
farmers as well as entity/ organization such as 
FPOs/FPCs/NGOs/PSUs/Firms/Companies, etc. are eligible to avail benefi ts 
under the scheme. 
Under the scheme of Promotional Activities of MoFPI, Ministry has provided financial 
assistance to various eligible organizations for organizing 60 events such as 
seminar, workshop, conference, exhibitions etc. across the country during the year 
2024 to create awareness among stakeholders including  small farmers and Farmers 
Producers Organization (FPO) on various schemes of the Ministry. 
In order to generate proposals under the SCSP/STP/NER heads, it is submitted that 
the Ministry on 27.07.2023 floated a special EOI for SC/ST/NER category. Ministry 

 
18  
had received 179 proposals in the said EOI out of which 48 proposals were 
approved. 
Third party assessment for impact evaluation study of component schemes of 
PMKSY i.e. APC & CEFPPC is under process.  
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-
I of this Report. 
 
3. Scheme for Creation of Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters 
(APC) 
The Committee note that the Agro  Processing Cluster Scheme is under the 
umbrella Scheme of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY). The Scheme 
aims at the development of modern infrastructure to encourage entrepreneurs to set 
up food processing units based on the cluster approach. The Committee observe 
that the fund utilization under the Scheme has not been satisfactory, as it was 
82.79% and 61.94% of the RE for the years 2022 -23 and 2023-24, respectively. The 
Committee also note that the BE for 2024 -25 has been kept at Rs. 38.90 Crore, 
which is less than half of the previous year’s BE. Moreover, the actual utilization so 
far is Rs. 9.72 Crore (as on 11.10.2024), which is about 25% of the BE. Regarding 
the reasons for the underutilization of the budget, the Ministry have attributed it to 
various issues faced in submission of documents for statutory clearances by the 
Project Implementation Agency (PIA) and settling of at least five food -processing 
units with minimum investment of Rs. 25 Crore. Without the submission of complete 
documents by the PIA, the Ministry cannot process the release of the grant -in-aid 
within the stipulated  time frame, which is beyond the control of the Ministry. 
Considering the importance of the Scheme, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should pursue this matter with the concerned authorities to streamline the 
documentation process, improve coordination with implementing agencies, and 
accelerate the approval of statutory clearances. The Committee also recommend 

 
19  
that the Ministry make efforts to generate proposals under the SCSP/TSP, NER 
heads by publicizing the benefits of the APC Scheme in these underserved social 
groups and regions and incentivizing private sector investments, which can help in 
raising fund utilization. The Committee believe that these efforts would give impetus 
to the Scheme and ensure better utilization of the budgetary allocation. The size of 
the districts varies from State to State it is suggested to consider the possibility of 
reducing to f urther lower levels to enable the setting up of specialized clusters in 
those units which are below the districts. 
Reply of the Government: 
The implementation schedule for the projects prescribed in the scheme 
guidelines of the Scheme for Creation of Infrastructure for Agro Processing Cluster 
(APC), which is 24 months for general category project, and 30 months for SC/ST, 
NER & ITDP Area projects from the date of issue of approval letter. In exceptional 
circumstances, for the reasons beyond the control of the promoter(s), the 
implementation period may be extended with the approval of Project Approval 
Committee (PAC). 
Delays in the implementation of projects are due to various reasons, such as 
the non -receipt of statutory clearances/approvals from the State Government and 
other concerned government authorities including Consent to Establish (CTE), 
Consent to Operate (CTO), building/layout plans, change of land use (CLU), FSSAI 
license and the fulfilment of pre -disbursement conditions by lending banks for term 
loan disbursement, etc. 
The Ministry is also making continuous efforts to utilize the funds, as outlined below: 
a) The Ministry and the Project Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged under 
the APC are in regular interaction with the Project Implementing Agencies 
(PIAs) of approved projects and are assisting them in the timely 
implementation of these projects. 
b) Regular review meetings, virtual verifications, and physical site inspections of 
APC projects are conducted by the Ministry and PMAs to ensure the smooth 
and timely completion of the projects. 

 
20  
c) At the request of the PIAs, the Ministry also takes up matters with the 
concerned States/UTs and their agencies to ensure the smooth and timely 
implementation of the projects. 
d) Weather conditions pose a major hindrance to projects, especially in the NER 
and difficult areas. 
e) The budget allocated under BE & RE 2024 -25 is based on a realistic 
assessment of the projects expected to be completed during the financial 
year. However, as of 28.01.2025, Rs. 23.874 crore (50.80% of the RE) has 
already been utilized, and Rs. 3.74 crore is in the pipeline and may be utilized 
by the end of January 2025. The remaining amount will be utilized by March 
2025. 
As of today, the Ministry has approved a total of 16 projects under the SC/ST 
& NER categories (7 SC, 1 ST, and 8 NER) with a total project cost of Rs. 402.59 
crore, including a grant-in-aid of Rs. 154.00 crore. 
Regarding the Committee's recommendation to generate proposals under the 
SCSP/TSP and NER heads, it is submitted that the Ministry, on 27.07.2023, floated a 
special  
EOI for the SC/ST/NER category. The Ministry received 5 eligible applications under 
the SC category and 1 eligible application under the NER category. All eligible 
projects have been approved, with a total project cost of Rs. 177.605 crore, including 
a grant-in-aid of Rs. 58.64 crore. No eligible applications were received under the ST 
category. 
Further, the Ministry floated another EOI on 04.10.2023 for all categories, 
against which only 1 eligible application under the SC category was received. This 
application was approved with a total project cost of Rs. 20.78 crore, including a 
grant-in-aid of Rs. 10 crore under the APC Scheme for FY 2023 -24. The projects 
approved under the EOI dated 04.10.2023 (approved between November 2023 and 
February 2024) require time for completion and operationalization, as their gestation 
period is 24 months for gener al category projects and 30 months for SC/ST/NER 
category projects. Grants-in-aid are being released by the Ministry accordingly. 

 
21  
Further, it is submitted that the APC scheme is a demand -driven scheme and 
is not state - or district-specific. Previously, the Mega Food Park (MFP) scheme was 
implemented by the Ministry, with a minimum land requirement of 50 acres. The MFP 
scheme was discontinued effective 01.04.2021. The APC Scheme has now been 
introduced as a component of PMKSY. The minimum land required for establishing 
an agro -processing cluster is 10 acres, and for setting up vertical projects/units in 
urban areas, the minimum required land is 5 acres. This land is essential for creating 
modern infrastructure, including basic enabling infrastructure and core processing 
infrastructure, to enable and encourage entrepreneurs to establish food processing 
units based on the cluster approach. 
Additionally, a third -party assessment for the impact evaluation study of the 
APC scheme is currently in process. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
4. Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Food Processing Industries is 
implementing the Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure under the umbrella scheme – Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana 
(PMKSY). The Scheme is demand -driven in nature. The Scheme supports the 
creation of Irradiation Facilities as standalone components. The Scheme allows 
flexibility in project planning with special emphasis on the creation of cold chain 
infrastructure at the farm level. Regarding the budgetary performance of the Scheme, 
the Committee note that the budgetary allocations for the Scheme are showing a 
downward trend. The allocation in BE for FY 2022 -23 for the Scheme was Rs. 
230.50 Crore which was reduced to Rs.  222.34 Crore in RE for 2022 -23. The 
allocation in BE and RE 2023 -24 was Rs. 196.50 Crore only. The Actual Utilisation 
for two years was 91.32% and 89.26% respectively vis -à-vis RE allocation. For the 
current financial year, 2024 -25 against the BE of Rs. 179.80 Crore, the actual 
utilization (as on 11.10.2024) is Rs. 41.17 Crore, which stands at 22.9% of the BE. 
The Committee express their concern over the falling budgetary allocation as well as 
its underutilization. The Ministry have submitted various reaso ns for the same. The 

 
22  
Committee understand that a Third Party Assessment of the Scheme by NABARD 
Consultancy Services on 30.03.2020, has given various suggestions and would like 
to be apprised of their acceptance or otherwise, their implementation, it’s impact on 
the implementations and outcomes in terms of fund utilization. 
Reply of the Government: 
The Ministry  has been implementing the Integrated Cold Chain and Value 
Addition Infrastructure Scheme since 2008 to reduce post -harvest losses and 
enhance the value of agricultural produce. As per the suggestion of evaluation study 
report dated 30.03.2020 of NABARD Consultancy Services (NABCONS), the Ministry 
is focusing on several key measures to further enhance the scheme's effectiveness.  
To ensure the optimum utilization of funds during the remaining period of the fiscal 
year, the Ministry has been taking several steps: 
• Monitoring and Evaluation : The Ministry ensures that funds are being used 
effectively by closely monitoring the progress of projects and programs. Regular 
assessments help identify any issues early, allowing timely interventions to keep 
expenditures on track. 
• Timely Release of Funds : Ensuring that funds are released promptly, helps in 
the efficient execution of projects. Delays in disbursement can lead to project 
slowdowns. 
• Identification of delays in obtaining necessary approvals from Central/State 
authorities for various project activities and follow -up with the relevant authorities 
to ensure timely action. 
• Improved Monitoring and Project Tracking by the MoFPI as well as Project 
Management Agency(PMA) 
• Regular Review of the progress of projects against targets. 
• Periodical review of the projects through SAMPADA Portal.  
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
 

 
23  
5. Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation 
Capacities (CEFPPC) 
The Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation 
Capacities (CEFPPC) is a component scheme under the umbrella Scheme Pradhan 
Mantri Sampada Yojana (PMKSY). The main objectives of the Scheme are the 
creation, expansion, and/or modernization of processing and preservation capacities, 
which will help in increasing the level of processing, value addition, and thereby 
reduction of waste and results in enhancement of farmer’s income. The Committee 
observe that there has been an erratic fund allocation and utilization under the 
Scheme. The Committee note that for FY 2022 -23, the BE was Rs. 282.80 Crore 
which was reduced to Rs. 219.68 Crore at RE and the actual utilization was Rs. 
170.10 Crore only. Whereas, during FY 2023 -24 the BE of Rs. 320 Crore was 
reduced to Rs. 275.12 Crore at RE and only Rs. 254.87 Crore could actually be 
utilized. The Committee note that the BE for 2024 -25 has been kept at Rs. 271.60 
Crore, which is Rs. 48.40 Crore and Rs. 3.52 Crore less than the previous year’s BE 
and RE respectively. The Committee note that in 2023 -24, out of the sanctioning 80 
projects, only 45 projects could be completed. Also, in the current financial year 
2024-25, 100 projects sanctioned, 17 only have been completed so far. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry may take remedial measures for 
addressing the reasons for under achievement in terms of completion of projects 
under the Scheme and if the existing Terms & Conditions (T&Cs) is coming in the 
way of quicker sanctioning, these may discussed with the stakeholders and explore 
the possibility of changing such T&Cs. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the status of Third Party Assessment for impact evaluation of the Scheme granted on 
02.07.2024 and also the outcome of such assessment. 
Reply of the Government: 
The implementation schedule for the projects prescribed in the 
Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC) 
scheme guidelines is 18 months from the date of issue of approval letter. In 
exceptional circumstances, for the reasons beyond the control of the promoter(s), the 
implementation period may be extended with the approval of Project Approval 
Committee (PAC). 

 
24  
Delay in implementation of projects occur due to various reasons like not receiving 
various statutory  clearances/approvals by the State Government / other concerned 
Govt authorities  such as Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to Operate (CTO), 
building/layout plans, change of land use (CLU), FSSAI license, meeting of pre -
disbursement conditions of lending banks for term loan disbursement etc.  
Ministry is also making incessant efforts to utilize the funds as mentioned below:  
a) Ministry and the Projects Management Agencies (PMA) engaged under 
CEFPPC Scheme are interacting regularly with the Project Implementing 
Agencies (PIAs) of approved projects and are assisting them in timely 
implementation of the projects. 
b) Regular review meetings, virtual verification and physical site inspection of 
CEFPPC projects are conducted by the Ministry and PMAs for smooth and 
timely completion of the projects.  
c) Ministry, on the request of PIAs, also takes up the matter with the concerned 
State Government and their agencies for smooth and timely implementation. 
d) Weather plays major hindrance for the projects especially in NER/difficult 
areas.  
e) Ministry has revised CEFPPC guidelines permitting only Final Term loan 
sanction order at the time of application so that bank related issues faced by 
implementing agencies may be minimized. 
f) Budget allocated under BE & RE 2024 -25 is after realistic assessment of the 
projects to be completed during the financial year.  However, as against the 
RE of Rs. 218.29 Crore for 2024 -25, as on date (28.01.2025), Rs. 150.26 
Crore (68.83% of RE) has already been utilized. Remaining amount will be 
utilized till March, 2025.  
g) Third Party Assessment for impact evaluation of the Scheme is under 
process.  
h) New guidelines dated 22.01.2025 have been issued. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 

 
25  
6. Scheme for Operation Greens 
The Committee note that the objective of the Scheme for Operation Greens 
(OG) under Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) is to enhance the 
value realization of farmers and minimizing post -harvest losses. The scope of the 
Operation Greens Scheme has been expanded from three crops, namely Tomato, 
Onion, and Potato (TOP), to 22 perishable crops. The Committee also note that the 
actual fund utilization under the Scheme against the Revised Estimate has been 
satisfactory, as it was 95.38% in 2022 -23, which increased to 100.55% in 2023 -24. 
The Budget Estimate for 2024 -25 is Rs. 173.40 Crore, whereas the actual 
expenditure, as on 11.10.2024, is Rs. 59.44 Crore, which is 34.27% of the BE. The 
remaining 65.73% of RE has to be spent in the last half of the financial year which 
may amount to violation of Dept. of Expenditure Guidelines prescribing quarterly 
expenditure ceilings, probably by obtaining exemption from DoE. 
 The Committee, while acknowledging the importance and usefulness of this 
Scheme for small farmers, desire that the Scheme should be further expanded to 
encompass more farmers by taking measures such as broadening the scope of 
crops under the Scheme, enhancing awareness and outreach, simplifying application 
processes, and regular monitoring and evaluation to gather feedback and take 
corrective steps. 
Reply of the Government: 
Under the Operation Greens scheme, the Ministry has utilized Rs. 77.09 crore 
against the RE of Rs. 161.41 crore as of 20.02.2025, which is 47.76% of the RE. The 
reason for the underutilization of funds is the cancellation/withdrawal of some 
approved projects and the non -sanctioning of fresh projects during the current 
financial year, as the funds allocated during the 15th FCC have already been 
exhausted, and no additional allocation has been made by the Government for the 
sanctioning of fresh projects. Further, the long -term interventions under Operation 
Greens are infrastructure projects, which require the involvement of multiple 
government agencies and logistical support for the speedy development of projects, 
which, in turn, also impacts fund utilization under the scheme. 
This scheme is demand -driven in nature, and project proposals are invited 

 
26  
from interested individuals/entities across India through Expressions of Interest (EOI) 
for setting up food processing facilities. Proposals received are evaluated based on 
eligibility and assessment criteria. 
The scheme was initially focused on Tomato, Onion, and Potato (TOP) but 
was later expanded to include 22 perishable crops, 10 fruits, and 11 vegetables 
(such as mango, banana, apple, carrot, cauliflower, gourd family, and more), as well 
as shrimp, for value chain development in designated clusters. Based on stakeholder 
feedback and market demand, additional crops may also be assessed for inclusion 
under the scheme. 
A key component of enhancing awareness and farmer participation under the 
scheme is the formation of Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) through 
designated Project Implementing Agencies. PIA plays a crucial role in: 
a) Mobilizing small and marginal farmers to form FPOs. 
b) Providing training through agricultural universities  and capacity -building 
programs on aggregation, value addition, and direct market linkages. 
c) Targeted outreach programs through promoters have resulted in increased 
farmer participation and better post-harvest management practices. 
Further, in order to simplifying application processes and regular monitoring & 
evaluation, a single -window digital platform (SAMPADA) is developed for easy 
access to information, application tracking and fulfil the objectives of the Scheme, 
the Ministry is committed to participate and engage with State Government officials 
on a regular basis in such meetings in the future. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
7. Scheme for Setting up / Up-gradation of Food Testing Laboratories 
 The Scheme for setting up/Upgradation of Food Testing Laboratories is a sub -
scheme of the Scheme for Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure under 
(PMKSY).The Committee observe that the Scheme for Setting up/Up -gradation of 
Food Testing Laboratories  has resulted in creation of infrastructure for ensuring 

 
27  
quality and safety standards of processed food products to most domestic and global 
standards. The Committee also note that out of 205 lab projects 162 lab projects 
have been completed. While appreciating the Ministry for initiating such Scheme that 
ensures quality control measures in food processing industry, the Committee, desire 
that the Ministry should take necessary steps/facilitate these labs in obtaining 
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories  (NABL) 
accreditation which not only enhances the credibility of the laboratories but also 
ensures that the testing processes and results are in line with international 
standards. This accreditation can significantly boost the confidence of both domestic 
and international stakeholders in the quality and safety of Indian processed food 
products. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
The Ministry already consider NABL mandatory in cases of upgradation and 
the recommendation of the Committee will be incorporated suitably  in the upcoming 
Scheme Guidelines. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
8. Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry 
(PLISFPI) 
The Committee note that the Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food 
Processing Industry (PLISFPI) was launched to support creation of global food 
manufacturing champions commensurate with India’s natural resource endowment 
and support Indian brands of food products in the international markets with an 
outlay of Rs.10,900 Crore. The Scheme would be implemented over a six -year 
period from 2021-22 to 2026-27. The BE for 2023-24 was Rs. 1530 Crore which was 
reduced to Rs. 1150 Crore at RE and the actual utiliza tion was Rs. 590.50 Crore 
which was only 51.34% of the RE. The scrutiny of the utilization of the allocated 
resources reveals that against the total outlay of Rs. 10,900 Crore, Rs. 1,101.31 
Crore only i.e. 12% of the total outlay only could be utilized during the last three year. 

 
28  
The Ministry have stated that the underutilization is primarily due to a lower number 
of claims received than anticipated. Also, a number of claims were not entertained, 
as they were incomplete and lacked essential documentation. Additionally, some 
applicants were unable to meet the minimum Compound Annual Growth Rate of 
10%. As suggested elsewhere in the other schemes, the Committee are of the view 
that if any of the T&Cs are hampering the progress, the Ministry in consultation with 
the stakeholders may explore the possibility of changing them to ensure the allocated 
funds are used for the purpose. The Committee further feel that, there is a need to 
simplify and streamline the entire procedure of applying the Scheme. Further, 
appreciating the Ministry for extending the Scheme to cover Millet -based products, 
the Committee desire that more such initiatives may be explored under the Scheme. 
The Committee suggest that the export policies that favour small and micro food 
processing industries be encouraged. 
Reply of the Government: 
To ensure effective implementation of the PLI scheme, various steps have been 
taken as under: 
• User-Friendly Interface:  The PLISFPI Portal is designed as a one -stop 
solution for all information related to the scheme. The Portal is used to file 
Quarterly Returns and filing Incentive Claims by the applicants. 
• Efficient Communication:  Email communications for different categories has 
been established to facilitate information dissemination, quick responses, and 
issue resolution. 
• Accessibility: The Ministry and PMA have dedicated teams to ensure easy 
access and prompt assistance. Additionally, PMA has assigned case officers to 
each selected applicant. 
• Technical Support:  A dedicated IT team is available at the PMA to address 
any technical issues with the PLISFPI Portal. 
• Comprehensive Information:  The Portal provides a wealth of information, 
including the selection process, applications received, selected applicants, 
investment locations, incentive claims, and bank guarantees. 

 
29  
• Weekly Meetings : Weekly Meetings are held with the PLI Beneficiaries to 
understand their concerns and resolve issues and dissemination of important 
updates regarding the Scheme. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-
I of this Report. 
 
9. Pradhan Mantri  Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises 
Scheme (PMFME) 
The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri  Formalisation of Micro Food 
Processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme is pivotal for fostering the growth and 
development of the micro food processing sector in India. This sector, predominantly 
unorganized, plays a crucial role in rural economies by providing employment and 
livelihoods to millions. The Committee also note that this sector not only contributes 
to reducing poverty and boosting rural development but also enhances food safety 
standards and promotes entrepreneurship, thereby playing a significant role in 
achieving the broader economic and social goals of the country. The Committee, 
however, note that the fund utilization under PMFME was not very impressive during 
2021-22 and 2022-23 as the Budget Estimate was considerably revised downward at 
the RE stage and that too could not be fully utilized at the end of the respective 
financial years. However, the Committee also note that the financial performance of 
the Scheme improved considerably  during 2023 -24 as the Budget Estimate of Rs. 
639.05 Crore was enhanced to Rs . 800 Crore at the RE stage and the actual 
utilization was Rs. 779.09 Crore which was more than 97% of RE. Similarly, out of 
the Budget Estimate of Rs. 879.5 Crore for 2024 -25, Rs. 700.88 Crore has been 
utilized till 10.11.2024. The Committee express their satisfaction over the 
considerable improvement in utilisation of the funds meant for the scheme.  The 
Committee also feel that there is still vast scope for the growth of this Scheme as our 
country has a large and diverse agricultural base, which provides a rich supply of raw 
materials. The Committee, therefore, recommend that measures such as the 

 
30  
organization of localized outreach and awareness campaigns in local languages, the 
simplification of application procedures and documentation requirements, and the 
strengthening of partnerships with local banks and microfinance institutions to 
provide easier access to credit, should be taken sincerely for the further growth of 
this Scheme.  
Reply of the Government: 
To raise awareness about the PMFME Scheme at the grassroots level and 
effectively address regional diversity, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, 
Government of India, has undertaken various initiatives.  These efforts include 
nationwide radio campaigns in regional languages, broadcasted across national, 
community and private radio stations to ensure widespread coverage. Additionally, 
national print advertisement campaigns in regional languages have been launched, 
targeting publications from small to large -scale. The Ministry, in collaboration w ith 
State Governments, has also been organizing district -level awareness workshops to 
engage key stakeholders such as potential micro -food processing enterprises, bank 
representatives, district officials, and resource persons, ensuring they are well 
informed about the PMFME Scheme.  
PMFME MIS Portal has been designed for easy process for submission of 
applications. The portal is online for submission of all the applications and no 
physical documentation is requited under the scheme. The Detailed Project Report is 
inbuilt in the system and is generated automatically upon filling and submission of all 
the details along with documents, by the applicants.  
The Scheme also engages District Resource Persons (DRPs) at the district or 
regional level to provide hand -holding support to micro food processing enterprises 
which includes assisting micro enterprises in preparing Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs), securing bank loans, providing training, upgradation of the units, obtaining 
necessary regulatory approvals, ensuring hygiene standards etc. 
PMFME Scheme's benefits are applicable on the loans availed from all 
Scheduled Commercial Banks registered by Reserve Bank of India. In addition, 
Micro Finance Institutions such as National Cooperative Development Corporation 
(NCDC) and StreeNidhi have also been onboarded to provide support for easier 

 
31  
access of credit to the beneficiaries. Regular follow -up/ review meetings with all the 
Lending Banks, State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) Meetings and 
representatives at State and District level are being conducted to ensure smooth 
implementation of the scheme. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter-
I of this Report. 
 
10. Institutions under Food Processing Industries 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Food Processing Industries has two 
Institutes of National Importance (INI) under their aegis - NIFTEM-K (Kundli) and 
NIFTEM-T (Thanjavur). The Committee further note that these two institutes offer 
Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.), Master of Technology (M.Tech.), and Ph.D. 
degrees in various areas of food technology and supply. These Institutes offer 
Master of Business Administration (MBA). Admission to the B.Tech.  program is 
based on the Joint Entrance Examination – Main (JEE Mains), while admission to the 
M.Tech. program is based on the Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE). 
The Committee, however, find that the annual student intake in both these institutes 
of such importance is low. There are only 365 seats for NIFTEM -K and 175 seats for 
NIFTEM-T. This number of intakes does not justify the good infrastructure in both 
institutes, such as NABL -accredited food testing labs, and their reputation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry take necessary measures to 
increase the student intake in both institutes to cater to the growing demands of 
students as well as the food processing industries. Simultaneously, the Ministry may 
also enhance the required infrastructure, such as lab facilities, to support the 
increased intake and ensure high-quality education and research opportunities. 
Reply of the Government: 
Both NIFTEMs are undergoing infrastructure expansion with financial 

 
32  
assistance from the Ministry. The expansion project at NIFTEM -K is nearing 
completion, while NIFTEM -T's infrastructure project has recently received approval 
from the Ministry. These infrastructure expansion projects will undoubtedly enhance 
the student intake at both institutes. 
Additionally, the Ministry continues to support both institutions through annual 
grants under various GIA Heads, including salaries, creation of capital assets, 
general expenses, and scholarships in order to ensure that existing infrastructure 
facilities are enhanced to meet the increased demand and maintain the highest 
standards of education and research excellence. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
11. Enhancing Accessibility and Simplifying Implementation of Schemes in 
the Food Processing Sector 
 The Committee note that the Schemes of the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries are excellent initiative taken by the Government with good objectives and 
vision. The common man, however, often faces significant hardships/challenges in 
accessing the benefits of these Schemes. These challenges include complex 
application processes, lack of awareness about the Schemes, and bureaucratic 
hurdles that can be daunting for small farmers and small -scale 
entrepreneurs/enterprises. Many potential beneficiaries strug gle with the complex 
paperwork and the need for multiple approvals, which can be time -consuming and 
discouraging. Additionally, the lack of adequate support and guidance further adds to 
these difficulties, leaving many eligible individuals unable to take full advantage of 
the available Schemes. The Committee, with a view to addressing these issues, 
recommend for simplifying the application process, making it more user -friendly and 
accessible. These can be achieved by reducing bureaucratic red tape, providin g 
clear and concise guidelines, and offering assistance through dedicated helpdesks or 
online platforms. Increasing awareness about the Schemes through targeted 
outreach programs and workshops can also help to ensure that more people are 
informed about the benefits they are entitled to in simple terms. Furthermore, 
leveraging technology to streamline processes and enhance transparency can 

 
33  
significantly reduce the compliance burden on applicants. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government: 
In order to promote and ensure overall development of the Food Processing 
Sector, Ministry has been incentivizing setting up/expansion of related infrastructure 
through its Central Sector Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY) 
Scheme, Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry 
(PLISFPI) and centrally sponsored PM Formalization of Micro Food Processing 
Enterprises (PMFME) scheme across the country.  
With an aim to encourage wider participation of stakeholders, g uidelines of 
schemes revised keeping in mind the ease of doing business and following 
measures were taken into account: 
• Approval Process simplified by a single Technical Committee and Project 
Approval Committee 
• List of eligible and ineligible components incorporated 
• Eligibility criteria are clearly defined 
• Document submission during online application and for release of installments 
simplified 
• Timelines for completion of project increased 
• Condonation for delay in completion of the project simplified. 
• ‘Penalty’ word removed from guidelines (Decriminalization) 
• Need for documents at frequent intervals done away with 
Since the schemes are demand driven, Ministry invites project proposals from 
interested individuals/entities by floating an Expression of Interest (EoI). In order to 
give wide publicity about the opportunity available under MoFPI schemes, Notices 
about issuance of EoI also published in National/Regional/Local newspapers all 
across the country.  
In addition, posts also released on Ministry’s Social Media Handles - Twitter, 
Facebook, Instagram and Koo. These posts disseminate information about benefits 
available under MoFPI scheme for people in general, as well as about concessions 

 
34  
available for SC, ST, NER, Difficult Area people.  
Separate Online portals have been developed for all its schemes PMKSY, 
PMFME and PLISFPI. The module facilitates online submission of application 
document and its status tracking on real time basis.  Ministry has made all the 
processes related to release of grants simple, easy and transparent through online 
scheme management system. The system captures entire workflow starting from the 
stage of submission of proposals to project acceptance and thereafter facilitating 
grant release involving all the stakehold ers namely Promoter, Project Execution 
Agencies, Project Management Agencies (PMAs) and Ministry and automates all the 
processes related to grant release. At every instance, email /SMS is being 
automatically sent to applicant about their status. A helpline number including email 
based queries & reply has also been provided to promoter for getting their 
resolutions, if any. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
12. Measures to reduce wastage of agriculture produce 
The Committee note that one of the objectives of Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) is reducing wastage of agricultural produce. They may 
be apprised of the specific measures/strategies put in place to reduce system wide 
wastages in agricultural/ horticulture produce. 
Reply of the Government: 
Implementation of PMKSY helps in creation of modern infrastructure with 
efficient supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet across the country. 
The scheme not only provides a boost to the growth of food processing sector in the 
country but also helps in, inter -alia, reducing wastage of agricultural produce, 
increasing the processing level and enhancing the export of the processed foods. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter-
I of this Report.  

 
35  
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

 
36  
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION 
TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
Underutilization of allocated resources  
Recommendation (Para No. 1)  
The allocations and expenditure pattern of the Ministry since 2018 -19 shows 
that despite reduction of funds at RE vis-a-vis BE (except in 2020-21), the actuals fell 
short of REs of the respective years. The average utilization of funds allocated at RE 
stage stood at 80.11% since 2018-19.  For the year 2024-25, the Ministry allocated a 
total of Rs. 4,019 Crore including Rs. 4,016 Crore in the Revenue Section and Rs. 
2.54 Crore in the Capital Section. However, there is a recovery of Rs. 729 Crore 
under the head of AIDF; therefore, the net budgetary provision is of Rs. 3,290 Crore. 
The Committee also note that against the Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs. 3,290 Crore 
the actual expenditure (as on 11 thNovember 2024) is Rs. 995.89 Crore. The Ministry, 
however, have proposed a Revised Estimate (RE) of Rs. 3,399.17 Crore for 2024 -25 
which is Rs. 109.17 Crore more than the BE. Out of RE, the utilization stood at Rs. 
995.89 Crore, as on 11/11/2024, which stands at Rs. 995.89 Crore, representing only 
30% (approx.) of the RE.  Rest 70% of RE will have to be spent in the next 4/5 
months. This in turn means the Ministry has to spend amounts higher than the 
amounts in percentage terms prescribed by the Department of Expenditure in the last 
two quarter of the financial years. The Committee, therefore, suggest that provisions 
be made at least at RE stage taking into consideration the ground realities so that 
funds given at RE are not surrendered. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for making efforts 
for optimum utilization of funds. 
The Ministry is closely monitoring implementation and expenditure for improving 
level of utilization of allocated budget under various schemes of the Ministry viz. 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), Prime Minister Formalization of 

 
37  
Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) and Production -Linked Incentive 
Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLIS). 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter -I 
of this Report. 
 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY) 
Recommendation (Para No. 2)  
 The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY) 
is a comprehensive scheme launched by the Government of India with an approved 
outlay of Rs. 5,520 Crore aimed at boosting the food-processing sector. The Scheme 
is designed to create modern infrastructure and enhance supply chain management 
from farm gate to retail outlet. The scheme aims to benefit FPOs, 
Cooperatives/FPCs/SHGs/Government & Private Sector Companies, processors and 
retailers. The Committee observe that the actual expenditure during the last two 
financial years, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24, was 83.49% and 89.42 % of respective RE 
allocation. The Committee also note that the budgetary allocation for the Scheme 
has been reduced by Rs. 200 to Rs. 729 Crore for 2024 -25 from Rs. 923 Crore in 
2023-24. Against this reduced Budget Estimate, only about 34% of it has been 
utilized, as on 11.11.2024, during the current financial year. The remaining 66% of 
RE has to be spent in the last half of the financial year which may amount to violation 
of Department of Expenditur e Guidelines prescribing quarterly expenditure ceilings, 
probably by obtaining exemption from DoE. 
In regard to  the reasons for the underutilization of funds, the Ministry have 
stated that PMKSY is a demand -driven scheme, and fewer projects have been 
received under the SCSP/TSP/NER heads, limiting fund disbursement under these 
categories. The Ministry have also mentioned that funds are released only after the 
submission of necessary documents, and due to the gestation period of 18 to 30 

 
38  
months for projects, combined with delays in obtaining statutory clearances, full 
utilization of funds has not been achieved. For the reduction of the Budget Estimate 
for 2024-25, the Ministry have stated that no sufficient number of release proposals 
have been expected during 2024 -25. They have also stated that no fresh 
Expressions of Interest (EoI) issued in most of the sub -schemes of PMKSY, except 
the present EOI issued for inviting proposals for Irradiation units under the Cold 
Chain Scheme, has also been a reason. 
The Committee express their concern over the underutilization of the allocated 
funds under the Scheme. They are also surprised over the reduction of the Budget 
Estimate for 2024 -25 as they were expecting that the Ministry would come up with 
solution for better utilization of funds. Though PMKSY is a good initiative with novel 
objectives, considering the reduction in the Budget Estimate for 2024 -25 as well as 
its low utilization so far, the Committee feel that the budgetary forecasting of the 
Scheme needs a revisit. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should examine all the aspects of this Scheme, hold discussions with the 
stakeholders, and make a fair assessment of the needs and requirements of the 
sector to reinvigorate this important Scheme. The Committee suggest that the 
reasons for lack of response from the intended beneficiaries under SCSP/STP/NER 
heads be obtained, analysed and the appropriate action including the change in 
Terms and Conditions (T&Cs) applicable under these heads be re visited, if required, 
to utilize fully the budgeted funds for these disadvantaged sections and intended 
beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government: 
The implementation schedule for the food processing projects under PMKSY 
is as prescribed in the scheme guidelines of the respective component schemes. In 
exceptional circumstances, for the reasons beyond the control of the promoter(s), the 
implementation period may be extended with the approval of Project Approval 
Committee (PAC). 
 Delays in the implementation of the projects are due to various reasons, such 
as the non-receipt of statutory clearances/approvals from state and other concerned 
government authorities, including Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to Operate 

 
39  
(CTO), building/layout plans, Change of Land Use (CLU), FSSAI license, and the 
fulfilment of pre -disbursement conditions by lending banks for term loan 
disbursements. These factors have contributed to delays in project implementation, 
leading to lower -than-expected disbursements. Furthermore, the Ministry releases 
the final tranche of the grant only after the completion of the project. 
 Budget allocated under BE & RE 2024 -25 is after realistic assessment of the 
projects expected to be completed during the Financial year. However, as against 
the RE of Rs. 629.8 Crore for 2024 -25, as on date (06.03.2025), Rs. 421.96 Crore 
(67.19 % of RE) has already been utilized and Rs. 170 Crore is also in pipeline and 
may be utilized by the end of March 2025. 
The Ministry is making incessant efforts to utilize the funds by efforts as mentioned 
below: 
i) Ministry and the Project Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged under 
component schemes of PMKSY are interacting regularly with the Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs) of approved projects and are assisting them in 
timely implementation. 
j) Regular review meetings, virtual verifications and physical site inspections of 
projects are being conducted by the Ministry and PMAs to ensure the smooth and 
timely completion of the projects. 
k) Ministry on the request of PIAs, also takes up the matter with the concerned 
State/UT Governments and their agencies for smooth and timely implementation. 
l) Under the PMKSY scheme, project proposals are invited from time to time across 
the country including remote or underdeveloped areas by floating Expression of 
Interests (EoIs) on the  Ministry’s website. For wider publicity of the component 
schemes under PMKSY, it is also circulated through Press Information Bureau 
(PIB) and leading national and regional newspapers. Individuals including small 
farmers as well as entity/ organization such as FPOs/FPCs/NGOs/PSUs/Firms/  
Companies, etc. are eligible to avail benefits under the scheme. 
Under the scheme of Promotional Activities of MoFPI, Ministry has provided financial 

 
40  
assistance to various eligible organizations for organizing 60 events such as 
seminar, workshop, conference, exhibitions etc. across the country during the year 
2024 to create awareness among stakeholders including  small farmers and Farmers 
Producers Organization (FPO) on various schemes of the Ministry. 
In order to generate proposals under the SCSP/STP/NER heads, it is submitted that 
the Ministry on 27.07.2023 floated a special EOI for SC/ST/NER category. Ministry 
had received 179 proposals in the said EOI out of which 48 proposals were 
approved. 
Third party assessment for impact evaluation study of component schemes of 
PMKSY i.e. APC & CEFPPC is under process.  
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-
I of this Report. 
 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI) 
Recommendation (Para No. 8)  
The Committee note that the Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food 
Processing Industry (PLISFPI) was launched to support creation of global food 
manufacturing champions commensurate with India’s natural resource endowment 
and support Indian brands of food products in the international markets with an 
outlay of Rs.10,900 Crore. The Scheme would be implemented over a six -year 
period from 2021-22 to 2026-27. The BE for 2023-24 was Rs. 1530 Crore which was 
reduced to Rs. 1150 Crore at RE and the actual uti lization was Rs. 590.50 Crore 
which was only 51.34% of the RE. The scrutiny of the utilization of the allocated 
resources reveals that against the total outlay of Rs. 10,900 Crore, Rs. 1,101.31 
Crore only i.e. 12% of the total outlay only could be utilized during the last three year. 
The Ministry have stated that the underutilization is primarily due to a lower number 
of claims received than anticipated. Also, a number of claims were not entertained, 

 
41  
as they were incomplete and lacked essential documentation. Additionally, some 
applicants were unable to meet the minimum Compound Annual Growth Rate of 
10%. As suggested elsewhere in the other schemes, the Committee are of the view 
that if any of the T&Cs are hampering the progress, the Ministry in consultation with 
the stakeholders may explore the possibility of changing them to ensure the allocated 
funds are used for the purpose. The Committee further feel that, there is a need to 
simplify and streamline  the entire procedure of applying the Scheme. Further, 
appreciating the Ministry for extending the Scheme to cover Millet -based products, 
the Committee desire that more such initiatives may be explored under the Scheme. 
The Committee suggest that the export policies that favour small and micro food 
processing industries be encouraged. 
Reply of the Government: 
To ensure effective implementation of the PLI scheme, various steps have been 
taken as under: 
• User-Friendly Interface:  The PLISFPI Portal is designed as a one -stop 
solution for all information related to the scheme. The Portal is used to file 
Quarterly Returns and filing Incentive Claims by the applicants. 
• Efficient Communication:  Email communications for different categories has 
been established to facilitate information dissemination, quick responses, and 
issue resolution. 
• Accessibility: The Ministry and PMA have dedicated teams to ensure easy 
access and prompt assistance. Additionally, PMA has assigned case officers to 
each selected applicant. 
• Technical Support:  A dedicated IT team is available at the PMA to address 
any technical issues with the PLISFPI Portal. 
• Comprehensive Information:  The Portal provides a wealth of information, 
including the selection process, applications received, selected applicants, 
investment locations, incentive claims, and bank guarantees. 
• Weekly Meetings : Weekly Meetings are held with the PLI Beneficiaries to  
 

 
42  
understand their concerns and resolve issues and dissemination of important 
updates regarding the Scheme. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2023-Parl. dated 21.03.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of  
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
  

 
43  
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi            CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
15 December 2025,                Chairperson, 
24 Agrahayana 1947 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal  
       Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
44  
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19 th September, 2025 from 1103 hrs. to 1335 hrs. 
in Committee Room No. 1, First Floor, Block -A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
4.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
5.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
6.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
7.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
8.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
9.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
12.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
13.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
14.  Shri Madan Rathore 
15.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
16.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 

 
45  
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Subject Reports and Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(ii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(iii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*;  
(iv) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(v) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(vi) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*; 
(vii) Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 5 th Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2024 -25) of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries, presented during 18th Lok Sabha, and 
(viii) xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx*. 
 
3. xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx* 
 
4. The Committee also adopted xxxxx* 5th Report on DFG (2024 -25) and xxxxx* with 
modifications as suggested in Annexure xxxxx* III xxxxx*. The Committee authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize and present the Reports to Parliament.   
 
5. xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx* 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  
 
  
 
* Matter not related to this report. 

 
46  
Annexure-III 
 
During the Sitting held on 19.09.2025, the Members made the following 
suggestions to be incorporated in  the Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024 -25) on 'Demands for Grants 
(2024-25)' pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
Page 
no. of 
the 
Draft 
Report 
Comment 
Para No. 
Original Comments Modification incorporated 
3  1.7 
 
The Committee had noted that while 
the Ministry has stated that efforts 
are being made for optimum 
utilization of funds, the reply remains 
general and does not specifically 
address the issue concerning the 
formulation of Revised Estimates 
(RE) based on a realistic 
assessment of ground -level 
progress.  
However, the Ministry’s reply lacks 
clarity regarding the actionable steps 
being taken to ensure the judicious 
preparation of RE in future.  
The Committee duly noted and 
appreciate the efforts indicated by 
the Ministry towards optimum 
utilization of funds, the reply 
remains broad and does not 
specifically address the issue of 
formulating Revised Estimates 
(RE) on the basis of the realistic 
assessment of ground -level 
progress.  
However, the Ministry’s reply 
does not clearly outline the 
specific steps proposed for 
ensuring the judicious preparation 
of RE in the future.  
7 1.10 
 
While these efforts are 
acknowledged, the Committee are of 
the view that the Ministry has not 
provided specific details on the steps 
taken to assess the needs and 
requirements of the sector, nor on 
the review of budget forecasting of 
the Scheme, as previously 
recommended. Additionally, 
although the Ministry has undertaken 
awareness activities for 
stakeholders, it has not provided any 
information regarding the feedback 
received from them to further 
strengthen the Scheme. 
 
2. The Committee appreciate 
the Ministry’s initiative to generate 
proposals under the 
SCSP/TSP/NER categories by 
floating a special EOI, however, they 
While these efforts are 
commended, the Committee are 
of the view that the Ministry 
should provide more specific 
details on the steps taken to 
assess the needs and 
requirements of the sector, on the 
review of budget forecasting of 
the Scheme, as was previously 
recommended.  Additionally, 
although the Ministry has 
undertaken awareness activities 
for stakeholders, it is yet to 
provide information regarding the 
feedback received from them to 
further strengthen the Scheme. 
2. The Committee appreciate 
the Ministry’s initiative to generate 
proposals under the 
SCSP/TSP/NER categories by 
floating a special EOI.  At the 

 
47  
find the Ministry’s response 
incomplete. The reply does not 
furnish the reasons for the low 
number of approvals out of the total 
applications received, and it is also 
silent on the Committee’s 
recommendation to review the terms 
and conditions applicable under the 
SCSP/TSP/NER heads to address 
the issue of low participation. 
same time, the response does not 
furnish details on the reasons for 
the relatively low number of 
approvals out of the total 
applications received and the 
information on the Committee’s 
earlier recommendation to review 
the terms and conditions under 
SCSP/TSP/NER heads with a 
view to encouraging greater 
participation. 
9-10      
 
 
1.13 
  
While these measures are 
appreciable, the Committee are of 
the view that the Ministry’s reply 
does not adequately address their 
recommendation regarding the 
revision of the Scheme’s Terms and 
Conditions which may be hindering 
its progress, if any, it does not 
indicate whether any consultations 
with stakeholders have been held in 
this regard. Furthermore, the 
Committee observe that the 
Ministry’s reply is silent on the 
suggestions made earlier to simplify 
and streamline the application 
process, inclusion of additional 
product categories beyond millets, 
and also promoting export policies 
that support small and micro food 
processing enterprises.  
While these measures are 
appreciable, the Committee note 
that the Ministry’s reply does not 
furnish details on their earlier 
recommendation regarding a 
possible revision of the Scheme’s 
Terms and Conditions, which may 
have a bearing on its progress.  
Additionally, it is not very clear 
from the reply whether any 
consultations with stakeholders 
have been held in this regard. 
Furthermore, the Committee 
observe that the Ministry’s reply 
does not furnish enough 
information on the suggestions 
made earlier regarding simplifying 
and streamlining the application 
process, inclusion of additional 
product categories beyond 
millets, and promotion of export 
policies that support small and 
micro food processing 
enterprises.  
12-13  
 
 
1.16 
 
2. However, the Committee are 
of the view that the reply lacks clarity 
on the actual effectiveness of these 
measures at the ground level, 
particularly with respect to digital 
accessibility for micro -entrepreneurs 
and the ease of availing credit in 
rural and remote areas. The 
Committee also observe that the 
Ministry has not articulated any 
forward looking strategy for scaling 
up the Scheme, despite earlier 
recommendations and in view of 
India’s vast and diverse agricultural 
base. In the absence of a proactive 
plan for expansion, they believe that 
the Scheme will fail to achieve a 
substantial increase in capital 
2. However, the Committee 
note that further clarity on the 
effectiveness of these measures 
at the ground level, particularly 
regarding digital accessibility for 
micro-entrepreneurs and the ease 
of availing credit in rural and 
remote areas would be useful.  
The Committee also feel that 
outlining a forward -looking 
strategy for scaling up the 
Scheme, in view of earlier 
recommendations and India’s 
vast and diverse agricultural 
base, could help in achieving a 
substantial increase in capital 
investment outlay nee ded to 
support growth within the 

 
48  
investment outlay required for 
growth within the country’s 
agricultural landscape.  
 
country’s agricultural landscape.  
13-14    1.18 
 
In view of this, the Committee are of 
the opinion that the Ministry should 
outline a comprehensive action plan 
that can serve as a practical model 
for addressing food waste 
challenges and fostering 
sustainability in agricultural and 
horticultural produce. The 
Committee would further desire to be 
apprised of the concrete measures 
undertaken in this regard. 
 
The Committee suggest that it 
would be useful if the Ministry 
could provide details of specific 
measures or strategies for 
reducing wastage in agricultural 
and horticultural produce, in line 
with the earlier recommendation, 
as this would further strengthen 
the Scheme’s overall impact.  The 
Committee, further desire to be 
apprised of the concrete 
measures undertaken in this 
regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
49  
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2024-25). 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations       12 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the 
Government  
           Para Nos.  3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12. Total      09 
 Percentage     75% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee d o not desire to    
pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
      Para No.    .    NIL                                                                Total     00 
 Percentage 0.00% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the   
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
    Para No              1, 2, 8                                                                 Total     03 
                                                                                                                                
Percentage   25% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which f inal replies of the       
Government are still awaited 
      Para No.    NIL                                                                            Total     00 
 Percentage 0.00% 
 
 
 