 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2025-26) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
 
 
RESEARCH FOR DEVELOPING WATER EFFICIENT VARIETY OF 
SEEDS TO SAVE GROUND WATER 
         
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2026 / Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
  
34 

 
 
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND 
FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND 
EDUCATION) 
 
 
Research for Developing Water Efficient Variety of Seeds to Save 
Ground Water 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on                               27.03.2026 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                             27.03.2026 
 
 
 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2026 / Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 


i 
 
 
COA No. 533 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  

ii 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) iii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) iv 
Introduction vi 
Abbreviations vii 
REPORT 
PART – I 
Chapter – I A. Introductory 1 
B. Ongoing Programmes to Develop Water Efficient Varieties 2 
C.  Targets and Achievements 11 
D.  Water Efficient Seed Mission 15 
E.  Genetic Improvement by Integrating Modern Tools 16 
F.  Review Mechanism for Assessment 31 
G. Constraints and Problems 32 
H.  Seed Systems and Accessibility  34 
I.  Capacity Building and Awareness Creation 42 
Chapter-II A. Water Budget Based Cropping System 47 
 B.  Climate-Smart Agronomy 55 
 C. Apex Body for Coordination 58 
PART – II 
Recommendations/Observation 60 
APPENDICES 
Minutes of the 29th Sitting of the Committee held on 20th June, 2025 69 
Minutes of the 3rd Sitting of the Committee held on 20th November, 2025 73 
Minutes of the 12th Sitting of the Committee held on 23rd March, 2026 75 
 
 
 
 
  

iii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2024-25) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P . P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
  
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para 
No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025.   

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2025-26) 
 
PRESENT 
CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  2. Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai  3. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal  4. Shri Rajkumar Chahar  5. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan  6. Shri Kuldeep Indora  7. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav  8. Md. Abu Taher Khan  9. Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi  10. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi  11. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel  12. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel  13. Shri Narayan Tatu Rane  14. Shri Murasoli S.  15. Shri Dharambir Singh  16. Shri Dushyant Singh  17. Shri Sudhakar Singh  18. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh  19. Shri Tejasvi Surya  20. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor  21. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
  22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde  
24. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
27. Shri Madan Rathore 
28. Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
29. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30. Shri P. P . Suneer 
31. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
  

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Fourth Report on the Subject ‘Research for 
Developing Water Efficient Variety of Seeds to Save Ground Water’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education). 
 
2. The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing had selected the Subject for examination during 2024-25.  The Committee 
took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) on the Subject at their Sitting 
held on 20th June, 2025. As the examination of the Subject could not be completed 
during 2024-25, the Subject was again selected for examination by the Committee 
during 2025-26.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 23rd March, 2026. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) for appearing before the Committee and furnishing requisite information in 
connection with the examination of the Subject. 
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
  
            
       
 
NEW DELHI;                          CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
24th March, 2026                                                   Chairperson 
03 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 
  

vii 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
AGGRi Alliance Accelerated Genetic Gain in Rice Alliance 
AICRP All India Coordinated Research Projects  
AICRPDA All India Coordinated Research Project for Dryland Agriculture  
AINP All India Network Projects  
AMAAS Application of Micro-organisms in Agriculture and Allied Sectors  
AWD Alternate Wetting and Drying  
BCM Billion Cubic Metres  
BSPCs Breeder Seed Production Centres  
CAU/SAUs Central and State Agricultural Universities  
CFLDs Cluster Front Line Demonstrations  
CRIDA Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture  
CRPs Consortium Research Projects  
CRTs Climate Resilient Technologies  
CRURRS Central Rainfed Upland Rice Research Station  
CRV Climate Resilient Village  
DA&FW Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare  
DSR Direct Seeded Rice  
EU European Union  
FLDs Front-Line Demonstrations  
FPOs Farmer Producer Organization  
FSSI Federation of Seed Industry of India  
GEAC Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee  
GM Genetically Modified  
GMOs Genetically Modified Organisms  
IBKP Indian Biosafety Knowledge Portal  
IBSC Institutional Biosafety Committee  
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research  
ICARDA International Centre for Agricultural Research in Dry Areas  
ICRISAT International Crop Research Institute for Semi Arid Tropics  
IIFSR Indian Institute of Farming Systems Research  
IISWC Indian Institute of Soil and Water Conservation  
IoT Internet of Things  
IRRI International Rice Research institute  
KBLP Ken-Betwa Link Project  
KVKs Krishi Vigyan Kendras  
LMOs Non-Living Modified Organisms 
MoA&FW Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare  
MP Madhya Pradesh  
NARS National Agricultural Research System  
NBPGR National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources  
NFSM National Food Security Mission  
NGOs Non-Governmental Organizations  
NIASM National Institute for Abiotic Stress Management  
NIC National Informatics Centre  
NICRA National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture  
NPP National Perspective Plan  
NRCIPM National Research Centre for Integrated Pest Management  
NSAI National Seed Association of India  
NSCL National Seed Corporation Ltd.  
NSG National Seed Grid  
NTIWRDM National Taskforce on Integrated Water Resource Development and 
Management  

viii 
 
NUE Nitrogen Use Efficiency  
NWDA National Water Development Agency  
NGTs New Genomic Techniques  
NGOs Non-Governmental Organizations  
PDMC Per Drop More Crop  
PMKSY Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana  
PSUs Public Sector Undertakings  
RCGM Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation  
RTCP Real-Time Contingency Planning  
SATHI Seed Authenticity Traceability & Holistic Inventory  
SMSP Sub-Mission on Seeds and Planting Material  
SSAP-W State Specific Action Plans on Water  
SSCAs State Seed Certification Agencies  
SMSP Sub-Mission on Seeds and Planting Material  
TDC Technology Demonstration Component  
TGCP Translational Genomics in Crop Plants  
UP Uttar Pradesh  
VCRMCs Village Climate Risk Management Committees  
WUE Water Use Efficiency  
YMD Yellow Mosaic Disease  
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
PART - I 
Chapter – I 
A.  Introductory 
1.1   Agriculture sector has been the backbone of the Indian economy, playing a vital role 
in national income and employment.  This sector contributes approximately 16 per cent of 
the country’s GDP for FY 24 at current prices and supports about 46.1 per cent of the 
population. Not only does its performance directly impact food security, but it also influences 
other sectors, sustaining livelihoods and supporting economic growth.  The food grain 
production of 50.8 million tonnes in 1950-51 has now touched 332.23 million tonnes during 
2023-24.  The bumper food grain production is primarily attributed to cultivation of high 
yielding crop varieties developed by the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) led 
by Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).  Despite the increase in crop production, 
further enhancements in productivity across various crops and regions are vital for boosting 
performance and positively influencing farmers’ incomes.  To meet the projected demand of 
1.68 billion population during 2047, we need to develop highly water efficient varieties with 
higher grain yield. 
1.2 In India, while the volatility in agricultural growth has notably diminished over time 
due to targeted interventions, the sector is not without its challenges. Issues like climate 
change and water scarcity present significant obstacles that require focused and targeted 
interventions.  Major adverse impacts of climate change on agriculture are owing to increase 
in temperature; change in rainfall pattern; weather hazards, decline in soil and water quality; 
shifting dynamics of insects, diseases, soil flora and fauna; intrusion of sea water on land 
and biotic and abiotic stresses arising due to climatic extremes.  Amongst these challenges, 
availability of water for agriculture is one of the serious issues. In India, the agriculture sector 
also remains highly vulnerable to weather variability.  Nearly 51 per cent of the 139.9 million 
hectares (m ha) net cropped area of the country falls under rainfed situation which supports 
40 per cent of its human and 60 per cent of livestock population. Rainfed agriculture is 
complex, highly diverse and risk prone. It is characterized by low levels of productivity and 
input usage coupled with vagaries of monsoon emanating from climate change; resulting in 
wide variation and instability in crop yields.  One of the most viable solutions to overcome 

2 
 
this serious issue is the development of varieties which are amenable to low water 
requirement conditions and can perform well even under drought like conditions.  Moreover, 
as per reports, ground water is depleting at an alarming rate in several parts of the country 
and availability of water for Agriculture is one of the serious issues as maximum instability 
in yield is generally due to less or non-availability of water. So, to maintain the sustainability 
of crop production and attain the target of ensuring food, nutrition, environment and 
livelihood security, development of water efficient crop varieties and production of their 
seeds are quite essential.  In addition, promoting agricultural production patterns and 
practices that align with the specific agro-climatic conditions and natural resource available 
in the different regions across the country is vital. Investment in research and development, 
especially on climate-resistant varieties, improved agriculture practices, diversification to 
high-yield and climate-resilient crops and micro-irrigation, can yield to sustainable long-term 
benefits.   
B. ONGOING PROGRAMMES TO DEVELOP WATER EFFICIENT VARIETIES 
 
1.3 Crop Science Division of the ICAR is working on 85 field crops under an Umbrella 
Scheme titled “Crop Science for Food and Nutritional Security” through its six sub-schemes 
viz., (i) Basic and Strategic Research and Education, (ii) Plant Genetic Resource 
Management, Seed and Hill Agriculture, (iii) Genetic Improvement for Food and Fodder 
Crops, (iv) Pulse and Oilseed Crop Improvement, (v) Improvement of Commercial Crops  
for Genetic Gains and (vi) Insects and Microbes Resources, Plant Protection and Pollinators 
Research; is focusing on undertaking research and capacity building activities by harnessing 
conventional and modern scientific knowledge and modern tools for developing location 
specific improved crop varieties/ hybrids and matching protection and production 
technologies; refinement of seed production chain; conserve the genetic resources including 
plants, insects and microorganisms; and providing advisory services and capacity building 
in the domain area besides promoting the basic, strategic and anticipatory crop science 
research. The six sub-schemes have total 63 components including 28 Institutes, 20 All India 
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP), six All India Network Projects (AINP), four 
Consortium Research project (CRPs), Incentivizing Research in Agriculture, Translational 
Genomics in Crop Plants, Genome Editing, Millet Global Hub and Application of Micro-

3 
 
organisms in Agriculture and Allied Sectors (AMAAS). All the scheme components have one 
or more activities related to development of crop varieties needing less water requirement 
or technologies which can help in mitigating the effect of scarcity of water. Sub-scheme-wise 
details along with budget outlay for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26 are presented as under: 
 
S.No. Name of Sub-scheme/ Components Budget 
(Rs. 
crores) 
I Basic and Strategic Research and Education   
1 Indian Agriculture Research Institute, New Delhi 838.510 
2 Indian Agriculture Research Institute, Jharkhand 117.740 
3 Indian Agriculture Research Institute, Assam 129.260 
4 CRP on Hybrid Technology, New Delhi 32.900 
5 CRP on Molecular Breeding, New Delhi 26.060 
6 National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, New Delhi 58.280 
7 Translational Genomics in Crop Plants (TGCP), NIPB, New Delhi 9.760 
8 AINP on Biotech Crops 24.750 
9 Indian Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology, Ranchi 132.800 
10 Enhancing climate resilience and ensuring food security with 
genome editing tool 
310.00 
 Total of sub-scheme (I) 1680.060 
II Plant Genetic Resource Management, Seed and Hill 
Agriculture 
 
1 National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources, New Delhi  133.640 
2 All India Network Project (AINP) on Potential Crops, New Delhi 9.910 
3 Consortium Research Project (CRP) on Agrobiodiversity, NBPGR, 
New Delhi 
32.990 
4 Vivekananda Parvatiya Krishi Anusandhan Sansthan, Almora 64.760 
5 Indian Institute of Seed Science, Mau  41.260 
6 AICRP on Seed (Crops), Mau including ICAR Seed Projects 68.960 
 Total of sub-scheme (II) 351.520 
III Genetic Improvement for Food and Fodder Crops  
1 National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack 82.825 
2 Incentivising Research in Agriculture, Cuttack 65.190 
3 Indian Institute of Rice Research, Hyderabad 69.800 
4 AICRP on Rice, Hyderabad 41.261 
5 CRP on Biofortification, Hyderabad 39.000 
6 Indian Institute of Wheat and Barley Research, Karnal 56.881 
7 AICRP on Wheat & Barley, Karnal 14.380 
8 Indian Institute of Maize Research, Ludhiana 79.000 
9 AICRP on Maize, Ludhiana 24.751 
10 Indian Institute of Millets Research, Hyderabad 37.572 
11 AICRP Sorghum and small millet, IIMR Hyderabad 28.515 
12 AICRP on Pearl millet, IIMR Hyderabad 11.320 

4 
 
13 Indian Grassland and Fodder Research Institute, Jhansi 50.830 
14 AICRP on Forage Crops and Utilization, Jhansi 14.760 
15 Global R&D Hub for millets in India 250.000 
 Total of sub-scheme (III) 866.085 
IV Pulse and Oilseed Crop Improvement  
1 Indian Institute of Pulses Research, Kanpur 99.200 
2 AICRP on Rabi Pulses (chickpea, lentil, fieldpea), IIPR Kanpur 19.320 
3 AICRP on Khrarif Pulses (Pigeonpea, mubgbean, urdbean, 
lathyrus, rajmash, cowpea arid legumes) 
24.750 
4 Directorate of Groundnut Research, Junagarh 52.730 
5 AICRP on Groundnut, Junagarh 14.860 
6 Indian Institute of Soybean Research, Indore 36.960 
7 AICRP on Soybean, Indore 12.320 
8 Directorate of Rapeseed Mustard Research, Bharatpur 36.980 
9 AICRP on Rapeseed & Mustard, Bharatpur 17.060 
10 Indian Institute of Oilseeds Research, Hyderabad 49.990 
11 AICRP on Oilseeds, IIOR, Hyderabad (sunflower, safflower, 
castor, linseed) 
21.470 
12 AICRP on Sesame and Niger, Jabalpur 7.690 
 Total of sub-scheme (IV) 393.330 
V Improvement of Commercial Crops for Genetic Gains  
1 Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow 115.030 
2 AICRP on Sugarcane, Lucknow 12.910 
3  Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore 68.850 
4 Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajamundry 32.440 
5 AINP on Tobacco, Rajamundry 5.482 
6 Central Institute of Cotton Research, Nagpur 71.385 
7 AICRP on Cotton, Coimbatore 11.444 
8 Central Research Institute for Jute and Allied Fibres, Barrackpore 54.209 
9 AINP on Natural Fibres, CRIJAF, Barrackpore 7.110 
 Total of sub-scheme (V) 378.860 
VI Insects and Microbes Resources, Plant Protection and 
Pollinators Research  
 
1 National Institute of Biotic Stress Management, Raipur 79.290 
2 National Bureau of Agricultural Insect Resources, Bengaluru  32.990 
3 AICRP on Biocontrol of Crop Pests, Bengaluru 24.010 
4 National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Microorganisms, Mau 45.450 
5 Application of Micro-organisms in Agriculture and Allied Sectors 
(AMAAS)  
21.360 
6 National Research Centre for Integrated Pest Management 
(NRCIPM), New Delhi 
27.505 
7 AICRP on Nematodes in Cropping System, New Delhi 11.000 
8 AICRP - Honeybees and Pollinators, New Delhi 13.210 
9 AINP on Pesticides Residues& Contaminants, New Delhi 11.560 
10 AICRP on Crop Pest Management (Soil arthropod, Agri Agrology, 
Vertebrate Pest mgmt) 
30.260 

5 
 
11 AINP on Emerging Pests (UG 99, wheat blast, Sclerotinia stem 
rot, red rot, Locust, Fall Army Worm) 
12.860 
 Total of sub-scheme (VI) 309.495 
 GRAND TOTAL  3979.35 
(Background Note Page: 2-4) 
1.4 The development and evaluation of varieties under the AICRPs is done based on the 
five major agro-climatic zones. Based on their suitability, these varieties are recommended 
for the whole zone or for a particular state. Development of water efficient varieties in all 
mandated crops is one of the objectives under AICRPs across all Agro-climatic zones and 
state-specific conditions. 
(Reply to LOP No. 2 dt. 9.7.2025) 
1.5 The Department also informed that in addition to the planned projects, a good number 
of externally funded projects are also working on the objective of breeding for low water 
requiring varieties in different field crops. 
The externally funded projects operating in the Council with the objective for 
development of low water requiring genotypes are listed as under: 
 
Rice 
 Molecular tagging of genes related to early seedling vigour using landraces and wild 
introgression lines to develop climate smart rice varieties (Funded by SERB, DST) 
 Evaluating IoT enabled AWD system for reducing GHG emissions and enhancing 
sustainability of rice production (Funded by CULTVATE) 
 Identification and characterization of superior haplotypes for agronomically important 
traits in rice (Oryza sativa. L.) (Funded by SERB, DST) 
 Accelerated genetic gain in rice - Irrigated rainfed (Drought, salinity & submergence) 
and DSR ecologies (AGGRI- Alliance) 
Maize 
 Improving rainfed (Kharif) maize productivity (Funded by CIMMYT) 

6 
 
 Deployment and scaling high-yielding, climate-resilient and water-efficient maize 
hybrids to enhance productivity of low yielding districts in Kharif season (Funded by 
CIMMYT) 
Oilseeds 
 Exploiting genetic diversity for improvement of safflower through genomics-assisted 
discovery of QTLs/genes associated with agronomic traits (DBT-Safflower)  
 Exploitation of genetic & genomic resources for improvement of niger (Guizotia 
abyssinica L.F. Cass) through breeding and biotechnological tools (DBT-Niger). 
Tobacco 
 Genetic exploration to harness burley germplasm resources and breeding for water 
stress tolerance in burley tobacco (Funded by Godfrey Phillips India Ltd, Guntur) 
Sugarcane 
 Genome editing in sugarcane to improve yield, quality, biotic stress tolerance and 
biomass modification for biofuel production (Under the Central Sector Scheme Crop 
Science for Food and Nutritional Security, Sub-scheme) 
 Enhancing climate resilience and ensuring food security with genome editing tools) 
(ICAR-EFC) (a) Creating targeted mutation in sugarcane for improving water deficit 
tolerance 
 CRISPR – Crop Network – Targeted improvement of stress tolerance, nutritional 
quality and yield of crops by using genome editing (NASF) 
 Deciphering the genetic basis of root-system architecture developing climate resilient 
sugarcane (BRNS) 
 Identification of climate resilient drought tolerant sugarcane varieties suitable for 
Haryana state (RKVY Haryana). 
Cotton 
Technology for upscaling of non-GM Extra Long Staple Cotton Production in 
Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu. 

7 
 
 
1.6 Besides, ICAR under its flagship network project ‘National Innovations in Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)’ launched in 2011 is also focussed on climate resilient 
technological innovations as detailed below:  
 Climate resilient technologies viz., resilient intercropping systems, conservation 
agriculture, crop diversification from paddy to other alternate crops like pulses, oilseeds, 
agroforestry systems, zero till drill sowing of wheat to escape terminal heat stress, 
alternate methods of rice cultivation (system of rice intensification, aerobic rice, direct 
seeded rice), green manuring, integrated farming systems, integrated nutrient 
management, integrated pest management, organic farming, site specific nutrient 
management, in-situ moisture conservation, protective irrigation from harvested rainwater 
in farm pond, micro irrigation method (drip and sprinkler) etc. developed and 
demonstrated to large number of farmers. 
 Developed several doable rainfed technologies like rainwater management, efficient and 
profitable cropping systems, nutrient management, energy management, alternate land 
use/farming systems which can increase production, decrease cost of cultivation, reduce 
drudgery and enable farmers to complete farm operations timely. These technologies 
have been widely adopted by the farmers across the country and imparted stability in 
productivity and production particularly in the rainfed areas. 
 Climate resilient varieties have been developed under NICRA in rice (CR Dhan 201, 
NICRA Aerobic Dhan 1, CR Dhan 412, CR Dhan 414, NICRA Aerobic Dhan 2, Pusa 1882-
12-111-20, NICRA Hill Rice 2022-2, NICRA-Boro Dhan 1), wheat (HD 3411), mungbean 
(Virat, Varsha, Heera, Kanika), lentil (IPL 534), maize (CMH 08-287) and tomato (Kashi 
Adbhut, Kashi Tapas) resistant to diseases and extreme weather conditions. These 
varieties have been introduced in drought and heat wave affected districts, well adopted 
by farmers resulting in increased crop yields and monetary returns at different locations.  
 Simulation modelling studies indicate that adopting improved varieties coupled with 
improved agronomic management can minimize the yield loss due to extreme weather 
events in several crops. 
 Planting methods such as zero till, raised bed planting, cropping intensification with 
harvested water were demonstrated in North-Eastern and districts in the Eastern states. 

8 
 
 Location-specific climate resilient technologies have been tested and validated at on-farm 
sites of 151 climatically vulnerable districts for adoption by the farmers. One village cluster 
from each of the 151 districts was selected by the respective Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) 
in the district and the program is implemented through farmer participatory approach 
which can be upscaled by the respective State Governments. 
 Major achievements of Climate Resilient Village (CRV) developed under this programme 
includes Location specific Climate Resilient Technologies (CRTs) demonstrated in 446 
villages covering 2,13,421 households and 2,35,874 ha area and Village climate risk 
management committees (VCRMC), custom hiring centers, seed and fodder production 
systems and community nurseries enabled wider adoption of CRTs. NICRA model 
villages are being upscaled by different State Governments and agencies such as PoCRA 
in Maharashtra, Drought proofing of watersheds by NABARD, etc. 
 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is also promoting the climate resilient 
varieties particularly less water requiring under the contingency planning when there is delay 
in monsoon or rainfall is much lower than normal rainfall. 
 
1.7 On being asked about the Institutions of the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education engaged in research for developing water efficient variety of seeds to save 
groundwater, the Department stated: 
“The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is actively addressing the 
challenges of climate change in agriculture through a range of targeted initiatives 
implemented by its leading institutes. Crop Science Division is the largest division of ICAR 
carrying the research programmes for developing high yielding crop varieties including 
research for developing water efficient varieties of seeds through its 28 Institutes, 26 All-
India Coordinated Research Projects (AICRPs) and All-India Network Projects (AINPs) and 
nine other projects through their more than 650 centres located in various ICAR 
Institutes/Central and State Agricultural Universities (CAU/SAUs) across different agro-
ecological regions. The mandate of AICRPs/AINPs is ‘Development, multi-location 
evaluation and dissemination of technologies to enhance the productivity and profitability of 

9 
 
field crops on an ecologically and economically sustainable basis for the food and nutritional 
security of the nation’ and these operate on the following objectives: 
• Generation and evaluation of new genetic material in multi-location trials to 
identify genotypes with broad and specific adaptation.  
• Development, evaluation and validation of crop management technologies for 
sustainable production and ensuring protection from biotic and abiotic 
stresses.  
• Pre-breeding and trait discovery for improving crops using diverse germplasm 
resources  
• Varietal maintenance and seed production.  
• Share experience, knowledge and genetic material among the stakeholders 
working in different parts of the country.  
In addition to the Crop Science Division Institutes, Institutes and programmes under 
Natural Resource Management Division are also equally contributing towards development 
of varieties and management technologies for higher productivity under water deficit/ less 
water availability conditions and help in saving the ground water. These Institutes include 
ICAR-National Institute for Abiotic Stress Management (NIASM), Baramati (Maharashtra) 
and ICAR-Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture (CRIDA), Hyderabad 
(Telangana). The project entitled “National Innovations for Climate Resilient Agriculture” 
(NICRA) under ICAR-CRIDA is exclusively involved in development of water efficient 
varieties and management technologies.” 
 
1.8 On being asked about the Institutes/Organizations, other than that of ICAR and 
DARE, engaged in development of water efficient variety of seeds to save groundwater, the 
Department stated: 
“The institutions other than ICAR and DARE engaged in development of water 
efficient variety of seeds to save ground water the National Agricultural Research System 
(NARS) partners like State Agriculture Universities (SAUs) located across agro-climatic 
zones in India, Central Agricultural Universities (CAUs) which undertake the research under 

10 
 
the aegis of ICAR through the All India Coordinated Research Project Centres. Other than 
the NARS   the international organizations viz., International Centre for Agricultural 
Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA (chickpea, lentil), International Crop Research Institute for 
Semi Arid Tropics (ICRISAT (pigeonpea), WorldVeg (Mungbean, blackgram), International 
Rice Research institute (IRRI) under AGGRi Alliance project are engaged in development 
of rice water efficient varieties. A few private companies also have their independent 
Research and Development programmes for development of water efficient varieties.” 
 
1.9 When the Committee asked whether the Institutions and schemes of the Department 
for developing water efficient variety of seeds are catering to the requirements of all agro-
climatic zones of the country, the Department stated: 
“Yes, the varietal testing is done on Zonal and State Basis under the All India 
Coordinated Research Projects of different crops. The AICRPs help in identification of site 
specific varieties technologies through its multilocation testing protocol across the zones. 
ICAR is mandated for the production and supply of breeder of varieties developed through 
various crop based AICRPs to the different public and private seed production agencies. 
The AICRP on Seed (Crops) is coordinating the production of breeder seeds of the varieties 
developed by different Institutes/ SAUs/ CAUs through its 68 breeder seed production 
centres (BSPCs) located across 27 states and UTs covering diverse agro-climatic zones. 
The state-wise distribution of BSPCs is given below: 
S. 
No. 
State Centre 
1 Assam (1) AAU, Jorhat  
2 Andhra Pradesh (1) ANGRAU, Guntur 
3 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands (1) ICAR-CIARI, Port Blair 
4 Bihar (2) BAU, Sabour; RPCAU, Pusa 
5 Chhattisgarh (1) IGKV, Raipur  
6 Delhi (1) ICAR-IARI, New Delhi  
7 Goa (1) ICAR-CCARI, Goa  
8 Gujarat (5) AAU, Anand; SDAU, SK Nagar; NAU, Navsari; JAU, Junagadh; 
ICAR-IIGR, Junagadh 
9 Haryana (2) CCSHAU, Hisar; ICAR-IIWBR, Karnal 
10 Himachal Pradesh (1) CSKHPKV, Palampur 
11 Jammu & Kashmir (2) SKUAST, Srinagar; SKUAST, Jammu 

11 
 
12 Jharkhand (2) BAU, Ranchi; ICAR-IARI, Jharkhand 
13 Karnataka (4) UAS, Bangalore; UAS, Dharwad; UAS, Raichur; UAHS, 
Shimogga 
14 Kerala (1) KAU, Trissur  
15 Madhya Pradesh (3) JNKVV, Jabalpur; RVSKVV, Gwalior; ICAR-NSRI, Indore 
16 Maharashtra (6) VNMKV, Parbhani; MPKV, Rahuri; PDKV, Akola; KKV, Dapoli; 
VSI, Pune; ICAR-CICR, Nagpur 
17 Manipur (1) CAU, Imphal  
18 Meghalaya (1) ICAR RC NEH, Barapani  
19 Odisha (2) OUAT, Bhubaneswar; ICAR-CRRI, Cuttack 
20 Punjab (2) PAU, Ludhiana; ICAR-IIMR, Ludhiana 
21 Puducherry (1) PAJANCOA&RI, Karaikal  
22 Rajasthan (6) AU, Kota; SKRAU, Bikaner; SKNAU, Jobner; MPUAT, Udaipur; 
ICAR-CAZRI, Jodhpur; ICAR-IIRMR, Bharatpur 
23 Telangana (4) PJTSAU, Hyderabad; ICAR-IIRR, Hyderabad; ICAR-IIMR, 
Hyderabad; ICAR-IIOR, Hyderabad 
24 Tamil Nadu (2) TNAU, Coimbatore; ICAR-SBI, Coimbatore 
25 Uttar Pradesh (10) 
NDUAT, Faizabad; CSAUAT, Kanpur; SVPUAT, Meerut; BUAT, 
Banda; BHU, Varanasi; RLBCAU, Jhansi; ICAR-NISST, Mau; 
ICAR-IGFRI, Jhansi; ICAR-ISRI, Lucknow; ICAR-IIPR, Kanpur 
26 Uttarakhand (2) GBPUAT, Pantnagar; ICAR- VPKAS, Almora 
27 West Bengal (3) BCKV, Nadia; UBKV, Pundibari; ICAR-CRIJAF, Barrackpore” 
 
C. TARGETS AND ACHIEVEMENTS 
1.10 Development of varieties is a continuous process and various water efficient varieties 
have been produced over the years. Keeping the changing climate and scarcity of irrigation 
water, degrading soils, the focus has been on development of varieties suitable for such 
conditions. The target was to develop at least 80% varieties having one or more traits for 
biotic/ abiotic stress tolerance to face the climate change impact. Likewise, out of the total 
varieties, the focus was to breed 15-20% percent varieties as water efficient/ drought tolerant 
and at least 7-8% of total varieties were targeted to have tolerance to extreme water deficit 
conditions. The overall target set have been achieved as out of total 3053 varieties of 85 
crops released since 2014, 2813 varieties (92%) are climate resilient, 1064 varieties (35%) 
are drought tolerant and 328 varieties (10.7%) are extremely drought tolerant. The details 
of the water efficient varieties developed during the last 10 years (2014 – 2024) and current 
year (2025) are as follows: 
 

12 
 
During the last 10 years (2014-2024) and current year (2025) a total of 328 drought tolerant 
/ less water or rainfall requiring varieties have been released and notified, out of which 195 
are of Cereals comprising 103 of Rice, 30 of Wheat, 22 of Maize, 9 of Sorghum, 13 of Pearl 
Millet, 3 of Little Millet, 5 of Kodo Millet, 1 each of Barnyard Millet and Foxtail Millet, 8 of 
Finger Millet; 25 are of Oilseeds comprising 5 of Soybean, 6 of Groundnut, 2 each of 
Sesame and Toria, 1 each of Niger, Taramira and Linseed and 7 of Indian Mustard; 43 are 
of Pulses comprising 4 of Urd bean, 2 each of Moong bean, Horse gram, Moth bean and 
Lentil, 3 of Cowpea, 14 of Pigeon pea, 9 of Chickpea, 1 each of Cluster bean, Faba bean, 
Rajmash, Lathyrus and Winged bean; 14 are of Fibre comprising 11 of Cotton, 1 of Jute 
and 2 of Mesta Roselle; 16 are of Forage crops comprising 3 of Forage Pearl Millet, 2 each 
of Forage Sorghum and Rice bean, 1 each of Forage Maize, Forage Cowpea, Napier Bajra 
Hybrid, Fescue grass, Marvel grass, Anjan grass, Forage Sewan grass, Guinea grass and 
Seteria grass; 33 are of Sugarcane; 2 are of Other crops comprising 1 each of Kalingda 
and Grain Amaranthus. 
Further, during the same time, 1064 rainfed varieties have been released and notified, 
comprising of 391 of Cereals which include 128 varieties of Rice, 66 of Maize, 50 of 
Sorghum, and 41 of Pearl Millet. Among the millets, 14 varieties of Little Millet, 5 each of 
Proso Millet and Barnyard Millet, 8 of Kodo Millet, 31 of Finger Millet, 11 of Foxtail Millet, 27 
of Wheat and 5 of Barley; 162 of Fibres which includes 61 varieties of Cotton and 70 
varieties of Bt Cotton/Hybrids, 13 varieties of Jute, 9 of Mesta (Roselle), 6 of Mesta (Kenaf), 
2 of Sunhemp, and 1 variety of Ramie; 69 of Forages which include 18 varieties of Forage 
Sorghum, 14 of Forage Pearl Millet, 7 of Forage Cowpea, and 3 each of Forage Maize and 
Guinea Grass,  4 each of Marvel Grass and Anjan Grass, 2 each of Dhaman Grass, Rice 
Bean, and Forage Sewan Grass, and one variety each of Setaria Grass, Black Kolukattai 
Grass, Jawahar Vicia, Bundel Bajra Squamulatum hybrid, Aparajita, Dinanath Grass, Oats, 
Lucerne, Hedge Lucerne (Desmentus virgatus), and Berseem; 219 of Oilseeds include 69 
varieties of Soybean, 42 of Groundnut, 28 of Linseed, and 18 of Safflower, 14 of Sunflower, 
13 of Indian Mustard, 8 each of Sesame and Niger, and 7 each of Castor and Toria. 
Additionally, 3 varieties of Taramira and one variety each of Yellow Sarson and Brown 
Sarson; 16 of Potential Crops (Other Crops) which include 6 varieties of Grain Amaranth, 
5 of Tobacco, and 2 of Kalingada. Additionally, one variety each of Buckwheat, Asalio, and 
Winged Bean; 203 of Pulses which include 48 varieties of Pigeon Pea/Red Gram, 37 of 

13 
 
Chickpea, 31 of Lentil, and 28 of Field Pea, 17 of Urdbean/Blackgram, 11 of Green 
Gram/Mungbean, 10 of Cowpea (Grain), and 5 of Horse Gram, 4 varieties of Moth Bean, 3 
of Pigeon Pea, 2 each of Cowpea, Cluster Bean (Guar), and Lathyrus, and 1 variety each 
of Rajmash/French Bean, Faba Bean, and Indian Bean and 4 of Sugarcane. 
1.11 On being asked about steps taken/being taken by the Department to further 
strengthen/broad base the research for developing water efficient variety of seeds to save 
ground water, the Department stated: 
“In varietal development programme of each crop, emphasis has been made to develop 
early maturing and moisture stress tolerant varieties. Several steps have been taken to 
strengthen the research on water efficient crop like import of new germplasm, use of exotic 
and wild germplasm for development in new varieties, use of molecular markers and 
precision breeding in development of drought tolerant and early maturing varieties and 
creation of phenotyping facility for research on water efficient crop varieties. Brief about the 
efforts made is presented as under:  
 Import of elite germplasm: Germplasm with desired traits for low moisture tolerance 
and enhanced water use efficiency have been imported in different crops with special 
emphasis to oilseeds and pulses which are being used in the breeding programme.  
 Establishment of Phenotyping Faculties for Drought and Heat Screening: State 
of art facilities for screening the various genotypes in field crops have been 
established at ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi and ICAR-
National Institute for Abiotic Stress management, Baramati.  
 Establishment of rainout shelters for screening the genotypes for drought 
tolerance: Crop-wise rainout shelters for screening the germplasm and advanced 
breeding lines in different crops have been established. Rainout shelters have been 
established at ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi for multiple 
crops and one for pulses; ICAR-Sugarcane Breeding Institute Regional Station, 
Karnal for sugarcane, ICAR-IIPR, Kanpur for Pulses; ICAR Indian Institute of 
Groundnut Research, Regional Station at Anantpur. 
 Various drought tolerant advance lines/ varieties developed in different crops: 
Two entries of maize viz., IIMR23K-18 and CAH2313 have been identified as drought 

14 
 
and heat tolerant under combined heat and drought stress trial of one year, however 
needs validation with another year of testing. In case of oilseeds, focused breeding 
programs have led to development of short-duration, drought- and heat-tolerant 
oilseed varieties like KBSH-53 (sunflower), PBNS-12 (safflower), JN-105 (niger), 
Padmini (linseed), DCH-177 (castor), and RT-351 (sesame).  
 Special programmes for breeding water efficient varieties: In case of wheat and 
barley, varietal testing trials for restricted irrigation conditions are conducted in each 
zone. After multi-year multilocation testing new water use efficient wheat and barley 
varieties are identified and recommended for cultivation. In case of sugarcane, fifteen 
pre-breeding materials have been developed under an institute project entitled 
“Development of Multiparent Advanced Generation Inter- Cross (MAGIC) population 
for drought tolerance in sugarcane”. These pre-breeding materials are used as 
parents for developing drought tolerant varieties. Groundnut genotypes that exhibit 
superior performance under drought conditions and possess high WUE are being 
routinely screened under a rainout shelter at the Institute’s regional station in 
Anantapur. Regular crossing programs are conducted to develop HYVs of groundnut 
with enhanced WUE. As a result, advanced breeding lines viz. PBSA 11061 and 
PBSA 11010 are under coordinated trial/ ready for state release.  
 Registration of drought tolerant/ water efficient donors with Committee for 
Plant Germplasm Registration Committee: Donors with high drought tolerance viz. 
NRCG 10666, NRCG 14082, NRCG 15363, NRCG 16508, NRCG 14963, NRCG 
13036, NRCG 13383, NRCG 13516 are identified following screening of 2000 
germplasm accessions for over 3 seasons. Registration of these with National 
Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR) as genetic stocks is in progress. In 
cotton, a cotton drought tolerant genetic stock IC0587405 has been registered with 
ICAR-NBPGR. In case of pulses, the projects with the objective of developing pulses 
varieties suitable for rainfed cultivation are already operating and majority of the 
varieties are having traits for water use efficiency. Under multilocation trials for 
evaluation of candidate entries of Spring and Summer mungbean, urdbean, and 
rainfed trials of chickpea have been taken up to develop specific varieties which can 
grow well in these ecologies. 

15 
 
 Special efforts for development of water efficient varieties in rice: Varietal 
development programmes in rice now give priority to traits such as drought tolerance, 
early maturity, aerobic adaptation, and suitability to Direct Seeded Rice (DSR). In All 
India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Rice strengthened multi-location 
testing for breeding lines under rainfed system for identification of water-efficient rice 
varieties in drought-prone and upland ecologies have been taken-up. Support for the 
Development of Suitable Agronomic Packages for Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) to 
reduce water and labour, Alternate Wetting and Drying (AWD) to reduce irrigation 
frequency. The Department is fostering partnerships with national and international 
agencies, including IRRI, AGGRi Alliance (Accelerated Genetic Gain in Rice 
Alliance), and projects funded by other international agencies. Further, a dedicated 
research center under the ICAR-Central Rice Research Institute, Cuttack viz., Central 
Rainfed Upland Rice Research Station (CRURRS), Hazaribag, specifically focusing 
on rainfed and water-limited ecosystems.” 
  
D. Water Efficient Seed Mission 
1.12 When the Committee categorically asked whether the Department agree with the 
view that there is a need to have a long term ‘Water Efficient Seeds Mission’ for development 
of water efficient varieties of seeds of various field crops, the Department stated: 
“Under the recently announced National Mission of High Yielding Seeds development 
of water efficient varieties and their further upscaling will be one objective. However, a long-
term ‘Water Efficient Seeds Mission’ with special emphasis on crops with high water use 
efficiency (WUE) or rainfed crops will be more impactful which should have focus on 
Precision Farming practices to enhance water use efficiency.  
Such Mission aligned with other national priorities would provide a focused 
framework to address the challenges of rainfed agriculture, promote the conservation of 
groundwater resources, and support scientific innovations in breeding drought-resilient and 
water-efficient groundnut genotypes. Further, by mobilizing targeted manpower, sustained 
funding, and institutional support, the Mission will play a transformative role in ensuring 

16 
 
sustainable crop production under water-deficit conditions specifically in case of oilseeds 
and pulses.” 
 
E.  Genetic Improvement by Integrating Modern Tools 
1.13 Keeping the gravity of the problem in view, the programmes of breeding climate 
resilient varieties have been reorganized. As maximum unstability in yield is generally due 
to less or non-availability of water, hence breeding the less water requirement crop varieties 
and production of their seed is the focus of the Crop Improvement programmes.  Among the 
63 programmes operating under Crop Improvement the project entitled, “Enhancing climate 
resilience and ensuring food security with genome editing tool” with a total budget of Rs. 
310 crores during 2023-24 to 2025-26 is based on the cutting edge latest biotechnological 
tools where 24 crops have been included for improvement in this programme.” 
 
1.14 The details of the program on “Enhancing climate resilience and ensuring food 
security with genome editing tool”, as submitted by the Department, are as under: 
“In the 2023-24 budget, the Government of India allocated ₹500 crores for genome 
editing in agriculture. The 500 crores was allocated to Crop Science (300) and Natural 
Resource management (10 crores), Horticulture (120 crores), Agricultural Engineering (10 
crores), Fisheries (20 Crores), and Animal Sciences (40 crores) SMDs. With the 310 crores 
allocated to Crop Science and Natural Resource management SMDs, a Sub-Scheme on 
“Enhancing climate resilience and ensuring food security with genome editing tools” 
with a budget of Rupees 310.00 Crores under the EFC Scheme on “Crop Science for Food 
and Nutritional Security” was approved in 2023. This sub-scheme is being coordinated by 
ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi as Lead Centre, 23 ICAR Institutes 
as partner Institutes. Under this project genome editing of 24 crops is being carried out. 
These include 7 cereals, 6 pulses, 6 oilseeds, 3 fibre crops, sugarcane and tobacco. In 
addition, genome editing of four insect pests namely pink bollworm (Pectinophora 
gossypiella), fall armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda), cotton leafworm (Spodoptera litura), 
Fruit fly (Bactrocera zonata) is being carried out. The details of crops and traits improved 
through genome editing are given below: 

17 
 
Crop  Traits 
Rice  Drought and salt tolerance, Herbicide Tolerance, dwarfing, Ideal Plant 
Type, lodging resistance, shattering resistance, grain number, early 
flowering, Nitrogen Use Efficiency (NUE), WUE, Bacterial Blight 
Resistance, Blast resistance, Southern rice black-streaked dwarf 
virus, Nematode resistance, Fe Biofortification, Low Phytate, male 
sterility (for 2 line hybrid system), Clonal rice seeds production, yield 
Wheat NUE, Phosphorus Use Efficiency, Heat stress tolerance, Salt 
tolerance, Resistant starch, Biofortification of Fe and Zn 
Maize  Haploid induction, High planting density, BLSB resistance, low-
glycemic maize, Kernel number per cob 
Sorghum Herbicide tolerance 
Pearl millet Shelf life, Grain yield 
Finger millet Drought stress tolerance, Grain yield 
Foxtail 
millet 
Grain yield 
Mustard  Early flowering, Improved plant architecture, shattering resistance, 
tolerance to Sclerotinia rot, Aphid resistance, Orobanche resistance, 
Low erucic acid, High oleic acid, Improved oil yield, Seed number per 
siliqua, seed yield 
Soybean Photoperiod insensitivity, photosynthesis, Insect resistance, Yellow 
Mosaic Disease (YMD) resistance, resistance to pod shattering, 
Drought tolerance, Water logging tolerance, Salinity stress tolerance, 
oil yield, seed yield 
Groundnut Seed RFOs, High oleic acid, low phytic acid  
Sesame Determinate habit, Seed no. per capsule, Non-shattering, High oleic 
acid content, oil content, seed yield 

18 
 
Sunflower High oleic acid content, Powdery Mildew Resistance 
Castor Low ricin content 
Linseed Early flowering, 1000 seed weight 
Chickpea Drought, Fusarium wilt 
Chickpea Nodulation, Productivity 
Pigeonpea High yield 
Urd bean  Tolerance to MVYV and UCLV, High yield  
Grasspea Low Lathyrus toxin, specifically β-N-oxalyl-L-α,β-diaminopropionic 
acid (β-ODAP) 
Lentil High yield 
Cowpea High biomass 
Sugarcane Drought tolerance, high sucrose content, flowering resistance, 
tillering, red rot resistance, Virus resistance, reduced lignin, high 
biomass yield 
Cotton Compact architecture, determinate sympodial shoots, Fibre quality, 
Seed oil quality, Tolerant to premature Square and boll shedding, 
Resistance to short-day flowering, Improve fibre quality (reduced 
lignin & pectin in bast fibre), Boll yield 
Jute Herbicide Tolerance, 
Flax Haploid Induction, Heat Tolerance 
Tobacco Low Nicotine content” 
 
1.15 On being asked, the Department furnished a detailed note on various aspects of 
genome editing details of which are as under: 

19 
 
 “Mutations are the source of evolution, crop domestication and crop 
improvement: 
Mutation is a small change in the nucleotide sequence of a genome (DNA). Mutations can 
be grouped in to 1) point mutation where one nucleotide is replaced with another or insertion 
or deletion of one or a few nucleotides; and 2) Chromosomal Mutations. Point mutations can 
be i) silent due to the redundancy of the genetic code, ii) mis-sense leading to a single amino 
acid in the protein, iii) Nonsense Mutations which create a premature stop codon causing a 
truncated or longer non-functional protein, and iv) Frameshift Mutations due to insertion or 
deletion of nucleotides that changes the reading frame of the gene leading to significant 
changes in the amino acid sequence of the protein. Chromosomal mutations can be i) 
deletion of a segment of a chromosome, ii) duplication of a segment of a chromosome, iii) 
inversion of a segment of a chromosome, and iv) translocations of a segment of a 
chromosome to a non-homologous chromosome.  
Mutations occur naturally which are called as spontaneous mutations. Mutations can be 
induced by chemical or physical or biological mutagenic agents. Spontaneous mutations 
occur naturally due to errors during DNA replication or spontaneous DNA damage. The 
spontaneous mutations are the primary source of genetic variation within populations. The 
frequency of spontaneous mutation is very low (10-6). The spontaneous mutations led to 
evolution and domestication of crops plants, and are used in breeding of modern crop 
varieties. Two major examples of use of spontaneous mutations in crop breeding are the 
semi-dwarf 1 (sd1) mutation, and reduced height 1 (rht1) mutation in rice and wheat, 
respectively, which brought green revolution and food security to the world.  
Since the frequency of spontaneous mutations are very low, scientists have discovered 
method of using x-rays as mutagenic agent to artificially induced mutations about 100 years 
ago. Later chemical and physical mutagenic agents have been discovered, and are being 
used over the past 75 years to develop and release crops varieties. The limitations/demerits 
of physical and chemical mutagenic agents include rare with reference to specific target 
locus of a gene, and rare desirable mutations, and creation of large number of non-targeted 
mutations. Thus, getting a desirable mutant is a rare chance. Hence, scientists were 
continuously making efforts to develop methods for precision mutagenesis. 

20 
 
Genome editing is a precision mutagenesis method to create mutation at a target locus of a 
gene with very high frequency. Instead of non-targeted mutation created by physical or 
chemical mutagenic agents, genome editing uses biological mutagenic agents (gRNA and 
Cas enzyme) to create targeted mutation in a gene.  
Induced mutagenic agents such as physical or chemical agents create DNA damage at 
several locations on the genome, while genome editing agents create mutations on the 
location which is complementary to the gRNA and thus at one or few locations. The DNA 
damage created by physical, chemical and genome editing reagents are repaired by native 
cellular mechanisms, which often lead to creation of mutation at DNA locus where the DNA 
damage was caused by the mutagenic agent. Therefore, similar to conventional physical or 
chemical mutation methods, mutations are created by genome editing in the native gene in 
the native location on the genome.  
Globally, over 3400 crop varieties have been released through mutation  
breeding using physical or chemical mutagenic agents, and  
about 346 varieties have been released in India since 1948 
(https://nucleus.iaea.org/sites/mvd/SitePages/Home.aspx). Starting from the domestication, 
selection, and recombination breeding, all the crops that we cultivate today are the results 
of either spontaneous or induced mutations, and there is no biosafety and environmental 
safety concern.  
 Method of creation of mutations using Genome Editing: 
In genome editing method, for creating mutation (editing) in the target gene, an exogenous 
DNA coding for gRNA and Cas enzyme are used. Similar to the method of development of 
transgenic GM crop, recombinant DNA technology and genetic transformation are used in 
genome editing to create mutation. A DNA vector (exogenous DNA) consisting of exogenous 
DNA coding for gRNA and Cas enzyme, and a gene coding for as selection marker such as 
hygromycin resistance (NPTII) is used for genetic transformation of crop plant. In the 
transformed plant, the “introduced exogenous DNA (vector)” is integrated in to the host plant 
genome. In the first generation of transformed plants, the gRNA and Cas enzyme express 
from the introduced exogenous DNA. The gRNA-Cas enzyme complex specifically binds to 
target locus on the host plant genome, and Cas enzyme makes a precise cut (DNA double 
strand break) on the host plant genome DNA at the targeted location in the gene.   

21 
 
Depending upon the method by which the DNA damage caused by the mutagenic agent is 
repaired, the mutations are classified as Site Directed Nuclease 1 (SDN 1), SDN2 and 
SDN3.  
a) Site-Directed Nuclease-1(SDN1) mutation:  Involves the unguided repair of a 
targeted double-strand DNA break (DSB) by natural endogenous DNA repair 
mechanism of the host organism such as nonhomologous end joining. The 
spontaneous repair of this break can lead to a mutation causing gene silencing, gene 
knock-out or a change in the activity of a gene. The plant produced will be free from 
foreign DNA. These mutations can be base substitution/indels/deletions including 
large deletions or structural changes. These resultant mutations are comparable to 
those occurring in nature, obtained through conventional mutagenic treatments or 
natural variation found in primary/secondary gene pool. 
b) Site-Directed Nuclease-2 (SDN2) Mutation: Involves a template-guided repair of a 
targeted DSB using an externally supplied donor sequence. The donor carries one 
or several small mutations flanked by two sequences matching both ends of the DSB, 
and is thus recognised as a repair template, allowing the introduction of the 
mutation(s) at the target site. The resultant mutant carries modified sequence, 
leading to altered expression profile of the gene and/or altered activity of the encoded 
protein/RNA. Thus, the edited version could be regarded as allelic form comparable 
to those available in primary/secondary gene pool.   
c) Site-Directed Nuclease-3 (SDN3) Mutation: A foreign DNA is provided as repair 
template, foreign genes can be precisely inserted in the safe harbor loci in the 
genome. The SDN3 mutants will contain foreign DNA. Hence these are considered 
as GMOs. 
In the first generation of mutants created by genome editing, the plant will have the 
introduced exogenous DNA (gRNA, Cas9 and selection marker gene), and the desirable 
mutation. In the subsequent generations, plants with the desired mutant is segregated from 
the plants containing introduced exogenous DNA. Plant containing introduced exogenous 
DNA are discarded and destroyed, and plants containing only desired mutations with no 
introduced exogenous DNA are carried forward. Thus, the mutants developed by SDN1 and 
SDN2 methods of genome editing are indistinguishable from natural/induced mutants, free 

22 
 
from transgene (introduced exogenous DNA), and thus are not Genetically Modified 
Organisms (GMOs) or LMOs (Non-Living modified organisms). Hence, the final varieties 
obtained from genome editing do not elicit any biosafety and environmental safety concerns. 
Spontaneous mutations, and induced mutations developed by conventional 
physical/chemical mutation techniques and those developed by genome editing techniques 
have the same effect on the genes, and organisms. Only native gene is mutated by genome 
editing as in case of the conventional mutation breeding method. Hence, there is no 
biosafety risk, environmental risk and ecological risk is associated with varieties developed 
by genome editing. 
 
 Regulation of genome edited crops in India: 
Several countries such as USA, Japan, UK, Philippines, Australia, Brazil, Argentina, Kenya, 
Nigeria, Indonesia, Canada, Columbia, etc., have already exempted gene edited plants 
developed by SDN1 and SDN2, and they are considered as plant varieties developed by 
any other breeding tools. On March 14, 2025, European Union (EU) Member States agreed 
in the European Council on a common position to move forward with development of new 
rules plants generated using modern precision breeding methods that, in the EU, are 
collectively termed “new genomic techniques” (NGTs). The European Union is also working 
constructively to develop rational regulation for genome edited crops. Already genome 
edited soybean crop in USA, tomato and fishes in Japan are commercially cultivated and 
consumed. 
In India, the biosafety and environmental safety of GMOs/LMOs are regulated under Rules 
1989 of Environment (Protection) Act of 1986 of Government of India. Since, in the first step 
of development of genome edited plants, recombinant DNA technology is used, 
development of genome edited mutant, till the exogenous introduced DNA is removed, is 
regulated under Rules 1989 of Environment (Protection) Act of 1986 of Government of India. 
“Draft Genome Edited Organisms: Regulatory Framework and Guidelines for Risk 
Assessment” in January 2020 was published by DBT for different ministries, stake holders 
and public consultation. Based on the inputs received from various stakeholders, ministries 
and national science academies, Ministry of Environment, forest and Climate Change, 

23 
 
Government of India published OM on 30th March 2022, exempting genome edited crop free 
from exogenous introduced DNA from GM regulation rules (Rules 7-11 of Rules 1989). 
Further, RCGM, DBT, GoI published “Guidelines for safety assessment of genome edited 
plants 2022” and “SOPs for regulatory review of genome edited plants” in 2022 following the 
International standard practice followed in other countries.  
For conduction of research and development using genome editing, approval of Institutional 
Biosafety Committee (IBSC) needs to be obtained by the developer scientist. The details of 
gene, vector, crop, scientists involved etc., are uploaded in Indian Biosafety Knowledge 
Portal (IBKP), and the IBSC discusses all the details and gives approval. The proceedings 
of IBSC is submitted to Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) for noting of 
the proceedings. 
The work on development of genome editing mutants is carried out under biosafety Lab, 
transgenic greenhouse and nethouse contained conditions. Once the mutation is confirmed 
in the transformant plant, the exogenous introduced DNA is segregated out from the 
mutation in the subsequent generation by selfing or backcrossing. Developer select the 
desirable mutant plant with no undesirable phenotype. Then the developer confirms the 
absence of exogenous introduced DNA in the genome edited mutant by using the protocols 
given in the “SOPs for regulatory review of genome edited plants 2022”. 
Under this protocol, the developer generate data to confirm that 
1) Stability of the mutation across generations. DNA sequence data of mutant across 
generation are obtained for the mutant locus to confirm stable inheritance of the mutation.  
2) Absence of selection marker such as antibiotic resistance gene: Phenotypic analysis of 
parent genotype (Wild Type, WT), primary transformant containing introduced exogenous 
DNA, and the mutant free from exogenous introduced DNA are grown on the antibiotic 
medium, and the sensitivity equivalence of WT and mutant is established. 
3) Overlapping PCR analysis to show the absence of introduced exogenous DNA: As per 
the overlapping PCR method given in the “SOPs for regulatory review of genome edited 
plants 2022”, PCR primers are designed to detect any vector fragment that may be 
integrated in to the host genome, and PCR was carried out to demonstrate the absence of 
any vector fragment in the mutant genomic DNA. 

24 
 
Based on these data, the IBSC exempts the SDN1 and SDN2 mutants free of introduced 
exogenous DNA from Rules 7-11 (inclusive of 7 and 11) of Rules 1989. The detailed dossier 
is submitted to RCGM along with the proceedings of IBSC. Then the RCGM deliberate on 
the dossier and ascertain that all procedures given in the SoPs for exemption of genome 
edited mutant free of introduced exogenous DNA is followed, and the mutant is free from 
introduced exogenous DNA. Then the RCGM confirms the exemption given by IBSC. Then 
the genome edited mutant is treated equivalent to that of mutant obtained by conventional 
method, and tested in field trials of AICRPs for identification as variety for cultivation by 
farmers.” 
 
1.16 On being asked by the Committee whether the crops developed through ‘genome 
editing’ tool can be considered as Conventional Variety of crops or Genetically Modified 
(GM) crops, the Department stated: 
 
“Genome editing is a precision mutagenesis tool. Mutation is a small change in the 
nucleotide sequence of a genome (DNA). Mutations occur naturally which are called as 
spontaneous mutations. Mutations can be induced by chemical or physical or biological 
mutagenic agents. Spontaneous mutations occur naturally due to errors during DNA 
replication or spontaneous DNA damage. The spontaneous mutations led to evolution and 
domestication of crops plants, and are used in breeding of modern crop varieties. Two major 
examples of use of spontaneous mutations in crop breeding are the semi-dwarf 1 (sd1) 
mutation, and reduced height 1 (rht1) mutation in rice and wheat, respectively, which brought 
green revolution and food security to the world. In 1927, induced mutations with X-rays was 
discovered. Later chemical and physical mutagenic agents have been discovered, and are 
being used over the past 75 years to develop and release about crops varieties.  
Developing a desirable mutant with physical and chemical mutagenic agents is a rare 
chance. Hence, scientists developed Genome editing, a precision mutagenesis method to 
create mutation at a target locus of a gene with very high frequency. Instead of non-targeted 
mutation created by physical or chemical mutagenic agents, genome editing uses biological 
mutagenic agents (gRNA and Cas enzyme) to create targeted mutation in a gene.  

25 
 
In both GM Crops and Genome editing, a DNA vector (exogenous introduced DNA) is used 
for genetic transformation. In GM crop, the vector (exogenous introduced DNA) has a gene 
for desirable trait (for example, Cry1Ac gene conferring insect resistance) and a gene for 
selection of transgenic plant (for example, NPTII gene conferring hygromycin antibiotic 
resistance). Thus, in GM crops, exogenous introduced DNA is stably integrated in to plant 
genome and confers trait of economic importance.   
In case of genome editing, a DNA vector (exogenous introduced DNA) consisting of gene 
cassette for the gRNAs, Cas enzyme and selection marker is introduced in to the parent 
variety through genetic transformation. After mutagenesis in the first or second generation 
of the transgenic plant, the exogenous introduced DNA is segregated out, and only the 
plants with a desirable mutation in the target locus is carried forward to develop a variety. 
Thus, genome edited variety does not contain any foreign gene, and has only desirable 
mutation. The difference between GM crop and genome edited mutant are given in the 
following Table: 
Difference between GM crop and Genome edited mutant crop 
 GM Crops  Genome Editing 
1. Vector DNA or 
Foreign DNA 
(introduced 
Exogenous 
DNA) contains 
Gene that confers trait of 
interest (for examples, 
Cry1Ac gene conferring 
insect resistance) and 
selection marker gene  
Genes coding mutagen (for 
sgRNA, Cas9 enzyme) and 
selection marker 
2. Integration of 
introduced 
Exogenous 
DNA 
Stably integrated at random 
in the host plant genome 
Stably integrated at random 
in the host plant genome 
3. Function of the 
introduced 
Exogenous 
DNA 
 
Integrated transgene is 
transcribed and the 
transcribed RNA or 
translated protein confers 
the trait of interest. 
The transcribed sgRNA and 
Cas9 protein act at the 
desired specific locus/loci to 
create the mutation.  
4. Trait of 
economic 
The introduced Exogenous 
DNA  
The mutation in the native 
gene of the host plant  

26 
 
importance is 
conferred by 
5. Presence of 
introduced 
Exogenous 
DNA in the 
commercial 
variety 
The commercial variety 
developed will have the 
stably integrated transgene. 
Transgene and desired 
mutant loci are segregated, 
plants with introduced 
Exogenous DNA are 
destroyed, and the mutant 
is free from introduced 
Exogenous DNA 
6. Molecular 
detection 
By using molecular 
techniques, GM crops can 
be identified and 
distinguished from parent 
variety 
By using molecular 
technique, the mutant 
cannot be distinguished 
from same mutant that can 
arise from spontaneous or 
induced mutation breeding. 
 
The mutant plant developed through ‘genome editing’ tools is considered as a conventional 
variety of crops as genome editing creates mutation in the native gene similar to that of 
spontaneous or induced mutagenic agent.” 
 
1.17 When the Committee asked whether development of seeds through ‘genome-editing’ 
is permissible in India as Genetically Modified (GM) crops are banned, the Department 
stated: 
“Yes. Development of seeds through ‘genome-editing’ is permissible in India. Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change issued an Office Memorandum on 30th March 
2022 for exemption of SDN-1 and SDN-2 categories of Genome Edited Plants which are 
free of exogenous introduced DNA from the provisions of Rules 7 to 11 (both inclusive) of 
the Rules 1989 of EPA, 1986.  
 GM Crops are not banned in India. Bt cotton is a GM crop approved for cultivation in 
2002 by the Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC) of Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, Government of India. Since then, it is commercially cultivated 
in the Country. In 2022-23, the GM Bt cotton was cultivated in about 12.9 million ha in India.” 
 

27 
 
1.18 To the pointed query of the Committee whether the use of scientific tools like genome 
editing etc. for developing seeds of various crops is a way to bypass the ban on Genetically 
Modified crops, the Department stated: 
“No. The use of scientific tools like genome editing etc. for developing seeds of 
various crops is not a way to bypass the ban on Genetically Modified crops. The Genetically 
Modified crops essentially carry a gene from foreign source, while genome edited crops do 
not have any such foreign genes. Genome edited crops are similar to conventional bred 
varieties and hence they are not considered as genetically modified crops. 
In first step of genome editing, recombinant DNA technology is used and exogenous DNA 
(sgRNA and Cas9 gene) is introduced in to the host plant. The genes for sgRNA and Cas9 
integrate in to the host plant and these genes express, and sgRNA-Cas9 complex create 
DNA damage at target locus of the gene in the host plant, and when the damaged DNA is 
repaired by native cellular enzymes, mutations in the target gene are induced. In the 
subsequent generation, the exogenous introduced DNA containing locus and mutant locus 
segregate in to different plants. Plants carrying exogenous introduced DNA are discarded. 
Plants with only desirable mutant but no exogenous introduced DNA is selected.   
As per the Ministry of Environment, forest and Climate Change, Government of India OM 
on 30th March 2022, on exempting genome edited crops free from exogenous introduced 
DNA from GM regulation rules (Rules 7-11 of Rules 1989), RCGM, DBT, GoI “Guidelines for 
safety assessment of genome edited plants 2022” and “SOPs for regulatory review of 
genome edited plants 2022”, the developer of the genome edited crops conducts 
experiments to obtain phenotypic and molecular evidences for the absence of exogenous 
introduced DNA. These data are submitted to the Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBSC) 
which examine the application and gives exemption to the genome edited mutants (SDN1 
or SDN2 type) free from exogenous introduced DNA. Then the proceedings of IBSC is 
submitted to Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) for noting of the 
proceedings. Till this stage the genome edited plants is grown and handled under confined 
lab/greenhouse/transgenic net house conditions as per the provisions of Rules 1989 of 
Environment (Protection) Act 1986. Once the proceedings of IBSC on exemption of genome 
edited mutant is noted by RCGM, IBSC exempts the genome edited mutant, and once 
exempted, genome edited mutant is considered as variety developed by conventional 

28 
 
breeding method. Since genome edited plants do not contain any foreign gene, and 
mutation is created in the native gene similar to spontaneous/induced mutation, the genome 
edited crops are non-GM, and is not bypass of GM crops. “  
 
1.19 When the Committee asked whether the Department has analyzed the side effects 
of the use of tools like genome editing, speed breeding etc. for development of various crops 
on the health of the consumers, natural resources, biodiversity and environment, the 
Department stated: 
“As the genome editing is induced mutagenesis tools with the use of biological 
mutagenic agents namely gRNA and Cas enzyme instead of conventional physical 
(radiation) or chemical mutagenic agents.  While conventional mutation breeding is random, 
probability based, imprecise and uncontrolled, the genome editing process is very precise 
and targeted. Genome edited varieties are very similar to conventional bred varieties 
developed through mutation breeding tools. The foreign DNA (introduced exogenous DNA) 
is removed from the genome edited plants by genetic segregation, and only introduced 
exogenous DNA free SDN1 and SDN2 mutants developed through CRISPR-Cas genome 
editing are exempted by IBSC and RCGM. 
Since similar to conventional physical or chemical mutation methods, mutations are created 
by genome editing in the native gene in the native location on the genome, and only 
introduced exogenous DNA free mutants are permitted for field testing and further release, 
there is no environmental biosafety or food safety concerns. Globally, over 3400 crop 
varieties have been released through mutation breeding using physical or chemical 
mutagenic agents, and about 346 varieties have been released in India since 1948 
(https://nucleus.iaea.org/sites/mvd/SitePages/Home.aspx). Starting from the domestication, 
selection, and recombination breeding, all the crops that we cultivate today are the results 
of either spontaneous or induced mutations, and there is no biosafety and environmental 
safety concern. 
Speed breeding is a method of accelerating the breeding cycle of crops to breed varieties 
faster. It is done through adjustment of lights, temperature, and other factors affecting crop 
growth and development. It does not have any side effects on the health of the consumers, 
natural resources, biodiversity and environment.” 

29 
 
 
1.20 On being asked to provide a detailed note on the potential ill effects and concerns 
including bio-safety and environmental safety concern related to crops developed through 
genome editing etc., the Department submitted:  
“There are two concerns raised by some people who are against GM crops.  
1) Foreign DNA in the mutagenesis process of genome editing 
2) Off-target mutations  
The use of foreign DNA in the mutagenesis process of genome editing is addressed under 
Rules 1989 of EPA 1986 in India following the global standards. After thorough analysis and 
understanding, it has been established that all crop breeding lines developed by the process 
of genome editing are very much similar to conventional bred varieties developed through 
mutation breeding tools. Several countries such as USA, Japan, UK, Philippines, Australia, 
Brazil, Argentina, Kenya, Nigeria, Indonesia, Canada, Columbia, etc., have already 
exempted gene edited plants developed by SDN1 and SDN2, and they are considered as 
plant varieties developed by any other breeding tools. Already genome edited soybean crop 
in USA (from 2019), tomato and fishes in Japan (from 2021) are commercially cultivated and 
consumed. A “Draft Genome Edited Organisms: Regulatory Framework and Guidelines for 
Risk Assessment” in January 2020 was published by DBT, Government of India for open 
consultation from different ministries, stake holders and public. Based on the inputs received 
from various stakeholders, ministries and national science academies, and a thorough 
analysis and following the global standards, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, Government of India issued an Office Memorandum on 30th March 2022 for the 
exemption of SDN-1 and SDN-2 categories of Genome Edited Plants which are free of 
exogenous introduced DNA from the provisions of Rules 7 to 11 (both inclusive) of the Rules 
1989 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
The biosafety concern of genome edited plants during the initial phases of development are 
addressed through existing GM regulation rules (Rules 1989). For conduction of research 
and development using genome editing, approval of Institutional Biosafety Committee 
(IBSC) needs to be obtained by the developer scientist. The details of gene, vector, crop, 
scientists involved etc., are uploaded in Indian Biosafety Knowledge Portal (IBKP), and the 

30 
 
IBSC discusses all the details and gives approval. The proceedings of IBSC is submitted to 
Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) for noting of the proceedings. The 
research on development of genome edited plants is carried out in the lab, transgenic 
greenhouses and net houses with biosafety protection.    
Once the mutation is confirmed in the transformant plant, the exogenous introduced DNA is 
segregated out from the mutation in the subsequent generation by selfing or backcrossing. 
Developer select the desirable mutant plant with no undesirable phenotype. Then the 
developer confirms the absence of exogenous introduced DNA in the genome edited mutant 
by using the protocols given in the “SOPs for regulatory review of genome edited plants 
2022” (RCGM, DBT, GoI). 
Under this protocol, the developer generate data to confirm that 
1) Stability of the mutation across generations. DNA sequence data of mutant across 
generation are obtained for the mutant locus to confirm stable inheritance of the mutation.  
2) Absence of selection marker such as antibiotic resistance gene: Phenotypic analysis of 
parent genotype (Wild Type, WT), primary transformant containing introduced exogenous 
DNA, and the mutant free from exogenous introduced DNA are grown on the antibiotic 
medium, and the sensitivity equivalence of WT and mutant is established. 
3) Overlapping PCR analysis to show the absence of introduced exogenous DNA: As per 
the overlapping PCR method given in the “SOPs for regulatory review of genome edited 
plants 2022”, PCR primers are designed to detect any vector fragment that may be 
integrated in to the host genome, and PCR was carried out to demonstrate the absence of 
any vector fragment in the mutant genomic DNA. 
Based on these data, the IBSC exempts the SDN1 and SDN2 mutants free of introduced 
exogenous DNA from Rules 7-11 (inclusive of 7 and 11) of Rules 1989. The detailed dossier 
is submitted to RCGM along with the proceedings of IBSC. Then the RCGM deliberate on 
the dossier and ascertain that all procedures given in the SoPs for exemption of genome 
edited mutant free of introduced exogenous DNA is followed, and the mutant is free from 
introduced exogenous DNA. Then the RCGM confirms the exemption given by IBSC. Then 
the genome edited mutant is treated equivalent to that of mutant obtained by conventional 
method, and tested in field trials of AICRPs for identification as variety for cultivation by 

31 
 
farmers. Therefore, all biosafety procedures are followed till the developer shows that 
genome edited mutant is equivalent to conventional mutant variety developed by 
conventional mutagenesis.   
The off-target mutation in genome editing are far less as compared with uncontrolled 
conventional mutagenesis method with physical and chemical mutagenic agents. Any plant 
with undesirable phenotype are discarded, only plants with desirable phenotypes are 
selected. This is the procedure followed in conventional mutation breeding, and the same is 
followed in genome editing. Therefore, no concern of off-target mutation mediated 
environmental safety and biosafety. 
The mutations created through genome editing have the same effect as that of mutation 
created through conventional mutation breeding. Mutant with desirable traits are being used 
in agriculture since domestication of crops.” 
 
F. Review Mechanism for Assessment 
1.21 When the Committee asked whether the present review mechanism for assessment 
of newly developed seeds of various crops in terms of yield, quality, nutritional value, taste, 
shelf life, etc. vis-à-vis conventional varieties is adequate or needs further strengthening, 
the Department stated: 
“The current AICRP system of coordinated multilocation trials encompasses various 
ecologies of different growing regions of the country and it is a robust system of review 
mechanism of newly developed varieties. It is a unique system in the entire globe and must 
be continued. The present review mechanism for the assessment of newly developed seed 
varieties, as implemented through ICAR’s coordinated network trials and institutional 
protocols, has been broadly effective in evaluating key parameters such as yield potential, 
disease and pest resistance, grain quality, and adaptability across agro-climatic zones. The 
system ensures that new varieties are rigorously compared with conventional checks under 
diverse environments, thereby maintaining scientific rigor and transparency in varietal 
release.  
 

32 
 
However, with the evolving priorities of agriculture—such as nutritional security, consumer 
preferences, climate resilience, and sustainability, there is a growing recognition that certain 
dimensions like nutritional profiling, sensory evaluation, shelf life, and water-use efficiency 
(in case of drought tolerant varieties) may be supplemented for further strengthening within 
the existing framework. Besides, the shelf-life parameter of crop commodities should be 
categorized for various time duration. Therefore, while the current mechanism is robust, 
there is scope for its continuous refinement to keep pace with future challenges 
and expectations.” 
 
G.  Constraints and Problems 
1.22 On being asked about the problems in respect of infrastructure, human 
resources/manpower, finance etc. being faced by the Department in undertaking research 
for developing water efficient variety of seeds to save ground water, the Department stated: 
“The Department is getting regular funds for development of crop varieties under 
above-described schemes. Three budget announcements have also been made by the 
Govt. of India during 2025-26 viz., National Mission on High Yielding Seeds, Mission for 
Cotton Productivity and establishment of 2nd Gene Bank as safety copy, which will also 
expedite the research for climate resilience as well as water efficient varieties. However, for 
strengthening more than 65-year-old Institutes, establishing state of art infrastructure 
including genotyping platforms, inhouse and field phenotyping facilities for precision 
phenotyping, Tissue culture labs, Speed breeding for rapid generation advancement etc., 
additional funds will help in faster development of water efficient and climate resilient 
varieties.” 
 
1.23 On being categorically asked whether the funds allocated for research for developing 
water efficient variety of seeds to save ground water in the last five years were sufficient, 
the Department stated: 
“Yes, the funds provided during past years were sufficient to develop water efficient 
varieties. Apart from the funds allocated by GoI for the schemes and AICRPs as described 
above, researchers are also generating grants from various national and internationally 

33 
 
funded projects. Moreover, every year funds are increased rationally for taking up the 
research works.” 
 
1.24 On being asked about the expectations of the Department from this Committee in 
achieving the desired result or to strengthen the research ecosystem for developing water 
efficient variety of seeds to save ground water, the Department stated: 
“The Department expects this Committee to provide strategic guidance and 
actionable recommendations to strengthen and expand research efforts focused on 
developing water-efficient crop varieties. The committee may recommend additional funds 
for strengthening infrastructure of more than 50 years old Institutes for facilitating cutting 
edge research for developing less water consuming/ drought tolerant varieties of different 
crops for targeted regions of the country. 
 
AICRPs centres are generally facing difficulty of infrastructure and human resource. Some 
of the states are supporting the AICRPs properly, however in many states, support is not 
upto mark. For breeding the water use efficient varieties, good phenotyping facilities along 
with state of art laboratories are required at some selected AICRP centres across the 
country, which should be supported by the concerned states for water efficient varieties. 
 
States should be advised to develop State Seed Rolling Plans for ensuring regular supply 
of certified seeds of high yielding climate resilient varieties within minimum time of their 
release. It will help in increasing share of seed from the public sector agencies and facilitate 
the farmers with good quality seed at reasonable cost. Currently truthfully labelled seed of 
research varieties/ hybrids are marketed openly by private seed producers, where hardly 
any regulation is applied, which lead to deceiving the farmers. The States and Department 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare may also be involved in such examination.” 
1.25 The Department further suggested the Committee: 
“The alternate crops suggested under the crop diversification plan should be selected 
from among major crops that have demonstrated success in terms of establishment, 

34 
 
productivity, and market returns in the respective block, district, state, or agro-climatic zone. 
It is essential to strengthen agricultural research in a network mode across diverse agro-
climatic regions, with an emphasis on technology development and dissemination tailored 
to local needs. Further, there is a strong need to enhance research funding through 
collaborative models, involving multiple stakeholders including research institutions, 
extension agencies, and farmers. Additionally, evaluation of government water-related 
schemes should be conducted on scientific and impact-based parameters, ensuring they 
are farmer-centric and integrated, rather than assessed in isolation.” 
 
H. Seed Systems and Accessibility 
1.26 Varieties of different field and horticultural crops are developed under the All India 
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP). Once a variety is identified during Annual Group 
Meeting of respective AICRP , some quantity of basic seed is given to National Seed 
Corporation Ltd. (NSCL) for stock seed production. After release of the variety and its 
notification in Gazette of India, some quantity of stock seed is used as breeder seed by the 
NSCL and rest is informed to DAFW for its distribution under mini kits and other 
demonstrations under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) through State Deptt. of 
Agriculture at farmers’ fields. After notification, the Department of Agriculture of States, 
NSCL, Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), 
Farmer Producer Organization (FPOs) and Private Seed Companies (Through Seed 
Associations) give the indent for breeder seed of variety to Seed Division of Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(MoA&FW), Govt. of India. Indents thus received from various public and private seed 
producing agencies for different varieties from different agro-climatic conditions are 
compiled in DAFW Seed Division and a meeting of all the indenting agencies and Project 
Coordinators/Directors of ICAR Institutes is convened by Seed Divisions of DA&W and 
ICAR. Based on the availability of nucleus stage (seed from which breeder seed will be 
produced), the variety-wise indents of various agencies are finalized and communicated to 
the respective Crop Director/ Project Coordinator of ICAR Institutes/AICRPs for further 
allotment to the producing Units i.e. ICAR Institutes or State/Central Agricultural Universities. 
AICRP on Seed (Crops) at ICAR-National Institute of Seed Science and Technology, Mau 

35 
 
(Uttar Pradesh) coordinates all the activities of breeder seed production at its 65 centres 
across the SAUs/CAUs and ICAR Institutes located in different agro-climatic conditions.  
The same system is catering the need of varietal development as well as seed supply of 
different categories of 85 field crop varieties for the different agro-climatic conditions of the 
country.” 
 
1.27 When the Committee asked the Department to provide information (year-wise and 
crop-wise) about quantum of breeder seed of drought tolerant varieties produced and made 
available to the various seed producing agencies for downstream multiplication of 
foundation and certified seeds in last ten years and whether the Department has faced any 
shortage during these years, the Department stated:  
 
“ICAR is mandated to produce breeder seeds as per the indent of DA&FW, which in 
turn are converted into foundation, certified and TL seeds in the next generations 
respectively by seed producing agencies and finally distributed among the farmers. The 
department has not faced any shortage of breeder seed. However, in few years due to 
adverse weather conditions like untimely rains, extreme drought, the varietal mismatches 
have been observed, but indented quantity has been provided with alternative suitable 
varieties.” 
 
1.28 On being asked to provide information about the amount of water efficient seeds of 
various crops distributed in the last ten years, the Department stated:  
“During past 10 years 3,96,217.9 quintals of quality seed of water efficient varieties 
produced and distributed under AICRP on Seed (Crops) through its centres.”   
 
1.29 When the Committee categorically asked whether the production of breeder and 
certified seeds of water efficient varieties of various crops in the country is sufficient to meet 
the requirements, the Department stated:  
 

36 
 
“Over the past 10 years, a total of 1,45,266.2 quintals of breeder seed of water-
efficient varieties was produced against an indent of 93,147.8 quintals. The breeder seed 
production is aligned with the annual demand (indents) placed by various state governments 
as per their Seed Rolling Plan and also by other public and private seed producing agencies. 
The quantity produced has remained adequate to support the production of the required 
quantum of quality seed, as envisaged under the Seed Rolling Plans of the respective 
states. 
 
To ensure the smooth and timely availability of breeder seed, the Department of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare, in coordination with ICAR, State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), and 
seed corporations, has initiated several measures. These include district- and agro-climatic 
zone-wise seed planning, and support through Seed Village programs to ensure quality seed 
at farmers level. Efforts are also being made to strengthen the seed supply chain through 
public-private partnerships, enhance seed testing and certification infrastructure, and 
promote farmer awareness and adoption of improved varieties through training and 
demonstrations. These steps aim to bridge the gap arising between demand and supply, 
particularly for water-efficient varieties, and ensure timely and region-specific seed 
availability to support sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture.” 
 
1.30 About the share of Private vs. Non-Private sector in the Seed Chain, the Department 
stated: 
“The share of the private and public sectors in quality seed availability is 71% and 
29%, respectively during 2024 (DAC&FW). In India’s seed supply chain, the private sector 
is dominating for high-value crops like cotton, maize, and vegetables. During 2024-25, 
against the estimated quality seed requirement of 482.00 lakh quintal, 531.50 lakh quintal 
seed was available across the country out of which 155.20 lakh quintal was supplied by 
public sector and 376.30 lakh quintal was from private sector agencies. The public sector 
focusses on staples such as cereals, pulses, and oilseeds. Due to declining indents from 
the states, the share of public sector National and State level corporation is declining and 
private sector is supplying the seeds to the states under various schemes. The private sector 

37 
 
is indenting the breeder seed of public sector varieties but now a days private sector share 
in breeder seed indents is also declining. 
However, it is observed that the share of varieties and hybrids notified since 2014, the 
contribution from the public sector is significant. State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) 
accounted for 60% of the total notifications, followed by ICAR with a 25% share. The private 
sector contributed the remaining 15%.” 
 
1.31 On being asked about the advantages and disadvantages of mandatory use of water 
efficient varieties of seeds in cultivation of various crops in the country, the Department 
stated:  
“The idea of mandating the use of water-efficient seed varieties carries both 
advantages and disadvantages, particularly when applied across diverse agro-ecological 
zones and farming systems. Among the key advantages, these varieties help reduce water 
demand, making them especially suitable for water-stressed and drought-prone regions. 
They enhance climate resilience by minimizing the risk of crop failure during dry spells in 
rainfed areas and generally ensure better yields compared to conventional varieties under 
limited moisture conditions. Additionally, they support sustainable agricultural intensification 
by enabling higher productivity without increasing water usage. 
 
However, there are notable challenges associated with mandatory use. Imposing such a 
mandate may restrict farmers’ autonomy in choosing crop varieties best suited to their local 
conditions or traditional preferences. Ensuring the timely availability of quality seeds at the 
right time and place would be a major operational challenge, especially for small and 
marginal farmers who often face affordability and access barriers. Furthermore, widespread 
adoption of a few select varieties could lead to homogenization of cropping systems, and 
threatening the survival of locally adapted landraces that have cultural and ecological 
significance. Enforcing such a mandate could limit farmers’ freedom to select varieties 
tailored to their local agro-climatic conditions, market needs, or traditional preferences. Our 
existing seed distribution systems needs to be equipped to meet the increased and rapid 
demand, avoiding seed shortages, ensuring quality, and easy availability. 

38 
 
 
Therefore, while water-efficient varieties play a vital role in climate adaptation and resource 
conservation, a policy-driven approach must carefully balance ecological sustainability, 
farmer autonomy, seed system readiness, and socio-economic realities.”  
  
1.32 When the Committee asked about the view of the Department on the issue of making 
use of water efficient varieties of seeds mandatory in cultivation, the Department stated:  
“Acknowledging that varietal adoption is shaped by diverse agro-climatic conditions, 
cropping patterns, market preferences, and socio-economic factors influence varietal 
adoption, government always advocated farmers choice and autonomy in selection of crop 
varieties. However, there is a critical need to create awareness among farmers about the 
importance of adopting water-efficient varieties as a strategy for climate adaptation and 
water conservation, which needs to be supported by robust evidence of agronomic and 
economic benefits derived from such varieties. To facilitate wider adoption, a policy-driven 
approach should be emphasized comprising targeted awareness campaigns, front-line 
demonstrations (FLDs), and incentivization mechanisms under schemes like National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM). Improving seed access in arid and resource-poor regions remains 
a significant challenge, with many farmers relying heavily on the informal seed sector to 
meet their seed requirements. In this context, greater emphasis must be placed on 
supporting research and development, participatory varietal evaluation at farmers' fields, 
and region-specific extension initiatives. State governments must take proactive steps to 
promote adoption of climate-resilient, water-efficient varieties by ensuring timely availability 
and affordability of quality seeds, ultimately empowering farmers to make informed varietal 
choices. For the favourable environmental conditions also the water efficient seeds with the 
same level of production as under irrigated conditions are required, which will encourage 
the adoption of water efficient varieties in all type of ecologies.”   
1.33 When the Committee asked what percentage of the gross and net cropped areas of 
the country are under cultivation of water efficient variety of seeds of various crops at 
present, the Department stated:  

39 
 
“Due to the structural limitations in India’s agricultural data systems (Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare, Directorate of Economics & Statistics, and State Agriculture 
Departments), particularly the absence of seed variety-level cropping area statistics, the lack 
of a standardized definition for water-efficient varieties, and the patchy nature of adoption 
tracking, it is currently not possible to accurately estimate the percentage of gross and net 
cropped area under water-efficient varieties of seeds at the national or state level. Water 
efficient, drought tolerance, and salinity tolerance are desirable traits in seeds, however 
these are not yet institutionalized as formal statistical categories in seed systems. This 
makes it difficult get the required data from the agriculture data system. However, with the 
establishment of Seed Registry (in final stage of implementation) and full implementation of 
SATHI portal (public system already onboarded), the traceability of water efficient varieties 
will also be captured, enabling the actual area coverage under such varieties.” 
 
1.34 On the issue of Seed Traceability, the Department stated: 
“Seed Authenticity Traceability & Holistic Inventory (SATHI) is a national platform 
implemented by the collaborative efforts of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare, 
Government of India with the Technical support of ICAR, and the National Informatics Centre 
(NIC). It proposes to provide a digital platform that streamlines the holistic management of 
seed production, quality certification, distribution, and traceability pan-India. This endeavor 
establishes a National Seed Grid (NSG), integrating all seed stakeholders within a unified 
national digital platform. 
  SATHI distinguishes itself as a multi-tenant application capable of accommodating all 
states within a single project instance, providing an unmatched level of agility to state 
specific needs while ensuring the core principles remain consistent across the board. This 
level of adaptability empowers each state to configure the platform according to their unique 
requirements, offering a tailored experience that creates a perception that SATHI was 
individually crafted for them. States have the freedom to configure regional specific 
workflows, terminologies, payment collection mechanisms, as well as specialized data 
capture and validation strategies, all without compromising the fundamental principle of 
quality seed production. It is proposed that Standardized QR coded traceable tags on each 

40 
 
bag made mandatory for all states which upon scanning will link to SATHI to disseminate 
information about the seed bag. 
The development of the platform has been taken up in 2 phases.  
Phase I of the project has been launched which covers onboarding the stakeholders 
involved in Nucleus to Breeder Seed Production, Breeder to Foundation and Foundation to 
Certified Seed Production processes to SATHI platform and capture their transactions at the 
granular level. All the State Governments, Agricultural Universities, National Level 
Institutions submitting their breeder seed requirement on the portal itself triggering the 
breeder seed production program. All stakeholders like Seed producer both Private & 
Governments, Seed Processing Plants, Seed Certification Bodies, State Level Seed Testing 
Labs & Labs of BSPC, Central Seed Testing Lab, Seed Dealers & Retailers, Seed Hubs, 
Various Breeder Seed Production Centers are on-boarded on SATHI. The process like Seed 
Grower Registration, Producer Registration, Plant Registration,  direct collection of various 
fees at bank accounts of respective State Government,  Geo-Tagged Field Inspection/Re-
Inspection/Supervisory Inspection,  Transport Certification issue, Raw Seed Intake by Plant 
& Processed Stock Entry, Coded Sample Slip Generation, Central Coding Centers, Sample 
Collection Centers, Test result entry by the labs and release order issue but not limited to 
this are all done online on SATHI portal.  
Being an ambitious project, SATHI was officially launched by the Honorable Minister of 
Agriculture, Shri. Narendra Singh Tomar, on April 19, 2023. 
States on-boarded: Out of 26 State Seed Certification Agencies (SSCAs) in the country all 
the SSCAs except that of Telangana and Gujarat are on boarded on SATHI.  As far as 
Breeder Seed Production is concerned all the 23 Project Directors of Agricultural and 
Horticultural Crops concerned are onboarded on SATHI. There are 350 Breeder Seed 
Production Centers (BSPCs) of ICAR that are also on aborded on SATHI. 
Phase II of the project will cover seed Supply chain and Inventory management. The 
movement of seed bag in supply chain will be recorded in real time to provide end to end 
traceability and Seed Inventory from Micro to Macro level (Retailer to State and National 
level). Pilot run of Phase II (supply chain management) has been successfully carried out in 

41 
 
two states Maharashtra and Uttarakhand. The other states that are onboarded on Phase-I 
of SATHI have also started the process of onboarding on SATHI. 
Implication and Features of SATHI 
• End to end visibility and traceability of seeds throughout their lifecycle. 
• Identification of a seed source, variety and quality by backward linkage (traceability) 
till its origin. 
• Automation of manual processes of indent submission, allocation, allotment, lifting 
etc. for breeder seeds. 
• Real time monitoring of demand, allocation and supply of breeder seeds. 
• Automation of seed certification system involving registration, inspection, testing, 
certificate issuance. 
• Reduced paper work, easy and effective inspection by use of Mobile/Tablet app for 
inspection. 
• Automated registration of seed dealers, application renewal and license issuance. 
• Dashboard based monitoring and MIS for complete track of all activities in seed 
lifecycle. 
• Monitoring of seed inventory and sale to farmers. 
• Inspection Mobile App. 
• With full implementation, Information on Seed availability at Micro to Macro level 
(Retailer, state and National level) will be easily available. 
OTHER PERIPHERAL MODULEs OF SATHI 
• Central Seed Testing Lab (5% Sample Sending and Testing Module). 
• Dashboard Development for National Level Seed Producing Agencies. 
• Seed Hubs Integration and Monitoring Dashboard. 
• Integration With Krishi Mapper and Other Portals. 

42 
 
• Integration of Seednet on Sathi. 
• TL Seed Module for Notified Seed. 
• CVRC variety proposal submission module. 
 
For onboarding private seed companies on SATHI, the Seeds Division has initiated the work 
in association of NIC. The Seeds Associations like National Seed Association of India (NSAI) 
and Federation of Seed Industry of India (FSSI) were involved in the work. The Private 
Companies and Seed Associations have some apprehensions on which the Seed Division 
is working.” 
 
I.  Capacity Building and Awareness Creation 
1.35 After release of the variety, it’s seed availability to the farmers is one of the important 
activities. The mechanism adopted/followed by the Department for 
dissemination/popularization of the water efficient variety of seeds of various crops and 
water-use-efficient technologies developed – among farmers and other intended 
beneficiaries so as to minimize consumption/utilization of ground water is as under: 
 
“Availability of breeder seed is the primary step for taking any variety to farmers 
through the various central and state seed production and extension agencies.  Varieties of 
different field crops are developed under the AICRPs. Once a variety is identified during 
Annual Group Meeting of respective AICRP, some quantity of basic seed is given to National 
Seed Corporation Ltd. (NSCL) for stock seed production. Once the variety is released and 
notified in Gazette of GOI, 25% of this stock seed is used as breeder seed by the NSCL and 
rest is informed to Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) for its 
distribution under mini-kits and other demonstrations under National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM) though State Deptt. of Agriculture at farmers fields. After notification, the 
Department of Agriculture of States, NSCL, Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs), Farmers Producer Organization (FPOs) and Private 
Seed Companies (Through Seed Associations) give the indents for breeder seed of a variety 

43 
 
to Seed Division of DA&FW, MoA&FW, GoI. Indents, thus received from various public and 
private seed producing agencies for different varieties are compiled in DA&FW Seed 
Division and a meeting of all the indenting agencies and Project Coordinators/ Directors of 
ICAR Institutes is convened by Seed Division of DA&FW and Seed Section of ICAR. Based 
on the availability of nucleus seed (seed from which breeder seed will be produced), the 
variety-wise indents of various agencies are finalized (Seed Rolling Plan) and 
communicated to the respective Crop Director/ Project Coordinator of ICAR Institutes/ 
AICRPs for further allotment to the producing Units i.e. ICAR Institutes or State/Central 
Agricultural Universities.  
 
AICRP on Seed (Crops) at ICAR-National Institute of Seed Science and Technology 
(NISST), Mau coordinates all the activities of breeder seed production. Breeder Seed is 
monitored by a Monitoring Committee consisting of Breeder of the variety, representatives 
from NSCL, State Seed Certification Agency and the In-charge/ Nodal Officer of Station/ 
Farms/ Seed Production unit. The breeder seed is thus supplied to the indenting agencies 
as per the indents of the various agencies. Further downstream multiplication of breeder 
seed to foundation and certified seed is taken up by the various central and state public 
sector agencies as well as private sector seed agencies.” 
 
1.36 The Department uses a multi-channel strategy to promote water-efficient seed 
varieties among farmers. These varieties are distributed through national programs like the 
Sub-Mission on Seeds and Planting Material (SMSP) and NFSM, ensuring their availability 
via certified agencies and cooperatives. Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), ICAR institutes, and 
State Agricultural Universities conduct on-farm demonstrations, training, and awareness 
campaigns to showcase the yield benefits. Initiatives like NICRA and Biotech-KISAN involve 
farmers in selecting and adopting drought-tolerant seeds. Additionally, mobile advisories, 
field days, and public-private partnerships support widespread adoption, helping reduce 
groundwater use in agriculture. 

44 
 
In addition, ICAR-AICRPs centres and Krishi Vigyan Kendras are conducting the Front Line 
Demonstrations (FLDs) and Cluster Front Line Demonstrations (CFLDs) sponsored by 
NFNSM, respectively of newly released varieties across the country for their popularization. 
 
1.37 When the Committee asked about the reasons for low adoption of water efficient 
variety of seeds developed by the ICAR by the farmers and what can be done to enhance 
their adoption by the farmers, the Department stated:  
“Major reasons of low adoption of water efficient variety of seeds developed by the 
ICAR by the Farmers are (i) poor awareness about the water efficient varieties, (ii) lesser 
demonstrations, (iii) poor breeder seed indents leading to seed availability, (iv) yield gaps 
between water efficient variety and normal bred variety during normal season.  Their 
adoption by the farmers can be enhanced by (i) special package of practice, and (ii) 
incentivizing farmers through government schemes like NFNSM.” 
 
1.38 On being asked about the impact of the campaigns of the Department for 
popularization/adoption of water use efficient variety of seeds and water use efficient 
technologies on consumption of ground water in Agriculture sector, the Department stated:  
 
“Impact assessment and adoption studies of Water Use Efficient (WUE) varieties 
have shown positive results in enhancing productivity under limited water conditions. These 
varieties have improved yield stability, reduced irrigation needs, and promoted sustainable 
water management. After release all the varieties are evaluated at farmers’ fields through 
Front Line Demonstrations and Cluster Front Line Demonstrations and indents of such 
varieties are raised only when the cultivars are performing better than the existing varieties 
of that area. Overall impact of high yielding varieties combined with other improved 
technologies is judged by the overall production and productivity of a particular crop.  
Country has made a consistent progress in food grain production primarily through increase 
in productivity and has achieved a record production of 332.23 million tonnes during 2023-
24. The deployment of suitable varieties coupled with crop production and protection 

45 
 
technologies has led to increased food grain production (6.54 times), pulses (2.88 times), 
oilseeds (7.69 times), cotton (10.63 times) and sugarcane (7.94 times) since 1950. Besides, 
an increasing trend of crop production during four consecutive years (2021-22 – 315.62 mt, 
2022-23 – 329.69 mt, 2023-24 – 332.23 mt, 2024-2025 – 353.96 mt) was observed even 
under bad weather conditions due to drought, untimely rains and high temperatures in many 
parts of the country. 
 
The ever highest food grains production with a total estimated production 353.96 million tons 
(2024-25) which is 44% higher over 2014-15 (252.02 million tons) is estimated during 3rd 
Advance Estimates 2024-25. Likewise, Rice has touched the ever highest record production 
of 149.07 mt with 41% increase over the rice production during 2014-15 (105.48 mt). Wheat 
has also touched the ever highest record production of 117.50 mt with more than 35% 
increase over the wheat production during 2014-15 (86.53 mt). The same trend has been 
followed in maize, where production has also touched the ever highest level of 42.28 mt 
production with around 75% record increase over 2014-15 (24.17 mt). Ever highest 
production of oilseeds with a total estimated production 42.60 million tons (2024-25) which 
is more than 55% higher over 2014-15 (27.51 million tons). This is a major milestone towards 
Atmanirbharta in oilseeds. Major oilseeds like soybean (15.18 mt ever highest), followed by 
mustard (12.60 mt) and groundnut (11.90 mt ever highest) have registered the records.” 
 
1.39 Further, on being asked about the steps the Department has taken or contemplating 
to take for capacity building in terms of training to breeders, scientists and farmers for 
popularizing water-use-efficient seeds and technologies in the country, the Department 
stated: 
 
“All the ICAR Institutes, State and Central Agricultural Universities and Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras are conducting need-based training programs to build the capacity of breeders, 
scientists, and farmers. Additionally, field demonstrations, farmer field schools, and KVK-led 
outreach programs have been instrumental in transferring these technologies to end-users. 
However, to further strengthen scientific competencies and remain aligned with cutting-edge 

46 
 
technology for water-use efficiency, it is imperative to provide opportunities for scientists and 
breeders to visit reputed institutes that possess advanced expertise in these areas. Such 
exposure will enrich the knowledge, skill enhancement, and the adoption of proven global 
best practices relevant to the Indian context.”  
 
  

47 
 
Chapter-II 
A. Water Budget Based Cropping System 
2.1 During the sitting of the Committee, the representatives of the Department stated: 
“महोदय, मœ आपक े संǒान मŐ लाना चाहता šं िक पानी बचाने क े िलए वेराइटी सीड्स एक  महȕपूणŊ आ˙ ेƃ  
है लेिकन उससे Ǜ ादा आगे जाने की जŝ रत है। उसी कड़ी मŐ हमŐ यह देखना पड़ेगा िक तेलहन, दलहन, 
मſ ा, धान, कपास, गेšं, क ु छ भी हो, इस देश को वाटर बजट बे̾ड Ţॉिपंग िसː म िडजाइन करने की जŝ रत 
है। हमŐ इसक े िलए लंबी द ू री तक क े िलए सोचना पड़ेगा, Ɛ ोंिक जब तक हम बजिटंग नहीं करŐगे, बाįरश का 
िकतना पानी आता है, िकतना रेɘ ेिनश होता है, हम िकतना पानी िनकालते हœ, और वह फरदर नीचे ना जाए, 
िजतना पानी बचता है उसमŐ Ɛ ा फसल और Ɛ ा फसल Ůणाली हो सकती है, लंबे समय तक इसको िटकाऊपन 
बनाए रखने क े िलए एक कायŊ योजना बनाई जानी चािहए।“ 
 
2.2 The Department, in a written submission, stated as under: 
“Water being a critical input for crop production, the enhanced water resources for 
irrigation contributed immensely towards spurt in food grain production. Out of 141 Million 
ha of net sown area in the country, net irrigated area accounts about 78 Million ha (55%) 
and remaining 63 million ha (45%) is under rainfed condition.  The gross irrigated area in 
India at present is 112.2 M ha. According to Vision 2050 document of ICAR (2015), the 
available supply is only 1121 billion cubic metres (BCM) compared to the projected total 
water demand of 1498 (BCM). The attention needs to be paid to integrated water 
management action plan in the backdrop of diminishing water availability to agriculture due 
to glacier melting. The additional water demand in domestic, industrial and energy sectors 
will need additional 222 BCM water by 2050. As a result, the water used in irrigation sector 
in agriculture in India is expected to decline from 80% at present to 74% by 2050.   
 
In view of the emerging scenarios, the challenge is now to produce more crop per unit 
volume of water. According to the study made by ICAR-National Institute of Agricultural 
Economics and Policy Research, New Delhi, the availability of resources for agriculture will 
increase but at a slower rate as compared to the growth in food demand by the year 2050, 

48 
 
and in order to strike a balance between the future demand and supply of agricultural 
products, we need to achieve two-fold increase in water productivity by 2050. Under the 
scenario of producing 550 million tonnes food grain from shrinking water resources towards 
the fulfilling the objective of Viksit Bharat by 2047, we have to execute sustainable and 
climate resilient water management action plan to substantially improve our irrigation 
efficiency in agriculture from present level of 38% to 65% by Amrit Kaal (2047).  In this 
context, one major factor which needs to be considered is water budgeting and sustainable 
utilization of water resources. Here is a need to analyze the national water policies 
addressing the components of water budgeting in agriculture and other sectors.  
 
Ministry of Jal Shakti (Formerly Ministry of Water Resources), Government of India 
formulates national water policies from time to time with an objective of aiding in planning 
and governance of water resources for their optimal utilization. In this direction, National 
Water Policy (1987), National Water Policy (2002) and National Water Policy (2012) were 
formulated. The first National Water Policy, 1987 aimed at increasing the area under 
irrigation, food output from 150 million tons in 1987 to 240 million tons in 2000, meet the 
drinking water needs of 100 percent of the  population, and meet the sanitation needs of 80 
percent of urban and 20 percent of rural populations. National Water Policy 2002 has given 
emphasis on commitment to Integrated Water Resources Management and Development, 
importance to environment related concerns and importance to innovative techniques and 
strategies based on science and technology. National Water Policy 2012 considers water 
as economic good to promote its conservation and efficient use. These national policy 
documents clearly provide the base for initiatives on water budgeting in different sectors of 
India. In addition, as water is a state subject, several states formulate their policies on water 
resource planning, development and utilization for agriculture and other sectors. 
 
National Commission on Integrated Water Resource Development (Hashim Committee, 
1996-1999) of Ministry of Jal Shakti, Government of India assessed the budget of surface 
and groundwater resources which was further refined later. It has assessed the total water 
resources of the country as 4000 BCM based on annual rainfall and other forms of 
precipitation and utilizable water resources as 1123 BCM (Surface water resources: 690 

49 
 
BCM and Groundwater resources: 433 BCM). Similarly, National Water Mission has taken 
initiative for assessment and management of water resources in the form of state specific 
action plans on water (SSAP-W) which will be of immense use in understanding the supply 
and demand of water resources of Indian States. National Taskforce on Integrated Water 
Resource Development and Management (NTIWRDM) has been constituted by Ministry of 
Jal Shakthi under the chairmanship of Dr. Ramesh Chand, Hon’ble Member, NITI Aayog in 
January 2025 to reassess the water resources of India and to provide integrated plan and 
action plan for sustainable utilization of surface and groundwater resources. This committee 
has constituted eight working groups on different components including water budgeting and 
water use efficiency. Similarly, the National Government schemes like Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), Jal Jeevan Mission, Atal Bhujal Yojana play vital role in water 
resource assessment, budgeting and enhancing water use efficiency.  
The national and state water policies stress on various measures for enhancing water use 
efficiency. Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) component of PMKSY plays vital role in this context. 
The area under Micro irrigation in India has been enhanced from 3.1 M ha in 1992 to 16.7 
M ha in 2023. However, the concentration of micro irrigation is in few states and we need to 
promote it in several other states where potential exists. Five states of India i.e.  Karnataka 
(2.42 M ha), Rajasthan (2.09M ha), Maharashtra (2.03 M ha), Andhra Pradesh (1.92 M ha) 
and Gujarat (1.70 M ha) contribute about 70% (10.16 M ha) of total area under micro 
irrigation in India.  For achieving the optimum area under micro irrigation by Amrit Kaal 
(2047), the efforts must be made to expand the irrigation infrastructure in all the potential 
states as suggested by various committees. Government of India recently constituted 
Bureau of Water Use Efficiency for strengthening our efforts to enhance the water use 
efficiency. 
 
On supply side management, Amrit Sarovar Yojana, played significant role in enhancing the 
storage capacity of India. Owing to the initiatives taken by Government of India in the form 
of extensive dam-building activities, the total number of dams in India has attained more 
than 5264 large dams. The total live storage capacity of 123 important reservoirs located 
throughout the country is 171.1 BCM which is about 66.36% of the live storage capacity of 
all the reservoirs in the country i.e. 257.8 BCM. However, India’s per capita storage needs 

50 
 
to be improved from present level of 190 m3/person. The major concern is sedimentation in 
reservoirs which reduces the storage capacity drastically. For enhancing the storage 
capacity, the reservoir control system must be strengthened while considering needs of both 
upstream and downstream areas. The creation of water storage infrastructure through rain 
water harvesting structures is vital and Amrit Sarovar Mission of Government of India which 
was launched in the year 2022 played significant role by creating or renovating more than 
68000 water bodies. 
The National Perspective Plan (NPP) was prepared by Ministry of Jal Shakti (Formerly 
Ministry of Irrigation) in 1980 for water resources development through inter basin transfer 
of water, for transferring water from water surplus basins to water-deficit basins. Under the 
NPP, the National Water Development Agency (NWDA) has identified 30 links (16 under 
Peninsular Component & 14 under Himalayan Component) for preparation of Feasibility 
Reports. It is heartening to note that the Foundation stone for the Ken-Betwa Link Project 
(KBLP) was laid down by our hon’ble Prime Minister in December 2024. This project aims 
to transfer surplus water from the Ken River in Madhya Pradesh (MP) to Betwa in Uttar 
Pradesh (UP) to irrigate the drought-prone Bundelkhand region.” 
 
2.3 On being asked about the merits and limitations of the Water Budget based Cropping 
Pattern/system, the Department stated:  
“Water Budget-Based Cropping Pattern/System refers to designing and managing 
cropping systems based on the availability of water resources in a particular region, with the 
aim of optimizing water use for sustainable agriculture. The merits of water budget based 
cropping pattern / system include optimal utilization of available water resources in the 
country, ensuring sustainability of access to water for future generations and efficient 
tackling of climate change induced natural disasters. The demerits include threat of less 
orientation of food security crops like rice, non-suitability of this approach in challenge 
ecosystem like waterlogged areas. Merits and demerits are summarized below:  
Merits: 
 Efficient Water Management: Aligns crop selection with water availability, ensuring 
optimal use of water resources. 

51 
 
 Reduces Crop Failure Risk: Prevents planting of water-intensive crops during 
water-scarce periods. 
 Saves Costs: Lowers irrigation and energy expenses by promoting suitable crops. 
 Promotes Sustainability: Helps conserve groundwater and maintain ecological 
balance. 
 Supports Climate Resilience: Helps farmers adapt to rainfall variability and 
drought conditions. 
 Encourages Crop Diversification/Intensification: Promotes cultivation of less 
water-demanding and climate-smart crops. 
Limitations: 
 Knowledge & Data Requirement: Requires accurate local data on rainfall, soil 
moisture, and crop water needs. 
 Resistance to Change: Farmers may be hesitant to shift from traditional cropping 
patterns. 
 Initial Planning Effort: Needs proper institutional support and planning for effective 
implementation. 
 Market Risks: Water-efficient crops may not always fetch good market prices. 
Water Budget Based Cropping is a pragmatic and sustainable approach, especially vital in 
drought-prone and water-deficit areas. While it promotes ecological balance and water 
efficiency, successful implementation requires institutional support, market alignment, and 
farmer training.” 
 
2.4 When the Committee categorically asked is there a need for implementation of Water 
Budget Based Cropping System/Pattern in the country, the Department stated:  
“Yes, the Department agrees that there is a strong need for implementing a Water 
Budget Based Cropping System/Pattern across the country. This approach is crucial in view 
of the increasing frequency of droughts, depleting groundwater levels, and uneven 

52 
 
distribution of rainfall across different agro-climatic zones. A water budget-based cropping 
strategy can significantly contribute to sustainable water management, enhanced resource-
use efficiency, and climate-resilient agriculture. 
Further, water budget-based cropping is essential as water scarcity and declining 
groundwater levels have become major constraints, particularly in arid and semi-arid 
regions. Existing cropping patterns often do not align with local water availability, causing 
over-extraction and environmental stress. A systematic, scientific approach is needed to 
match crop water requirements with region-specific water resources to ensure sustainable 
and efficient agricultural practices.  The key aspects of implementation are:  
 Scientific Water Budgeting at Agro-climatic Zone Level: Surface and 
groundwater availability must be assessed at district or agro-ecological levels, with 
water demand estimated for crops, livestock, and domestic use. Tools like remote 
sensing, GIS, hydrological models, and rainfall data should be used to create 
dynamic, real-time water budgets for informed planning. 
 Cropping System Planning Based on Water Availability: Crops and cropping 
systems should be selected based on local water availability, promoting low water-
requiring crops like pulses, oilseeds, and millets in scarce regions while discouraging 
water-intensive crops such as paddy and sugarcane. Seasonal water budgeting 
should guide the realignment of cropping patterns with irrigation potential. 
 Policy and Institutional Support: Water budgeting principles need to be embedded 
into National and State Water Policies, supported by measures such as water pricing, 
crop insurance incentives, and participatory irrigation management. Community-
based water governance mechanisms must also be promoted for localized decision-
making. 
 Capacity Building and Extension: Capacity building should focus on training 
farmers, extension personnel, and planners on water budgeting practices, supported 
by mobile apps and digital platforms that provide real-time water availability data and 
crop advisories for timely decision-making. 
 Research and Technological Innovations: ICAR and SAUs should lead the 
development of location-specific cropping systems aligned with water budgeting, 

53 
 
while advancing climate-smart practices like micro-irrigation, rainwater harvesting, 
and deficit irrigation to ensure sustainability and efficiency. 
The implementation of a Water Budget Based Cropping System is vital for long-term 
sustainability and food security. It not only helps in conserving scarce water resources but 
also ensures equitable distribution and efficient utilization, especially under changing 
climatic conditions. The Department fully supports the development and implementation of 
such a system with appropriate policy backing, institutional mechanisms, and on-ground 
interventions.” 
 
2.5 On being asked whether the Department has prepared any proposal for 
implementation of Water Budget Based Cropping Pattern in the country, the Department 
stated:  
“The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), through the All India 
Coordinated Research Project on Integrated Farming Systems, has identified alternative 
efficient cropping systems with higher water use efficiency compared to the existing 
predominant systems across various agro-climatic regions. In addition, a detailed crop plan 
analysis was conducted for 14 major crops—rice, wheat, maize, sorghum, pearl millet, 
redgram, chickpea, soybean, mustard, groundnut, sugarcane, cotton, onion, and potato. 
Based on indicators such as the Relative Spread Index, Relative Yield Index, Sustainable 
Yield Index, and Soil Climate Suitability Index, the areas were categorized into 'highly 
potential', 'moderately potential', 'marginally potential', and 'not suitable'. Utilizing this 
analysis, the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) has initiated a crop 
diversification program from 2023–24 in 75 districts across 17 states, with the objective of 
replacing marginally suitable and unsuitable rice areas with pulses, oilseeds, millets, 
vegetables, and other suitable crops.  However, a mission mode programme (inter 
departmental/inter-ministerial) with dedicated funding is required.” 
 
2.6 To the query of the Committee whether the Water Budget Based Cropping Pattern 
can be conveniently implemented in the country, the Department stated:  

54 
 
“Yes, the Department believes that a Water Budget Based Cropping Pattern can be 
effectively implemented in the country, provided it is done in a phased and region-specific 
manner. This requires a science-based approach, guided by thorough analysis of key 
indicators such as soil type, rainfall patterns, water availability and gap, crop diversification 
index, productivity, and the comparative economics of existing versus alternate crops.  
However, for successful implementation, several critical challenges must be addressed. 
These include: 
 Data gaps related to accurate and real-time water availability, crop-wise water 
demand, and yield performance; 
 Policy incoherence, where water, agriculture, and pricing policies are not aligned to 
promote water-efficient crops; 
 Limited market access and procurement support for alternative crops like pulses, 
millets, and oilseeds; 
 Farmer resistance to shift from traditional high water-use crops due to risk 
perception and income concerns; 
 Lack of institutional coordination between agriculture, water resources, and rural 
development departments. 
Addressing these hurdles through policy integration, technology support, market linkages, 
and targeted capacity building will be crucial for the scalable and sustainable implementation 
of water budget based cropping systems.” 
 
2.7 During the sitting of the Committee, the need for having a regulatory 
mechanism/provision detailing crops to be grown and farming methods/practices to be 
followed for areas where water resources have been severely depleted was raised as under: 
“….एक मैक े िनǚ  होना चािहए िक जहां डŌाई एįरया हो गया है, वहां कौन-कौन सी फसलŐ आप उगा 
सकते हœ और कौन सी नहीं उगा सकते हœ? यह तय होना चािहए। जो हम कर रहे हœ, वह सː ेनेबल डेवलपमŐट 
नहीं है। आने वाले भिवˈ  को लेकर, आने वाली नˠ ों को लेकर िक वे क ै से जीए ं गी, उनक े िलए नैचुरल įरसोसőज़ 

55 
 
का यूज हो। इस तरह से हो िक पानी उनक े िलए बच जाए, यह सː ेनेबल िवकास है। अब यह नहीं हो रहा है। 
अब बबाŊदी हो रही है। उसको देखने क े िलए Ɛ ा कानून हœ….” 
 
2.8 When the Committee asked whether the Department agree with the view that there 
is a need of legal mechanism/provision detailing which crops are to be grown and which 
farming methods are to be followed for places where water has been completely dried out, 
the Department, in a written reply, submitted:  
“Yes, there is a clear need for a legal or regulatory mechanism, particularly in critical 
and over-exploited water zones, to guide farmers on suitable crop choices and farming 
practices when water resources are severely depleted. However, such a mechanism must 
be science-based, flexible, and incentive-driven, rather than restrictive. It should consider 
local agro-ecological conditions, water availability, and socio-economic factors. To ensure 
farmer acceptance and compliance, the Government must provide adequate support 
systems, including assured procurement, minimum support prices, and market linkages for 
alternate, low water-requiring crops, thereby safeguarding livelihoods while promoting 
sustainable water use.” 
 
B. Climate-Smart Agronomy 
2.9 Issues like climate change and water scarcity present significant obstacles and 
challenges for Indian Agriculture that require focused and targeted interventions.  Promoting 
agricultural production patterns and practices that align with the specific agro-climatic 
conditions and natural resource availabilities of different regions across the country is vital. 
Investment in research and development, especially on climate-resistant varieties, improved 
agriculture practices, diversification to high-yield and climate-resilient crops and micro-
irrigation, can yield sustainable long-term benefits.  The widespread adoption of digital 
technologies in agriculture will unlock further possibilities for enhancing productivity. 
 

56 
 
2.10 On being asked by the Committee to provide details of the Water Smart Strategies 
implemented by the ICAR in the last 10 years to address ground-water depletion and 
improve irrigation efficiency, the Department stated:  
“Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has developed different water smart, 
cost effective, location specific scientific technologies viz., rainwater harvesting and 
recycling, multiple use of water, conjunctive use of rain, surface and groundwater resources, 
smart and precision technologies for irrigation and farming practices, optimum irrigation 
scheduling including micro-irrigation, development of land drainage and reclamation of 
saline soils to enhance irrigation water efficiency and water productivity in Indian agriculture. 
Further, Indian Institute of Soil and Water Conservation (IISWC), Dehradun has 
standardized several location specific bio-engineering water conservation measures for 
facilitating infiltration and in-situ moisture conservation and ex-situ storage of run-off water 
to provide supplementary irrigation to minimize the risk of farming. All these measures 
improve ground water recharge and minimize depletion of ground water.  Some of the 
strategies and salient achievements are as under:  
 Developed ICAR flexi check dam (Rubber Dam) for watershed to reduce soil 
erosion, create water storage facility, enhance ground water recharge and quick 
& safe disposal of sediments, and successfully installed at 40 locations in 9 
states (Odisha, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Kerala, 
Uttarakhand, Meghalaya, and Himachal Pradesh) of India. The adoption of the 
technology enhanced crop productivity (12-36%), cropping intensity (20-31%) 
and net return by 44,000/ha.  
 Developed surface irrigation schedules for 53 crops and micro-irrigation 
schedules for 54 crops for various agro-ecological regions with improved water 
saving by 10 to 40% with increased water use efficiency by 17 -130%.   
 Fertigation schedule through drip irrigation has been standardized for 20 crops 
which could save 50–60% water, 25–30% fertilizers besides improving yield, 
fertilizer use efficiency under different agro-ecological regions of India. 
 Automated alternate wetting and drying (AWD) irrigation scheduler for 
transplanted rice has been developed and being promoted at farmers field 

57 
 
through collaborating centres, SAU’s and convergence with government 
schemes which can save 17% irrigation water. 
 Sensor-based drip irrigation system and IoT-enabled capacitance-based soil 
moisture sensing system for irrigation scheduling were developed.  
The Council has imparted training to more than 10,000 farmers and other stakeholders on 
water smart strategies and provide technical backstopping to various developmental 
schemes as and when required.” 
 
2.11 When the Committee asked to provide details about Climate Smart Agronomy 
promoted by the Department in the last 10 years, the Department submitted: 
“The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has been actively promoting 
climate smart agronomy through its flagship initiative NICRA and the All India Coordinated 
Research Project for Dryland Agriculture (AICRPDA). These programs focus on developing 
and disseminating location-specific, climate-resilient agronomic practices.  
The Technology Demonstration Components (TDC) of NICRA was demonstrated across 
448 villages in 151 climate-vulnerable districts involving KVK’s, these practices are 
supported by custom hiring centres, seed and fodder banks, and farmer-led institutions like 
Village Climate Risk Management Committees.   NICRA conducted 25,716 capacity-building 
programs using a farmer participatory approach through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), 
focusing on hands-on training, demonstrations, and weather-based agro-advisories. 
Technologies suited to local agro-climatic conditions—such as zero tillage, crop 
diversification, and alternate rice establishment methods—were documented and 
disseminated across 23 States and 3 UTs. Seed and fodder banks, along with Village 
Climate Risk Management Committees (VCRMCs), were established to ensure timely 
access to inputs and coordinated community-level responses to climate risks. 
AICRP-DA through 28 centres in rainfed areas, developed and field-tested location-specific 
practices like in-situ moisture conservation (ridge-furrow, compartment bunding), 
supplemental irrigation using harvested rainwater, and soil test-based nutrient management. 
These were integrated with Real-Time Contingency Planning (RTCP), involving drought-

58 
 
tolerant short-duration crops and foliar nutrient sprays to tackle delayed monsoons or early-
season droughts. Additionally, over 1,229 trainings, 608 field days, and 49 exposure visits 
helped transfer these methods to 6.7 lakh farmers for large-scale adoption. 
 
Apart from this, ICAR-Indian Institute of Farming Systems Research (IIFSR) has developed 
and promotes more than 64 integrated farming system models tailored to climatic risks. The 
Indian Institute of Soil and Water Conservation (IISWC) focuses on landscape-level soil and 
water conservation strategies, while institutes like ICAR-IARI, ICAR-IISS and ICAR-CRRI 
work on climate-resilient crop varieties, smart nutrient and water management practices. 
These programs emphasize region-specific solutions, advanced modeling, weather-based 
advisories, and sustainable intensification to strengthen resilience against climate variability 
across diverse agro-ecological zones.” 
  
C. Apex Body for Coordination 
2.12 During the sitting of the Committee, the Department was asked that:  
“…वषŊ 1980 मŐ लगभग सारे खेती से संबंिधत िड पाटŊमŐट्स एक ही िमिनː Ōी क े अंदर थे, लेिकन अब 
सात िडपाटŊमŐट्स बन गए हœ। इन सभी िडपाटŊमŐट्स मŐ कॉिडŊनेशन का कोई िस ː म है? ऐसी कोई कमेटी है, 
जो कॉिडŊनेशन करे?” 
 
2.13 The representatives of the Department replied as under: 
“सर, यह सही बात है िक वषŊ 1980 तक एक मंũालय था, उसक े शायद आठ-नौ मंũालय हो गए हœ। 
वे धीरे-धीरे िनकलते गए हœ। वे सारे मंũालय डायरैƃ ली-इनडायरैƃ ली खेती से जुड़े Šए हœ। मेरे संǒान मŐ कोई 
कॉिडŊनेशन कमेटी एज सच नहीं है, लेिकन आपस मŐ कॉिडŊनेशन की जŝ रत है। सारे िवभाग-मंũालय खेती से 
ही िलं̋ड हœ।“ 
 
2.14 Further, the Department, in a written submission, stated: 

59 
 
“The Ministries of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Chemicals and Fertilizers, Jal 
Shakti, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Rural Development, Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution and Commerce and Industry have diverse mandates and 
activities. However, on need based issues, the discussions and collaborations are held at 
appropriate level. The suggestion will be presented to Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare.” 
 
2.15 When the Committee categorically asked whether the Department agree with the 
view that there is a need for establishing an Apex Body to coordinate among various 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies on Agriculture related issues or the present arrangements 
are sufficient to cater the requirement of Agriculture sector, the Department stated: 
 
“Yes, a Committee for coordination among various Ministries, Departments, and 
Agencies on agriculture-related issues needs to be constituted for institutional convergence, 
policy coherence, and integrated implementation of agricultural strategies, especially in the 
context of complex and cross-cutting interventions like the Water Budget Based Cropping 
System.” 
  

60 
 
PART- II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
Strengthening of R&D Ecosystem for Development of Water Use Efficient Varieties 
 
1.  Agricultural sector is the backbone of the Indian economy, playing a vital role 
in the generation of national income and employment.  In India, while the volatility in 
agricultural growth has notably diminished over time due to targeted interventions, 
the sector is not without its challenges. Availability of water for agriculture is one of 
the serious challenges as maximum instability in yield is generally due to less or non-
availability of water.  So, to maintain the sustainability of crop production and attain 
the target of ensuring food, nutrition, environment and livelihood security, 
development of water efficient varieties of crops and production of their seeds are 
quite essential. 
 
 The Committee have been informed that Crop Science Division of the ICAR is 
working on 85 field crops under an Umbrella Scheme entitled ‘Crop Science for Food 
and Nutritional Security’ through its six sub-schemes. The six sub-schemes have 
total 63 components including 28 Institutes, 20 All India Coordinated Research 
Projects (AICRPs), six All India Network Projects (AINPs) and four Consortium 
Research Projects (CRPs).  All the scheme components have one or more activities 
related to development of varieties for less water requirement or technologies which 
can help in mitigating the effect of less water. In addition, Institutes and Programmes 
under Natural Resource management Division are also contributing towards 
development of varieties and management technologies for higher productivity under 
water deficit/less water availability condition and help in saving the ground water. 
Besides, ICAR under its flagship network project ‘National Innovations in Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) is also focused on climate resilient technological 
innovations. Apart from these planned projects, a good number of externally funded 
projects and the international organizations are also working on the objective of 
breeding for low water requiring varieties in different field crops. A few private 
companies also have their independent Research and Development programmes for 

61 
 
development of water efficient varieties.  The Committee have also been informed 
that out of total 3053 varieties of 85 crops released by ICAR since 2014, 2813 varieties 
(92%) are climate resilient, 1064 varieties (35%) are drought tolerant and 328 varieties 
(10.7%) are extremely drought tolerant. Despite these developments the Committee 
are of firm opinion that R&D ecosystem of the ICAR needs to be further strengthened 
and breeding of location specific drought tolerance and high water-use efficient traits 
catering to the requirement of all agro-climatic regions of the country to be prioritized. 
The Committee also desire implementation of a long term ‘Water Efficient Seeds 
Mission’ for development of water efficient varieties of seeds of various crops to 
promote the conservation of groundwater resources and to ensure sustainable crop 
production even under water-deficit conditions. 
 
Genetic Improvement by Integrating Modern Tools 
 
2.  The Committee note that the project or sub-scheme entitled ‘Enhancing climate 
resilience and ensuring food security with genome editing tools’ (with a total budget 
of Rs. 310 crores during 2023-24 to 2025-26), under an Umbrella Scheme entitled 
‘Crop Science for Food and Nutritional Security’ is based on the cutting edge latest 
biotechnological tools where 24 crops, which include 7 cereals, 6 pulses, 6 oilseeds, 
3 fibre crops, sugarcane and tobacco, have been included for improvement. The 
Committee have been apprised by the Department that Genome editing is a precision 
mutagenesis tool or method which uses biological mutagenic agents (gRNA and Cas 
enzyme) to create targeted mutation in a gene. Further, Genome edited crops are not 
considered as Genetically Modified (GM) Crops and bypass of GM Crops as GM Crops 
essentially carry a gene from foreign source, while Genome edited crops do not have 
any such foreign gene. Genome edited crops are similar to conventional bred 
varieties as genome editing creates mutation in the native gene similar to that of 
spontaneous or induced mutagenic agent. Hence, there is no biosafety, 
environmental and ecological risk associated with varieties developed by genome 
editing. Several countries such as USA, Japan, UK, Philippines, Australia, Brazil, 
Argentina, Kenya, Nigeria, Indonesia, Canada, Columbia, etc. have already exempted 
gene edited plants developed by SDN1 and SDN2, and they are considered as plant 

62 
 
varieties developed by any other breeding tools. Already, genome edited soybean 
crop in USA (from 2019), tomato in Japan (from 2021) are commercially cultivated and 
consumed.  The Committee have also been apprised by the Department that 
development of seeds through ‘genome editing’ is permissible in India. The bio-safety 
and environmental safety of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)/Non-Living 
Modified Organisms (LMOs) are regulated under Rules 1989 of Environment 
(Protection) Act of 1986 of Government of India.  The Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change, Government of India published OM on 30th March 2022 
exempting SDN-1 and SDN-2 categories of genome edited crop free from exogenous 
introduced DNA from the provision of Rules 7 to 11 (both inclusive) of the Rules 1989 
(GM Regulation Rules).  Further, Review Committee on Genetic, Manipulation 
(RCGM), DBT, Government of India published ‘Guidelines for safety assessment of 
genome edited plants 2022’ and ‘SoPs for regulatory review of genome edited plants 
2022’ following the International standard practice followed in other countries. 
 
The Committee recommend that while undertaking the genetic improvement by 
integrating modern tools like genome editing, speed breeding, marker-assisted and 
genomic selection etc., bio-safety measures must be scrupulously followed to secure 
human health, biodiversity and environment of the country. 
 
Review Mechanism for Assessment 
 
3.  As per the information furnished by the Department, the ICAR has a robust 
system of review mechanism of newly developed varieties. The present review 
mechanism for the assessment of newly developed seed varieties, as implemented 
through ICAR’s coordinated network trials and institutional protocols, has been 
broadly effective in evaluating key parameters such as yield potential, disease and 
pest resistance, grain quality and adaptability across agro-climatic zones.  The 
Committee are of view that with the evolving priorities of agriculture – such as 
nutritional security, consumer preferences, climate resilience and sustainability, 
certain dimensions like nutritional profiling, sensory evaluation, shelf life and water-
use efficiency (in case of drought tolerant varieties) may be supplemented for further 

63 
 
strengthening within the existing framework. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Review Mechanism for assessment of newly developed varieties of various 
crops should be continuously refined and strengthened to keep pace with future 
challenges and expectations. 
 
Seed Systems and Accessibility 
 
4.  The Committee have been informed that after release of variety and its 
notification in Gazette of India, the Seed Division of Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare receives indents for breeder seed of the variety from the Department 
of Agriculture of States, National Seeds Corporation Limited (NSCL), Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs), Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), Farmer Producer 
Organizations (FPOs) and Private Seed Companies (through Seed Associations) and 
subsequently in a meeting with all indenting agencies, the indent is finalized. ICAR 
produces breeder seed as per the indent, which in turn are converted into Foundation, 
Certified and Truthfully Labelled (TL) seeds in the next generations respectively by 
seed producing agencies and finally distributed among the farmers. The Committee 
have also been informed that the Department has not faced any shortage of breeder 
seed. Over the past 10 years, a total of 1,45,266.2 quintals of breeder seed of water-
efficient varieties was produced against an indent of 93,147.8 quintals.  The breeder 
seed production is aligned with the annual demand (indents) placed by various state 
governments as per their Seed Rolling Plan and also by other public and private seed 
producing agencies. The quantity produced has remained adequate to support the 
production of the required quantum of quality seed, as envisaged under the Seed 
Rolling Plans (Indents) of the respective states. However, due to declining indents 
from the states, the share of public sector National and State Level Corporation is 
declining and private sector is supplying the seeds to the states under various 
schemes.   
 
The Committee are of considered view that seeds are crucial and vital inputs 
for Agriculture.  Ensuring the timely availability of quality seeds at affordable price at 
the right time and place remains a significant challenge especially for small and 

64 
 
marginal farmers, who face affordability and access barriers, and in arid and 
resource-poor regions, with many farmers relying heavily on the informal seed sector 
to meet their seed requirements.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to take steps, in coordination with the Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare, for strengthening and equipping the existing seed production and 
distribution system networks to meet the increased and rapid demand, avoiding seed 
shortage, ensuring quality and affordability and easy availability. Also, State 
Governments should be impressed upon to take proactive steps to promote adoption 
of Climate-resilient and water-efficient varieties by ensuring timely availability and 
affordability of quality seeds to the farmers. 
  
Seed Authenticity and Traceability 
 
5.  The Committee note that the Seed Authenticity Traceability & Holistic Inventory 
(SATHI) is a national platform implemented by the collaborative efforts of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India with the Technical support 
of ICAR, and the National Informatics Centre (NIC) which proposes to provide a digital 
platform that streamlines the holistic management of seed production, quality 
certification, distribution and traceability at pan-India level.  This endeavor 
establishes a National Seed Grid (NSG), integrating all seed stakeholders within a 
unified national digital platform. 
 
The development of the platform has been taken up in 2 phases. Phase I of the 
project has been launched which covers onboarding the stakeholders involved in 
Nucleus to Breeder Seed Production, Breeder to Foundation and Foundation to 
Certified Seed Production processes to SATHI platform and capture their 
transactions at the granular level.  Phase II of the project will cover seed Supply chain 
and Inventory management. The movement of seed bag in supply chain will be 
recorded in real time to provide end to end traceability and Seed Inventory from Micro 
to Macro level (Retailer to state and National Level).  The Committee feel that full 
operationalization/implementation of SATHI platform would solve seed related issues 
particularly the menace of spurious and sub-standard seeds for the farmers.  The 

65 
 
Committee, therefore, while appreciating the launching of the ambitious SATHI 
project, desire that the process of onboarding of all the stakeholders including 
Private Seed Companies on SATHI platform should be expedited in a time bound 
manner so that the system becomes fully functional and effective at the earliest. 
 
Capacity Building and Awareness Creation 
 
6.   The Committee note that Water Use Efficient (WUE) varieties of various crops 
and water use efficient technologies have bene developed by the Institutes of the 
ICAR. Impact assessment and adoption studies of WUE varieties have shown positive 
results in enhancing productivity under limited water conditions. These varieties 
have improved yield stability, reduced irrigation needs and promoted sustainable 
water management. However, varietal adoption is shaped by diverse agro-climatic 
conditions, cropping patterns, market preferences and socio-economic factors.   The 
Committee also note that poor awareness about the water use efficient varieties, 
lesser demonstrations, poor breeder seed indents leading to seed availability, yield 
gaps between water efficient variety and normal bred variety during normal season, 
etc. are the major reasons for low adoption of water efficient variety of seeds by the 
farmers.  The Committee are of the view that there is a critical need to create 
awareness among farmers about the importance of adopting water-efficient varieties 
and technologies as a strategy for climate adaptation and water conservation which 
needs to be supported by robust evidence of agronomic and economic benefits 
derived from such varieties and technologies.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Department to take prompt and suitable action including awareness creation for 
addressing the reasons for the low adoption of water use efficient varieties and 
technologies by the farmers.  The Committee also recommend the Department to 
frequently provide training to breeders, scientists and farmers in water-use-efficient 
technologies to strengthen their scientific competencies and make them aligned with 
cutting-edge technologies for water-use efficiency. 
  

66 
 
 
Water Budget Based Cropping System 
 
7. The Committee note that the water is a critical input for crop production. Water 
scarcity and declining groundwater levels have become major constraints, 
particularly in arid and semi-arid regions.  The Committee also note that the total 
water resources of the country, as per an assessment, is 4000 billion cubic meters 
(BCM) based on annual rainfall and other forms of precipitation and utilizable water 
resources is 1123 BCM compared to the projected total water demand of 1498 BCM.  
There are also competing demands in domestic, industrial and energy sectors which 
will need additional 222 BCM water by 2050.  There are also regional, seasonal and 
temporal variations in availability of water in the country and the existing cropping 
patterns often do not align with local water availability, causing over-extraction and 
environmental stress.    In this backdrop, the Committee are of the view that the 
implementation of Water Budget-Based Cropping Pattern/System i.e. designing and 
managing cropping systems based on the availability of water resources in a 
particular region, with the aim of optimizing water use for sustainable agriculture, is 
a pragmatic and sustainable approach especially vital in drought prone and water-
deficit areas as it promotes ecological balance, sustainable water management, 
enhanced resource-use efficiency and climate-resilient agriculture. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to make sincere efforts, 
in coordination with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and other 
concerned agencies/organizations, for successful implementation of the Water 
Budget-Based Cropping System in the Country. The Committee also recommend for 
establishing a legal or regulatory mechanism, particularly for critical and over-
exploited water zones, to guide farmers on suitable crop choices and farming 
practices taking into consideration local agro-ecological conditions, water availability 
and socio-economic factors when water resources are severely depleted. 
 
  

67 
 
Climate-Smart Agronomy 
 
8. The Committee note that water scarcity and climate change present significant 
obstacles and challenges for Indian Agriculture.  Promoting agricultural production, 
patterns and practices that align with the specific agro-climatic conditions and 
natural resource availabilities of different regions across the country is vital. The 
Committee also not that the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has been 
actively promoting climate smart agronomy through its flagship initiative ‘National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) and the All India Coordinated 
Research Project for Dryland Agriculture (AICRPDA) by focusing on developing and 
disseminating location-specific, climate-resilient agronomic practices. The 
Committee further note that the ICAR has developed and standardized different water 
smart, cost effective, location specific scientific technologies and practices viz. 
rainwater harvesting and recycling, bio-engineering water conservation measures for 
facilitating infiltration and in-situ moisture conservation and ex-situ storage of run-
off water to provide supplementary irrigation to improve ground water recharge and 
minimize depletion of ground water, multiple use of water, conjunctive use of rain, 
surface and groundwater resources, smart and precision technologies for irrigation 
and farming practices, optimum irrigation scheduling including micro-irrigation, 
Fertigation schedule through drip irrigation, sensor-based drop irrigation system and 
Internet of Things (IoT) -enabled capacitance-based soil moisture sensing system for 
irrigation scheduling, automated alternate wetting and drying (AWD) irrigation 
schedule for transplanted rice, development of land drainage and reclamation of 
saline soils to enhance irrigation water efficiency and water productivity in Indian 
Agriculture.  Besides, technologies and practices such as zero tillage, crop 
diversification, alternate rice establishment methods, integrated farming system, 
climate-resilient crop varieties, smart nutrient and water management, weather-based 
advisories, sustainable intensification etc. strengthen resilience against climate 
variability across diverse agro-ecological zones. The Committee, while 
acknowledging the contributions made by the Department and ICAR in promotion of 
Climate Smart Agronomy, desire that Climate Smart Agronomy should be promoted 
and encouraged to cover all the agro-climatic regions of the country so as to not only 

68 
 
mitigate the adverse impacts of climate change on the Indian Agriculture but also to 
reap the sustainable long-term benefits. 
 
Apex Body/Committee for Coordination 
 
9. The Committee note that during 1980s, almost all Agriculture and Allied Sector 
related Department were under a single Ministry and in course of time several new 
Ministries have been created, though they are directly or indirectly related to 
Agriculture. The Committee have been apprised that the discussions and 
collaborations are held among these Ministries at appropriate level but a permanent 
coordination Committee or an Apex body for coordination among these Ministries 
does not exist at present. The Committee, therefore, desire that an Apex Body or a 
Committee for coordination among various concerned Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies on Agriculture and Allied Sector-related issues be constituted for 
institutional convergence, policy coherence and integrated implementation of 
agricultural strategies especially in the context of complex and cross-cutting 
interventions. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
24th March, 2026                                                   Chairperson 
03 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  
 
  

69 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 20th June, 2025, from 1435 hours to 1545 hours in 
Committee Room `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
    LOK SABHA 
 
32.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
33.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
34.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
35.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
36.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
37.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
38.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
10. 
11 
Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
12. Shri Madan Rathore 
13. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
 2. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
 3.     Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria - Deputy Secretary 
  
  

70 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE 
Department of Agricultural Research & Education 
 
Sl 
No.  
Name Designation 
1 Dr. M.L. Jat  Secretary, (DARE), & Director General (ICAR) 
2 Dr. D.K. Yadava  Deputy Director General (Crop Science), ICAR 
3 Dr. Sanjay Kumar Singh  Deputy Director General (Horticultural 
Science), ICAR 
4 Dr. Rajbir Singh Deputy Director General 
(Agril. Extn.), ICAR  
 
 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
 
5 Shri Frankin L. Khobung  
 
Joint Secretary, (NRM/RFS),  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the sitting 
convened in connection with the examination of the Subject ‘Research for Developing 
Water Efficient Variety of Seeds to Save Ground Water’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education).  
Thereafter, the representatives were called in. The Chairperson welcomed the 
representatives to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them of the provisions of 
Directions 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings.  
 
3. After the introduction by the witnesses, a power-point presentation was made by the 
representative(s) of the Department of Agricultural Research & Education on the Subject 
briefing the Committee about the diversity and ecosystems of Indian Agriculture, projected 

71 
 
population and food requirement in Viksit Bharat and other challenges, network of varietal 
improvement, progress made towards varietal development in field crops, extremely climate 
resilient varieties developed for stable production, water use efficient varieties developed 
during 2014-2024, impact of technologies on crop production showing resilience in Indian 
Agriculture, R&D network and seed system in India, progress made towards seed 
availability, Breeder & Quality Seeds production of water use efficient varieties and multiple 
stress tolerant (extreme climate) varieties during last 3 years, new research initiative for 
climate resilience, announcements in Budget 2025-26 and the way forward. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised several issues / 
points, as briefly mentioned below and sought clarifications / information from the 
Department thereon: 
i. Need for designing Water Budget based Cropping pattern; 
ii. Need for establishing an Apex Body to coordinate among various Ministries / 
Departments / Agencies on Agriculture related issues; 
iii. Requirement of having /preparing a Comprehensive Plan/Mission to deal with 
‘Water’; 
iv. Mandatory use of water efficient varieties of seeds; 
v. Need to have a long term ‘Water Efficient Seeds/ Agriculture Mission’ for development 
of water efficient varieties of seeds; 
vi. Assessment of difference in nutritional value of natural / original and hybrid variety of 
crops; 
vii. Legal mechanism / provision detailing which crops are to be grown and which farming 
methods are to be followed for places where water has been completely dried out; 

72 
 
viii. Need for having labelling on seeds packets indicating natural / hybrid / genetically 
modified / genetically edited seeds; 
ix. Issue of availability of genuine /certified seeds to the Farmers; 
x. Need of the Seed Law; 
xi. Review mechanism for assessment of newly developed seeds of various crops in 
terms of yield, quality, adoption by Farmers and other parameters; 
xii. Issue of Genetically Modified (GM) and Genome Edited (GE) crops; 
xiii. Promotion of drip irrigation; 
xiv. Promotion of river linking and water harvesting projects for overcoming shortage of 
water; etc. 
 
5. The representatives of the Department responded to most of the queries raised by 
the Members. The Chairperson, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable 
information with the Committee on the Subject and directed them to furnish the requisite 
information in writing on the points/items, which were not readily available with them to the 
Secretariat by 30th June, 2025, positively.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  

73 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2025-26) 
 
***** 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20th November, 2025, from 1430 hours to 1445 
hours in Committee Room ‘1’, First Floor, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
4.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
5.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
6.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
7.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
8.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
9. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
 
                Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11. 
12 
Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
Shri Madan Rathore 
13. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
14. Shri P. P. Suneer 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.          Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
2.     Shri Prem Ranjan    - Deputy Secretary 
3.     Shri Fauzi Badruddin   - Deputy Secretary 
  

74 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee then took up of the draft Reports on the subjects- (i) ‘Production and 
Availability of Oilseeds and Pulses in the Country’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare); and (ii) ‘Research 
for Developing Water Efficient Variety of Seeds to Save Ground Water’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) for consideration. 
 
3. A Member of the Committee raised some objections/suggested some modifications 
to the recommendations contained in the draft Reports.  Consequently, the Chairperson 
decided to keep the adoption of the draft Reports on hold and constitute a Sub-Committee 
to finalize the draft reports. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  

75 
 
Appendix-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23rd March, 2026 from 1035 hrs. to 1118 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 2, First Floor, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
3. Shri Kuldeep Indora 
4. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
5. Shri Dushyant Singh 
6. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Shri Fauzi Badruddin - Deputy Secretary 
 
7. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
8. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
9. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
10. 
 
Shri Madan Rathore 
  
 
Secretariat 
 

76 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Subject Reports and Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
 *(i) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx ; 
 (ii) Report on the Subject ‘Research for Developing Water Efficient Variety 
of Seeds to Save Ground Water’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) 
 *(iii) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx ; 
 *(iv) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx ; 
 *(v) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx ; 
 *(vi) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx; 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter adopted the draft Reports mentioned at Para 2 (i) 
and (ii) with modifications/amendments as listed at Annexure A and B, respectively. 
 
*4. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx ; 
 
*5. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx ; 
 
6. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the 
light of modifications suggested and present the Reports to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
*Matter not related to this report. 
  

77 
 
Annexure-B 
 
Modification/amendment suggested in the Draft Report on the subject ‘Research 
for Developing water efficient variety of Seeds to save Ground Water 
  
S. No. Recommendation
/ Observation 
Para No. 
Omitted Incorporated 
1 2 Despite these 
developments, the 
Committee are 
apprehensive about the 
genome edited crops. The 
Committee, therefore, 
recommend the 
Department to re-assess 
the Rules, Regulations, 
Guidelines, SOPs etc. so 
as to ensure that while 
undertaking the genetic 
improvement by 
integrating modern tools 
like genome editing, 
speed breeding, marker-
assisted and genomic 
selection etc., 
precautionary measures 
are scrupulously 
undertaken and provided 
for so as to avoid any 
unintended/potential ill 
effects on human health, 
biodiversity, environment 
and bio-safety in the 
country. 
The Committee 
recommend that while 
undertaking the genetic 
improvement by 
integrating modern tools 
like genome editing, 
speed breeding, marker-
assisted and genomic 
selection etc., bio-safety 
measures must be 
scrupulously followed to 
secure human health, 
biodiversity and 
environment of the 
country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 