 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
 ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
     (2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING) 
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26)' 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-
25) on Demands for Grants (2025-26)] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2026/ CHAITRA, 1948(SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
  
37 

 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING) 
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26)' 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
on Demands for Grants (2025-26)] 
 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on                     27.03.2026 
 
 Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on       27.03.2026 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2026/ CHAITRA, 1948(SAKA) 
 


i 
 
 
 
COA No. 536 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  

ii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) …………………………………….. iii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) …………………………………….. iv 
Introduction ……………………………………………………………………….. vi 
Chapter I Report…………………………… 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
11 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
33 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
34 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
36 
 
   
   
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 12th sitting of the Committee held on 23rd March,2026  
 
 
38 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants 
(2025-26)  
 
 
 
40 
 
  

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 (2024-25) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
    LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
      
    RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
 
 Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok 
Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025.  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 (2025-26) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
    LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
      RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
24.  Shri H. D. Devegowda 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
27.  Shri Madan Rathore 
28.  Shri S. R. Sivalingam 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala   
  

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 3. Smt. Sonia Gupta   - Committee Officer 
  
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Seventh Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing (2024-25) on 'Demands for Grants (2025-26)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying).  
 
2. The Eleventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2025.  The Action Taken Notes on the 
Report were received on 19.06.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 23rd March, 2026. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2025-26) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
24th March, 2026                               Chairperson 
03 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Agriculture 
                Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing deals with the Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying), which was presented to Lok Sabha on           
19th March, 2025 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2025. 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying) has furnished Action-taken Replies in respect of all the 09 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
scrutinized and thereafter categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4 5, 7 and 8 
Total 07  
Chapter - II  
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendation No.                        NIL 
Total 00 
Chapter – III 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No.        9 
Total 01 
Chapter – IV 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 
Recommendation No.       6  
Total 01  
Chapter - V  
 
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance be given by the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying) to implement the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Department to implement the 
Recommendations in letter and spirit, for any reason, the matter should be intimated, in 
writing, to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee also 
desire that further Action-taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early 
date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action-taken by the Government on some of the 
Observations / Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.   Milk Prices 
 (Recommendation No. 5) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under: - 
 
“The Department has stated that the average milk price has increased from Rs. 30 in 
2014 to Rs. 45.98 in December 2024. Further, the Department has acknowledged that 
the milk inflation has remained much below the average food inflation during last one 
year while the WPI inflation in food was recorded around 6 per cent, it was just 1.6 per 
cent in milk and milk products. 
 
Price of milk to farmers is being determined by the cooperatives and private dairies 
based on market conditions. The retail price of milk and the price provided to procure 
milk from milk farmers are different as other costs like transportation, processing, 
packaging, marketing, sales & distribution, infrastructure costs etc. are also incurred. 
As per the Department, about 70-80% of the consumer / retail rupee is paid back to milk 
producer farmers in the Dairy Cooperative sector. 
  
The Committee are of view that there is widespread adulteration of milk and milk 
products which is resulting in the farmers not getting remunerative price for their milk 
sold in the market and also affecting the health of consumers. The Committee also note 
that increase in milk prices is less than the average rate of food inflation in the country 
This, the Committee believe, is not benefitting the millions of dairy farmers who depend 
solely/ predominantly on sale of milk for their livelihood, as the dairy Farmers' income 
from sale of milk, is not keeping pace with food inflation The Committee, therefore, is 
apprehensive of the fairness of price being determined by the procurement agencies be 
it cooperatives or private dairies. They accordingly recommend the Department to 
examine thoroughly into mechanism of price determination by milk procurement 
agencies to ensure just and reasonable price. Further, the committee feels there is lack 
of proper implementation of laws relating to adulteration checks and prevention of milk 

3 
 
and their products, accordingly the Committee recommend the Department to take 
appropriate action, and efforts may be made to devise an instrument to test purity of 
milk at household level. 
 
1.6 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted as under: - 
 
“Mechanism of Price Determination by Milk Procurement Agencies: 
i. The Government of India recognizes the concern raised by the Committee regarding 
the need for a fair and transparent milk price determination mechanism to ensure that 
dairy farmers receive a just and remunerative price for their produce. 
 
ii. It is important to note that Animal Husbandry, including dairy development, is a State 
subject under Entry 15 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Therefore, 
pricing of milk and procurement arrangements fall within the purview of respective State 
Governments. 
 
iii. That said, milk is a highly perishable commodity requiring prompt collection, chilling, 
processing, and distribution. Hence, price determination by cooperatives and private 
dairies is driven by market dynamics, including the cost of production, handling, 
transport, processing, packaging, and distribution. The Government does not regulate 
procurement or retail prices of milk, in line with the liberalized pricing framework of 
agricultural produce. 
 
iv. However, to support fair returns to farmers, especially those associated with the 
cooperative sector, it is noteworthy that 70-80% of the consumer price is paid back to 
producers. This share is among the highest globally in the dairy sector. The 
Government, through the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD), is also 
supporting initiatives that reduce production costs and enhance farmers' profitability. 
 
v. DAHD monitors the milk situation in the country at regular intervals in consultation with 
State Milk federations and concerned stakeholders to review the situation and take 
policy interventions in the interest of farmers. 
 
Adulteration of Milk and Quality Assurance: 
 
i. The Committee’s concern regarding adulteration of milk and its impact on both farmers’ 
incomes and consumer health is well acknowledged. 
 
ii. The Government of India enacted Food Safety and Standards (FSS) Act- 2006 to unify 
food related laws and establish the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) under administrative control of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The 
responsibility for monitoring milk quality lies with the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India (FSSAI). The FSSAI sets science-based standards for food articles 
and regulates their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure 
availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption.  The implementation 
and enforcement of FSS Act are carried out by FSSAI through Food Safety 
Commissioners of State Governments and Union Territory Administrations. 
 

4 
 
iii. In order to empower consumers and enhance grassroots - level purity testing, the 
Government is exploring the feasibility of developing and promoting affordable 
household milk testing kits in collaboration with FSSAI and relevant scientific 
institutions. 
 
iv. Following steps have been taken by FSSAI for proper implementation of laws relating 
to Food safety specially to check adulteration in milk and milk products:  
 
v. FSSAI conducts periodic Pan-India Surveillance of Food products especially on staple 
foods and commodities that are prone to adulteration to ascertain the quality and safety 
of the food products produced and consumed in India. As part of such plan, a total of 6 
Surveillances have been conducted on Milk & Milk Products since 2011, the list is as 
follows:  
o National Survey on Milk Adulteration, 2011 
o National Milk Survey, 2016 
o National Milk Safety and Quality Survey, 2018 
o Milk Surveillance, 2022. 
o PAN India Milk Products Survey, 2020 
o PAN India Milk and Milk Products Surveillance, 2023. 
 
vi. For testing of various food commodities including dairy products, FSSAI has notified 
243 primary laboratories and 22 Referral Laboratories across the country. 
 
vii. FSSAI has provided Mobile Food Testing Laboratory (MFTL) referred to as “Food Safety 
on wheels” (FSW) to State/UTs. MFTLs are equipped with basic infrastructure for on 
spot testing of adulteration in various food commodities including milk and milk products. 
The MFTLs are equipped with “Milk-o-Screen” equipment for testing quality parameters 
viz., Fat, Solids not fat (SNF), protein, adulterants such as added water, urea, sucrose, 
maltodextrin, ammonium sulphate etc. Currently, 286 FSWs are deployed across 35 
States/UTs. 
 
viii. FSSAI has developed 125 testing methodologies which includes chemical tests and 
advanced analytical techniques for testing of adulterants like detergents, urea, starch, 
formaldehyde, and synthetic substances along with other quality parameters as per 
FSSR. Furthermore, for detection of food adulterants at household by the citizens 
themselves FSSAI has developed Detect Adulteration with Rapid Test (DART) booklet. 
DART covers more than 50 tests that can be performed easily at household including 
test methods for milk and milk products. 
 
ix. Food Safety Magic Boxes, consists of reliable "quick screening tests “for detection of 
adulterants like starch, urea, detergent, cellulose, maltodextrin salicylic acid, glucose in 
Milk along with detection of artificial dyes in butter, khoa, cheese; and vanaspati/ 
hydrogenated edible fat in ghee etc. It consists of a total of 107 tests across 06 food 
categories, with 27 tests for detection of adulterants in dairy and dairy Products. 
 
x. National Dairy Development Board, under the guidance of Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying has developed a kit for the easy detection of adulterants in 
milk. This kit can also be used at household level for testing of milk adulterants. The 

5 
 
Department is working towards popularizing the kits among different stakeholders in 
consultation with NDDB and FSSAI. The details of the kits are as follows: 
 
Kit type Suitable for following Adulterants Raw milk samples can 
be tested 
Large Urea, Ammonia Fertilizers, Nitrate 
Fertilizers, Starch and cereal flours, 
Sugar/Sucrose, Glucose, Salt, 
Neutralizers, Hydrogen Peroxide 
100 tests each  
Medium Salt, Urea, Sugar/Sucrose, Neutralizers, 
Neutralizers, Starch and cereal flours  
100 tests each 
Small Urea, Starch and cereal flours, 
Neutralizers, Hydrogen Peroxide 
5 tests each 
” 
 
1.7 Noting that the increase in milk prices is less than the average rate of food 
inflation in the country and expressing apprehension about the fairness of price being 
determined by the procurement agencies be it cooperatives or private dairies, the 
Committee in its earlier Report on the Subject had recommended the Department to 
examine thoroughly the mechanism of price determination by milk procurement 
agencies to ensure just and reasonable price. Further, the Committee had also 
recommended the Department to take appropriate action and efforts be made to devise 
an instrument to test purity of milk at household level. The Department in its Action 
Taken reply has stated that the Animal Husbandry, including dairy development, is a 
State subject under Entry 15 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. 
Therefore, pricing of milk and procurement arrangements fall within the purview of 
respective State Governments. It has further stated that the Government does not 
regulate procurement or retail prices of milk, in line with the liberalized pricing 
framework of agricultural produce. The Department has further stated that it monitors 
the milk situation in the country at regular intervals in consultation with State Milk 
federations and concerned stakeholders to review the situation and take policy 
interventions in the interest of farmers. However, the Department has not provided the 
details of any such review undertaken in recent past and consequent policy 
interventions, in line with recommendation of the Committee to examine thoroughly into 
the mechanism of price determination by milk procurement agencies to ensure just and 
reasonable price. As for the recommendation of the Committee for devising an 
instrument to test purity of milk at household level, the Department has stated that the 

6 
 
Government is exploring the feasibility of developing and promoting affordable 
household milk testing kits in collaboration with FSSAI and relevant scientific 
institutions. They have further enumerated various steps taken by FSSAI for proper 
implementation of laws relating to Food safety specially to check adulteration in milk 
and milk products which include various testing kits/methodologies available in market 
for adulterant testing in milk, various initiatives taken by FSSAI like Mobile Food Testing 
Laboratories, undertaking of periodic Pan-India Surveillance of food products, 
operation of various Food Testing and Referral Laboratories across India.  
 
In view of reply of the Department that it monitors the milk situation in the country at 
regular intervals in consultation with State Milk federations and concerned stakeholders 
and take policy interventions in the interest of farmers, the Committee are quite hopeful 
that just and reasonable price would be ensured to the dairy farmers. Further, 
appreciating the Government for taking steps for checking and preventing adulteration 
of milk and milk products, the Committee expect that affordable household milk testing 
kits would be made available to households in the country at the earliest.  
 
B. Livestock Insurance 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
1.8 The Committee in its 11th Report had observed/recommended as under: - 
 
 "The Committee observe during examination of Demand for Grant for 2024-25 that 
shortage of fund, non-participation of insurance companies as reasons for non-achievement 
of targets under Livestock Insurance under National Livestock Mission. The Committee was 
again informed during examination of Demands for Grants (2025-26) that huge amount of 
funds will be required for covering large number of animals under the insurance and the 
Budgetary allocations for the entire department will not be sufficient for covering large number 
of animals. The Committee in this context note that the Department has huge amount of 
unspent balances under its scheme of Livestock Health & Disease Control Program where 
after reviewing the progress of expenditure under the scheme, Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) of the Department in its meeting dated 12.08.2024 recommended to reduce 
the outlay for the scheme. The Committee recommend that the Department in the first instance 
make an assessment of amount of funds required to implement livestock insurance across 
country to support its claim of insufficiency of funds, based on objective figures. Further, the 

7 
 
Committee would like the Department to assess the feasibility of utilizing funds unspent under 
Livestock Health & Disease Control Program for purpose of Livestock insurance in the country 
in view of ensuring financial security of livestock owners." 
 
1.9 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted as under: - 
 
“i. The Committee observed during examination of Demand for Grant for 2024-25 that 
shortage of fund, non-participation of insurance companies as reasons for non- 
achievement of targets under Livestock insurance under National Livestock 
Mission. The Committee was again informed during examination of Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) that huge amount of funds will be required for covering large 
number of animals under the insurance and the Budgetary allocations for the entire 
department will not be sufficient for covering large n umber of animals. The 
Committee in this context note that the Department has huge amount of unspent 
balances under its scheme of Livestock Health & Disease Control Program where 
after reviewing progress of expenditure under the scheme, Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) of the Department in its meeting dated 12.08.2024 recommended 
to reduce the outlay for the scheme. The Committee recommended that the 
Department in the first instance make an assessment of amount of funds required 
to implement livestock insurance across country to support its claim of insufficiency 
of funds, based on objective figures. Further, the Committee would like the 
Department to assess the feasibility of utilising funds unspent under Livestock 
Health & Disease Control Program for purpose of Livestock insurance in the country 
in view of ensuring financial security of livestock owners. 
ii. In this context, it may be stated that the total Milch cattle and buffalo is 1256.78 lakh 
and 5% is 62.84 lakh. The fund requirement for Insuring 5% of Milch Population 
under different valuation starting from Rs.30,000 till Rs.60,000 considering duration 
of 1 year and Premium % as 4.5 is as under: 
  
  
  
 
 
The 
average requirement of funds to insure 5% of milch population in each category of value 
of animal is Rs. 700.00 crores per year.” 
 
 
Sl. No Value of animal Fund required for insuring 5% 
of Milch population (Rs. in Cr.) 
1 Rs.30,000  477.64 
2 Rs.35,000  551.61 
3 Rs.40,000  625.59 
4 Rs.45,000  699.57 
5 Rs.50,000  847.52 
6 Rs.55,000  773.54 
7 Rs.60,000  921.50 

8 
 
1.10 Taking note of the fact that shortage of fund, non-participation of insurance 
companies were cited as reasons by the Department for non-achievement of targets of 
Livestock Insurance under National Livestock Mission, the Committee had 
recommended  the Department to make an assessment of amount of funds required to 
implement livestock insurance across country to support its claim of shortage of funds, 
based on objective figures and  to assess the feasibility of utilizing funds unspent under 
Livestock Health & Disease Control Program for purpose of Livestock insurance in the 
country with view of ensuring financial security of livestock owners. The Department, 
in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted that the total number of Milch cattle and 
buffaloes are 1256.78 lakh and 5% of Milch Population is 62.84 lakh and the average 
fund requirement for insuring 5% of Milch Population under different valuation starting 
from Rs.30,000 till Rs.60,000 considering duration of 01 year and premium of 4.5% is 
Rs. 700 crores. However, the Department has not submitted reply to further 
recommendation of the Committee to assess the feasibility of utilising funds unspent 
under Livestock Health & Disease Control Program for purpose of Livestock insurance 
in the country with view of ensuring financial security of livestock owners.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to assess the feasibility of 
utilizing unspent funds or funds being reduced under Livestock Health & Disease 
Control Program for purpose of Livestock insurance in the country with a view to 
ensuring financial security to livestock owners. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
C.  Popularization of Scheme and Budget Head 
 (Recommendation No. 9) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under: - 
 
 “The Committee note that the Credit, Extension and Publicity (CE&P) Division of the 
Department helps farmers to get information regarding financial and technical assistance, 
scientific research, and new knowledge in livestock production and Animal Husbandry 
practices. It assists and encourages the State Governments in organizing, maintaining, and 
operating professional Extension Services, through its various programs, schemes and 
activities. Funds for the awareness programs are utilized as per the budget allocation under 
various schemes of the Department for advertisement and publicity. Thus, there is no separate 
budget allocation to the Credit, Extension and Publicity (CE&P) Division of the Department to 

9 
 
carry out its awareness programme independently of fund availability under specific schemes. 
This seems to make efforts of the Division contingent upon allocation of funds under specific 
scheme for the popularization purpose and hamper efforts of undertaking consolidated 
awareness programmes about all schemes/programmes for wholesome awareness of the 
livestock farmers and stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department explore possibility of allocating separate budget under awareness and outreach 
head for work of the Department being carried out through its Credit, Extension and Publicity 
(CE&P) Division. This shall also entail a compulsory obligation on the Department to undertake 
expenditure on awareness programmes year after year in line with budgetary fund allocations 
and ensure more autonomy to the CE&P Division in carrying out its activities independently of 
fund availability under specific schemes. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
necessary provisions/modifications in budget planning heads of the Department to be made in 
this regard.” 
 
1.12 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted as under: - 
 
“The Department respectfully acknowledges the observations and recommendations of 
the Hon’ble Committee. With reference to the Office Memorandum dated 30.04.2025 
issued by the Department of Economic Affairs, it is submitted that, as per the extant 
instructions, 40% of the budget allocation under Object Head ‘26 – Advertisement and 
Publicity’ of all Ministries/Departments is to be placed at the disposal of the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting (M/o I&B). 
The Ministry of Information & Broadcasting undertakes publicity and awareness 
campaigns through various Government-owned media platforms, including 
Doordarshan, All India Radio, and other associated channels, to ensure wider outreach 
and effective dissemination of information regarding Government schemes to the target 
beneficiaries and the general public.” 
 
1.13 Noting that there is no separate budget allocation to the Credit, Extension and 
Publicity (CE&P) Division of the Department for dissemination of information regarding 
awareness programmes relating to the various plans/schemes of the Department of 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying, other than the funds available under the various 
Schemes of the Department , the Committee in its earlier Report on the Subject had made 
specific recommendation that the Department explore possibility of allocating separate 

10 
 
budget under awareness and outreach head for work of the Department being carried 
out through its CE&P Division. The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted 
that it respectfully acknowledges the observations and recommendations of the Hon’ble 
Committee. They have further stated that with reference to the Office Memorandum dated 
30.04.2025 issued by the Department of Economic Affairs, as per the extant instructions, 
40% of the budget allocation under Object Head ‘26 – Advertisement and Publicity’ of all 
Ministries/Departments is to be placed at the disposal of the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting (M/o I&B). The Committee are of the view that while Government media 
plays an important role in dissemination of information with respect to Programmes and 
Schemes being carried out by various Departments of the Government, the Department 
of Animal Husbandry and Dairying too has an important role to play for disseminating 
information related to specific Scheme and Programmes of the Department to the 
intended target groups so that they can benefit from them. Therefore, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Department explore possibility of 
allocating separate budget under specific budget head to CE&P Division for carrying out 
the awareness programmes of the Department to ensure more autonomy to the CE&P 
Division in carrying out its activities independently of fund availability under specific 
schemes and undertake collective awareness programmes about the 
schemes/programmes for wholesome awareness of the livestock farmers and 
stakeholders. The Committee would like to be apprised of specific steps taken in this 
regard. 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
QUARTERLY EXPENDITURE PLANNING 
Recommendation No. 1 
 The Committee observe that the Department was allocated Rs. 4014 cr at Revised 
Estimate (RE) Stage for the financial year 2024-25. According to the Quarterly Expenditure 
Plan (QEP), Rs. 1232.81 crores (25% of the Budget Estimates for 2024-25) is to be spent in 
each quarter. However, the Department was able to spend only Rs. 2116.79 crores (52.73%) 
up until third quarter. Thus, the Department needs to spend Rs.1898 Crore (47.28%) in the 
last quarter to completely utilise its RE stage budget allocations. As per the guidelines issued 
by the Ministry of Finance (MoF), expenditure in the last quarter should not exceed 33% of the 
total budget grant. The Department has informed that it sought relaxation from MoF to utilize 
the remaining amount exceeding 33% in the fourth quarter of FY 2024-25. The MoF, however, 
has advised prioritizing the expenditure of the allocated amount for last quarter before 
considering any relaxation. Thus, it appears that the Department may not be able to utilise its 
RE stage allocations of Rs. 4014 crores, completely, due to not following quarterly expenditure 
plans and left too much to be spent in the last quarter. The non-adherence to the expenditure 
stipulations by the Ministry is likely to result in surrender of substantial amount of allocated 
funds. The non-adherence to the expenditure stipulations by the Ministry is likely to result in 
surrender of huge amount of funds allocated even at Revised Estimates (RE) stage, at end of 
this financial year. 
  
 The Committee believe that such non adherence to the spending limits and the 
consequent surrendering of the funds may likely to hamper Department's ability to bargain for 
higher budget allocation in the subsequent Budgets. The Committee are also of the view that 
when it is not able to fully utilise even the reduced amounts allocated at RE stage fully, it will 
have adverse impact on outcomes of the programmes, schemes and projects. The Committee 
invite the attention of the Ministry to their recommendations made time and again for 
impressing upon Ministry of Finance to increase allocation to the Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying Sector. The Department's, inability to properly distribute its expenditure throughout 
the year and falling short on quarterly expenditure plans defeat the purpose of 

12 
 
recommendations of Committee and proposals of the Department for increased budgetary 
allocations. The Committee, therefore, suggest that proper planning, after taking into 
consideration all possible scenarios may be made to ensure maximum use of funds allocated 
at RE stage. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
I. The Department respectfully acknowledges the observations and recommendations of 
the Hon’ble Committee regarding the expenditure pattern for the financial year 2024–
25. 
II. As per the approved Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP), Rs. 1232.81 crore, amounting 
to 25% of the Budget Estimates of Rs. 4931.21 crore which is 30.71% of Revised 
Estimate (RE) Rs. 4014.25 crore, was to be utilised in each quarter. However, due to 
certain operational and administrative constraints, only Rs. 3649.25 crore (90.91% of 
RE) could be expended up to the end of the fourth quarter. 
III. It is submitted that under the RGM and NPDD scheme the fund utilization pattern 
adheres to the SoP/Ceiling for last quarter. However, under all other major schemes the 
pattern shows that the expenditure during last quarter is Rs. 1532.46 crore (38.18% of 
RE) of the allocated funds. The less expenditure under LHDCP scheme is mainly due 
to changes of procedure to release funds under CSS Scheme through SNA model, 
which later moved to SNA SPARSH model.  
IV. The Department made all efforts to ensure maximum permissible utilisation of the 
allocated funds in the fourth quarter in compliance with MoF guidelines. The department 
had assigned limits in CNA and SNA of implementing agencies (IA) for implementing 
the schemes. As per the current procedure of fund flow, the implementing agencies 
(CNA/SNA) are required to submit the bills against the limits assigned, then only the 
actual utilization of the allocated funds will be considered. However, in many of the IAs 
the bills were not submitted on time which led to lower utilization of the allocated funds. 
V. The Department assures the Hon’ble Committee that lessons learned from the current 
year will inform better planning and forecasting in the subsequent financial years. 
Emphasis will be laid on quarterly target-based fund utilisation, with close monitoring 

13 
 
through the SNA-SPARSH platform and regular reviews at the senior management level 
to prevent bunching of expenditure. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Dept. of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
F. No. G-28011/2/2025-Budget (E-34194) Dated 19th June, 2025 
 
Delhi Milk Scheme 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee understood that the Delhi Milk Scheme (DMS), set up in 1959, is a 
subordinate office of the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying. Its mandate is to provide 
pure and safe milk and milk-based products.  Expenditure on all head of accounts including 
the expenditure on inputs like raw milk, SMP, white Butter etc. and capital items met from 
consolidated fund of Government of India through annual budgetary allocation made by the 
Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying. Sale proceeds of milk and milk products are 
credited into the revenue account of the Government of India. DMS has been source of 
constant revenue to the Department with net Revenue receipts of Rs. 195 crores in 2023-24 
and Rs. 175 crore in 2024-25 (upto 20.01.2025). The Department, however, has informed that 
License of DMS has been suspended by the Food safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) and no infrastructure upgradation is being taken up as a result.  
 
The Department did not provide any reply on plans of Department to strengthen DMS as 
source of robust revenue generation and fully exploiting its potential in retail segment neither 
it elaborated on the reasons, whether policy, structural, administrative and/or others, plaguing 
the revenue generation and realization capacity of DMS or what led to suspension of licence 
and remedial steps taken by the Department for its restoration. The Committee are not clear 
as to why such an outfit which is contributing to the Government revenues rather than 
depending on the Government for survival, is being made to suffer.  The  Committee, therefore, 
want the Department to furnish them a detailed note including inter alia  (i) the reasons for 
suspension of license of DMS by FSSAI; (ii) the steps taken to ensure its adherence to FSSAI 
stipulations; (iii) revival steps taken / proposed to be taken especially in view of the fact that it 
is not dependent on Government for its operations and instead contributing huge amounts to 
Government revenues year  after year; and (iv) huge brand value / recall value it enjoys in the 
retail markets of NCT, Delhi. 

14 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
I. The reasons for suspension of license of DMS by FSSAI are briefly summarized as 
below: 
(i) As per observations of improvement notices and suspension order of FSSAI 
surprise inspection team, the conditions in which the food products were being 
manufactured at DMS’s premise was alarming and was likely to pose health 
hazard.  The sanitary and hygiene condition of the factory premise was found poor, 
thus failed to comply to the requirements of Schedule 4 of FSSS (Licensing and 
Registration of Food Businesses) Regulation, 2011. This was mainly due to lack of 
renovation/upgradation of DMS's Central Dairy, its plant & machinery and building 
infrastructure was found to be poor.  
(ii) DMS's Food Business Nominee as per FSSAI regulations did not sign requisite 
Form IX of FSSAI Regulations., which was a non-compliance.  
(iii) As per observations of FSSAI's Surprise Inspection, DMS was engaged in 
unauthorized manufacturing of Sweet Dahi i.e. without a valid license which is again 
a contravention to Section 31(1) of the FSS Act, 2006.  However, as per DMS's 
clarification dated 13.10.2023 submitted to CEO, FSSAI, DMS was manufacturing 
"DMS Meethi Dahi/DMS Sweet Dahi" in place of Sweetened Dahi in compliance to 
Para 6 Sub Para (a) (ii) regarding "Labelling requirements" as per FSSAI Food 
Safety & Standards (Food Products Standards and food additives) Regulations 
2011, version XII (8.9.2020). 
(iv) As per the Suspension Order dated 13.10.2023, DMS does not have any evidence 
to substantiate destruction of products recalled.  However, DMS has furnished 
requisite information as per pertinent Schedules I to III during the period from 
21.7.2023 to 3.8.2023 providing necessary details of Product Recall Process in 
compliance to FSSAI Regulation. 
(v) Two regulatory samples of Pasteurized Full Cream Milk and Pasteurized Toned 
Milk were drawn from DMS’s factory premise on 23.8.2023 which have been 
reported as Unsafe and Substandard by the Primary Food Laboratory due to 
presence of Neutralizer and solids not fat below the minimum prescribed 

15 
 
limit.  However as per subsequent Quality Re-Test Analysis Report, the sample of 
Pasteurized Full Cream Milk was found to comply to Quality Standards of FCM.  As 
regards Re-Test Analysis Report of Pasteurized Toned Milk, the results differ from 
it corresponding first test report, which is now sub-judice. 
(vi) DMS failed to submit compliances to FSSAI within the prescribed time limit of 30 
days to the Improvement Notice dated 5.9.2023. However, on receipt of above 
Improvement Notice on 16.9.2023, DMS has furnished compliance report vide letter 
dated 13.10.2023 which was within stipulated time period of 30 days.   
(vii) The FSSAI’s Suspension Order No. E-34/Improvement Notice Delhi/FSSAI/NR/ 
2023/1030 dated 13.10.2023 is attached herewith. 
 
II. Steps taken by DMS to adhere to FSSAI stipulations are briefly given below: -  
(i) The DMS vide its letter no. 7-6/99-PDCC dated 13.10.23 (attached herewith) 
submitted its 42-points Compliance Report in response to FSSAI’s Improvement 
Notice dated 5.9.2023 (which was received in DMS on 16.9.2023).   
(ii) The DMS vide its letter no. 7-6/99-PDCC dated 13.10.23 (attached herewith) 
submitted pointwise Compliance to the grounds on the basis of which its License was 
suspended vide FSSAI’s order dated 13.10.2023, with the request to revoke the 
License of DMS so as to continue to serve the consumers of Delhi. 
(iii) The DMS vide its letter no. 11002-2/2023-PDCC dated 25.10.2023 (attached 
herewith) requested the Competent Authority of the DAHD to grant a temporary Dairy 
Plant break down period/Plant improvement period of atleast one year and allow 
DMS to upgrade the Building, Plant and Machinery during this period through an 
expert agency like National Dairy Development Board ( NDDB)/IDMC etc. as per 
recommendation of the DMS’s Task Force which was constituted on 17.10.2023 to 
examine and ascertain the likely operational and financial implications of the 
observations of FSSAI Inspection team.  
(iv) The Delhi Milk Scheme submitted a/an request/appeal dated 26.10.2023 (attached 
herewith) under Section 32(4) of FSSAI for revoking license of DMS suspended vide 
Suspension Order No. E-34/Improvement Notice/Delhi/FSSAI/NR/2023/ 1028 to 
1032 dated 13.10.2023. The details were also provided to them w.r.t. FSSAI Spot 

16 
 
Memo points and observations points which had been implemented by DMS and 
which were to be implemented further within a period of 6, 12 and 18 months, as 
applicable, subject to timely financial approval from the Competent Authority and 
implementation through CPP Portal. 
(v) In response to the above, FSSAI vide its letter dated 21.11.2023 (attached herewith) 
stated that: - 
a. upon reviewing the appeal filed by DMS, it has been observed that the specific 
actions/improvement measures taken by the DMS regarding the non-
compliance points highlighted in the Spot Memo dated 16.10.2023 have not 
been provided. 
b. it was advised to furnish a comprehensive, point by point compliance report 
addressing all the concerns outlined in the Improvement Notice/Spot Memo 
issued by CLA/DO so that the matter may be examined further. 
c. all fundamental measures which are essential for the food safety and hygiene 
are required to be established by the DMS which will facilitate a 
comprehensive follow-up inspection by the CLA/DO and a decision regarding 
the revocation of the License suspension will be taken accordingly. 
(vi) A meeting was held on 27.10.2023 under the chairpersonship of Secretary, AHD 
wherein it was decided that an assessment will need to be done for 
revamping/renovation covering all points of observation made by FSSAI. A short term 
rectification plan also to be drawn out. NDDB was assigned this task. Following this, 
a team of officers of NDDB visited DMS and carried out inspection of DMS Central 
Dairy building and plant. Report from NDDB has reportedly been submitted to DAHD 
directly. However, DMS is not in receipt of any copy of that report. 
(vii) Covering the above points, the DMS vide its letter no. 11002-2/2023-PDCC dated 
24.11.2023 (attached herewith) requested the DAHD for issuing suitable direction to 
DMS regarding compliance of related observations like, renovation/modernization of 
DMS building, plants & machinery etc. so that DMS may take necessary action for 
compliance of observation made by FSSAI in Spot Memo and also inform to FSSAI 
accordingly.  The response of DAHD in this regard is still awaited. 

17 
 
(viii) A letter no. 11002-2/2023-PDCC dated 4.4.2024 (attached herewith) was also sent to 
the CEO, FSSAI for considering and allowing DMS some more time to 
complete structural works of the Central Dairy plant to comply to the observations of 
FSSAI against DMS's License No. 10012011000266, along with copy to the DAHD. 
(ix) The proposal for renovation of DMS’s Central Dairy Plant, Machinery and Building is 
also under consideration of DAHD w.r.t. DMS's letter dated 19.2.2024 on the "current 
status on the observations of FSSAI" and observations made by FSSAI in its Spot 
Memo dated 17.5.2024. The DMS has also submitted further clarifications vide its 
Letters dated 4.6.2024, 17.1.2025, 31.1.2025, 3.2.2025, 9.4.2025 and 13.5.2025 in 
the matter (attached herewith). 
  
  Accordingly, unless all fundamental measures which are essential for the food safety and 
hygiene are established by the DMS for which the proposal is already under consideration of 
the DAHD as stated in Point No. (ix) above, no follow up action can be taken up with the FSSAI 
for facilitating a comprehensive follow-up inspection by the CLA/DO and taking a decision 
regarding the revocation of the License suspension.  
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Dept. of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
F. No. G-28011/2/2025-Budget (E-34194) Dated 19th June, 2025 
 
Rashtriya Gokul Mission 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee note that the Department has utilized an amount of Rs.2132 Cr out of the 
approved outlay of Rs.2400 Crore for the period of 5 years w.e.f. 2021-22 to 2025-26 leaving 
only Rs.268 Cr balance outlay for FY 2024-25 and 2025-26. The Committee further understood 
that the Rashtriya Gokul Mission envisages to enhance average productivity of bovines from 
1800kg/ animal /Year in 2021-22 to 2300 kg/ animal per year in 2025-26. The Committee note 
that as per Basic Animal Husbandry Statistics average productivity of bovines in 2023-24 is 
2079 kg/ animal/ year. 
 
 However, the Department, during examination of the subject "Role of NDDB in 
Protection and Development Indigenous Cattle Breeds" at the Committee sitting dated 

18 
 
19.12.2023, stated that the scheme envisages to enhance average productivity of bovines from 
1924 kg per animal per year to 3000 kg per animal per year by 2025- 26. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that this downward revision in the target for productivity 
needs to be explained given there is before time complete utilization of funds of the Scheme 
and more so as the country is lagging behind in terms of average bovine productivity in world 
despite being highest milk producer indicating huge potential for increasing productivity of our 
bovine breeds. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reason for downward revision 
of the targets of bovine productivity under the Scheme and also provided the policy documents 
supporting productivity targets stipulated at time of formulation and rolling out the scheme. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
I. The Rashtriya Gokul Mission (RGM) is implemented since December 2014 for 
development and conservation of indigenous bovine breeds, genetic upgradation of 
bovine population, and enhancement of milk productivity and production. Scheme is 
crucial for upliftment of rural poor as more than 80% low producing indigenous animals 
are with small and marginal farmers and landless labourers. The scheme is important in 
enhancing milk production and productivity of bovines to meet growing demand of milk 
and making dairying more remunerative to the rural farmers of the country. The scheme 
is leading to multiplication of elite animals of indigenous breeds and increased availability 
of indigenous stock.  
 
II. The Rashtriya Gokul Mission was restructured/ realigned in July 2021 under 
Development Programmes with the approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) for implementation from 2021-22 to 2025-26 with allocated sum of ₹2400 crores. 
At the time of the scheme’s restructuring in 2021–22, the average productivity of bovines 
was estimated at 1800 kg/animal/year, and a target of 2300 kg/animal/year by 2025-26 
was proposed. However, due to field realities and challenges, including supply chain 
disruption in germplasm availability and the outbreak of Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) 
globally, it was not possible to import exotic germplasm for semen production. As a 
result, the growth in productivity has slowed down for a while. In addition, under COVID 
situation there was a shortage of liquid nitrogen which is essential for storing and 

19 
 
transporting semen doses used in artificial insemination (AI). This shortage affected the 
AI services and also contributed to the slower growth in productivity. 
 
III. It is mentioned that there is no downward revision in the target for productivity and the 
implementation of the Rashtriya Gokul Mission and other initiatives by the Government 
of India have resulted in a significant 63.5% increase in milk production over the past 
decade, rising from 146.31 million tonnes in 2014-15 to 239.3 million tonnes in 2023-24. 
During this period, productivity across all animal categories, including descript, non-
descript cattle, buffaloes, and crossbred cattle, improved by 26.35%, which is highest 
growth in productivity of animals in the world. While indigenous and non-descript cattle 
saw a 39.37% increase, with productivity rising from 927 kg per animal per year in 2014-
15 to 1292 kg in 2023-24. Productivity of buffaloes has increased by 14.89% between 
2014-15 and 2022-23 from 1880 kg per animal per year in 2014-15 to 2160 kg per animal 
per year in 2023-24. During the same period, Milk production from indigenous cattle 
surged by 69.27%, growing from 29.48 million tonnes to 49.90 million tonnes, and buffalo 
milk production increased by 39.73%, from 74.70 million tonnes to 104.38 million tonnes. 
Additionally, the number of milking animals rose by 30.46%, from 85.66 million in 2014-
15 to 111.76 million in 2023-24. 
 
IV. The Cabinet has approved the revised Rashtriya Gokul Mission in March 2025 with an 
additional outlay of ₹1000 crores that is total outlay of ₹3400 crores during 15th Finance 
Commission cycle that is from 2021-22 to 2025-26. The revised RGM will result in 
enhanced productivity and benefit of the programme, percolating to all cattle and 
buffaloes of India especially with small and marginal farmers and the revised RGM 
envisages to enhance average productivity of bovines from 2079 kg/ animal /Year in 
2022-23 to 3000 kg/ animal per year by 2028-29. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Dept. of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
F. No. G-28011/2/2025-Budget (E-34194) Dated 19th June, 2025 
Infrastructure Strengthening Under NPDD 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Committee understood that the National Programme for Dairy Development 
(NPDD) is being implemented with an objective of increasing sale of milk and dairy products 

20 
 
by increasing farmers' access to organised market, upgrading dairy processing facilities and 
marketing infrastructure and by enhancing the capacity of producer-owned institutions. 
Component ‘A' under the scheme focuses on creation and strengthening of infrastructure 
linking the farmer to the consumer such as cold chain infrastructure among others. As per 
figures provided by the Department for State wise targets and achievement on various 
parameters under Component A of the Scheme viz. Bulk Milk Cooler (BMC), Functional Dairy 
Cooperative Societies (No.), Enrollment of Farmer Member (No.s), Average Daily Milk 
Procurement, Automatic Milk Collection Unit (AMCU)& Data Processing & Milk Collection Unit 
and Electronic Adulteration Testing unit, there is more than 50% shortfall under parameters of 
Electronic Adulteration Testing Units, Average Daily Milk Procurements, Functional Dairy 
Cooperative Societies while other parameters are also lagging behind. The Committee 
expresses concern on such shortfall in the targets on various scheme parameters, more so 
when funds utilisation under scheme is almost 100% over years. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the specific reasons for not achieving the set targets and the steps taken or 
proposed to be taken to address shortfalls in achievement of targets under all the parameters 
across various States of the Country and progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
I. Shortfall in the achievements of outcome parameters:  
Under Component A of NPDD scheme, no financial assistance is provided to States for 
organisation of new dairy cooperative societies (DCS) with enrolment of milk producers and 
milk procurement. The target for these outcome parameters is decided based on the target of 
output parameters of the project viz. installation of Bulk Milk Coolers, Electronic Milk 
Adulteration Testing Machines and Automatic Milk Collection Units (AMCU) at the existing 
DCS. However, achievements on these parameters also depends on various other factors like 
milk surplus availability, milk price and regular payments, animal health & disease condition, 
input services provided etc.  DAHD pursues and encourages States to continuously increase 
organised dairy coverage through formation of new DCS or revival of old DCS and increase 
Farmer Members and Milk Procurement from their own sources.  
In this regard, it is also to inform that recently the Cabinet has approved the revision of 
NPDD scheme on 19.03.2025 with enhanced financial allocation. The scheme will now have 

21 
 
the activity of DCS organisation for which financial assistance will be provided to States to set 
up new DCS, thereby increasing farmer enrolment and milk procurement.  
 
II. Shortfall in the achievements of output parameters:  
The current status of the physical targets fixed and achievements made is as follows: - 
S.No. Parameter Target (EOP)* Achievement % Achievement 
1. Bulk Milk 
Cooler 
Number 7220 5456 75.57 
Capacity 17476.10 13319.66 76.22 
2. Automatic Milk Collection 
Units/Data Processing Units 50922 38556 75.72 
3. Electronic Milk Adulteration 
Testing Units (EMAT) 12715 7221 56.79 
*EOP-End of Project i.e. 31.03.2026 
i. Under NPDD scheme, since inception in 2014, about 79% of the funds 
allocated/approved has been released to States against which about 80% has been 
utilised which accounts to 63% of the funds allocated/approved as utilised. Therefore, the 
progress of above output parameters is in commensurate to the EOP (End of project 
targets-31.03.2026) under the scheme.  
ii. As regards low progress in EMAT installation, it is to inform that about 35% of the EOP 
target for EMAT installation is in Gujarat (4389 nos.) and the delay in its 
procurement/installation has resulted in the overall low achievement under this parameter 
of the scheme. The issue has now been resolved and Gujarat has started procuring and 
installing EMATs, achievement of the same will be reflected in the first quarter of FY 2025-
26. 
iii. In addition, it is to inform that Department has conducted Regional Review Meetings with 
the States under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (AHD) in March and April 2025. Status 
of fund utilisation and physical progress under the scheme has also been reviewed. The 
lag in the achievement is likely to be achieved by the end of FY 2025-26. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Dept. of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
F. No. G-28011/2/2025-Budget (E-34194) Dated 19th June, 2025 
 

22 
 
Milk Prices 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Department has stated that the average milk price has increased from Rs. 30 in 
2014 to Rs. 45.98 in December, 2024. Further, the Department has acknowledged that the 
milk inflation has remained much below the average food inflation during last one year while 
the WPI inflation in food was recorded around 6 per cent, it was just 1.6 per cent in milk and 
milk products. 
 
Price of milk to farmers is being determined by the cooperatives and private dairies 
based on market conditions.  The retail price of milk and the price provided to procure milk 
from milk farmers are different as other costs like transportation, processing, packaging, 
marketing, sales& distribution, infrastructure costs etc. are also incurred. As per the 
Department, about 70-80% of the consumer / retail rupee is paid back to milk producer farmers 
in the Dairy Cooperative sector. 
 
The Committee are of view that there is widespread adulteration of milk and milk 
products which is resulting in the farmers not getting remunerative price for their milk sold in 
the market and also affecting the health of consumers. The Committee also note that increase 
in milk prices is less than the average rate of food inflation in the country This, the Committee 
believe, is not benefitting the millions of dairy farmers who depend solely/ predominantly on 
sale of milk for their livelihood, as the dairy Farmers’ income from sale of milk, is not keeping 
pace with food inflation. The Committee, therefore, is apprehensive of the fairness of price 
being determined by the procurement agencies be it cooperatives or private dairies. They 
accordingly recommend the Department to examine thoroughly into mechanism of price 
determination by milk procurement agencies to ensure just and reasonable price. Further, the 
committee feels there is lack of proper implementation of laws relating to adulteration checks 
and prevention of milk and their products, accordingly the Committee recommend the 
Department to take appropriate action and efforts may be made to devise an instrument to test 
purity of milk at household level. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
I. Mechanism of Price Determination by Milk Procurement Agencies: 

23 
 
i. The Government of India recognizes the concern raised by the Committee regarding 
the need for a fair and transparent milk price determination mechanism to ensure 
that dairy farmers receive a just and remunerative price for their produce. 
 
ii. It is important to note that Animal Husbandry, including dairy development, is a State 
subject under Entry 15 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. 
Therefore, pricing of milk and procurement arrangements fall within the purview of 
respective State Governments. 
 
iii. That said, milk is a highly perishable commodity requiring prompt collection, chilling, 
processing, and distribution. Hence, price determination by cooperatives and private 
dairies is driven by market dynamics, including the cost of production, handling, 
transport, processing, packaging, and distribution. The Government does not 
regulate procurement or retail prices of milk, in line with the liberalized pricing 
framework of agricultural produce. 
 
iv. However, to support fair returns to farmers, especially those associated with the 
cooperative sector, it is noteworthy that 70-80% of the consumer price is paid back 
to producers. This share is among the highest globally in the dairy sector. The 
Government, through the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD), is 
also supporting initiatives that reduce production costs and enhance farmers’ 
profitability. 
 
v. DAHD monitors the milk situation in the country at regular intervals in consultation 
with State Milk federations and concerned stakeholders to review the situation and 
take policy interventions in the interest of farmers. 
II. Adulteration of Milk and Quality Assurance: 
i. The Committee’s concern regarding adulteration of milk and its impact on both 
farmers’ incomes and consumer health is well acknowledged. 
ii. The Government of India enacted Food Safety and Standards (FSS) Act- 2006 to unify 
food related laws and establish the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) under administrative control of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The 
responsibility for monitoring milk quality lies with the Food Safety and Standards 

24 
 
Authority of India (FSSAI). The FSSAI sets science-based standards for food articles 
and regulates their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure 
availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption.  The implementation 
and enforcement of FSS Act are carried out by FSSAI through Food Safety 
Commissioners of State Governments and Union Territory Administrations. 
iii.  In order to empower consumers and enhance grassroots-level purity testing, the 
Government is exploring the feasibility of developing and promoting affordable 
household milk testing kits in collaboration with FSSAI and relevant scientific 
institutions. 
iv. Following steps have been taken by FSSAI for proper implementation of laws relating 
to Food safety specially to check adulteration in milk and milk products:  
v. FSSAI conducts periodic Pan-India Surveillance of Food products especially on staple 
foods and commodities that are prone to adulteration to ascertain the quality and 
safety of the food products produced and consumed in India. As part of such plan, a 
total of 6 Surveillances have been conducted on Milk & Milk Products since 2011, the 
list is as follows:  
o National Survey on Milk Adulteration, 2011 
o National Milk Survey, 2016 
o National Milk Safety and Quality Survey, 2018 
o Milk Surveillance, 2022. 
o PAN India Milk Products Survey, 2020 
o PAN India Milk and Milk Products Surveillance, 2023. 
vi. For testing of various food commodities including dairy products, FSSAI has notified 
243 primary laboratories and 22 Referral Laboratories across the country. 
vii. FSSAI has provided Mobile Food Testing Laboratory (MFTL) referred to as “Food 
Safety on wheels” (FSW) to State/Uts. MFTLs are equipped with basic infrastructure 
for on spot testing of adulteration in various food commodities including milk and 
milk products. The MFTLs are equipped with “Milk-o-Screen” equipment for testing 
quality parameters viz., Fat, Solids not fat (SNF), protein, adulterants such as added 

25 
 
water, urea, sucrose, maltodextrin, ammonium sulphate etc. Currently, 286 FSWs 
are deployed across 35 States/Uts. 
viii. FSSAI has developed 125 testing methodologies which includes chemical tests and 
advanced analytical techniques for testing of adulterants like detergents, urea, 
starch, formaldehyde, and synthetic substances along with other quality parameters 
as per FSSR. Furthermore, for detection of food adulterants at household by the 
citizens themselves FSSAI has developed Detect Adulteration with Rapid Test 
(DART) booklet. DART covers more than 50 tests that can be performed easily at 
household including test methods for milk and milk products. 
ix. Food Safety Magic Boxes, consists of reliable “quick screening tests “for detection 
of adulterants like starch, urea, detergent, cellulose, maltodextrin salicylic acid, 
glucose in Milk along with detection of artificial dyes in butter, khoa, cheese; and 
vanaspati/ hydrogenated edible fat in ghee etc. It consists of a total of 107 tests 
across 06 food categories, with 27 tests for detection of adulterants in Dairy and 
Dairy Products. 
x. National Dairy Development Board, under the guidance of Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying has developed a kit for the easy detection of adulterants in 
milk. This kit can also be used at household level for testing of milk adulterants. The 
Department is working towards popularizing the kits among different stakeholders in 
consultation with NDDB and FSSAI. The details of the kits are as follows: 
 
Kit type Suitable for following Adulterants Raw milk samples 
can be tested 
Large Urea, Ammonia Fertilizers, Nitrate Fertilizers, 
Starch and cereal flours, Sugar/Sucrose, 
Glucose, Salt, Neutralizers, Hydrogen Peroxide 
100 tests each  
Medium Salt, Urea, Sugar/Sucrose, Neutralizers, 
Neutralizers, Starch and cereal flours  
100 tests each 
Small Urea, Starch and cereal flours, Neutralizers, 
Hydrogen Peroxide 
5 tests each” 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Dept. of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
F. No. G-28011/2/2025-Budget (E-34194) Dated 19th June, 2025  

26 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of this Report.  
 
Addressing Menace of Stray Bovine Animals and Guashalas 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
In view of the existing livestock population of 193.46 Million Cattle and 109.85 Million 
Buffaloes and continuous efforts of the Department to produce genetically efficient cattle and 
buffaloes, there appears a need for provision of more funds for sheltering of non–productive 
bovine animals past their age of productivity to prevent and control the menace of stray bovine 
animals in the country. In order to address this issue the role of Animal Welfare 
Organizations/Gaushalas become important for providing shelter to rescued cattle and 
preventing their illegal transportation/ slaughter and prevent menace of stray animals. Although 
the Department is not directly funding  the Gaushalas across various States in the Country, 
the Committee note that through Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI), the financial 
assistance is being provided to the Animal Welfare Organizations including Gaushalas under 
three schemes namely; (i) Regular & Rescue Cattle Grant (ii) Provision of Shelter House for 
looking after the Animals, (iii) Provision of Ambulance for the animals in distress and (iv) Relief 
for Animals during Natural Calamities & unforeseen Circumstance implemented by the AWBI. 
The allocations of funds have been more or less constant at Rs. 10 crores over past few years 
to Animal Welfare Board of India.  
 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend the following: 
 
I. A process may be initiated for registration of indigenous cow at the time of their birth 
itself. All the indigenous cows may be Geo-tagged.  
II. During the process of Artificial Insemination, farmers may be given freedom of choice 
to select Livestock gender through Sex Sorted Semen Technology which may be 
expended to include male progeny as well. 
III. A scheme may be formulated for providing incentives to the public/farmers for voluntary 
adoption of Stray Indigenous Bovine Animals. 

27 
 
IV. The Department may formulate programmes for spreading awareness among farmers 
for lifetime uses for male bovine animals and incentivise their use in farming sector and 
control the menance caused by Neel Gai, in particular, in urban and rural areas. 
V. The Department, in order to popularise rearing of indigenous cows, may explore the 
possibility of offering financial incentive in form of 50% subsidy of  cost of such cows 
and remaining amount as interest free loans to farmers who are willing to buy 
indigenous cows. 
VI. The Department may issue guidelines and formulate policies for setting up and 
operations of Gaushalas which may include the standards such as number of cattles 
sheltered per square meter in Gaushalas, provision of facilities such as food, water, 
health care, caretaker availability etc. 
VII. A survey may be conducted to assess the cost involved in taking care of non-productive 
bovine animals on per day basis to enable government bodies to fix amount of daily 
assistance to the Gaushalas and those people who are willing to take care of Bovine 
Animal past their productive age. 
VIII. The Department may revise upwards its allocation of funds to Animal Welfare Board of 
India and direct Animal Welfare Board of India to come up with a long-term plan, to 
increase both number of gaushalas across country and bring more efficiency in their 
operation through increased monetary assistance, in consultation with the States. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
I. Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying (DAHD) along with NDDB has 
developed data base named as “Bharat Pashudhan”. This database has been developed 
utilizing a unique 12-digit Tag ID allocated to each livestock animal registered in the system. 
All registrations are linked location information of animal owners as per Local Government 
Directory. So far, 34.12 crore animals have been registered on the database.  
 
II. Under Rashtriya Gokul Mission assistance is given to the States for providing Bovine 
Breeding services at farmers doorstep using conventional semen as well as sex sorted 
semen. The farmers are given freedom of choice to use sex sorted semen with certain 

28 
 
accuracy of obtaining calves of desired gender or conventional semen with 50% chance of 
obtaining male or female calf. 
 
III. The management of stray bovine animals comes under the purview of the State 
Government and the local bodies need to evolve the mechanism to control stray animals in 
order to protect the citizens. 
As per the Article 246(3) of the Constitution of India in List II of Seventh Schedule, the 
Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases; 
veterinary training and practice is under State list on which the State has exclusive power to 
make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated 
in List II in the Seventh Schedule. Further, as per the Article 48 of the Constitution of India, 
State shall endeavor to organize agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific 
lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and 
prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle. 
This kind of Scheme is not feasible to implement. However, a committee may be constituted 
to study the feasibility of the Scheme. 
 
IV. The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been duly noted. The Department 
agrees with the importance of promoting awareness among farmers regarding the lifetime 
utility of male bovine animals. Necessary steps will be taken to formulate suitable programmes 
aimed at sensitizing stakeholders and encouraging the use of male bovines in the agricultural 
sector, thereby enhancing their economic value and utility. 
Further, with regard to the menace caused by Neelgai in both urban and rural areas, the 
Department is examining feasible strategies in consultation with concerned State 
Governments and relevant agencies to implement effective and sustainable measures for 
population control and mitigation of associated risks. The Department remains committed to 
addressing the issue in a holistic and scientific manner. 
 
V. In order to support and incentivize farmers to purchase High Genetic Merit (HGM) IVF 
heifers, 3% interest subvention is provided under Rashtriya Gokul Mission, on loans taken by 
farmers from milk unions, financial institutions, or banks for this purpose. This initiative aims 
to promote the adoption of superior genetics at the grassroots level, leading to the systemic 

29 
 
induction of high-yielding breeds, enhanced milk productivity, and increased income for dairy 
farmers. 
 
VI. The Indian Council of Agricultural Research has released “Manual on Management of 
Gaushalas” which include the standards such as number of cattles sheltered per acre in 
Gaushalas, provision of facilities such as food, water, health care, caretaker availability etc. 
The same may be considered for all Gaushalas. 
 
VII. NITI Aayog in its Task Force Report (2023) in publication titled “Production and 
promotion of organic and bio fertilizers with special focus on improving economic viability of 
Gaushalas” has recommended total cost of running a gaushala without land which comes out 
to be Rs. 82.47 for each cattle. NITI Aayog got this study done from National Council of 
Applied Economic Research (NCAER). Therefore, cost involved in taking care of non-
productive bovine animals on per day basis is available. 
 
VIII. The Scheme guidelines to be implemented by AWBI is under revision. This revised 
scheme will require large quantum of funds. 
A DO to Secretary, Department of Expenditure requesting increase of allocation of funds to 
AWBI to come up with a plan, to increase both number of gaushalas across country and bring 
more efficiency in their operation through increased monetary assistance, in consultation with 
the States. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Dept. of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
F. No. G-28011/2/2025-Budget (E-34194) Dated 19th June, 2025 
 
Less Expenditure under Scheme of Livestock: Health and Disease Control Programme: 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Committee understood that Livestock Health & Disease Control Programme 
(LHDCP) aims to prevent ingress and spread of animal diseases and aims to improve animal 
health by way of implementation of preventive vaccination 
against diseases of animals, enhancing delivery of quality Veterinary services, disease 
surveillance and strengthening veterinary infrastructure. It covers important activities of 

30 
 
vaccination against Foot and Mount Disease (FMD), Brucellosis, Peste des Petits Ruminants 
(PPR) and Classical Swine Fever (CSF), Establishments & Strengthening of Veterinary 
Hospitals - Mobile Veterinary Units (MVU).  The Committee find that there is huge 
underutilization of funds under the scheme year after year with only 57% funds utilized in the 
year 2022-23, 69% of funds during the year 2023-24 and 49% funds utilized in the year 2024-
25 vis-à-vis RE stage allocations. The Committee notes with concern that as part of addressing 
the issue of underutilization of funds, the Department is planning reduction in budget allocation 
to the scheme and its Expenditure Finance Committee also recommended reducing the outlay 
for the scheme. There have been under achievement of targets under operationalization MVUs 
in various States. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department focus on 
expansion of activities under the scheme instead of reducing allocation of funds to the Scheme. 
Under this, the Department needs to focus on further expansion and fortification of network of 
MVUs across all the States of the Country in a comprehensive manner and equipping them 
with all facilities related to veterinary services for the livestock farmers especially diagnostic 
facilities, which seem to be lacking, based on figures of diagnosis made by MVUs provided by 
the Department. Moreover, the Department needs to innovate the scheme to include other 
elements of veterinary services like veterinary practitioners, related medical supplies based on 
ground requirements in line with sufficient budget under the Scheme. The Committee may be 
apprised of the necessary action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
Observations of 
Committee 
Response from LHDCP 
57% funds utilized in 
2022-23 
 States/UTs had significant unspent balances from previous 
releases under NADCP and ESVHD-MVU, including funds 
earmarked for MVU procurement. 
 There was limited availability of quality FMD and PPR 
vaccines until November 2023 and August 2023, 
respectively. 
 The emergence and rapid spread of exotic diseases such 
as LSD and ASF shifted priority towards vaccination and 
control measures for these outbreaks. 

31 
 
 The introduction of the new fund flow mechanism 
(SNA/CNA), coupled with delays in compliance by 
States/UTs, further hindered timely fund release in 
instalments. 
 Additionally, considerable time taken by States in 
procurement processes led to delays in raising demands for 
recurring expenses. 
69% funds utilized in 
2023-24 
There was notable improvement in expenditure in 2023-24 
compared previous years due to the following reasons: 
 Unspent balances of ₹700 crore from FY 2022–23 were 
effectively utilized. 
 Supply of quality vaccines increased significantly from 20.24 
crore doses in 2022–23 to 36.05 crore in 2023–24. 
 Vaccine application also rose from 16.18 crore doses in 
2022–23 to 30.64 crore in 2023–24. 
 However, issues related to the 4123 budget code and 
existing unspent balances with States/UTs led to limited 
fund releases for MVUs. 
 Moreover, not all MVUs were fully operational during the 
year. 
49% funds utilized in 
2024-25 
During the later part of the financial year 2024-25, utilisation 
of funds under the LHDCP scheme was around 49% of the 
Revised Estimates (RE). By the end of the year, the 
Department had utilised ₹1,825 crore against the RE of 
₹1,980 crore, achieving an overall utilisation of 92.17% of 
RE under the scheme. 
Despite the shift to bill-based payments for vaccine 
procurement—requiring expenditure booking under 
Material & Supplies instead of Grant-in-Aid—FY 2024–25 
witnessed a marked improvement in fund utilization due to 
the following factors: 
 Unspent CNA balances of approximately ₹622 crore from 
FY 2023–24 were effectively utilized. 
 Supply of quality Foot & Mouth Disease (FMD) vaccines 
increased from 36 crore doses in 2023–24 to over 45 crore 
in 2024–25. 

32 
 
 Application of FMD vaccines rose from around 30.44 crore 
doses in 2023–24 to 40.54 crore in 2024–25. 
However, the following challenges delayed the fund 
utilisation: 
 High unspent balances in SNA accounts reflected on PFMS. 
 Delays in submission of Utilization Certificates for funds 
released in FY 2023–24. 
 Transition to the new SNA-SPARSH fund flow mechanism 
created temporary procedural hurdles. 
Under achievement of 
targets under 
operationalization of 
MVUs 
 Under the ESVHD-MVU subcomponent, funds were 
provided to States/UTs for procurement of customized 
mobile veterinary units (MVUs) aimed at delivering doorstep 
veterinary services in remote areas.  
 Operational guidelines have been issued to ensure effective 
implementation, including an indicative list of onboard 
facilities such as diagnostic tools, treatment provisions, 
vaccination equipment, and minor surgical capabilities. 
 
To address the issue of underutilization of funds under the Livestock Health and Disease 
Control Scheme, the Department has taken the following steps: 
 Ensuring accurate budget allocations based on realistic needs assessments.  
 Streamlining the process for quicker disbursal to prevent delays. 
 Enhancing monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to track fund usage. 
Training staff and stakeholders (especially in SNA SPARSH) to manage and utilize funds 
effectively.” 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Dept. of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
F. No. G-28011/2/2025-Budget (E-34194) Dated 19th June, 2025 
 
 
__________ 
  

33 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Popularization of Scheme and Budget Head 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
 The Committee note that the Credit, Extension and Publicity (CE&P) Division of the 
Department helps farmers to get information regarding financial and technical assistance, 
scientific research, and new knowledge in livestock production and Animal Husbandry 
practices. It assists and encourages the State Governments in organizing, maintaining, and 
operating professional Extension Services, through its various programs, schemes and 
activities. Funds for the awareness programs are utilized as per the budget allocation under 
various schemes of the Department for advertisement and publicity. Thus, there is no separate 
budget allocation to the Credit, Extension and Publicity (CE&P) Division of the Department to 
carry out its awareness programme independently of fund availability under specific schemes. 
This seems to make efforts of the Division contingent upon allocation of funds under specific 
scheme for the popularisation purpose and hamper efforts of undertaking consolidated 
awareness programmes about all schemes/programmes for wholesome awareness of the 
livestock farmers and stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department explore possibility of allocating separate budget under awareness and outreach 
head for work of the Department being carried out through its Credit, Extension and Publicity 
(CE&P) Division. This shall also entail a compulsory obligation on the Department to undertake 
expenditure on awareness programmes year after year in line with budgetary fund allocations 
and ensure more autonomy to the (CE&P) Division in carrying out its activities independently 
of fund availability under specific schemes. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
necessary provisions/modifications in budget planning heads of the Department to be made in 
this regard. 
 
 

35 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department respectfully acknowledges the observations and recommendations of the 
Hon’ble Committee. 
With reference to the Office Memorandum dated 30.04.2025 issued by the Department of 
Economic Affairs, it is submitted that, as per the extant instructions, 40% of the budget 
allocation under Object Head ‘26 – Advertisement and Publicity’ of all 
Ministries/Departments is to be placed at the disposal of the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting (M/o I&B). 
The Ministry of Information & Broadcasting undertakes publicity and awareness campaigns 
through various Government-owned media platforms, including Doordarshan, All India Radio, 
and other associated channels, to ensure wider outreach and effective dissemination of 
information regarding Government schemes to the target beneficiaries and the general public. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Dept. of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
F. No. G-28011/2/2025-Budget (E-34194) Dated 19th June, 2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of this Report. 
  

38 
 
CHAPTER - V  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
Livestock Insurance  
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee observe during examination of Demand for Grant for 2024-25 that shortage 
of fund, non-participation of insurance companies as reasons for non-achievement of targets under 
Livestock Insurance under National Livestock Mission.  The Committee was again informed during 
examination of Demands for Grants (2025-26) that huge amount of funds will be required for covering 
large number of animals under the insurance and the Budgetary allocations for the entire department 
will not be sufficient for covering large number of animals. The Committee in this context note that 
the Department has huge amount of unspent balances under its scheme of Livestock Health & 
Disease Control Program where after reviewing the progress of expenditure under the scheme, 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) of the Department in its meeting dated 12.08.2024 
recommended to reduce the outlay for the scheme. The Committee recommend that the Department 
in the first instance make an assessment of amount of funds required to implement livestock 
insurance across country to support its claim of insufficiency of funds, based on objective figures. 
Further, the Committee would like the Department to assess the feasibility of utilising funds unspent 
under Livestock Health & Disease Control Program for purpose of Livestock insurance in the country 
in view of ensuring financial security of livestock owners. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
i. The Committee observed during examination of Demand for Grant for 2024-25 that shortage 
of fund, non-participation of insurance companies as reasons for non- achievement of targets 
under Livestock insurance under National Livestock Mission. The Committee was again 
informed during examination of Demands for Grants (2025-26) that huge amount of funds will 
be required for covering large number of animals under the insurance and the Budgetary 
allocations for the entire department will not be sufficient for covering large n umber of 
animals. The Committee in this context note that the Department has huge amount of unspent 
balances under its scheme of Livestock Health & Disease Control Program where after 
reviewing progress of expenditure under the scheme, Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
of the Department in its meeting dated 12.08.2024 recommended to reduce the outlay for the 

39 
 
scheme. The Committee recommended that the Department in the first instance make an 
assessment of amount of funds required to implement livestock insurance across country to 
support its claim of insufficiency of funds, based on objective figures. Further, the Committee 
would like the Department to assess the feasibility of utilising funds unspent under Livestock 
Health & Disease Control Program for purpose of Livestock insurance in the country in view 
of ensuring financial security of livestock owners. 
 
ii. In this context, it may be stated that the total Milch cattle and buffalo is 1256.78 lakh and 5% 
is 62.84 lakh. The fund requirement for Insuring 5% of Milch Population under different 
valuation starting from Rs.30,000 till Rs.60,000 considering duration of 1 year and Premium 
% as 4.5 is as under: 
  
Sl. No Value of animal Fund required for insuring 5% of 
Milch population (Rs. in Cr.) 
1 Rs.30,000  477.64 
2 Rs.35,000  551.61 
3 Rs.40,000  625.59 
4 Rs.45,000  699.57 
5 Rs.50,000  847.52 
6 Rs.55,000  773.54 
7 Rs.60,000  921.50   
 The average requirement of funds to insure 5% of milch population in each category of value 
of animal is Rs. 700.00 cr per year.   
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Dept. of Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
F. No. G-28011/2/2025-Budget (E-34194) Dated 19th June, 2025  
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of this Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
24th March, 2026                                          Chairperson 
03 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
  

40 
 
Annexure 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23rd March, 2026 from 1035 hrs. to 1118 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 2, First Floor, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.           Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
3. Shri Kuldeep Indora 
4. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
5. Shri Dushyant Singh 
6. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Fauzi Badruddin  - Deputy Secretary 
 
7. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
8. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
9. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
10. Shri Madan Rathore 

41 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Subject 
Reports and Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
*(i)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  
 
*(ii)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
*(iii)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  
*(iv)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 (v) Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 11th Report of the Committee on the Demands 
for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) presented during 18th Lok Sabha, 
and 
 
*(vi)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
*3.  xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx. 
 
4. The Committee adopted the Draft Action-taken Reports mentioned at para 2 (iii) to (vi) 
without any modifications. 
 
*5.  xxxxx                 xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx                xxxxx. 
 
6. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the light of 
modifications suggested and present the Reports to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
_________________________________________ 
*Matter not related to this report. 
 
  

42 
 
 
APPENDIX  
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH REPORT (18th LOK SABHA) OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2024-25) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26)  
  
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations       9 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the Government  
            Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,7 and 8 Total    07 
      77.78% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue     
in view of the Government’s replies  
           Para Nos. NIL Total 00 
    00.00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
           Para No. 9 Total 1 
 11.11% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
           Para No. 6 Total 01 
  11.11% 
 
 