70 STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING
SEVENTEENTH 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF 
‘EMPLOYMENT GENERATION AND REVENUE EARNING 
POTENTIAL O
SEVENT
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
FEBRUARY
- i - 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING
 
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES)  
 
 
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION AND REVENUE EARNING 
POTENTIAL OF FISHERIES SECTOR’ 
 
 
 
SEVENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2024/ MAGHA 1945 (SAKA) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION AND REVENUE EARNING 

SEVENT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF 
‘EMPLOYMENT GENERATION AND REVENUE EARNING 
POTENTIAL OF FISHERIES SECTOR
 Presented to Lok Sabha on
 Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
FEBRUARY
  
- ii - 
SEVENTIETH REPORT 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 
(2023-24) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
INISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES)  
 
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION AND REVENUE EARNING 
POTENTIAL OF FISHERIES SECTOR’ 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.02.2024 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2024 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2024/ MAGHA 1945 (SAKA) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
INISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION AND REVENUE EARNING 

- iii - 
COA No. 498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
 

- iv - 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2021-22) v 
Composition of the Committee (2022-23) vi 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24) vii 
Introduction ix 
REPORT 
PART – I 
CHAPTER-I An Introduction to Fisheries Sector of India  
a. Fisheries Resources of the Country 1 
b. Fishing & Aquaculture Activities in Fisheries Sector  6 
c. Role of Union and States/UTs Vis-a-Vis Fisheries Sector of 
India 
17 
CHAPTER-II Production, Consumption and Infrastructure Development in 
Fisheries Sector 
a. Production/Consumption in Fisheries Sector against Demand 
and Supply 
24 
b. Import and Export of Fisheries Products   28 
c. Infrastructure Development  in Fisheries Sector 37 
CHAPTER-III Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential  
of Fisheries Sector   
a. Gross Value Added by Fisheries Sector 42 
b. Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 44 
c. Employment Generation in Fisheries Sector 51 
d. Revenue Earning Potential in Fisheries Sector 54 
e. Kisan Credit Card & Insurance Coverage 57 
PART-II  
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 61 
ANNEXURES  
I     -   Component wise physical targets and their corresponding Achievements 
during the financial year 2020-21 and 2021-22 
76 
II    -  State/UT-wise list of Employment under the Inland Fisheries Sector along 
with the status of Employment viz Full time, Part time, Casual etc. 
80 
III   -  State/UT-wise list of Employment under the Marine Fisheries Sector along 
with the status of Employment viz Full time, Part time, Casual etc. 
81 
IV  -  State/UT-wise status of issuance of KCC for Fisheries Sector. 82 
APPENDIX  
I.   Minutes of the 22nd Sitting of the Committee (2021-22) held on 02.08.2022  83 
II.  Minutes of the 2nd Sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held on 15.11.2022  89 
III.  Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Committee (2023-24) held on 06.02.2024 95 
 
 
 
 

- v - 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING* 
 (2021-22) 
 
 
    SHRI P.C. GADDIGOUDAR         -         CHAIRPERSON  
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri Afzal Ansari  
3.   Shri Horen Sing Bey  
4.   Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole'  
5.   Shri A. Ganeshamurthi  
6.   Shri Kanakmal Katara  
7.   Shri Abu Taher Khan  
8.   Shri Mohan Mandavi 
9.   Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
10. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
11. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel  
12. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil  
13. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
14. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
15. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Mohammad Sadique 
18. Shri Virendra Singh  
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav  
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa  
23. Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Kailash Soni 
27. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
28. Shri Vaiko 
29. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
 
* Standing Committee on Agriculture renamed as Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing vide Para No. 3293, Bulletin Part-II dated 23.11.2021 
 
 

- vi - 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 #Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav on 10.10.2022 vide 
Bulletin- Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022.  
*Vacant w.e.f.29.04.2023 due to disqualification of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha 
Membership from the date of his conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the 
Constitution of India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 [Vide 
Table Office (B) Notification No. 21/4(6)/2023 dated 01.05.2023] 
 
 
 
  

- vii - 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Mohammad Sadique 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
21. VACANT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar* 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 * Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar, MP, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Committee 
vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 7523 dated 29.09.2023 vice Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
w.e.f. 26.09.2023 
 

- viii - 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan  - Additional Secretary 
 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
 
3. Shri N. Amarathiagan   - Under Secretary 
 
4. Shri Ashwaghosh B. Lokhande  - Under Secretary 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

- ix - 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2023-24), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf,  present this Seventieth Report on 'Employment Generation and Revenue Earning 
Potential of Fisheries Sector’ of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of  Fisheries). 
 
2. The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing had 
selected the Subject for examination during 2021-22. Briefing on the Subject by the 
Representatives of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) was held at the Sitting of the Committee on 02.08.2022. As the examination of the 
Subject could not be completed during 2021-22, the Subject was again selected for 
examination by the Committee during 2022-23. Evidence of the Representatives of the Ministry 
of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) was taken by the 
Committee in their Sitting held on 15.11.2022. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
06.02.2024. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report.  
 
5.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Representatives of the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing requisite information in connection with the examination of the 
Subject.  
 
6.  The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation for 
the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached 
to the Committee. 
 
New Delhi              P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
06 February, 2024       Chairperson 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
             Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

- 1 - 
CHAPTER - I 
 
An Introduction to Fisheries Sector of India  
 
 India has vast marine and inland fishery resources which is directly indicative of 
immense potential of the Fisheries Sector.  Growth and development of Fisheries 
Sector has huge potential to provide employment and entrepreneurship opportunities in 
many fields such as capture and culture fishery activities, fish processing, seed 
production, feed, transportation, cold chain, freezing, navigation, packaging and 
pharmaceuticals.   
 
 
A.  Fisheries Resources of the Country 
 
1.2. India has rich and diverse fisheries resources ranging from deep seas to lakes, 
ponds, rivers and more than 10 Percent of the global biodiversity in terms of fish and 
shellfish species. The Marine Fisheries resources are spread along the country's vast 
coastline and Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and large continental shelf area.  The 
Inland Fisheries resources are in the form of rivers and canals, floodplain lakes, ponds 
and tanks reservoirs, brackish water, saline/alkaline affected areas etc. 
 
 
1.3. Marine Fisheries Resources - The marine resources of the country comprise 
an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of 2.02 Million Sq. Kms., a continental shelf area of 
0.53 Million Sq. Kms and a coastline of 8,118 Kms. The Marine Fisheries potential in 
the Indian waters has been estimated at 5.321 MMT constituting about 43.3 Percent 
Demersal, 49.5 Percent Pelagic and 4.3 Percent Oceanic Groups.   (Sub-para-24 of Para-
.2.3 of DoF AR 2022-23)  According to Department of Fisheries, the Marine Fisheries of the 
country with a long coast line and Continental Shelf area provides ample scope for 
harnessing deep-sea fisheries resources, which remain predominantly untapped. The 
country has an estimated harvestable potential of 5.31 Million Metric Tonnes in its 
EEZs and this include deep sea resources of 3.30 Million Tonnes (depth between 200-
2000 Metres) and Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (ABNJ). In this context, large 
deep-sea long liners equipped with adequate carrying capacity and On-board Post-
Harvest Handling Facilities could bolster the catch efforts.  
 
1.4. Inland Fisheries Resources - The vast inland resources comprise of 0.27 
Million Kms. of rivers and canals, 1.2 Million Ha Floodplain Lakes, 2.45 Million Ha of 

- 2 - 
Ponds and Tanks and 3.15 Million Ha Reservoirs.  The trend analysis of Indian 
Fisheries sector reveals a paradigm shift from Marine dominated fisheries to a scenario 
where Inland Fisheries has emerged as a major contributor to the overall fish 
production in the country.  Inland Fisheries presently have a share of 75 Percent in 
total fish production of the country.  Although, Inland Fisheries has grown in absolute 
terms, however the rate of growth in terms of its potential has not been realized yet.  
 
 
1.5. The Inland Fisheries Activities are conducted across an extensive network of 
Rivers and Canals (1.95 Lakh Kms), floodplain lakes (8.12 Lakh Hectares), Ponds and 
Tanks (24.1 Lakh Hectares), Reservoirs (31.5 Lakh Hectares), Brackish water (12.4 
Lakh Hectares), saline/alkaline affected areas (12 Lakh Hectares), etc., with an 
estimated Fish Production Potential of about 17 Million Tonnes. Thus, with the actual 
production standing at 11.20 Million Tonnes as of 2020-21, only about 66% of the total 
potential is being currently harnessed. For instance, there are about 5701 Large Dams 
in the country and many medium and small reservoirs with a water spread area of 
about 32 Lakh Hectares. These Reservoirs, called ‘sleeping giants’ in leading fisheries’ 
research, have the potential to change the contours of fish production and, if harnessed 
to their capacity, can productively contribute to the sectors' growth and provide 
livelihood opportunities for millions. 
 
 
1.6. Untapped Potential - The full potential of Fisheries Sector is yet to be realized 
due to critical gaps in production inputs, investment, infrastructure, value addition, 
technological know-how and skilled manpower. The future development of aquaculture 
depends upon adoption of new and innovative production technologies, management 
and utilization of underutilized water bodies, and deployment of effective marketing 
strategies. Additionally, building core efficiencies in post-harvest management including 
reduction of losses and incorporation of hygienic primary processing standards is vital. 
Simultaneously, forward and backward market linkages need to  be strengthened to 
bring remunerative returns to the fishers and fish farmers and to provide good quality 
fish and fish products to the consumers at affordable prices.    
 
Measures for Conservation and Development of Fisheries Resources  
1.7. The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) code of conduct for responsible 
fisheries and the international instruments pertaining to fisheries and biodiversity 

- 3 - 
conservation, stress the need for developing selective and eco-friendly fishing gears in 
order to conserve resources, protect non targeted resources and endangered species 
like sea turtles and minimize environmental impacts of fishing.   Overfishing and 
irresponsible fishing practices along with other factors such as pollution, habitat 
destruction and fragmentation, non native species, invasions and climate change have 
long been recognized as leading causes for reduced aquatic biodiversity, declining 
stocks falling economic returns, employment opportunities., etc. in Fisheries Sector.   
 
 
1.8. Fisheries resource enhancement and conservation measure have long been 
adopted in many countries for sustaining capture fish production, conserving aquatic 
biodiversity, rescuing endangered species, improving environmental conditions, etc.  
Some of the resource enhancement measures being undertaken in the country are 
Seed Farming, River Ranching, Creation of Artificial Reefs, etc.   
 
 
1.9. Rural Fisheries and Indigenous Breeds - The Committee wanted to know 
whether any measures have been taken by the Ministry to protect fishers/aquatic 
animals and to conserve indigenous breeds of fishes, which form the major component 
for providing nutrition to rural fishers. The Department in its reply submitted the 
following: 
"To protect fishers/aquatic animals and conserving indigenous breeds of fishes 
Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) encourages river ranching to address the 
depletion of fish stock in rivers under PMMSY through NFDB. This initiative is 
expected to increase production and restrict depletion of fish species hence 
improve the livelihood of fishers and farmers in NER States. Species like Magur, 
Singhi, Pabda, and Koi have special consumer preferences and fetch high 
market prices due to their medicinal properties and nutritional properties. The 
commercial breeding and propagation, and culture expansion of these species 
remains low due to the lack of adequate hatchery infrastructure for local fish 
seed production, lack of dissemination of breeding techniques among the 
farmers is supported." 
 
 
 
1.10. Bull Trawling and LED Light Fishing - The Committee desired to know 
whether the Department of Fisheries has taken any measures to ban / prohibit Bull 
Trawling, and LED Light fishing and other harmful fishing practices in the country.  In 
this regard,  the Department stated: 

- 4 - 
"The destructive fishing practices such as paired or Bull trawling and use of 
artificial lights/ LED lights for fishing are  banned in the Indian EEZ vide Order 
No.21001/3/2014-Fy (Ind) dated 10th November, 2017.  Department of Fisheries 
(MoFAH&D) issues advisories from time to time to the Coastal States/UTs 
requesting them to ensure sustainable fishing practices."               
 
 
1.11. River Ranching Scheme - River Ranching Scheme has been taken up as a 
priority activity to replenish depleted fish stock in rivers. Production of native species in 
the rivers by seed ranching of native stock, upgradation of riverine landing centers and 
instruments to provide financial assistance for fishermen wellbeing are being targeted. 
As India is bestowed with 14 Major, 44 Medium, and numerous Minor Rivers that run 
through 2.52 Lakh Kms, contribute to current production of 1 Lakh ton. For optimally 
harnessing the potential of riverine fisheries, the Department is focusing on 
conservation of indigenous fisheries resources and restoration of natural productivity by 
practice of river ranching and 41 Conservation and Awareness in Riverine Fisheries 
programme sanctioned under Blue Revolution in 9 States /UTs. River ranching is being 
implemented in Ganges and the tributaries of Ganges river system, Brahmaputra and 
Barak river distributaries and other rivers, Mahanadi and tributaries of Mahanadi river 
system and Godavari, Cauvery, Narmada and Indus river. 
 
 
1.12. The Committee desired to be apprised as to whether the Department plans to 
undertake River Ranching to assist the Fishing Community dwelling besides the rivers. 
The Department in its reply submitted: 
"The Department through National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) 
supports River Ranching activities under the Central Sector Component of 
PMMSY for addressing the depleted fish stock in rivers and improve the 
livelihood of fishers. Further, during 2020-21 the River Ranching scheme was 
implemented in three river basins namely (i) the Ganges and its tributaries of the 
Ganges river system, (ii) Brahmaputra and Barak river distributaries and other 
rivers, and (iii) Mahanadi and tributaries of Mahanadi river system, covering 8 
states of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Tripura, and Uttarakhand. 
During 2021-22, the scheme has been extended to cover other rivers such as 
Godavari, Cauvery and Narmada covering states of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Maharashtra, Gujarat in the 2nd phase. Till date, a total of 16.05 Crore has so 
far been sanctioned to 13 states for ranching 555.05 lakhs fingerlings." 
 

- 5 - 
1.13. Artificial Reefs - Artificial reefs (AR's), a centuries-old technique, provides a 
firm substrate for marine life to inhabit, attract fish that can consume the algae and 
other organisms that populate the artificial substrate. AR's are used all over the world 
to increase the production and fishing potential of underutilised areas. They also 
enhance the area's biological productivity and are widely used as spawning and 
nursery grounds for fishes. Their prime objectives are mitigation of habitat loss, 
enhancing biodiversity, enhancing aquatic creature populations by providing shelter for 
juvenile and mature animals, providing new substrates for algae and molluscs culture, 
establishing possible marine protected area (MPA) networks to regulate fish life cycles 
and connectivity, enhancing professional and recreational fisheries, creating suitable 
areas for diving and providing a mean to manage coastal activities and reduce conflicts 
and research and educational activities. The Department is taking up special projects 
to establish artificial reefs across the coastal belt in suitable places.  
 
 
1.14. The Committee desired to know whether the Department has any proposal or 
taken any measures to boost Marine Fisheries by setting up Artificial Reefs, and the 
details of number of Artificial Reefs that have been set up in States and Union 
Territories till date. The Department in its reply stated the following: 
"The Department has formulated a plan for inclusion of "Promotion of 
sustainable fisheries and livelihoods through Artificial Reefs and Sea Ranching" 
as a sub-activity under the "Integrated Modern Coastal Fishing Villages" 
(IMCFV) under the Non-beneficiary oriented Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
(CSS) Component of PMMSY for rebuilding of fish stocks and promoting 
sustainability in inshore/coastal fisheries in order to protect the livelihood of 
dependent fisher folks. The unit cost of each Artificial Reef set consisting of 250 
concrete reef units with bulk volume of 400m3 and surface area of 0.17 ha. has 
been fixed at Rs.31lakh. 
 
Further, The Central Advisory Committee (CAC) has recommended to earmark 
approximately Rs. 372 crore for taking up Artificial Reefs and Rs. 28 crore for 
Sea Ranching out of Rs. 750 crore earmarked for about 100 IMCFVs @ unit 
cost of Rs. 7.5 crore envisaged under the PMMSY. Wherein to showcase its 
utility and help the small scale fishers residing in them, it has been proposed to 
install at least one reef set in each of the 3477 coastal villages across coastal 
states/UTs. Accordingly, the target for 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 has been 
tentatively fixed as 1200, 1200, and 1100 respectively. Therefore, the 
States/UTs may ensure that the no. of reef sets proposed for 20-23 is not less 

- 6 - 
than one-third of the no. of coastal villages within their jurisdiction. Indicative 
targets and allocation for 2022-23 is as under: 
Details of marine fishing villages proposed for 
development as Artificial Reefs  under PMMSY 
DPR received from States 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Fishing 
villages 
(Nos) 
Number of artificial 
reefs proposed for 
2022-23 
Amount Remarks 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv)   
1 Gujarat 280 97   
2 Daman and Diu 12 4   
3 Maharashtra 526 182   
4 Goa 41 14   
5 Karnataka 162 56   
6 Kerala 220 76   
7 Lakshadweep 10 3   
  8 Tamil Nadu 575 198 Rs. 2448 lakh  
(75 Coastal 
Village selected) 
Under 
review 
9 Andhra Pradesh 533 184   
10 Odisha 739 255 Rs. 1776.25 lakh 
(50 Coastal 
Village Selected) 
Under 
review 
11 West Bengal 171 59   
12 Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 
169 58   
13 Puducherry 39 14   
 Total 3477 1200   
" 
B. Fishing & Aquaculture Activities in Fisheries Sector  
 
1.15. One of the most significant characteristics of the Indian fisheries sector is its 
small-scale nature. Fishing is a traditional economic activity in India practiced for 
generations by the fisher communities across the coasts and inland areas. The fishers 
can be broadly classified as (1) inland fishers, (2) marine fishers and (3) fish farmers.    
As per the Marine Fisheries Census-2016 conducted by the Department of Fisheries 
through Fisheries Institutes, there are 7,48,479 full time fishers and 1,53,968 part-time 
fishers in the marine fisheries of the country.  Further, about 9,632 fishermen families 
are engaged in aquaculture activities with fish, prawn, shrimp, crab, mussel, oyster, 
seaweed, etc. in coastal regions of the country.  
 
 
1.16. Deep-Sea Fishing - The Committee desired to know the details regarding  
steps taken by the Department to optimally harness the Deep-Sea resources of the 
Country which amounts to 5.31 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) in its Exclusive Economic 

- 7 - 
Zones (EEZs) including Deep-Sea resources of 3.30 Million Metric Tonnes (depths 
between 200-2000 metres). The Department in its reply stated the following: 
"The total potential yield of the Indian EEZ, revalidated by the Expert Committee 
for Revalidation of Potential yield of Fishery Resources in the Indian EEZ (2018) 
is estimated as 5.31 Million Metric tonnes....As against MSY of 5.31 MMT of 
total potential yield of the Indian EEZ, current output is about 4.41 MMT (2021-
22), last 5 years production data is given in the tables below:  
Year Marine Fish Production (In MMT) 
2017-18 3.76 
2018-19 3.85 
2019-20 3.73 
2020-21 3.48 
2021-22 4.41 
 
To harness the deep-sea resources to the fullest, the Department is undertaking 
several measures such as introduction of new scheme(s) for introduction of new 
indigenous deep sea fishing vessels through fishermen cooperatives/self-help 
groups, modernization of existing indigenous deep sea fishing fleet, on-board 
training for enhancing the skills and capabilities of the traditional fishermen, 
providing potential fishing zone (PFZ) and tuna fishery advisory to fishermen by 
Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) and Fishery 
Survey of India (FSI), development and modernization of Fishing Harbours, etc." 
  
 
1.17. On being asked about the of the Schemes introduced by the Department for 
introduction of new indigenous deep sea fishing vessels in the Country. The 
Department in its reply stated: 
"Given the low level of harnessing of deep-sea fisheries resources in EEZ and 
High seas, support under CSS on Blue Revolution Scheme and Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) has been envisaged by Government of 
India. The Department of Fisheries (then Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries) on 09.3.2017 had introduced a sub-component under 
Blue Revolution Scheme, namely, “Assistance for Deep Sea Fishing” and 
“Conversion of Trawlers into Resource Specific Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels” 
which aims to promote the Indian traditional fishers in Deep Sea Fishing.  
Further, financial assistance is being provided to traditional fishermen by 
Government of India under the PMMSY to all the maritime States/UTs for 
acquiring deep sea fishing vessels, for up gradation of existing fishing vessels 
for export competency, promotion of technologically advanced fishing vessels 
and fishing gear for fishermen/fishermen groups through State/UT governments 
along with training and capacity building for undertaking deep-sea fishing. In 
addition, A Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for procurement of Deep-Sea 

- 8 - 
Fishing Vessels from the empanelled shipyards has also been developed by 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPSW) and three variants of 
fishing vessels designs are developed by Cochin Shipyard Ltd."  
 
 
Aquaculture in India 
  
1.18. Aquaculture in India has evolved as a viable commercial farming practice from 
the level of traditionally backyard activity over last three decades with considerable 
diversification in terms of species and systems, and has been showing an impressive 
annual growth rate of 6-7 Percent.  Some of the important species cultured in India are 
the Indian major carps and shrimp. Besides these, ornamental fish culture and 
seaweed farming, are slowly gaining importance in the aquaculture scenario in the last 
few years as alternative livelihood supporting sectors as small-scale activities.  The 
Indian aquaculture sector can be broadly classified into Freshwater Aquaculture, 
Brakishwater Aquaculture and Mariculture. 
 
 
1.19. Fresh Water Aquaculture - As per the Department of Fisheries, a shift from 
capture fisheries to aquaculture has been observed in Inland Fisheries during the last 
two and half a decades.   Freshwater aquaculture with a share of 34 Percent in Inland 
Fisheries in mid 1980 has increased to about 76 Percent in recent years. (Sub-para-5 of 
Para-2.1 AR 2022-23)  The carp-based freshwater aquaculture, mainly constituted by the 
Indian major carps, such as, catla, rohu and mrigal, has been contributing over 90 
Percent of the aquaculture production satisfying the domestic need.   
 
1.20. On being asked by the Committee about the present status of Fresh Water 
Fisheries in the Country and the measures taken by the Department to accelerate the 
Fresh Water Fisheries and the availability of quality seeds all over the country. The 
Department in its reply stated the following: 
"Freshwater Fisheries contributes to more than 50% of India’s fish production 
and involves important species as the Indian Major Carps (IMC), tilapia, catfish, 
murrels, trouts, pangasius among others. Special emphasis has thus been given 
to further enhance production and productivity of freshwater fish species and 
seed that includes 509 new freshwater finfish hatcheries sanctioned with a total 
investment of Rs 12,640 lakh (Rs 25 lakhs unit cost), 4 new freshwater scampi 
hatcheries sanctioned with a total investment of Rs 200 lakh (Rs 50 lakhs unit 

- 9 - 
cost), construction of Biofloc and RAS, installation of cages in reservoirs, 
integrated development of small-medium and large reservoirs etc. Now, the 
Department under PMMSY has also started to focus on species’ diversification 
by promoting rearing of fish species pangasius, scampi and tilapia for domestic 
consumption and exports." 
 
1.21. Brakish Water Aquaculture - India has 1.24 Million Ha of Brackish Water Area 
spread over all maritime States / UTs, but hardly 15 Percent of brackish water areas 
have been developed for commercial farming, Shrimps, oysters, mussels, crabs, 
lobsters, sea bass, groupers, mullets, milk fish, cobia, silver pompano, pearl spot, 
ornamental fishes and sea weeds are being farmed to some extent. The Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority (CAA) is regulating these activities in brackish water systems 
within 2 kms of the High Tide Line for sustainable development of Coastal Aquaculture 
sector. 
 
 
1.22. About 40 Percent of inland saline areas (92.33 Lakh Ha) lies within the states of 
Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh and is not utilized for any agriculture 
activities. Thus, productive utilization of these soils through aquaculture has been 
initiated to convert waste land into wealth land. Fish and shrimp farming have already 
been introduced in saline-affected areas of the four states under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (RKVY) and Blue Revolution Scheme.  Efforts are also being made for 
diversification of traditional carp culture to high valued shrimp culture and by value 
addition to carp culture by introducing new species like L. Vannamei, sea bass and 
other candidate fish species for saline soil/water etc. Hatchery and seed production 
techniques have so far been standardized for few commercial varieties of shrimps, 
crabs and fin-fishes. 
 
1.23. Mariculture - Over the years, mariculture in the country has been confined 
largely to bivalve mollusks namely, mussels, edible oysters and pearl oysters, and to 
some extent to seaweeds.  With a thrust on development of technologies pertaining to 
sea cage farming during the last decade, developmental plans with both forward and 
backward linkages have been envisaged to allow these activities to become significant 
contributors to production of seafood in the country.   
 

- 10 - 
 
1.24. Marine Cage Fishing - Regarding the status of Marine Cage Fishing in the 
Country and the measures undertaken by the Department to promote Marine Cage 
Fishing, the Department furnished the following reply: 
"Pradhan Mantra Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) schemehas provision for 
Establishment of Open Sea cages culture (100-120 cubic meter volume) with a 
unit cost of Rs. 5.00 lakh. Cage culture is becoming a popular mode of fish 
rearing and open sea cages have been sanctioned to States/UTs as below 
under PMMSY in FY 2020-21 and FY 2021-22: 
       (Rs. in Lakhs) 
Sl. No. Name of the States Physical (No.) Proj. Cost GoI Share 
1 Andaman and Nicobar 6.00  30.00 15.00 
2 Andhra Pradesh 800.00  4000.00 1084.80 
3 Gujarat 500.00  2500.00 600.00 
4 Maharashtra 190.00  950.00 327.00 
5 Tamil Nadu 60.00  300.00 78.60 
Total 1556.00 7780.00 2105.40 
  " 
 
1.25. Seaweed cultivation - India has enormous scope for seaweed cultivation and 
promotion of seaweed-based industries. There are about 844 species of seaweeds 
reported, out of which about 60 species are commercially important ones. The 
Department and National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) have been focusing on 
bringing in policy and infrastructural changes to push the sector through joint 
interventions with States/UTs and research institutes. Focused interventions such as 
establishment of seaweed park in Tamil Nadu, conducting feasibility study for 
identifying conducive locations for cultivation, knowledge transfer on suitable cultivation 
technologies, establishment of easily accessible seaweed seed banks etc are being 
prioritized by the Department.  
 
 
1.26. Ornamental fisheries - India's share of global ornamental fish export is 
negligible (0.53 Percent with an import share of 0.42 Percent).  This Sector has 
enormous potential to grow in the country due to conducive environment and high 
diversity of tropical fishes. Action Plan for development of Ornamental Fisheries: 2020-
25 prepared by the Department focuses on development of Ornamental fisheries in 
potential states based on the resource potential and the existing value chain 
mechanism for fish production and marketing. The potential states identified for 

- 11 - 
development of Ornamental fisheries are West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, 
Kerala, Odisha, Gujarat, Karnataka, Assam and Manipur. 
  
 
1.27. Quality Seeds for Fish Farming - Fish Farming requires inputs such as quality 
seeds, feed, health management and marketing support. Programmes are being 
undertaken for production and distribution of quality seeds and feed for Aquaculture, 
culture-based-capture fisheries, husbandry of farmed species and availability of quality 
water in order to optimize production and productivity in Inland Fisheries and 
Aquaculture across the country.     
 
 
1.28. The Committee wanted to know if the cost of Hatcheries for quality seeds is 
beyond the reach of the common Fish Farmers and If so, what remedial steps have 
been taken by the Department to bring down the cost or ensuring availability of these 
quality seeds at cheaper rates to the Fish Farming community. The Department in its 
reply stated the following: 
"Fish hatchery forms an integral part of fish production as quality of seed plays a 
very major role as a key input. Moreover, Hatchery establishment require in 
depth technical know-how, high capital investment for establishment and skilled 
labor. Keeping in mind these fund requirements, the Department under PMMSY 
provides subsidy of 40% to General Category beneficiaries while 60% to 
SC/ST/Women beneficiaries with a funding pattern of 60:40 for General States 
while 90:10 for Hilly States for setting up of fresh water hatcheries (unit cost 
Rs.25lakh), brackish water hatcheries (Unit cost Rs.50lakh), trout fish hatchery 
(unit cost Rs.50lakh) 
 
Additionally, subsidy is also provided for establishment of brood banks under 
non-beneficiary oriented Centrally Sponsored components of PMMSY at a unit 
cost of Rs 500 lakhs.12 brood banks have been sanctioned with a total 
investment of Rs 5535.60 lakh for providing quality seed at lower rates. Further 
to this, NFDB has been providing technical trainings and organizing 
demonstration workshops in conjunction with the research institutes." 
 
1.29. Fish Processing Industries - In the Fish Processing Sector, currently, there 
are about 535 industries and firms, employing about 70,298 persons, with the average 
number employed per unit being 131 persons. Assuming a conservative annual 
average growth rate of 5% in the fish processing industry (post-harvest industry), the 

- 12 - 
registered number of industries and firms can be projected to reach 750 by 2024-25, 
potentially generating employment about one lakh people. Fishing sector also offers 
indirect employment in both skilled and semi-skilled activities such as boat building and 
maintenance, logistics including transportation, weighing, cleaning, ice and storage, 
supply of equipment, grading, filleting / dressing and jobs in the restaurant business.  
 
 
1.30. Fish Meal Fish Oil Industries (FMFO) - The Fishmeal and Oil Industry was 
essentially an oil production activity; the oil finding industrial uses in leather tanning and 
in the production of soap and glycerol and other non-food products. The residue was 
originally used as fertilizer, but since the turn of this century it has been dried and 
ground into fish meal for animal feeding. Its main use is in the diets of poultry, pigs and 
fish which need higher quality protein.  Small oily fish are the mainstay of the fishmeal 
and oil industry. There is a good demand for high quality fish meal and oil and 
production can be highly remunerative if suitable raw material is available. 
 
1.31. The Committee sought to know about the number of Fish Meal and Fish Oil 
(FMFO) industries in the country till 2022 and their role in generating employment and 
revenue for the fishers and fish farmers in India.  In this regard, the Department 
submitted as under : 
"The number of Fish Meal and Fish Oil (FMFO) industries set up in the country 
till 2022 is as under: 
Processing Type No. Capacity (MT) 
Fish Meal 54 3429 
Fish Oil 48 990 
Total 102 4419 
  * Source: MPEDA 
 
 
 
 Name of the State 
Fish Meal  Fish Oil  TOTAL 
No of 
Units Capacity No of 
Units Capacity No of 
Units Capacity 
1. Kerela 5 134 4 29.6 9 164.00 
2. Karnataka 23 2084.5 25 678.5 48 2,762.00  
3. Maharashtra 6 512 6 202 12 714.00 
4. Gujarat 7 255 2 7 9 262.00 
5. West Bengal 4 68 0 0 4 68.00 
6. Tamil Nadu 8 351 10 69 18 420 
7. Andhra 
Pradesh 1 25 1 5 2 30.00 

- 13 - 
Total 54 3429 48 990.00 102 4419 
*Source: MPEDA         " 
 
1.32. The Committee desired to know if the activities by these FMFO industries are 
promoting unsustainable fishing, by harvesting Juvenile Fishes (which is a reason for 
decline of many fish species such as Indian Oil Sardine) and Edible Fishes, which are 
processed and exported, resulting in collapse of fish stocks and marine ecology. The 
Department, in its reply, stated as follows: 
"During the past 40 years, Indian aquaculture has succeeded and continues to 
increase while achieving the critical goals of environmental, economic, and 
societal sustainability. In the country the contribution of Aquaculture in total fish 
production has been increased from 36 % (1980) to 75 % (2020).  As a result, 
the demand for aqua-feed has also increased substantially. Fish meal (FM) has 
been traditionally used as the main protein source in the aqua feed industry, due 
to its high protein content and balanced essential amino acid profile. FM is also 
an excellent source of essential fatty acids (EFAs), digestible energy, minerals 
and vitamins. 
 
Fishmeal and fish oil can be produced from whole fish, fish trimmings or other 
fish processing by-products. A number of different species are used as whole 
fish-mainly small pelagic fish, such as Peruvian anchoveta, menhaden, blue 
whiting, capelin, sardine, mackerel and herring. The increased demand for 
FMFO, coupled with a significant shortage in global fish meal production and 
fish oil, has created sharp competition for its use by fast-growing aquaculture 
industry, as well as by pig and poultry farming, and the pet-food and 
pharmaceutical industries. As a result, FMFO has become the most expensive 
commodities in animal and aquaculture feeds in recent years. 
 
Indian marine fisheries largely practiced as costal fisheries, is an open access, 
multi-species and multi-gear regime. Juvenile fish losses mainly occurs when 
they are caught as non- targeted species in trawls, include small sized fishes as 
well as juveniles of large growing, commercially important species that are 
classified as low value by-catch (LVB). With the increased demand for aqua-
feed on a global scale, the demand for juvenile fishes and LVB for fish meal 
production has also increased in recent years. 
 
For sustainable development of marine fisheries, much effort is being 
undertaken at global and regional scale including finding ways of reducing the 
fish meal and oil inclusion rate in aquaculture feeds. These efforts involve use of 
plant meals and oils, animal processing wastes, and fish offal meal and oil. In 
the recent years, a growing share of fishmeal and fish oil is being produced 
using fish by-products from capture and aquaculture processing with a positive 
impact on waste reduction. In addition, in order to avoid juvenile fishing, the 

- 14 - 
States like Kerala, Karnataka and Goa have declared minimum legal size for 
selected fish species. Further, to avoid the catch of juveniles and small fishes in 
trawls, States like Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Gujarat are 
implementing mesh size regulations as per their Marine fishing Regulation Acts." 
 
 
 
1.33. The Committee further wanted to know as to whether the Department has 
undertaken any study to assess the dangers posed by the Fish Meal industries and 
about the steps being taken to mitigate the effects of these industries to the 
environment due to overfishing. The Department submitted the following reply: 
"Fishmeal and fish oil are the protein-rich byproducts of smaller forage fish or 
low tropic level species like anchovy, herring, and krill that gather in immense 
schools on coastlines and in the open ocean.  FMFO are easily digestible 
products used in fertilizers and animal feed, ranging from beef and chicken 
(livestock) to salmon and tilapia (aquaculture).  Fishmeal is an excellent source 
of protein and essential amino acid mainly used as feed ingredient for 
aquaculture species and livestock. Fish oil is produced whenever fatty fish is 
processed into meal. It is 100% marine oil with high content of omega-3 fatty 
acids. 
Aquaculture utilizes about 43% of global fish meal production and 85% of fish 
oil, which are the major ingredients for aqua feed production. The increased 
demand for aquaculture feed mills with the exponential increase in the 
production of L. Vannamei shrimp has propelled mushrooming of fish meal and 
fish oil factories in India over a decade. The FMFO units mostly use by-
catch/trash fish or small forage fish for production of fish meal and fish oil.  
In this regard, for the conservation and effective management of fishery 
resources, the Ministry is imposing a 61-days uniform ban on fishing by all 
fishing vessels in the Indian EEZ beyond territorial waters on the East Coast and 
West Coast. To conserve the marine resources and its sustainable utilization the 
Department is bringing a Marine Bill which is in advanced stage. Additionally, 
the Department periodically issues the advisories to all the maritime States/ UTs 
for prevention of juvenile fishing, mesh size regulation and use of sustainable 
fishing methods. In addition, in order to avoid juvenile fishing, the States like 
Kerala, Karnataka and Goa have declared minimum legal size for selected fish 
species. Further, to avoid the catch of juveniles and small fishes in trawls, States 
like Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Gujarat are implementing mesh size 
regulations as per their Marine fishing Regulation Acts. Further, as a measure to 
control the over-utilization of fish resources, MPEDA implemented a moratorium 
on the registration of new fish meal and fish oil units w.e.f.              1st January, 
2020." 
 
 

- 15 - 
1.34. On being asked about the details of the actual employment generated State/UT 
wise through various Fish Meal Fish Oil industries set up in the Country up to till 2022, 
the Department gave the following reply: 
"As reported by MPEDA, the total number of Fish Meal and Fish Oil (FMFO) 
units registered is 102. However, the actual employment generated through 
various FMFO industries in the country is not maintained with the Department 
and the details have been sought from respective states/UTs."  
 
 
1.35. The Committee sought to know the underdeveloped Aquaculture Activities, in 
the country, if any, due to technical/financial/commercial constraints along with reasons 
for the same and proposed new activities to utilize the vast available Marine Resources 
of the country.  In this regard, the reply of the Department of Fisheries is reproduced 
below:- 
"For development of aquaculture activities and realize the full potential of 
available resources, the major challenges include availability of quality seed and 
feed, disease outbreaks. In addition, Water Quality, Technology Adoption, 
Access to Credit and Insurance, Lack of Skill Development, Research and 
Development, Climate Change Impact, Market Access etc. are the other issues 
before this sector. 
 
Further, New initiatives and economic activities being undertaken for holistic 
development of the available vast marine fisheries sector are as under: 
 
i. National Roll out of Vessel Communication and Support System on 
Marine Fishing Vessels for Safety of Fishermen at sea: The 
Government of India, under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana, 
approved Rs. 364 crore for installing satellite-based Vessel 
Communication and Support System on one lakh fishing vessels for 
implementation through New Space India Limited, a Central PSU under 
the Department of Space, Government of India. These devices will 
ensure the safety and security of fishermen at sea, enabling them to stay 
connected with their families and seek assistance during cyclones and 
storms and while fishing near international borders. This transformative 
project for the welfare of traditional fishermen is an Aatma Nirbhar 
Bharat initiative would be completed in next 18 months. 
 
ii. Installing Artificial Reefs and Sea Ranching for enhancing fish 
stocks: Artificial reefs are man-made or natural objects placed in 
selected areas of the marine environment functioning as underwater 
artificial habitats for marine life that help in rebuilding of fish stocks and in 

- 16 - 
turn augmenting the productivity of the marine ecosystem and promoting 
sustainability in marine fisheries. Sea ranching or ocean ranching is the 
rearing of fish and shellfish in a controlled environment and let into the 
sea when they are of a certain size. These activities improve the 
livelihoods for the fishermen, since the ground in which artificial Reefs 
and ranching is done assures good fish catch. The wastage of fuel and 
time for searching for fishing grounds can be avoided, thereby making the  
iii. Fishing voyage economical to the fishermen. Recently, under the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana, the Department has approved 
a project for installation of artificial reefs and sea ranching in Coastal 
States/UTs for enhancing the fish availability to artisanal and small-scale 
fishermen at a project cost of Rs. 227.80 crore to cover 732 villages in the 
states of Karnataka, Odisha, Maharashtra, Goa, Gujarat, Kerala, 
Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, and West Bengal. 
iv. Seaweed Park in Tamil Nadu: To harness the potential of seaweed 
farming and provide additional livelihoods to coastal communities 
especially fisherwomen, the Government of India has approved the 
Establishment of a Multipurpose Seaweed Park in Tamil Nadu with an 
investment of Rs 127.71 crore. 
v. Species Diversification: Aatma Nirbhar Bharat Initiative. At present 
India imports Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) Shrimp Brood stock. In order 
to address this issue and march towards self-reliance in this area, the 
Department has launched a National project for Genetic Improvement of 
Penaeus indicus (Indian White Shrimp) through ICAR-CIBA. Further, the 
Department has extended financial support to RGCA-MPEDA for the 
project “Domestication of Tiger Shrimp and Nucleus Breeding Centre for 
Penaeus monodon” being undertaken in Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
which is in the last stage of completion. Also, a national project on genetic 
improvement of Scampi has been initiated through ICAR-CIFA. In order to 
address diseases in shrimp, a SPF-Polychaete program has been 
approved to RGCA-MPEDA. Besides, Government of Kerala has also 
been supported for genetic improvement project on Karimeen." 
 
 
C. Role of Union and States/UTs Vis-a-Vis Fisheries Sector of India 
 
1.36. The history of fisheries in India dates back to the days of the Harappan 
civilization.  Reference to fish, its trade and fisher community are found in the Songs of 
the Sangam Age (1st to 4th Century A.D.).   The importance and the role of fisheries 
sector was officially recognized in India, through the enactment of the 'Indian Fisheries 
Act' in 1897.  This Act laid the foundation of the development of the fisheries sector in 
India and delineated the responsibility of the provinces, towards the development and 

- 17 - 
conservation of fisheries in the country. Through this Act, the provinces were 
empowered to formulate Rules/Laws for the conservation of the fish and fisheries 
resources. 
 
1.37. The Subject Matter of 'Fisheries' is listed in the State List (Entry-21 under 
Seventh Schedule of Article 246 of the Constitution of India, however, the Union 
Government supplements the efforts of the States/UTs for development of the fisheries 
and aquaculture sector. Inland sector is by and large, fully in the domain of State 
Governments while marine sector is a shared responsibility between the Central and 
Coastal State Governments. Coastal States/UTs are responsible for development, 
management and regulation of fisheries in the sea waters within the 12 nautical miles 
(22 km) from the base line. Government of India is responsible for the development 
and regulation of fisheries in the EEZ waters (200 nautical miles / 370 km) beyond 12 
nautical miles.  
 
 
1.38. As Fisheries is a State Subject, so historically investments in the sector, 
particularly in the fishing villages/coastal fishing villages, fishing harbours and ports 
have been made by the States 'for the welfare and support of the fisherment 
community'. However, with the growing requirements for resources, technological 
transfer/advice and policy orientation the efforts of State Government/UT 
Administrations are supplemented by the Government of India towards the 
development of the fisheries sector. 
 
 
Creation of Department of Fisheries 
 
1.39. The matters pertaining to Fisheries Sector was earlier dealt with by the Ministry 
of Agriculture.  In October, 1997, the subject of Fisheries was transferred from 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation to the Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (DAH&D).  The Department of fisheries was carved out from the erstwhile 
Department of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in February, 
2019 to provide sustained and focused attention towards the development of the 
sector. This was followed by the creation of an independent Ministry of fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry & Dairying in June, 2019.  The main objectives of the Department 
are to enhance fish production and productivity in an environmentally sustainable and 

- 18 - 
socially equitable basis, harness the untapped potential of Indian fisheries, 
conservation of aquatic resources and genetic diversity, preservation of health 
ecosystems, strengthening of infrastructure in harvest, post-harvest, value-addition & 
marketing and upliftment of fishers and aqua-farmers communities with gainful 
employment opportunities and capacity strengthening. 
 
Functions of Department of Fisheries 
 
1.40. The Department is responsible for matters relating to formulation of policies and 
schemes pertaining to Development of Inland. Marine and Coastal Fisheries and 
Fishery Institutes including its four subordinate institutions, one autonomous body and 
one regulatory authority.  The Department advises the State Governments/ Union 
Territories (UTs) in formulation of policies and programmes in the field of fisheries. The 
main focus of the activities is on the following: 
 
a. Expansion of Aquaculture in fresh and Brackish water 
b. Conservation and sustainability of Marine Fisheries Resources 
c. Promotion of Mariculture. Seaweed Cultivation, Cage Culture, RAS (Re-
circulating Aquaculture System), Ornamental Fisheries, Cold Water 
Fisheries and Fisheries Trade 
d. Development of Fisheries Infrastructure 
e. Inland Fisheries Development 
f. Establishment of the network of Aquatic quarantine 
g. Mapping of water bodies through GIS etc. 
 
 
Demand for a Separate Research Council for Fishery Sector 
 
1.41. The Committee noted that Shrimp Culture contributes around ninety Percent to 
the revenue generated through exports.  The need for a specialised Research Institute 
to give focussed  and in-depth research to promote new technologies in fisheries 
including Shrimp Culture was highlighted during the sitting of the Committee held on 
15.11.2022 for taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Fisheries on the subject 'Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of 
Fisheries Sector'.  During the course of discussion, the Committee appreciated 
establishment of separate Department of Fisheries and also expressed their desire that 
a separate Research Council for Fishery Sector namely Indian Council for Fishery and 

- 19 - 
Aquaculture Research on the lines of Indian Council of Agriculture Research and all the 
Fishery Research Institutes be constituted under the ambit of Department of Fisheries.  
Responding to the observations/queries, Secretary Department of Fisheries deposed 
before the Committee as under : 
 
"The Department also recognizes that there is a need for constituting a separate 
Research Council. This has been under discussion for the last three years. 
Frankly speaking, Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) does not agree 
with it. But we are moving the paper to have a separate research council for this 
sector" 
  
 
1.42. To a Post-evidence query of the Committee seeking details regarding the steps 
taken by the Department for setting up of a separate Research Council for Veterinary 
science/Annual Science and Fishermen Science in the similar pattern as Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research (ICAR), the Department of Fisheries submitted as under :- 
“There was a proposal initiated by Department of Animal Husbandry & 
Dairying for establishment of a research council for Veterinary science/Annual 
Science and Fishermen Science in the similar pattern as Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) by segregating fishers and Veterinary/Annual 
Science Wing from ICAR. In this regard, a high-level committee was 
constituted under the chairmanship of Dr. Sanjiv Kumar Balayan, Hon’ble 
MoS, FAHD. Recommendations have been made by the committee and 
recommendations were given however, the matter has not been finalized and 
final decision is yet to be taken.”      
 
 
Schemes and Programmes of Department of Fisheries 
 
1.43. The Government of India has taken several initiatives to harness the fisheries 
sector's potential through implementation of various Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
(CSSs) and Central Sector Schemes (CSs). The estimated employment generation of 
these interventions is summarized in the Table given below:- 
  
S. 
No. 
Scheme Year of 
Implementation 
Estimated Employment 
Generation (Direct &   Indirect) 
1 CSS – Blue Revolution (BR) 2015 – 2020 1453688  
2 Fishers Infrastructure 
Development Fund (FIDF) 
2018 – 2023 940551  

- 20 - 
3 Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
2020 – 2025 5500000  
Total 7894239 
 
1.44. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme – Blue Revolution (CSS-BR) was launched in 
2015-16 for Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries for 5 years (2015-
16 to 2019-20) with a central financial outlay of Rs.3000 Crore. During the 5 years of its 
implementation, the CSS-Blue Revolution has resulted in the development of the 
fisheries sector in terms of enhancement of fish production and productivity, post-
harvest infrastructure, and marketing. Blue Revolution enshrined the vision, “Creating 
an enabling environment for integrated and holistic development and management of 
fisheries and improving the socio-economic conditions of fishers and fish farmers 
keeping in view the sustainability, bio-security and environmental concerns.” The 
scheme ended on 31.03.2020.  
 
 
Need for Awareness Campaign on Schemes and Programmes 
 
1.45. The Committee enquired about the measures taken by the Department to 
promote effective dissemination of information through Digital Networks to enable 
producers/Fish Farmers to eliminate middlemen and reach out to more 
people/customers directly. The Department it its reply stated as under:- 
"Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) had been forthcoming in upgrading its 
digital network and systems to disburse information and enhance outreach to 
the public. Various open sources of information are available such as websites 
of Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D), National Fisheries Development Board 
(NFDB) and PMMSY. The websites are interlinked as well.  
Launch of applications like Fish Market Price Information System (FMPIS) and 
Matsya Setu have been a key in making on-ground/real time information 
available to fishers and fisher folks. FMPIS is used for analyses of information 
on fish prices in fish markets at major cities and towns through a mobile based 
application while Matsya setu app aims to educate aqua farmers about the latest 
technologies to enhance their operations. Additionally, to enhance outreach, 
efforts are being made to link sector related information on Umang app. The 
central agencies and states/UTs have been very active on social media and use 
diversified content to impart information and generate awareness about the 
activities in the sector. To garner attention and support of focused viewers, the 
social media content is specifically tagged, while for convenience and ease of 
usability, aforesaid websites include important hyperlinks such as “Department 

- 21 - 
of Fisheries”, “Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying”, “NFDB”, “MPEDA”, 
“CAA”, “FSI”, “FIDF”, “PMNRF”, “Invest India”, “myGov”. 
The Management Information System (MIS) dashboard launched under the 
PMMSY scheme complements all the above efforts by strengthening internal 
data management between the States/UTs and intends to support the center for 
improved decision making, gap analysis, suggest remedial actions and project 
implementation. The government further plans to take up many more digital 
initiatives based on regions and pressing issues thus promoting Digital India." 
 
 
 
1.46. The Committee desired to know about the steps taken towards creation of 
awareness among Fishers/Fish Farmers regarding Welfare Schemes being 
implemented by the Government under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY) for their upliftment.  The Department submitted the following reply: 
i. "Department has created a website which comprises of important and 
updated information about PMMSY scheme including implementation of 
Group Accident Insurance Scheme (GAIS), Livelihood and Nutritional support 
and other welfare measures, modalities of operation, scheme implementation, 
coverage, premium and sharing pattern. All of these factors have been clearly 
laid out on the website. For tracking status, the GAIS website also allows to 
enter details through claim intimation and claim status.  
ii. For information dissemination purposes, States/UTs fisheries departments 
have also mentioned details of GAIS on their respective department of 
fisheries official website. 
iii. Regular training and orientation programs are being conducted by States/UTs 
for awareness creation about the scheme and its benefits. 
iv. Besides, Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) through NFDB has utilised 
newspapers, publications and brochures, social media platforms (LinkedIn, 
Twitter) to enlist information about the scheme, provisions, cover, etc. to a 
larger group. 
v. A specific insurance cell is based at the NFDB office, in Hyderabad. The cell 
is responsible for collecting and collating information from states across India. 
The cell, along with the third-party insurance agency acts as a connection 
between Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D)and/or NFDB and the scheme 
beneficiaries; especially for highly vulnerable states such as Telangana, 
Odisha, etc. 
vi. Moreover, recently, NFDB has exclusively developed a subscription-based 
platform called ‘Fishing Chimes’ which is utilized for outreach activities, and 
knowledge dissemination. It is an open platform that can be accessed by to 
the public through a subscription fee. The platform contains complete 
information on GAIS. 

- 22 - 
vii. Extensive orientation and training programs are conducted on a regular basis 
across all states for scheme beneficiaries including MIS-based training 
programs for data entry operators." 
 
 
1.47. On being asked about the measures contemplated to ensure that model 
Detailed Project Reports (DPR’s) are made available on the Department’s Website as 
well as State Government Offices to help entrepreneurs in the Fishing Sector in 
preparing their Project Reports. The Department submitted the following reply: 
"Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) has created a separate tab on the 
National Fisheries Development Board website, with the name “Templates” 
which provides a “Blank template for preparation of DPR for fisheries 
projects” and the same is available in more than one language. In addition to 
the available templates, central and state officials also provide relevant 
advisory to potential applicants/beneficiaries’ from time to time." 
 
Insurance Coverage for Fish Farmers 
 
1.48. The Committee desired to know whether the Department has any plan to insure 
Fish Farmers (similar on the lines of Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana) who bear 
heavy losses during heavy rainfalls that is when the gates of reservoirs and dams are 
opened and the seeds which are being planted by them in these dams get washed 
away.  The Department in its reply stated the following: 
"Insurance is something new in fisheries sector. It was started mostly in shrimp. 
It was a big failure. We are designing a scheme but it will take some time. It may 
not come immediately. The suggestion of having insurance for the dam fishers 
against heavy rainfall is possible. It is a very welcome suggestion. We will work 
on that. There is no human intervention. Unlike the crop insurance, it is just 
based on rainfall. It can be monitored on day to day basis. This is insurable. We 
can do that."              
 
1.49. When further inquired as to whether the Department envisages any Schemes for 
insurance coverage to protect these Dam Fishers against heavy rainfall/natural 
disaster, the Department submitted the following: 
"Department of Fisheries does not have the provision to crop insurance however 
the Department through NFDB, under PMMSY, is implementing Group Accident 
Insurance Scheme (GAIS) for fishers since 26.07.2021.Under this scheme, 
fishers and any other category of persons directly involved in fishing and 
fisheries-related activities within the age group of 18 to 70 years is eligible for 
insurance coverage of Rs.5.00 lakhs against accidental death or permanent total 

- 23 - 
disability, Rs. 2.50 lakh against accidental permanent partial disability and                 
Rs. 25,000/- is provided against accidental hospitalization.  
Fishers involved in fishing at reservoirs/dams are also eligible to insure their 
lives against heavy rainfall/ natural disaster under the above scheme through 
the respective State fisheries department/Union Territories. During 2021-22 
(from 26.07.21 to 25.07.22)29,11,588 fishers belonging to 18 States and  7 UT’s 
have been covered under this scheme through a payment of Rs.16,73,02,285/- 
as insurance premium while during 2022-23, 31,89,057 fishers from 22 States 
and 7 UTs have so far been covered through a payment of Rs.20,25,21,881/- as 
total premium amount.  
 
*** 
  

- 24 - 
CHAPTER - II 
 
 
Production, Consumption and Infrastructure Development in Fisheries Sector  
 
 Fisheries Sector has been recognized as a powerful income and employment 
generator as it stimulates growth of a number of subsidiary industries and is a source 
of cheap and nutritious food, at the same time it is an instrument of livelihood for a 
large section of economically backward population of the country. Fisheries Sector 
occupies an important place in the socio-economic development of the 
country.  Fisheries is a fast-growing sector in India, which provides nutrition and food 
security to a large population of the country besides providing income and employment 
to more than 2.80 crore people.  
 
   
A. Production / Consumption in Fisheries Sector against Demand and Supply  
 
2.2 India is the Third Largest Fish Producing country in the world and accounts for 
7.96 Percent of the Global Production.  The total fish production during FY 2022-23 is 
estimated at 16.25 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) with a contribution of 12.12 MMT from 
Inland Sector and 4.13 MMT from Marine Sector.  The Annual Average Growth Rate in 
the Fisheries Sector has been 7% over the last five years.  (Sub-para-1 of Para-2.1 AR 
2022-23) In 2018, total fisheries potential of India was estimated at 22.31 MMT 
consisting of the Marine Fisheries potential at 5.31 MMT and the Inland Fisheries 
potential at 17 MMT. India is also a major producer of fish through Aquaculture and 
ranks second in the world after China. Inland fish production constitutes about 75 
Percent of the total fish production of the country. The fish production in the country 
has shown continuous and sustained increment since independence. During 2021-22, 
77 Percent of Marine Fisheries potential and 71 Percent of the Inland Fisheries 
potential have been harnessed   
 
2.3 On being asked the steps taken to increase the Aquaculture Production and 
domestic fish consumption from 5kg to 12 kg Per Capita, per Year, the Department 
stated: 
"To ensure increase in domestic consumption of fish, the production needs to 
increase and accordingly, Department of Fisheries is promoting both marine and 
inland fisheries sectors including aquaculture with inputs, financial support and 
facilities like brood banks, hatcheries, rearing facilities, feed units and infusion of 

- 25 - 
technology.  In addition, concessional loan are being given under FIDF to 
provide investment in critical infrastructures.  With these steps Department aims 
to raise fish production to 22 MMT by 2024-25. This will entail per capita fish 
availability to around 12 kgs. However, this alone will not translate into increased 
consumption given on the fact that fish is not a preferred food in large parts of 
country and also not easily and conveniently available to those willing to try it.   
Accordingly the Department has a 2- pronged strategy: 
(i)  To expand and strengthen marking in form of hygienic markets, mobile 
vending and cold chains to support the movement of this highly 
perishable commodity. 
(ii) To raise awareness about the benefits of eating fish and about the 
different ways in which it can be eaten and relished. 
Under PMMSY infrastructural funds have been earmarked for post-harvest and 
marketing infrastructure and so far Rs. 1615 Cr. proposal with an outlay of Rs. 
3959 Cr. have been approved.  Further, to raise awareness the Department has 
been organizing fish festivals/fish mela through NFDB/ States/ UTs and 
organizing webinar from time to time. 
 
Besides, the Department is taking up region specific digital campaigns, 
broadcasting of jingles, advertisements in print media, displaying of 
hoardings/posters on nutritional aspects of fish, organizing seminars/workshops, 
participating in programs such as Poshaan Mela, Annadata Devo Bhava.  
Entrepreneurs are also being encouraged to create value added products and 
newer forms of the marketing to attract new consumers".  
 
 
2.4 When  asked about the Schemes contemplated for increasing fish consumption, 
on the basis of the Demand Study Report of National Council of Applied Economic 
Research, the Department stated:- 
"The Department of Fisheries had engaged National Council of Applied 
Economic Research (NCAER) to conduct a study on “Demand of Fisheries 
Sector in India” under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). 
As per the scope of the study, it will estimate demand and supply gap of fish 
(state-wise and major species-wise) and determine parameters that influence 
the demand for fish across States/UTs and their relative influence on the 
aggregate demand function. 
 
The findings of the aforesaid study will be used to formulate region specific 
strategies to increase fish consumption such as promoting the preferred 
varieties to utilize, set up of appropriate marketing infrastructure and to fine tune 
the marketing campaign.  No new schemes are proposed at the moment and 
existing provision of PMMSY will be utilized for the same" 

- 26 - 
 
 
2.5 The Committee desired to know whether the Department has any Programmes 
to promote and make available Frozen Fish, so that the consumption of fish can be 
increased up to the level of Japan’s consumption by 2047, which is about 24kg Per 
Capita, the Department stated:- 
"World-wide, trade in frozen fish constitutes 80% of trade in fish, fish products. 
But in India, it is negligible because of perception that there is no demand for 
frozen fish.  Increase in marketing for frozen fish will improve availability of 
quality fish on non-fish producing areas.  Accordingly Department of Fisheries 
has already engaged National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) 
to conduct a study on “Demand of Fisheries Sector in India” wherein along with 
the preference for fish species, pattern and reason for preference of people 
including for frozen fish will be studied in detail. 
Based on the study results, the Department along with NFDB will formulate 
appropriate strategies in conjunction with private sector to boost sale and 
consumption of frozen fish."  
 
 
Post-Harvest Losses 
  
2.6 The Department of Fisheries has stated that the average level of post-harvest 
losses in fisheries sector is reported to be 25 to 30 Percent. No comprehensive study 
has been done so far to assess the Percentage of post-harvest losses in fisheries 
sector.    The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying is implementing (i) 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and (ii) Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) for development of fisheries sector in the 
country including reduction of post-harvest losses.  Under PMMSY, in order to provide 
safe landing, berthing & post-harvest infrastructure facilities so far 48 projects worth 
Rs.2526 crore have been approved for development and modernization of fishing 
harbours and fish landing centres in the country. Besides, 562 Ice plants/cold storages, 
294 Refrigerated vehicles and 1138 insulated vehicles of total project cost of Rs.745 
crore have been supported for fish preservation and transport so as to reduce the post-
harvest losses in fisheries sector. Under FIDF, 22nos. of fishing harbours and 24 nos. 
of fish landing centre projects have been approved at a total cost of Rs.4905.77 crore 
and Rs.182.20 crore respectively. Further, steps taken by National Institute of Fisheries 
Post Harvest Technology and Training (NIFPHATT) towards reduction of Post-harvest 
losses are as under: 

- 27 - 
i. Development of Value added fishery products through process and product 
diversification from all varieties of fish including low value, unconventional 
species and seasonally abundant fishes. 
ii. Development and transfer of Technology to beneficiaries consisting of rural 
fishermen community, small scale industries. 
iii. Imparting training in the field of post-harvest technology, refrigeration 
technology, Quality control and value added products. Further, NIFPHATT 
also provides consultancies and training for rural development programmes/ 
women empowerment programmes in fish processing, supporting local fish 
farmers, self-help groups of fisher community, fishermen’s cooperative 
societies functioning under Panchayath Raj Institution. 
iv. Besides, NIFPHATT also popularizes and market tests value added products 
of all fish varieties (including low value, unconventional species and 
seasonally abundant fishes) and develop markets in all the states with added 
attention to rural areas and enthusing entrepreneurs to enter into sea food 
processing industry.   
 
 
2.7 The Committee desired to know about the Percentage of Post-Harvest Losses 
for the last five years State/UT wise along with the steps taken by the Department to 
modernize and strengthen the value chain and improving the harbours so as to reduce 
the Post Harvest Losses. The Department, in its reply, stated:- 
"One of the objectives of PMMSY is to reduce the Post-Harvest Losses (PHL) 
from currently reported 20-25%to about 10%. As development of infrastructure 
is key to reducing post-harvest losses, especially that of Fishing Harbours and 
Fish Landing Centres. Hence, Department of Fisheries has allocated a total 
investment of ~Rs.7461Crore under Blue Revolution, FIDF and PMMSY which 
includes development of FH/FLCs. Under PMMSY, proposals under centrally 
sponsored component and Central Sector component for 22 Fishing Harbours 
(FH)/ Fish Landing Centers (FLC) have been approved with a total cost of Rs. 
2049.23 Crore.  
 
Under FIDF, proposals for 20 new FHs and 15 FLCs with a total outlay of Rs 
4593.83 Crores have been approved for concessional finance. Similarly, under 
Blue Revolution, 1423 Cr has been approved for development of 12 nos Fishing 
Harbour/ Fish Landing Centers." 
 
 
2.8 The Committee having noted that the target for reduction of post-harvest losses 
under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana, is up to 10 % by the year 2024-25 
and therefore desired to know the Percentage of post-harvest losses during the last 
five years Percentage and State/UT wise. The Department, in its reply, stated:- 

- 28 - 
"The Percentage of post-harvest losses in fisheries sector is reported to be          
20-25 Percent. No comprehensive study has been done during the last five 
years to assess the Percentage of post-harvest losses in fisheries sector." 
 
 
B. Import and Export of Fisheries Products 
 
2.9 Fish and Fish products are among the most traded food commodities in the 
world with export accounting for around 38 Percent of total fish production (live weight 
equivalent.  Trading in livestock and livestock products including fish/fishery products 
are regulated as per the Foreign Trade Policy-Export Import Policy (EXIM) of 
Government of India, which is implemented by Department of Commerce. However, in 
order to prevent ingress of Exotic Diseases through import of livestock and livestock 
products as well as fish and fishery products, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying regulates trade in such products as per provision of Section 3 and Section 
3A of the Livestock Importation Act, 1898. The Department oversees the Sanitary and 
Phyto-sanitary issues for the import and export of fish and fishery products.  
 
Import of Fisheries Products 
  
2.10 Livestock and fish/fishery products are categorized under Open General Licence 
(OGL) as per EXIM Policy.   Import of these products is basically allowed and is subject 
of Sanitary import Permits (SIPs which are guided by risk analysis done through 
Veterinary Health Certificates to be accompanied with the import of livestock products. 
 
 
 
2.11 As regards import of Fisheries products into the country, annual cost value of 
import of fisheries products in the last 5 years and the steps taken to boost domestic 
production, the Department of Fisheries furnished the following details: 
"India imports a variety of fisheries products, including Live fish, Fresh or chilled 
fish, Frozen Fish, Fish Fillets, Dried Fish, Crustacean, Mollusc, Invertebrates, 
Fish meal, Fish oil and Value added products (seafood preparations) etc. The 
country is a major consumer and importer of seafood, sourcing products from 
different countries to meet domestic demand and preferences. 
As such there is no shortage of domestic varieties. However, Fish varieties like 
Haddock, Cod, Flat- fish, Salmon, Pollock, sturgeon fish (fish roes), Argentinean 

- 29 - 
Red Shrimp, Norway Lobster, crabs etc are only found in Temperate countries 
and not available in India. Some of the varieties are being imported for supply to 
HoReCa (Hotel, Restaurants and Cafes) and some goes for reprocessing and 
value additions, therefore, import of these commodities cannot be avoided.  
During the financial year 2022-23, India imported 63016 MT of Seafood worth 
Rs. 1984 Crore. India Imported marine products from 64 countries. Bangladesh 
retained the title as the major exporter of seafood with a share of 24.4% in terms 
of INR followed by South East Asia 19.6% and USA 18.9% etc. The annual cost 
value of marine products during last five years from 2018-19 are as under: 
 Table 1: Import of Marine products since 2018-19:  
Year 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Qty in MT 56933.36 72405.68 101424.7 76618 63016 
Value  in Rs. Crore 1088 1290 1669 1668 1984 
 
The major categories of the products imported for fisheries sectors are listed below: 
i. Fish and fish products in various forms: Live, Fresh, Chilled, Frozen, 
Dried, Smoked, Flours, Meals and Pellets Fish and crustaceans, molluscs 
& other aquatic invertebrates, Fish Fillets, fish meat etc. 
ii. Preparations of meat, of fish or of crustaceans, molluscs or other aquatic 
invertebrates 
iii. Fish Oil and related products 
iv. Fish Meal, Crustacean Meal and other meal and flour (Feed Ingredients) 
v. Coral and Similar Materials, Shells of Molluscs, Crustaceans, 
echinoderms and cuttle-bone etc. 
vi. Fish nails, fish bones, Scales, other fish wastes etc. 
vii. Shrimp feed and Fish Feed (like larval and brood stock maturation diets, 
liquid feed, ornamental fish feed, compounded animal feeds etc). The 
commodities also include feed for animal husbandry sector, however 
major import is for fisheries sector. 
  
 The annual cost value of various fish and fisheries products imported for 
fisheries sector during last five years (2018-19 to 2022-23) have been tabulated 
as below.  
S. 
No. 
Chapter  Description (Value in Rs. Lakh) 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
1 3 Fish and crustaceans, 
molluscs and other 
aquatic invertebrates. 
74512.5 91631.15 112005.68 125672.82 152899.1 

- 30 - 
2  5 Coral and similar 
materials, unworked 
or simply prepare, 
shells of molluscs, 
crustaceans etc 
4473.55 3345.51 2013.74 3402.3 4422.95 
 3 5 Artemia or other dead 
products of 
crustaceans 
5333.49 2574.31 5280.58 5021.62 17759.53 
4 15 Fish oil and related 
products 
6442.26 8628.28 7149.38 11185.89 9463.26 
5 16 Preparations of meat, 
of fish or of 
crustaceans, molluscs 
or other aquatic 
invertebrates 
4019.68 5342.13 5842.62 9141.01 5714.55 
6 23 Fish feed/shrimp 
feed/fish meal, 
crustacean meal/other 
preparations of animal 
feeding/and other 
meal and flour (feed 
ingredients) 
299572.9 277431.91 297591.43 345780.43 338382.78 
   Total 394354.38 388953.29 429883.43 500204.07 528642.17 
   (Source: DoC, Export Import Data Bank) 
 
The broad strategies to boost the domestic production includes promoting 
establishment of brood stock multiplication centres, Genetic improvement 
programmes (NBCs), Species Diversification, Value addition and strengthening 
of post-harvest infrastructure facilitates, Promoting production of broodstock 
maturation diet and larval diets, Alternatives for fish meal and Optimization of 
cost of production for pangasius and Tilapia.  
 
Under Atma Nirbhar Bharat, the Department has already taken the following 
steps to phase out the imports of shrimp brood stock and to reduce the 
dependency on single shrimp species (i.e Litopenaeus vannamei).  
 
- Promoting establishment of Broodstock Multiplication Centres (BMCs) for 
L. vannamei and P. monodon. So far, out of 5 BMCs permitted, three are 
operational and two are under construction. 
 
- For promoting species diversification and reducing dependency on L. 
vannamei shrimp, the Department has approved a Genetic Improvement 
Program to Central Institute of Brackishwater Aquaculture (CIBA) for 
development of Penaeus indicus an indigenous Shrimp (Indian white 
shrimp) aquaculture with a total project cost of Rs. 2504.40 lakh under 
central sector component of PMMSY.  
 
- The Department is also supporting NBC project of MPEDA located at 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands on Domestication of Tiger Shrimp 
(Penaeus monodon). During 2021-22, Rs 12.07 crore has been funded 
under the PMMSY to complete the project and deliver SPF domesticated 
brood stocks to the hatchery operators." 
 
 
Export of Fisheries Products 
 

- 31 - 
2.12 As per Department of Fisheries, during  the financial year 2021-22, export of 
marine products stood at 1.37 MMT and valued at Rs.57,586.48 Crores (USD: 7.76 
billion) with an impressive average annual growth rate of about 10% in recent years. As 
for overseas markets, USA continued to be the major importer of Indian seafood with 
an import worth USD 3371.66Million, accounting for a share of 43.45 Percent in terms 
of US dollar value. 
 
2.13 On being asked by the Committee about the strategies to reach the Export 
Target set under PMMSY. The Department in its reply submitted the following: 
 "The broad strategies to reach the export targets set under PMMSY are as 
 below; 
i. Increase in area under shrimp cultivations 
ii. Increase shrimp productivity through species diversification and 
disease control 
iii. Improve post harvest infrastructure like establishment of Fishing 
Harbours/ Fish landing Centres and Cold chain facilities 
iv. Improving certification and traceability 
v. Awareness for quality products."                           
 
2.14 On being asked about the contribution of export of fish and fishery products 
during  the last five years, the Department furnished the following details : 
"Value-wise contribution of fisheries exports to the India’s total export 
Year 
Exports of Fish and 
Fisheries products 
[Value in Rs. Crore] 
India's Total Export 
[Value in Rs. Crore] 
% share to India’s 
Total Exports 
2017-18 45106.89 1956514.5 2.31 
2018-19 46589.37 2307726.2 2.02 
2019-20 46662.85 2219854.2 2.10 
2020-21 43720.98 2159043.2 2.03 
2021-22 57586.48 3147021.5 1.83 
 
Source: MPEDA Source: DGFT 
                                                                                                                  " 
 
2.15 On being asked about the contribution of Fisheries Exports in Employment and 
Revenue Generation and the reasons for the consistent fall in the value of fisheries 
exports from 2017-18 to 2021-22, the Department gave the following reply: 
"Marine exports reached an all-time high of Rs 57,586.48 crore in FY 2021-22. 
The value wise export of fish and fisheries products has been increased 
consistently from year 2017-18 to 2021-22 in addition to India’s total exports to 
other countries except in the year 2020-21. The fall in exports of marine 
products during FY 2020-21 is reported mainly due to global impact of Covid-19 

- 32 - 
pandemic on account of restrictions imposed in global markets, hotels and the 
hospitality sectors by importing countries. 
The consistent increase in exports of fish and fishery products from 2017–18 to 
2021–22 (with the exception of 2020–21) if measured in value–wise Percentage 
contribution to India's total export, shows a declining trend. This is primarily due 
to the rapid growth of total exports across all sectors."  
 
 
2.16 On being asked about the reasons which are hampering the Fish Exports and 
what measures has the Department planned to overcome the hurdles faced by the Fish 
Exports, the Department submitted:  
"The increase in production along with the demand of Indian marine products 
such as shrimps in the international markets are two driving factors for exports. 
Currently, issues pertaining to Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) and Technical 
Barrier to Trade (TBT) hamper the exports to various countries. 
 
For increasing exports, increasing of both production and variety are important. 
The Department has issued advisory to 9 potential states for area expansion 
including Maharashtra, Odisha, Goa, Gujarat etc. In order to tackle SPS issues, 
aquatic health management such as quarantine and bio security measures are 
being strengthened. Further, for export related matters, the Department of 
Fisheries is working closely with Department of Commerce to resolve the issues 
as and when required. Additionally, production of tilapia, trouts, scampi, 
pangasius etc is being enhanced to include variety of fish species for increasing 
product offering for exports."  
 
 
2.17 When asked about the comparative details of the contribution of Fisheries 
Sector in total exports of the country for the last five years, the Department submitted 
the following: 
 
"State wise export details of Marine products during last 5 years is given below: 
STATE WISE EXPORT DETAILS 
Q: Quantity in MT, V: Value in Rs. Crore, $: US Dollar Million 
    2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
    GUJARAT Q 291251  289348 252712 203917 200099 
V 5039.08  5283.59 5001.43 4188.52 4421.10 
 $ 790.81  756.88 713.42 572.08 599.07 
MAHARASHTRA Q 201509  176152 151425 110822 193999 
 V 5257.45  5345.82 4829.17 3684.94 7303.92 

- 33 - 
STATE WISE EXPORT DETAILS 
Q: Quantity in MT, V: Value in Rs. Crore, $: US Dollar Million 
    2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
 $ 823.36  771.33 690.70 502.87 935.77 
GOA Q 55330  43782 21498 16549 36057 
 V 885.40  831.61 520.65 435.25 730.64 
 $ 138.95  119.06 74.56 59.47 99.03 
KARNATAKA Q 146771  148672 111465 121348 120427 
 V 1806.40  1992.00 1520.10 1689.14 1962.19 
 $ 283.54  284.30 220.89 231.13 266.26 
KERALA Q 195177  187848 163563 157698 182430 
 V 6656.90  6312.92 5672.27 5623.12 6971.56 
 $ 1045.55  911.02 810.44 766.76 958.17 
TAMIL NADU Q 115436  133339 130377 110023 114810 
 V 5688.95  6028.88 6465.71 5565.48 6559.64 
 $ 893.70  872.56 925.41 758.05 892.92 
ANDHRA PRADESH Q 241272 261618 293314 279992 324904 
 V 13411.49  13854.74 15498.64 15831.74 20035.49 
 $ 2106.57  2007.29 2217.94 2154.55 2720.96 
TELANGANA Q 0  0 0 0 3102 
 V 0.00  0.00 0.00 0.00 156.91 
 $ 0.00  0.00 0.00 0.00 21.27 
ODISHA Q 53344  62608 66671 60718 86765 
 V 2871.61  2974.12 3243.93 3107.68 4627.91 
 $ 451.03  432.29 465.01 422.46 636.37 
WEST BENGAL Q 77155  89192 98626 88443 103398 
 V 3489.61  3965.69 3910.95 3595.12 4742.47 
 $ 548.04  573.77 560.35 489.58 619.68 
DELHI Q 0  0 0 0 766 
 V 0.00  0.00 0.00 0.00 39.00 
 $ 0.00  0.00 0.00 0.00 5.29 
OTHERS Q 0  0 0 0 2507 
 V 0.00  0.00 0.00 0.00 35.64 
 $ 0.00  0.00 0.00 0.00 4.80 
TOTAL Q 1377244  1392559 1289651 1149510 1369264 
 V 45106.89  46589.37 46662.85 43720.98 57586.48 
  $ 7081.55  6728.51 6678.70 5956.94 7759.58 
" 
2.18 The Committee observed that baring a few states, export of marine products for 
the period from 2017-18 to 2021-22 from States such as Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, 
Karnataka and Kerala have been consistently decreasing. When asked about the 
reasons for the same, the Department submitted the following: 
"As per the state wise export details during last five years, it has been observed 
that in terms of value, the exports from Maharashtra and Kerala have shown a 
continuous increase from year 2017-2022 while a slight dip has been observed if 
export of the aforesaid states are measured in terms of quantity. Further, for the 
state of Karnataka, there is a slight decrease in export quantity but export value 
in terms of rupees has increased over the period. While a few states like Goa 
and Gujarat have shown decreasing trend in terms of export quantity and value.  
 

- 34 - 
The above decrease in quantity maybe due to various reasons across last five 
years such as COVID-19 restrictions in FY 2020-22, lack of emphasis on 
development of fisheries by state, on-ground challenges faced by fishers and 
fisher folks, timely unavailability of inputs particularly quality seed, feed etc. As 
fisheries is a subject under State list and all Fisheries related activities in the 
State are largely governed by respective State Fisheries Departments hence the 
progress in aforesaid states is being reviewed from time to time for providing the 
necessary support and guidance. " 
 
 
2.19 The Committee desired to know if the Department has taken any measures to 
include Inland Fresh Water Fish in total Fish Export of the Country and the steps 
undertaken by the Department to boost the export of Tilapia fish, which forms the 
largest Component of exports from Inland Areas. The Department, in its reply, stated:- 
"Efforts are continuously being taken for diversification of aquaculture species 
like tilapia for exports. Tilapia has good demand in the international market and 
several steps are being taken to promote its production and export. Department 
of Fisheries is supporting state Governments by providing funding for tilapia 
hatcheries and tilapia culture through Recirculation Aquaculture System (RAS), 
cage culture and pond culture systems. Further, for facilitating Ease of Doing 
Business, Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) has authorized States/UTs to 
issue permissions for establishment of tilapia hatcheries.  
MPEDA-Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Aquaculture has standardized the hatchery and 
grow out farming technology of Genetically Improved Farmed Tilapia (GIFT) at 
its project site at Manikonda, Krishna-District, Andhra Pradesh. Through 
selective breeding programme, RGCA has developed an 8th generation of GIFT 
in Indian condition in technical collaboration with Worldfish, Malaysia. RGCA 
provides technical consultancy is provided to entrepreneurs apart from giving 
hands on training on “Breeding, Seed Production & Grow-out farming of 
Genetically Improved Farmed Tilapia (GIFT)” 
  

- 35 - 
 
i. Export details of Tilapia during last 5 years are given below: 
EXPORT DETAILS OF TILAPIA 
Q: Quantity in M T, V: Value in Rs. Crore, $: US Dollar Million 
  2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
TILAPIA Q 2439 2124 1597 2489 3890 
  V 17.52 15.68 13.03 18.89 30.49 
  $ 2.75 2.30 1.87 2.59 4.14 
  * Source: MPEDA 
 
ii. Export details of cultured fish during last 5 years are given below: 
EXPORT DETAILS OF CULTURED FISH 
Q: Quantity in M T, V: Value in Rs. Crore, $: US Dollar Million 
  2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
CULTURED FISH Q 3941 3967 2909 3981 6938 
(Scampi, Pangas, 
IMC, etc.)  
V 50.49 55.95 49.24 55.17 94.34 
$ 7.94 8.11 7.06 7.52 11.45 
         *Source: MPEDA         " 
 
2.20 The Committee desired to know the steps taken by the Department to include in 
exports other Inland Fresh Water Fishes also such as Rohu, Catla, Mahseer, Magur, 
Vaam and Hilsa. The Department in its reply stated the following: 
Data on export of culture fish from India shows a nearly threefold increase in 
quantity from 2,909 tons in 2019-20 to 6,938 tons in 2021-22. Though the 
exports of fishes like Hilsa, Catla, Pangasius etc, is more than the imports to 
India however, Government has been promoting the farming of commercially 
important freshwater fishes for diversifying the fish species exported. This 
includes promotion of fish species such as Pangasius, tilapia, Scampi, India 
Major Carps (Catla, Rohu and Mrigal) etc in all states/UTs.  
For few commercially important fish species like Hilsa and Vaam, breeding and 
seed production technology has not been standardised, therefore at present 
production of these species mostly comes from Capture fisheries.  
 
2.21 On being enquired about the steps taken by the Department to provide 
International Market for Monodon Shrimps Farmers and whether the Department plans 
to give any kind of grants to States so that the States can in turn subsidize electricity 
tariffs for Shrimp Farmers, the Department submitted:- 
"The DoF, GoI has approved Broodstock Multiplication Centres for SPF P. 
Monodon and Coastal Aquaculture Authority has empanelled 2 international 

- 36 - 
suppliers to support import of SPF seeds. Department of Fisheries has also 
issued advisories to states and intervened, as and when required, to subsidise 
the electricity tariffs for shrimp farmers.  
 
The Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA), Department of 
Commerce has been taking various steps to promote export of marine products 
from India to other countries including brand promotion. These inter alia include 
participation in various trade fairs and exhibitions and organizing 62 Virtual 
Buyer Seller Meets (VBSMs) with the importing countries for the benefit of the 
stakeholders. Additionally, MPEDA has been reaching out to 62 Indian Missions 
in selected markets for assistance to promote seafood exports from India. In 
addition, during Covid Pandemic, MPEDA formulated COVID 19 guidelines for 
seafood sector and issued advisories to exporters to avoid covid related 
contamination.  
 
Further, the Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying in the year 2020-21 has rolled out a flagship scheme the Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) with highest ever investment of Rs. 
20050 crores in the fisheries sector for implementation during a period of five 
years i.e., 2020-21 to 2024-25, in all States/Union Territories. One of the key 
objectives of the PMMSY is to enhance fisheries exports to Rs 1 (one) lakh crore 
by 2024-25. Towards meeting this objective and in order to enhance India’s 
export competitiveness and higher price realization, the PMMSY supports a 
basket of interventions/activities along the fisheries value chain. These include 
quality fish production, expansion, diversification and intensification of brackish 
water aquaculture, promotion of export-oriented species, infusion of technology, 
robust disease management framework, promotion of good aquaculture 
practices, branding, standards, certification and traceability, training and 
capacity building, creation of modern post-harvest infrastructure with seamless 
cold chain, development of modern fishing harbours and fish landing centres, 
etc.  In addition, to address the critical infrastructure requirements of fisheries 
and aquaculture sectors, the Department of Fisheries, Government of India 
during 2018-19 has created the Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure 
Development Fund (FIDF) with a total fund size of Rs 7522.48 crore to provide 
concessional finance to states/UT and private sector." 
  
 
2.22 The Committee desired to know whether there are any quality concerns of fish 
importing countries along with steps taken by the Department to address the same. 
The Department furnished the following reply: 
"The major concerns of fish importing countries are regarding presence of 
banned antibiotic i.e. Nitrofuran and Chaloramphanicol in the consignments 

- 37 - 
exported from India. To address this issue, since 2017 Export Inspection Council 
(EIC) has started sampling and testing of fish sample prior to export. The 
initiative has reduced the number of rejected consignment to 2 by 2022. 
Additionally, MPEDA is implementing pre-harvest test report mechanism to 
eliminate risk of residue presence at farm level. This test report will also include 
information about all the input suppliers thus provide traceability of the fish 
produce to eliminate the risk of presence of banned antibiotics in the fish supply/ 
value chain.  
In addition to this, five countries including Australia, Korea, China, Saudi Arabia 
and Thailand are obligating India to provide certification along with 
consignments declaring freedom from relevant WHOA listed diseases. EIC is 
providing the certification and is engaged in dialogues with respective countries 
for relaxing the same. Department of Fisheries, GoI is providing consultation in 
such matters.  
Post-COVID 19 Pandemic times, China has implemented Nucleic acid testing on 
packages to be exported to China from India, earlier this has resulted in rejection 
of around 100 consignments. This matter was considered as major issue under 
Technical Barrier to Trade (TBT) and the matter was taken up with China by EIC 
and Department of Commerce."  
 
 
C. Infrastructure Development in Fisheries Sector 
 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) 
 
2.23 The Government of India, in 2018-19, created Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) to address the infrastructure gaps in Fisheries 
Sector, with a total fund size of Rs 7522.48 Cr..  FIDF provides concessional finance 
(3% interest subvention) to Eligible Entities (EEs), including States/UTs and State 
entities for development of identified fisheries infrastructure facilities. Since the scheme 
is demand driven, no state-wise physical targets have been set.  The Department of 
Fisheries has approved the proposals to the tune of Rs.4923.94 Cr. to various 
States/UTs including the proposals of private beneficiaries. An amount of Rs. 1871.58 
Cr. has been sanctioned by Nodal Loaning Entities (NLEs). NABARD has sanctioned 
an amount of Rs. 1860.28 Cr. to the State Governments and Rs. 11.30 Cr. has been 

- 38 - 
sanctioned by Scheduled banks to private beneficiaries, respectively.  The details of 
the proposals approved under FIDF are given below: 
Sl. No Name of the Project Total Project Cost 
Proposals of State Governments 
1 Tamil Nadu (52 proposals) 1419.98 
2 Andhra Pradesh  (4 proposals) 1291.40 
3 Gujarat (5 proposals) 1354.92 
4 West Bengal (10 proposals) 27.99 
5 Goa (1 Proposal) 6.41 
6  Himachal Pradesh (1 Proposal) 5.00 
7 Odisha (3 proposals) 24.68 
8 Maharashtra ( 4 Proposals) 673.33 
 Sub Total 4803.71 
Proposals from Private Entrepreneurs  120.23 
Sub Total 120.23 
Total         4923.94 
 
" 
2.24 Regarding number of proposals approved/sanctioned under Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) since its inception, the 
Department furnished the following reply:- 
‘The Department of Fisheries, GoI has approved 105 proposals to the tune of 
Rs.4923.94 crore with Project cost restricted for interest subvention of Rs. 3236.81 
crore have been recommended to various States/UTs including the proposals of 
private beneficiaries, under the demand-driven FIDF Scheme. An amount of 
Rs.1871.58 crore has been sanctioned by Nodal Loaning Entities (NLEs) while 
NABARD has sanctioned an amount of Rs.1860.28 crore to the State Governments 
and Rs.11.30 crore has so far been sanctioned by Scheduled banks to private 
beneficiaries.’  The details of the State/UT and component wise are as under:- 
 
Component-wise proposal approved under FIDF 
Sl No Name of Activity No. of Proposals Approved under FIDF 
1 Brood Banks 2 
2 Fishing Harbours 24 
3 Innovative Projects 15 
4 Fish Processing Units 2 
7 State Fish Seed Farms 26 
8 Aquaculture 5 
9 Hatcheries 2 
10 Fisheries Training Centers 5 
11 Cage Culture in Reservoirs 1 
12 Construction of Ice Plants 3 
13 Fish Landing Centers 16 
14 Cold Storages 4 
TOTAL 105 
 
Details of State/UT wise proposal approved under FIDF                               
(including Government and Private beneficiary) 
Sl No. Name of State/UT No. of Proposals approved under FIDF 

- 39 - 
Sl No. Name of State/UT No. of Proposals approved under FIDF 
1 Andhra Pradesh 8 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1 
3 Assam 1 
5 Goa 1 
6 Gujarat 5 
7 Haryana 1 
8 Himachal Pradesh 1 
9 Karnataka 2 
10 Kerala 1 
12 Maharashtra 9 
13 Manipur 4 
14 Mizoram 1 
15 Odisha 3 
17 Tamil Nadu 54 
18 Telangana 1 
20 Uttar Pradesh 1 
22 West Bengal 10 
25 Jammu and Kashmir 1 
TOTAL 105 
 
State-wise loan sanctioned by NABARD:  
S.I No Name of the State No. of proposals 
sanctioned by NABARD 
Amount 
Sanctioned 
1 Tamil Nadu 28 798.28 
2 Gujarat 4 600.00 
3 Goa 1 5.00 
4 West Bengal 3 7.00 
5 Andhra Pradesh 3 450.00 
6 Private Beneficiary 3 11.30 
  Total 42 1871.58 
  " 
 
2.25 The progress in the implementation of FIDF was examined by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 15.11.2022 to take oral evidence on the subject on 15.11.2022.  
During  the sitting , Secretary, Department of Fisheries submitted:- 
 “In Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF), we 
have reached about 60 per cent of our project approval target. The sanction rate 
is a little low because most of the projects -- that have been   approved -- have 
come in the form of fishing harbors. They are big projects. The States of Andhra 
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have taken a large chunk of this money. Originally, 
when this scheme was envisaged, we had made a separate allocation for deep 
sea fishing vessels, markets, hatcheries, etc. Simultaneously, after that, when 
PMMSY came, there was a higher subsidy. So, there were not much takers from 
the private sector for the FIDF fund because only interest subvention was given. 
However, we are trying to achieve the targets and we are trying to achieve a 
convergence between FIDF fund and PMMSY so that a better utilization of both 
the schemes can happen”.  
 

- 40 - 
 
2.26 As regards State/UT wise Status of Utilisation of Funds / projects sanctioned 
under the Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF), the Department 
furnished the following details:- 
"Under the FIDF, the Department of Fisheries provides interest subvention up to 
3% per annum for providing the concessional finance by the Nodal Loaning 
Entities (NLEs) at the interest rate not lower than 5% per annum.The State/UT 
project wise Status of loan amount sanctioned and released under Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) is as under: 
Sl. No. Name of Borrowing State Total # of Projects 
1 Tamil Nadu 28 
2 Goa 1 
3 Gujarat 4 
4 West Bengal 3 
5 Andhra Pradesh 3 
" 
 
2.27 When asked about the number of proposals received and approved from Private 
Entrepreneurs under FIDF since its inception, the Department  submitted the following: 
"A total of 91 proposals have been received from private beneficiaries out of 
which 25 proposals have been approved/ recommended by CAMC. As FIDF is a 
demand driven scheme hence states are being encouraged to mobilise 
beneficiaries for sharing proposals." 
 
 
2.28 Modernization of Fishing Harbours - Modernization of fishing harbour is 
another thrust area mainly to improve hygienic conditions of the harbour facilities with 
the objective of enhancing export earnings and also ease congestion. The 
modernization project envisages improvement of auction halls, construction of a fish 
packing hall-cum-truck parking area, improvement of the sanitation and water supply 
facilities, improvement of electrifications and drainage, resurfacing of wharf backup 
areas, modernization of the existing buildings, construction of finger jetty, renovation of 
existing RCC Jetties, re-flooring of wharf frontage area, renovation of tower lightening 
structures, construction of rainwater harvesting system, construction of chilled fish 
storage facilities and construction of ice plants & cold storage, processing plants, 
floating dock / sleep-way, sleep-lift / dry dock, agri-export management etc. 
 
 

- 41 - 
2.29 When enquired about State/UT wise details of all Fish Landing Centers in Inland 
areas under PMMSY and the steps taken by the Department for providing Cold Chain 
and Refrigeration Units to Fishermen in Flood prone areas, the Department submitted 
inter-alia as under: 
"Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) has so far approved State-of-art 
wholesale fish markets and Modern Integrated fish landing Centres with a total 
outlay of Rs.20.50 Crore involving Central share of Rs18.45 Crore for 
establishment in Inland states under PMMSY.  
 
Further, project proposal with a total outlay of Rs. 273.18 Crore, with a central 
share of Rs. 91.38 Crore has been sanctioned to the flood prone states for 
providing cold chain and refrigeration units under PMMSY".  
 
 
*** 

- 42 - 
CHAPTER - III 
 Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of Fisheries 
Sector  
 
 In India, it is estimated that the Fisheries sector employs 28 million people 
directly, including fishers and fish farmers, and almost twice the number indirectly, in 
the Post-harvest processing and other allied activities. Broadly, about 75% of the 
fishers are engaged in inland fisheries and about 25% in marine fisheries activities.  
Employment potential in the sector has high potential in the various activities like 
production, sale of inputs (vessels, fishing gear, operational inputs, etc.)  farming, 
harvesting, processing, marketing, distribution of fish, and other ancillary activities for 
marine export. Fishing and aquaculture operations range from informal and small-scale 
to high level organized and industrial in nature.  
A. Gross Value Added by Fisheries Sector 
 
3.2 Fisheries Sector plays an important role in the national economy and the share 
of Fisheries Sector in the total Gross Value Added (GVA) at constant prices, in 2022-23 
is estimated at Rs.1,37,716 Crore that constitutes about 1.09 Percent of the total 
national GVA and 6.72 Percent of agricultural GVA.  Fisheries and aquaculture 
continue to be an important source of food, nutrition, income and livelihood to millions 
of people.  The Fisheries Sector of India has shown an impressive growth rate of 
9.03% (Constant Price: 2011-12) during the years 2015-16 to 2020-21. (Sub-para-1of 
Para2.1 of AR-2022-23)  Further, the Per capita Fish Consumption in India is 5 to 6 kg.  
 
3.3 When enquired about the contribution of Fisheries Sector to the Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) and overall Employment Generation/Revenue Earnings during the year 
2021-22, the Department stated:-  
"The Fisheries sector plays an important role in the National Economy and the 
share of Fisheries Sector in the total Gross Value Added (GVA), at Current 
Basic Prices, in 2021-2022 is projected at Rs. 2,64,484 Crore that constitutes 
about 1.24 Percent of the total national GVA. Employment Generation in the 
Fisheries Sector in India are as below: 
S.N. Year Employment Generated 
1 2020-21 687522 
2 2021-22 218491 
Total 906013 
" 

- 43 - 
3.4 When asked about the contribution of Fisheries Sector in the overall Agricultural 
contribution to the GDP of the country and the contribution of fisheries sector in 
doubling of farmer’s income by the year 2022, the Department submitted the following: 
Years Fisheries Agriculture, 
forestry and 
fishing 
National 
GVA 
% Share of 
Fisheries in 
Agriculture GVA 
% Share of 
Fisheries in 
National GVA 
Constant Prices (2011-12)     
2011-12 68,027 15,01,947 81,06,946 4.529 0.84 
2012-13 71,362 15,24,288 85,46,275 4.682 0.84 
2013-14 76,487 16,09,198 90,63,649 4.753 0.84 
2014-15 82,232 16,05,715 97,12,133 5.121 0.85 
2015-16 90,205 16,16,146 1,04,91,870 5.581 0.86 
2016-17 99,627 17,26,004 1,13,28,285 5.772 0.88 
2017-18 1,14,730 18,40,023 1,20,34,171 6.235 0.95 
2018-19 1,24,468 18,78,598 1,27,33,798 6.626 0.98 
2019-20 1,29,893 19,82,303 1,32,19,476 6.553 0.98 
2020-21 1,37,716 20,48,032 12585074 6.724 1.09 
 
From the above table it may be seen that the overall Agriculture Gross Value 
Added(GVA) at Constant Prices (2011-2012) increases from Rs. 15,01,947 
crore to Rs. 20,48,032 crore and Fisheries GVA increases from Rs. 68,027 crore 
to Rs. 1,37,716 crore. Fisheries sector has expanded 102.44% in       2011-12 to 
2020-21 as compared to agriculture sector which has expanded 36.36% during 
the same period." 
 
 
3.5 The Committee desired to know the steps taken by the Department to increase 
the Gross Value Addition to Fish production by the financial year 2024-25 so as to 
increase the Revenue Generation.  The Department furnished the following reply: 
"The Department of Fisheries is implementing two schemes “Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY)” and Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Development Fund (FIDF). Under PMMSY investment of Rs. 20050 Crore is 
envisaged in the fisheries sector over a period of five years up to 2024-25 in all 
States/Union Territories. The scheme intends to address critical gaps in fish 
production and productivity, quality, technology, post-harvest infrastructure and 
management, modernization and strengthening of value chain, 
traceability, enhancement of fisheries export, establishing a robust fisheries 
management framework and fishers’ welfare. 
 
Under FIDF, a dedicated Fisheries and Aquaculture Development Fund (FIDF) 
has been created to provide investments in infrastructure to the tune of                

- 44 - 
INR 7,522 Crore by provision of concessional finance with interest subvention of 
up to 3% to the Eligible Entities (EEs), including State Governments/Union 
Territories and State entities for development of identified fisheries infrastructure 
facilities through Nodal Loaning Entities (NLEs) namely (i) National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), (ii) National Cooperatives 
Development Corporation (NCDC) and (iii) Scheduled Banks.  The scheme was 
started in 2018-19 and will be in operation till 2022-23."  
 
 
B. Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
 
3.6 The Government of India had on 20th May, 2020 approved the “Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana” (PMMSY) under the flagship program of AtmaNirbhar Bharat 
Special Package for Fisheries Sector.  PMMSY marks the highest ever investment of 
Rs.20050 crores in fisheries sector over a period of 5 years from 2020-21 to  2024-25 
in all States/Union Territories to drive the sustainable and responsible development of 
the Fisheries sector while ensuring socio-economic development of the fishers, fish 
farmers and fish workers.  
 
3.7 The Committee having noted that total employment generation under all 
Schemes during the last five years has been 26,99,320 and desired to know plans of 
the Department to achieve the ambitious target of 55 lakh employment generation by 
2024-25 under the PMMSY. The Department, in its reply, stated:- 
"Since the inception of PMMSY, multiple strides have been made for providing 
livelihood and employment opportunities to the fishers and fisher folk 
community. So far a total project cost worth of Rs 11,029.34 crore have been 
approved for implementing various fisheries developmental activities in both 
inland and marine fisheries. Fisheries is a labour-intensive activity and requires 
skilled labour in many folds from fish culture/capture to processing and 
marketing.  Keeping these critical aspects in mind, Dept of fisheries (GoI), NFDB 
along with the State fisheries departments are continuously working to meet the 
ambitious targets of direct and indirect employment set under PMMSY.  
Department of fisheries (GoI) has been pro-active in evaluating and sanctioning 
big infrastructural projects such as multipurpose seaweed park, multiple                   
fish landing centers and fishing harbours etc. that require huge amount of 

- 45 - 
manpower to take ground and become operational. Therefore, with these 
upcoming projects, the target of 55 lakh employment will soon be achieved." 
 
3.8 On being asked about the details regarding the actual employment generated 
under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana since its inception in the year 2020-21 
as against the total allocation of funds done, the Department submitted:- 
"The Fisheries Sector has been expected to generate a total of 33.76 lakh 
employment since FY 2020-21 till date under PMMSY. The actual employment 
generated is currently not available hence all States/ UTs vide letter no. H-
11013 /3/2020-Fy dated 5th December,2022have been requested to provide the 
information regarding the actual employment generated under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana(PMMSY) since its inception in the year 2020-21 as 
against the total allocation of funds done." 
 
3.9 The Committee desired to know the actual outcomes against Physical Targets of 
PMMSY and the details of contribution/role of PMMSY in Employment Generation and 
Revenue Generation. The Department in its reply submitted the following: 
"Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) is implementing Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana for a period of five years from 2020-21 to 2024-25. The 
scheme is in its third year of implementation and its physical targets are 
expected to be achieved by the end of 2024-25. The details of anticipated 
outcomes and actual outcomes for the financial year 2020-21 and 2021-22 are 
as per Annexure-I. " 
 
3.10 On being asked about the details of the financial allocation State/UT wise under 
the various Components of Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) since 
2020-21 up to 2021-22, the Department submitted the following reply: 
"State/UT-wise allocation of central share under the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme (CSS) Component of PMMSY and indicative investment under the 
PMMSY for a period of five years (2020-21 to 2021-22) is as under: 
                            
  

- 46 - 
                         (Rs. In Crore) 
Sl 
No. State/UT Approved 
central share 
Indicative investment 
till 2024-25 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 301 782 
2 West Bengal 243 629 
3 Tamil Nadu 241 626 
4 Bihar 214 555 
5 Odisha 171 445 
6 Uttar Pradesh 168 435 
7 Kerala 149 387 
8 Gujarat 139 363 
9 Maharashtra 138 357 
10 Madhya Pradesh 115 301 
11 Karnataka 112 290 
12 Chhattisgarh 85 222 
13 Assam 126 218 
14 Telangana 75 195 
15 Jharkhand 73 190 
16 Goa 53 136 
17 Haryana 48 125 
18 Jammu & Kashmir 58 90 
19 Puducherry 58 87 
20 A and N Islands 56 86 
21 Uttarakhand 50 86 
22 Himachal Pradesh 46 80 
23 Lakshadweep 51 80 
24 Punjab 29 75 
25 Rajasthan 29 72 
26 Tripura 41 72 
27 Manipur 37 62 
28 Meghalaya 32 55 
29 Delhi 30 47 
30 Arunachal Pradesh 26 45 
31 Nagaland 21 35 
32 Mizoram 15 26 
33 Sikkim 13 21 
34 Chandigarh 13 19 
35 Daman and Diu D & Nagar Haveli 13 19 
36 Ladakh 13 19 
  Total (A) 3075 7331 
37 Add Central sector  (B) 688 688 
  Grand Total (A)+(B)   3763 8019 
" 
 
3.11 As regards State/UT-wise details of funds utilization along with steps taken by 
the Department to pursue the matter with State Governments, particularly States of 
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh to ensure utilization of funds allocated to them., the 
Department, in its reply, furnished the following information:- 

- 47 - 
"From the financial year 2021-22, the Department is ensuring the compliance of 
(Single Nodal Agency) SNA guidelines in all the States and UTs including the 
State of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh for better and effective utilization of funds by 
beneficiaries/ Stakeholders. In addition, regular VC meeting with States/UTs 
along with the visits in the States to monitor the physical progress of the funds 
sanctioned under PMMSY is also made before fresh release of the funds.   
 
The funds released to Various States/ UTs and their utilization under the 
PMMSY during the 2020-21 and 2021-22 is furnished as below:- 
  
           (Rs. in Lakhs) 
S. No States/UTs Funds released Amount Utilized 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 709.30  0.00 
2 Andhra Pradesh 18659.97  6693.65 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 1284.55  790.61 
4 Assam 7806.62  4027.49 
5 Bihar 4240.27  1422.67 
6 Chhattisgarh 6903.30  6210.95 
7 Daman & Diu 186.10  0.00 
8 Goa 2242.59  73.21 
9 Gujarat 6623.55  13.77 
10 Haryana 2573.97  1384.84 
11 Himachal Pradesh 1812.43  891.34 
12 Jammu & Kashmir 5700.42  4916.64 
13 Jharkhand 3125.71  667.41 
14 Karnataka 16162.98  8598.48 
15 Kerala 8610.95  1574.02 
16 Lakshadweep 1442.92  0.00 
17 Madhya Pradesh 7966.80  7560.83 
18 Maharashtra 7700.41  1885.35 
19 Manipur 1944.63  1801.82 
20 Meghalaya  1556.34  992.59 
21 Mizoram 2553.78  979.34 
22 Nagaland 2162.74  1906.27 
23 NCT Delhi 163.30  63.59 
24 Odisha 11910.29  3174.61 
25 Puducherry 2339.95  684.43 
26 Punjab 567.84  0.00 
27 Rajasthan 386.47  9.25 
28 Sikkim 555.21  234.20 
29 Tamil Nadu 4974.96  2550.00 
30 Telangana 5213.07  2383.84 
31 Tripura 2702.01  1042.08 
32 Uttar Pradesh  14755.76  7744.70 
33 Uttarakhand 2850.06  911.54 
34 West Bengal 519.27  0.00 
35 Ladakh 157.80  145.50 
 Total  159066.32 71335.02 
  " 

- 48 - 
3.12 The Committee desired to know reasons for low utilization of funds (Rs 
71335.02 out  of Rs 159066.32) as well as Nil funds utilization in Andaman & Nicobar, 
Daman & Diu, Punjab and West Bengal under PMMSY and the steps been taken to 
rectify the prevailing situation.  The Department, in its reply, stated:- 
"An amount of Rs. 1590.66 Crore has been released under Central Sponsored 
Scheme component under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana in the year 
2020-21 and 2021-22. Out of the aforesaid funds released, an amount of                 
Rs. 734.06 Crore has been utilized that stands at 46% of the total amount. The 
utilization of funds w.r.t. the funds released during 2020-21 is 74%.  
Low utilization of funds during the year FY 2021-22 was due to (i) difficulty in 
compliance of SNA guidelines by States/UTs (ii) restrictions due to COVID-19 
pandemic (iii) Non receipt of proportionate state matching share in time and (iv) 
late commencement of PMMSY in 2020-21 from September. 
Further, Andaman and Nicobar Administration faces many challenges in 
grounding PMMSY activities due to its unique topology. Few requests/proposals 
indicated by the A&N administration have been considered and the letter 
containing the approval have been issued to the UT on 26th November, 2022. 
Remaining few issues/proposals as requested will be posed to the Central 
Standing Committee and Central Apex Committee for appropriate decision 
making. With regards to Daman and Diu, West Bengal and Punjab, action plan 
was not received by the Department during the year 2021-22. Meanwhile, to 
expedite the utilization of funds and guide the states, regular review meetings 
are also being conducted."   
 
3.13 The Committee desired to know whether the reasons for under utilisation of 
funds by States/UTs under the PMMSY have been figured out and whether any 
corrective measures taken to change the process of Approval/Funds Release delinking 
utilisation certificate. The Department, in its reply, submitted the following: 
"Underutilization of funds during the year 2021-22 has been reported due to (i) 
Compliance of Single Nodal Agency (SNA) guideline regarding revised 
procedure for release of funds to States/UTs and monitoring utilization of funds 
(ii) restrictions due to COVID-19 pandemic (iii) Non receipt of proportionate state 
matching share in time and (iv) Late Commencement of PMMSY in 2020-21 
from September2020. However, progress of the States/UTs is being reviewed 
time to time. Department of Fisheries have been continuously advising them on 
utilization of funds available with the states/UTs for the activities approved 
during 2022-23 that has led to increase in pace of funds utilization by the 
States/UTs." 
 

- 49 - 
3.14 When asked about the details regarding total investment done up-till now under 
PMMSY in both Coastal as well as Non-Coastal States, the Department furnished the 
following information                                             
"            (Rs. in Lakhs) 
State/UT Name TOTAL PROJECT COST 
Coastal 570930 
Andhra Pradesh 211931 
Goa 9415 
Gujarat 73729 
Karnataka 73391 
Kerala 38572 
Maharashtra 50965 
Odisha 60229 
Tamil Nadu 35901 
West Bengal 6607 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands 2980 
Puducherry 6581 
The Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 631 
Non-Coastal 415736 
Arunachal Pradesh 8976 
Assam 32614 
Bihar 30130 
Chhattisgarh 36432 
Delhi 533 
Haryana 28322 
Himachal Pradesh 9775 
Jammu and Kashmir 8858 
Jharkhand 30835 
Ladakh 1457 
Lakshadweep 4460 
Madhya Pradesh 49703 
Manipur 8347 
Meghalaya 7027 
Mizoram 8573 
Nagaland 6831 
Punjab 14194 
Rajasthan 4260 
Sikkim 4696 
Telangana 14666 
Tripura 9574 
Uttar Pradesh 79173 
Uttarakhand 16303 
Grand Total 986667 
" 
3.15 On being asked by the Committee about details of funds allocation mainly 
Capital Expenditure made to the States/UTs under PMMSY and the Employment 
Generated thereby, the Department submitted the following reply: 

- 50 - 
"Under PMMSY, investment to the tune of Rs. 11029.36Crore has been made 
with a view to generate nearly 7,64,380 direct employment in the Fisheries 
sector. The details are as below:- 
Sl. 
No 
States Allocated 5 year 
Investment under 
PMMSY 
Investment 
approved 
(till date) 
Central 
share 
Expected 
Direct 
Employment 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv)   (v) 
1 Andaman & Nicobar  218 30 15 918 
2 Andhra Pradesh 1955  2119 545 80954 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 112  90 64 1542 
4 Assam 544  326 164 8923 
5 Bihar 1390  301 95 17418 
6 Chhattisgarh 555  364 111 56322 
7 Daman & Diu  47  6 4 97 
8 Delhi  117  5 3 121 
9 Goa 339  94 40 1823 
10 Gujarat 908  737 222 50514 
11 Haryana 313  283 90 9815 
12 Himachal Pradesh  199  98 47 5889 
13 Jammu & Kashmir 226  89 48 1597 
14 Jharkhand 475  308 102 14291 
15 Karnataka 725  734 225 34118 
16 Kerala 967  468 156 13153 
17 Ladakh 47  15 9 142 
18 Lakshadweep  198  45 31 3378 
19 Madhya Pradesh 751  497 155 25295 
20 Maharashtra 892  510 191 39916 
21 Manipur  156  83 41 3159 
22 Meghalaya  137  70 39 2688 
23 Mizoram 64  86 48 17430 
24 Nagaland 88  68 39 3650 
25 Odisha 1110  602 214 24450 
26 Puducherry 218  77 45 4600 
27 Punjab 187  142 38 1775 
28 Rajasthan 182  43 15 1164 
29 Sikkim 52  47 28 926 
30 Tamil Nadu 1565  445 155 21403 
31 Telangana 489  147 42 278150 
32 Tripura 178  96 48 16813 
33 Uttar Pradesh  1090  792 247 17388 
34 Uttarakhand 216  163 81 876 
35 West Bengal 1573  66 21 3686 
36 Chandigarh  47  0 0 0 
  Sub-total  18330 10046 3417 764384 
37 Central Sector 1720  983 591   
  Total 20050 11029 4009   
"  

- 51 - 
3.16 Regarding the details of funds allocated under PMMSY since 2020-21 to all the 
Beneficiary Oriented Activities to General/SC/ST/Women categories of all States/UT 
and North Eastern Region, the Department submitted the following reply: 
"PMMSY supports various beneficiary-oriented activities for the beneficiary 
different categories viz., General, SC, ST and women. Further, considering the 
fish production, fishers’ population, State budgetary support to fisheries Sector 
etc., State-wise overall investment targets under PMMSY have been conveyed 
to the all State/UTs including NER and no separate allocation of funds is done 
for beneficiary-oriented activity-wise and category-wise. Various beneficiary-
oriented activities to different categories such as General, SC, ST and women in 
all States/UT and North Eastern are sanctioned based on the viable projects 
received from the States/UTs and accordingly category-wise funds for the 
various activities are sanctioned. Since inception of PMMSY, beneficiary-
oriented activities with total outlay of Rs. 10223.45 crore have been sanctioned 
in all States/UTs to the beneficiaries including Rs.6764.71crore, Rs1015.68 
crore, Rs.790.49croreand Rs.1652.55 crore  for beneficiaries from General, SC, 
ST and women respectively. In so far as NER is concerned, beneficiary oriented 
activities with total outlay of Rs. 852.00 crore have been sanctioned including  
Rs. 219.62 crore , Rs.91.45crore, Rs. 387.83 crore  and Rs153.09 crore for 
beneficiaries from General, SC, ST and women respectively."  
 
 
C. Employment Generation in Fisheries Sector 
  
3.17 Fisheries Sector is the source of livelihood for a large section of economically 
backward population of the Country, especially in the coastal areas. It is also a foreign 
exchange earner.  The task of estimating employment in fisheries and aquaculture is 
complex, due to the extensive number of pre-harvest, harvest and post-harvest 
activities associated with this sector. Jobs range from the production and sale of inputs 
(vessels, fishing gear, bait, etc.) to farming and harvesting, processing, marketing and 
distribution of fish. Fishing and aquaculture operations can be informal and small-scale 
as well as highly organized and industrial in nature.     
 
 
 
3.18 According to Department of Fisheries, quantifying the employment potential of 
the fisheries sector is a complex task as fish is a natural resource and its availability, 
demand and price realization is highly dependent on multiple compounding factors 
such as environment market dynamics, climate change (which results in shifts of the 
distribution range of marine species), changes in productivity, etc. Moreover, 
employment in the fisheries sector also depends upon whether there is regulated open 

- 52 - 
access or quota-based regime or a fusion of both.    Notwithstanding the above factors, 
Fisheries Sector offers vibrant employment opportunities in large scale integrated 
projects, fishing harbours, fish landing centres, off shore fishing activities, mariculture 
including open sea cage culture and seaweed cultivation, fish feed plants, cold chains/ 
refrigerated warehouses/ice plants, processing units, fish markets,  commercial units of 
re-circulatory aquaculture system, etc. Further, employment potential exists in the 
development and creation of quality seed and feed mills, technology incubation and 
infusion centers, hatcheries and germ-plasm centers, quarantine facilities, aqua parks 
and Fish Farmer Producer Organizations (FFPOs) 
 
3.19 The Committee desired to know the details of estimated level of employment 
generation by Fisheries Sector in the country on the basis of GVA contribution by this 
Sector and the relation between these two factors.  The Department of Fisheries, in this 
regard furnished the following information:- 
"The Fisheries sector plays an important role in the national economy and the 
share of Fisheries sector in the total Gross Value Added (GVA)  at Current Basic 
Prices, in 2021-2022, is projected at Rs. 2,64,484 Crore that constitutes about 
1.24 Percent of the total national GVA. Resultantly, Employment generated  in 
the Fisheries Sector in India from 2020-21 to 2022-23  are as under:  
S. No. Year Employment Generated 
i 2020-21 687522 
ii 2021-22 218491 
iii 2022-23 221811 
          Total 1127824 
 
The GVA (Gross Value Added) proportionately increases or decreases the 
employment." 
 
 
 
3.20 The Committee desired to know details of the total employment generated 
through Fisheries Sector (both capture and culture fisheries) in various direct and 
indirect fishing related activities and also details of data comparing Marine and Inland 
Fisheries.  The Department in its reply furnished the following information:- 
"The details of State wise employment estimated to be generated through 
Fisheries Sector (both capture and culture fisheries) in various direct and 
indirect fishing related activities for the last five years are furnished below:  

- 53 - 
Sl. 
No Component Head 
Employment Generated in the last 5 years  
(Including Current year) 
Direct 
employment 
opportunity 
Indirect 
Employment 
opportunity 
Total 
Estimated 
Employment 
Generated 
A. Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
1 Grow Out Aquaculture and 
Production Related components 
174441 523323 697764 
2 Pre-harvest Services 697311  2084430 2781741 
3 Post harvest Infrastructure and 
Marketing 
41048 123144 164192 
4 Ornamental Fisheries 3250  9750 13000 
5 Deep Sea Fisheries and MCS 50697  152091 202788 
  Total 966747 2892738 3859485 
 B. Fisheries Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) 
1 Fishing Harbours Fish Landing 
Centres 
46032 138096 184128 
2 Cold Chain Facilities and Marketing 244  732 976 
3 Aquaculture and support services 475  1425 1900 
4 Fish Processing Units 725  2175 2900 
  Total 47476 142428 189904 
 C. Blue Revolution 
1  Grow-out/ Actual Aquaculture  265655  796965 1062620 
2 
 Support Services (Pre-harvest 
operations) 39154 117462 156616 
3 
 Post-Harvest Infrastructure – cold 
chain for fisheries including 
marketing facilities 
22563 67689 90252 
4  Fisheries Infrastructure projects 36050  108150 144200 
  Total 363422 1090266 1453688 
Grand Total (A + B + C) 1377645 4125432 5503077 
A comparison of the employment generated in the Inland as well as Marine 
sector during the last five years is furnished below: 
SL. No Scheme Inland Sector Marine Sector  
1 PMMSY 1704424 467033 
2 FIDF 1900 185104 
3 BR 167959 172900 
Total 1874283  825037 
 
3.21 The Committee desired to know the comparative data with respect to the 
employment generated (direct/indirect) through Inland and Marine Fisheries, the 
Department in its reply stated:- 
"Under PMMSY, since FY 2020-21 till date, creation of 9.7 lakh direct 
employment has been estimated along with the indirect employment of 29.1 

- 54 - 
lakh. The afore said bifurcation of the data is not maintained at the Department 
of Fisheries hence all States/ UTs vide letter no.J-1203135/22/2020-Fy dated 
25th November 2022 have been requested to provide the information regarding 
the contribution of Marine and Inland fisheries separately in Employment 
Generation and Revenue Earnings for each of the last five years through 
Fisheries Sector. Further, the comparative data stating the employment 
generated (direct/indirect) through Inland and Marine Fisheries separately for 
each of last five years has also been requested from States/UTs at the earliest." 
 
D. Revenue Earning Potential in Fisheries Sector 
3.22 Fisheries Sector has emerged as a sunrise sector and has been an important 
sector that provides food, nutrition, employment, income and livelihood in India. 
Transformation of the Fisheries sector from traditional to commercial scale has led to 
an increase in fish production from 0.75MMT in 1950-51 to 16.25 MMT during 2020. 
(Last Sub-para of Para-2,2 of  AR 2022-23l)  Fish and fisheries products are among the most 
traded food commodities in the World.  (Para-5.1 of AR-2022-23). 
 
3.23 According to Department of Fisheries, States will develop comprehensive 
leasing and licensing policy for all public water bodies by balancing competing 
objectives of resource development, livelihoods, welfare and revenue generation, etc. , 
with due priority to local fishing communities and their cooperatives, fisheries 
professionals / trained entrepreneurs while respective agencies may continue to retain 
trusteeship / custodial rights of these resources.  The minimum lease period in the 
range of 7-10 years with periodic review and the minimum leasue value will be 
determined on scientific principles, equity and long-term sustainable resource 
utilization.  A part of revenue obtained will be mandatorily used for development of 
fisheries in that entity. 
 
   
3.24 On being asked about the measures undertaken/envisaged by the Department 
to boost the Revenue Earning potential of Fisheries Sector and whether the 
Department identified any specific areas to focus on so as to enhance the revenue 
generation through fisheries, the Department stated:-  
"While the state wise details regarding revenue generation through fisheries for 
the last five years is being collected, the Department has taken various steps to 
boost the Revenue Earning potential Fisheries Sector. Region specific strategies 

- 55 - 
and initiatives entail increasing fish production and productivity through 
initiatives such as establishment of hatcheries, Construction of rearing and 
grow-out ponds, Re-circulatory Aquaculture Systems, Biofloc, cage culture, pen 
culture etc along with reduction in post-harvest loses through initiatives such as 
establishment of cold chain, logistics and transport support, expansion of 
markets etc. The above activities are supplemented by disease management 
and risk reduction through establishment of disease diagnostic and quality 
testing labs and mobile labs/clinics and availability of economical and accessible 
credit through Kisan Credit card and boosting export earnings. Further, 
initiatives undertaken under key focus areas of establishment of artificial reef, 
sea ranching and stocking of rivers and reservoirs in inland fisheries are 
expected to stabilise incomes for small fishermen and marginalised 
communities. 
Further the expected output value for States/UTs in 5 years (2024-25) are 
increasing fish production to 22 MMT, domestic fish consumption to 12 
kg/capita, productivity to 5 tonnes/Ha, employment generation of 55 lakhs while 
doubling export earning to Rs 1 lakh Crore and reducing post-harvest losses to 
10%." 
 
3.25 The Committee desired to know the contribution of Fisheries Sector in the 
overall Revenue Earnings during the years 2020-22 and the reasons for the drastic 
decrease in the employment generated in the year 2021-22 as compared to 2020-21. 
The Department in its reply submitted:- 
"With the fish production reaching 16.2 MMT (FY 21-22) and the marine exports 
reaching an all-time high of Rs 57,586.48 Crore, the fisheries sector contributes 
to1.29% of the overall Gross Value Added (GVA) during 2020-21. The sector 
has been key in stimulating growth for both of fisheries and allied sectors directly 
and indirectly contributing to the National GVA. 
Fisheries sector occupies an important place in the socio- economic 
development of the country as it provides livelihood for a large section of 
economically backward population of the country. Under PMMSY, since FY 
2020-21 till date, creation of99 9.7 lakh direct employment has been estimated 
along with the indirect employment of 29.1 lakh. 
The decrease in livelihood indicates that the sector is moving towards maturity 
for accomplishing big budget-long term-impactful projects. It must be highlighted 
that due to COVID restrictions, in FY 2020-21 the scheme sanctions revolved 
around smaller activities while as the restrictions were relaxed bigger and long-
term projects such as construction of ponds, hatcheries etc were approved that 
reduced pace of livelihood generation but ensures sustainable development of 
the sector" 
 

- 56 - 
 
3.26 Doubling Fishers and Fish Farmers incomes has been one of the objectives of 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), the Committee desired to know 
details regarding the contribution of the Scheme in doubling of farmer’s income since 
its inception in the year 2020-21. The Department submitted the following reply: 
"Since the inception of Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada (PMMSY), multiple 
strides have been made for providing livelihood and employment opportunities 
to the fish folk community. Such efforts are being made for overall enhancement 
in income levels so as to create an impact and meeting one of the primary 
objectives of PMMSY of ‘doubling farmers’ income’. 
(i) It is estimated that the sector-wise activities and projects approved since 
inception (till date) is expected to create about 9.70 lakh direct employment 
and over 29.10 lakh indirect employment through uptake of fisheries 
activities. 
(ii) In line with the above, PMMSY offers subsidy on more than 100 
components for the benefit of the fishers and fish farmers. So far, a total 
investment of Rs. 2646.98crorehas been done in the inland fisheries for 
sanctioning 14,253 ha of pond area, 2,766 Bio-floc, 4997 RAS (Re-
circulatory Aquaculture System), 21,284 cages, 509 fish hatcheries, 4 
scampi hatcheries, 12 brood banks. While in the marine sector, 376 deep 
sea fishing vessel, 4,250 Bio-toilets in mechanized fishing vessels, 1,556 
sea cages, 5 small marine finfish hatcheries and 5 large marine finfish 
hatcheries, 1,325 ha of pond area brought under brackish water 
aquaculture, and 13 brackish water hatcheries have been approved as per 
the proposals received under PMMSY for beneficiary and non-beneficiary 
oriented components. 
(iii) Important and large-scale activities approved such as 2489 Sagar Mitras, 3 
wholesale markets, 22 integrated development of reservoirs, 12 integrated 
modern fish landing centres, Integrated Modern Coastal Fishing Villages, 1 
Integrated Aquapark have opened new employment avenues hence 
increased employment and benefitting the fisher folk community through 
regular and increased income levels. As a result, fisheries sector’s 
contribution to the National GVA has almost doubled. Fisheries sector 
contribution to the agriculture GVA and national GVA was 4.5% and 0.84%, 
respectively in 2011-12 that has increased to 6.7% and 1.09%, respectively 
in 2020-21." 
 
3.27 The Committee desired to know the State/UT wise information regarding the 
contribution of Marine and Inland fisheries in Employment Generation and Revenue 
Earnings as on March 2022. The Department, in its reply, stated:- 

- 57 - 
"The fisheries sector has been expected to generate a total of 33.76 lakh 
employments since financial year 2020-21 till date under Pradhan Mantri                
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). The employment generation for Marine           
and Inland fisheries are not available hence the states/UTs have been 
requested for the data vide letter no. J-1203135/22/2020-Fy dated 25th 
November 2022." 
 
E. Kisan Credit Card & Insurance Coverage 
3.28 The Government of India extended the facility of Kisan Credit Card (KCC) to 
fisheries in 2018-19 and animal husbandry farmers to help them meet their working 
capital needs. The KCC facility is helping the fisheries and animal husbandry farmers 
to meet their short-term credit requirements for rearing animals, poultry birds, fish, 
shrimp and other aquatic animals. (Extracts of Para3.3 of AR 2021-22)   The State/UT wise 
details of people getting livelihood & employment from the Inland & Marine Fisheries 
Sector, as furnished by the Department of Fisheries, are at Annexure I and II 
respectively. At present, 1.66 lakh fishers and fish farmers have been provided KCC 
facility and details of the same are at Annexure III." 
 
3.29 When asked by the Committee about the measures taken by the Department to 
provide Institutional Finance to Fishers, Fish Farmers and also facilitate the penetration 
of Kisan Credit Card within the Fishing Community and the status of the development 
of Digital Portal by the Department along with SIDBI to enhance the issuance/coverage 
of KCC amongst Fishermen, the Department submitted the following:- 
 
"The various measures taken by Department of Fisheries to provide institutional 
finance to fishers, fish farmers and also to facilitate the penetration of Kisan 
Credit Card (KCC) within the fisher communities are as below: 
(a) Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) along with all the States /UTs and 
State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) have been working to sensitize  
and disseminate information amongst the fishers and fish farmers about 
KCC through special camps and other modes of communications.  
 
(b) Subsequently, the Hon'ble Finance Minister announced Rs. 2 lakh Crore 
concessional credit boost to Rs. 2.5 Crore farmers including fishers & fish 
farmers under Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Scheme as a part of Aatmanirbhar 
Bharat package. Thus, Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) in 
collaboration with all the States/UTs took up a special drive from 10thJune 
to 10th October, 2020 in order to saturate the issuance of KCC to fishers 
and fish farmers.  

- 58 - 
 
(c) Followed by this, a "Nationwide Fishery KCC campaign" was launched on 
15th November 2021 by Hon’ble Minister of Fisheries, MoFAH&D to ensure 
complete stakeholder coverage. The campaign period was from 
15thNovember 2021 to 31st July 2022. 
 
(d) Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) is continuously working with 
States/UTs to ensure (i) sourcing of the applications of fishers and fish 
farmers along with all relevant documents, (ii) to put in place the Scale of 
Finance (SoF) for deciding the working capital limit for fisheries related 
activities. 
 
(e) “Nationwide Fishery KCC” Campaign being held from 15th September 2022 
and continue till 15th March 2023. This time the KCC Camps will be held at 
Panchayat Level also to provide the KCC benefits to all the eligible 
beneficiaries. 
 
(f) Modification of RBI circulars for the benefit of Fish farmers. 
 
(g) Visiting Sample Campaigns/SLBC Meetings under “Nationwide Fishery 
KCC” Campaign. 
 
(h) Mass Awareness initiatives through Social Media platform. 
 
Department of Fisheries (MoFAH&D) had initiated the work of a Digital Portal 
along with SIDBI. However, the Nodal Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 
Govt of India has informed that a combined Digital Portal has been developed to 
track and monitor the KCC applications and to track the payment of interest 
subvention and that it is in the final stage. The same will be utilized by this 
Department for monitoring the progress of KCC." 
  

- 59 - 
 
3.30 The matter relating to Concession Credit under the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
was raised by Committee during their  sitting held on 22.11.2023 for taking oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Department of Fisheries on the subject 
'Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of Fisheries Sector'.  In this 
regard, Secretary, Department of Fisheries, while responding to queries of the 
Committee stated as under : 
 “KCC right now is given at seven Percent and there is a three Percent interest 
subvention in terms of repayment. Some States are giving another 4 Percent 
making the rate of interest zero. We have written to other States also whether 
they can follow this so that it can be interest free loan that can be repaid 
promptly within time."     
 
3.31 The Committee desired to know the State/UT-wise and year-wise financial and 
physical targets and achievements in respect of the KCC since 2018-19, till 2021-22 
and also the reasons for pendency of applications with banks for issuance of Kisan 
Credit Cards to Fishers. The Department in its reply submitted the following: 
 
"For the first time, separate Working capital requirements and term loan targets 
have been given by the Department of Financial Services, earlier it was a 
combined target for agri & allied sector.  The details are given below: 
 (Rs in Crore) 
S.N. Activity Working 
Capital 
Term 
Loan 
Total 
1 Dairy 21,546  50,274 71,820 
2 Poultry 5,670  13,230 18,900 
3 Sheep Goat, Piggery &Animal 
Husbandry-others 
4,158 9,702 13,860 
4 Fisheries 6,426  14,994 21,420 
Total 37,800 88,200 1,26,000 
 
(i) The state-wise targets achieved against under the scheme along with the 
number of pending applications are as below:  
Status of Progress of Issuance of KCC for Fisheries Sector as on 28.10.2022 
S.N. State Name Number of Applications 
Sanctioned Pending 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 3,906 - 
2 Andhra Pradesh 11,570 - 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 11   
4 Assam 4,291 264 
5 Bihar 625 106 
6 Chandigarh - - 
7 Chhattisgarh 1,217 206 
8 Dadra And Nagar Haveli 2 - 

- 60 - 
Status of Progress of Issuance of KCC for Fisheries Sector as on 28.10.2022 
S.N. State Name Number of Applications 
Sanctioned Pending 
9 Daman And Diu 308 - 
10 Delhi - - 
11 Goa 376 - 
12 Gujarat 9,748 104 
13 Haryana 127 33 
14 Himachal Pradesh 669 7 
15 Jammu And Kashmir 756 12 
16 Jharkhand 2,074 42 
17 Karnataka 5,178 1,465 
18 Kerala 4,993 15 
19 Ladakh 130 - 
20 Lakshadweep 12 - 
21 Madhya Pradesh 15,941 2,703 
22 Maharashtra 8,410 171 
23 Manipur 205 2 
24 Meghalaya 161 - 
25 Mizoram 41 - 
26 Nagaland 5 - 
27 Odisha 1,189 89 
28 Puducherry Ut 599 - 
29 Punjab 190 9 
30 Rajasthan 2,515 4 
31 Sikkim 45   
32 Tamil Nadu 8,701 171 
33 Telangana 4,024 2 
34 Tripura 10,770 24 
35 Uttar Pradesh 7,842 390 
36 Uttarakhand 330 195 
37 West Bengal 6,115 45 
  Total 1,13,076 6,059 
Source : Department of Financial Services 
 
(ii) The main reasons for pendency of the KCC applications are listed below:  
 
(a) Applicant has already having KCC/Availed loan/Applicant in default 
(NPA) 
(b) Application received for fish vending &marketing are not included as 
a listed activity under KCC 
(c) Applicant not traceable/unwilling to avail KCC 
(d) Applicant unaware about the submission of application in his/her 
name 
(e) Wrong/ incomplete information furnished"  
 
 
***  

- 61 - 
PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
Action Plan for Utilization of Available Resources in Fisheries Sector 
 
1. The Committee note that Marine Resources of the country comprise an 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of 2.02 Million Sq. Kms, a Continental Shelf area 
of 0.53 Million Sq. Kms and a Coastline of 8,118 Kms.  The inland resources 
comprise of 0.27 Million Kms of rivers and canals, 1.2 million ha floodplain lakes, 
2.45 Million Ha of Ponds and Tanks and 3.15 Million Ha of Reservoirs.  Inland 
Fisheries presently have a share of 75 Percent in total Fish Production of the 
country.   In 2018, total fisheries potential of India was estimated at 22.31 MMT 
consisting of the Marine Fisheries potential at 5.31 MMT and the Inland Fisheries 
potential at 17 MMT.  During 2021-22, 77 Percent of Marine Fisheries potential 
and 71 Percent of the Inland Fisheries potential have been harnessed.  During 
the financial year 2022-23, out of the estimated total Fish Production of 16.24 
Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) the contribution of Inland sector was 12.12 MMT and 
that of marine sector was 4.13 MMT.   The full potential of the Fisheries Sector is 
yet to be realized due to critical gaps in production inputs, investment, 
infrastructure, value addition, technological know-how and skilled manpower.  
The Committee therefore, recommend that the Government should prepare an 
action plan for optimal utilization of its Inland and Marine resources especially 
Deep-sea fishing Resources in a time bound manner.  The Committee feel that 
New Scheme Components may be formulated under the Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) and the Prime Minister 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) for the purpose.  The Committee would like a 
to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  

- 62 - 
Conservation Measures for Sustainable Production in Fisheries Sector  
 
2. The Committee note that Fisheries is a fast-growing Sector in India, which 
provides nutrition and food security to a large population of the country besides 
providing livelihood, income and employment to more than 2.80 Crore people.  
However, the Fisheries Sector has the risk of losing its sustainable production in 
the long run unless necessary conservation measures are taken.  Factors such 
as Overfishing, Harmful fishing practices, Pollution, Disease outbreak, 
Destruction of habitat, Climate change, etc. would adversely affect the Fisheries 
Resources of the country.  Conservation and Resource enhancement measures 
are essential to ensure aquatic bio-diversity and sustainability in Fisheries 
Sector.  Against this backdrop, the Committee appreciate that the Government 
has banned Bull-trawling and use of Artificial Lights / LED Light for fishing.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department needs to taken proactive 
conservation measures to protect sustainability of fishery resources and 
Fisheries Sector of the country.  The Committee, in particular, desire that 
breeding and propagation of all important fish species of the country be ensured 
by suitably developing hatchery infrastructure of Fisheries Sector of the country.   
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action in the matter. 
 
Development of Artificial Reefs 
 
3. The Committee note that the Department of Fisheries has formulated a 
plan for inclusion of “Promotion of sustainable fisheries and livelihoods through 
Artificial Reefs and Sea Ranching” as a sub activity under the “Integrated 
Modern Coastal Fishing Villages” (IMCFV) to rebuild fish stocks and promote 
sustainability in inshore/coastal fisheries and protect the livelihood of dependent 
fisher folks.  However, it is observed that only from the States of Tamil Nadu and 

- 63 - 
Odisha, Detailed Project Report (DPR) has been received for setting up of 
Artificial Reefs in the fishing villages, which are selected for proposed 
development of Artificial Reefs under PMMSY. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Department should take necessary measures and see that 
proposals are received from all the States for development of Artificial Reefs. 
 
Rural Fishers and  Preservation of Indigenous Breeds 
 
4. The Committee understand that the Indigenous Breeds of fishes form a 
major component for providing nutrition to the Rural Fishers and the 
preservation of such Indigenous Breeds is very important for the economic and 
nutritional well being of the Rural Fishers. The Committee appreciate that for 
conserving Indigenous Breeds the Department of Fisheries encourages River 
Ranching under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana. However, the 
Committee have been informed that the commercial breeding, propogation and 
culture expansion of the fish species like Magur, Singhi, Pabda and Koi which 
have medicinal properties has been low due lack of adequate Hatchery 
Infrastructure and therefore recommend that the Department should strive 
towards establishing necessary Hatchery Infrastructure required for all important 
indigenous species of the country. 
 
Promotion of  Deep-sea Fishing towards Optimal Utilization of Resources  
 
5. The Committee note that the country has an estimated harvestable marine 
fisheries potential of 5.31 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) which include the Deep-
sea resources of 3.30 MMT in its Exclusive Economic Zone.  The Deep-sea 
Resources have further harvestable potential in the Areas Beyond National 
Jurisdiction (ABNJ).  The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the 
Government to promote Deep-sea fishing through different Scheme components 

- 64 - 
of the Central Sector Scheme on Blue Revolution and the Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana, hold the view that the Department should strive hard to fully 
utilize the Deep-sea resources of the country.  Proper utilization of available 
resources besides generating additional employment opportunities would also 
bring proportionate revenues for the States.  The Committee also appreciate the 
efforts taken by the Department in modernising the Deep Sea Fishing Vessels 
and providing on board training to traditional fishermen for enhancing their skills 
and capabilities and modernising of Fishing Harbors and recommend that the 
Department should strive harder to see that these initiatives bear fruit in a target 
oriented and time bound manner so that large deep sea long liners equipped 
with adequate carrying capacity and On-board Post Harvest Handling Facilities 
are commissioned to harness the deep sea resources of the Country to the 
fullest. 
 
Need for a Separate Research Council for Fisheries Sector  
 
6. The Committee are happy to note that India has rich and diverse fisheries 
resources ranging from deep seas to lakes, ponds, rivers and more than 10 
Percent of the global biodiversity in terms of fish and shellfish species.   
Acknowledging the potential of Fisheries Sector of the country, the Government 
of India created a separate Department of Fisheries in February, 2019 to 
supplement the efforts of States and Union Territories and to provide sustained 
and focussed attention towards development of Fisheries Sector of the country.  
The Fisheries Sector contributes around 6.72% to Agriculture Gross Value 
Added (GVA) and 1.24 to National GVA in 2021-22 and is a major employment 
generator in direct as well as allied fishery activities.  The Fisheries Sector of the 
country possesses a huge untapped potential. At present, the national level 

- 65 - 
research activities in Fisheries Sector are undertaken under the aegis of Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).  The Committee, taking into account the 
these factors, recommend that a separate Research Council for Fishery Sector 
namely Indian Council for Fishery and Aquaculture Research under the 
Department of Fisheries be constituted as it would not only facilitate focussed 
and in-depth research in the Sector but also address the challenges faced by the 
Sector. 
 
Fish Meal Fish Oil Industries (FMFO) 
 
7. The Committee understand that sustainable fishing is imperative to the 
preservation of fish stocks and the survival of marine ecology and therefore for 
sustainable development of marine fisheries efforts should be taken to control 
the harvesting of juvenile fishes, which is also one of the reasons for the decline 
of many Fish Species including the Indian Oil Sardine and edible fishes. The 
Committee have been informed that the juvenile fish losses mainly occur when 
they are caught as Non-targeted Species in Trawls. The Committee understand 
that the practices such as Bull trawling and LED Fishing used by FMFO 
Industries are a major cause for such juvenile fish losses. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the Minimum Legal Mesh Size regulation as declared 
by the States like Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Goa to avoid 
juvenile and small fishes catch in Trawls also needs be implemented by other 
States and the Department should take active steps in pursuing all States/UTs to 
implements such regulations. Further, the Department should devise a foolproof 
mechanism in coordination with the States/UTs to stop the use of destructive 
and banned fishing practices like Bull Trawling and LED Fishing. 
 
Insurance Scheme for Dam Fishers 

- 66 - 
 
8. The Committee note that the Department of Fisheries, through National 
Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) is implementing Group Accident Insurance 
Scheme (GAIS) for Fishers under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
since 26.07.2021.   Fishers involved in fishing at reservoirs/dams are also eligible 
to insure their lives against heavy rainfall/ natural disaster under this Scheme 
through the respective State fisheries Departments/Union Territories. With 
regard to Dam Fishers, the Committee have been apprised that during heavy 
rainfall when the gates of the Dams are opened, the seeds planted by the Fishers 
in these Dams also gets washed away causing heavy losses to them and 
therefore recommend that the Department should design a Scheme for Dam 
Fishers, similar to crop insurance given under Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana 
to extend them insurance coverage against losses during heavy rainfall. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Cage Culture in Reservoirs 
 
9. The Committee have been informed that there are about 5701 large dams 
in the country and many medium and small reservoirs with coverage of about 32 
Lakh Hectares. These reservoirs which are also called as ‘sleeping giants’ if 
harnessed properly have the capacity to enhance the fish production capacity of 
the country manifold. The Committee therefore recommend that the Department 
should take concrete steps to promote Cage Culture in these reservoirs so as to 
increase the Fish production capacity of the Country.  
 
  

- 67 - 
Promotion of Fish Production and Consumption 
 
10. The Committee have been informed that India is the Third Largest Fish 
Producing Country in the world and accounts for 7.96 Percent of the Global 
Production.  The total Fish Production during FY 2022-23 was estimated at 16.25 
Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) with a contribution of 12.12 MMT from Inland sector 
and 4.13 MMT from Marine sector.  The Fisheries Sector of India has shown an 
impressive growth rate of 9.03% (Constant Price 2011-12) during 2015-16 to  
2020-21.  The share of Fisheries Sector in the total Gross Value Added (GVA) was 
0.84% in 2011-12 and the same increased to 1.09% in 2020-21.  The Per capita 
Fish Consumption in India was 5 to 6 Kg as compared to 24 Kg in Japan.  The 
Committee also take note that world-wide, the trade in frozen-fish constitutes 
80% of trade in fish & fish-products, whereas it negligible in India.  Further, the 
Department has undertaken a study through National Council of Applied 
Economic Research (NCAER) to find out the State-wise and major species-wise 
demand supply gap in the country so as to formulate region specific strategies 
to increase market infrastructure, supply and consumption.  Fish is a cheap 
source of protein and also possesses certain medicinal value and in addition it 
also has necessary potential for food-security for the country.  Taking into 
account the aforesaid factors, the Committee recommend that the Department 
shall expeditiously find out the demand and supply gap in Fish and Fish-
products in the country and take appropriate measures to promote fish 
consumption and production of fish and fish-products including frozen-fish in 
the country.   The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this 
regard. 
 
  

- 68 - 
Promotion of New Technologies in Fish Production    
 
11. The Committee note that at present the contribution of Freshwater 
Fisheries and Marine Fisheries in India’s Fish Production is about  75% : 25% 
respectively and the total fish production during FY 2022-23 was estimated at 
16.25 MMT. Adoption of new and innovative production technologies, 
management and utilization of underutilized water bodies, and deployment of 
effective marketing strategies are very essential to achieve the targeted increase 
in fish-production.  The Government is implementing the Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and the Scheme of Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Development Fund (FIDF) to address critical gaps in fish production and 
productivity, quality, technology, post-harvest infrastructure, strengthening of 
value chain, enhancement of fisheries export, establishment of robust fisheries 
management framework, fishers’ welfare, etc.   Under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana, a target to increase fish production to 22 MMT by the year 2025 
has been set.  The Committee also taken note that Biofloc Technology (BFT) is 
one of the highly productive, environment friendly aquaculture techniques which 
reduces water use, land use, spread of disease, and also reduces the pressure 
on capture fisheries. The Committee therefore recommend that the Department 
should review the progress in the implementation of PMMSY and take further 
necessary steps to increase production through popularization of new 
innovative technologies including like Biofloc Technology in the Fisheries Sector 
of the country. 
 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) 
 
12. The Committee have been informed that certain Activities/Projects 
undertaken under Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund 

- 69 - 
(FIDF) such as Aquaculture, Fishing Harbours, Fish Landing Centres, Cold 
Storages, pre-harvest services and post harvest Infrastructure are labour 
intensive activities and in turn generate a lot of direct and indirect employment 
opportunities. The Committee have also been informed that the sanction rate 
under FIDF is low since most of the Projects that have been approved are Big 
Projects and further the participation of private sector in FIDF Scheme is less 
because only interest subvention was provided to them. The Committee 
acknowledges that FIDF is a demand driven Scheme, however, at the same time, 
The Committee also understand that the Projects that are been funded under 
FIDF play a vital role in generating employment, be it direct or indirect.  The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the Department should take effective 
measures so as to encourage participation of private players from all the 
States/UTs in the FIDF Scheme in setting up of Projects, which would, in turn, 
boost both the employment and revenue generation.  The Department, therefore, 
should also take measures to ease out the process of sanctioning approval to 
such Projects. 
 
Post-Harvest Infrastructure Development in Fisheries Sector  
 
13. The Committee note that currently the Post-Harvest Losses (PHL) in 
Fisheries Sector are reported to be 20-25% and one of the Objectives of the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) is to bring down these losses 
to 10% by the year 2024-25.   However, the Department has not undertaken any 
comprehensive study in the last five years to assess the Percentage of PHL in 
Fisheries Sector and therefore the Committee recommend that the Department 
should undertake a comprehensive study to compute these losses and find ways 

- 70 - 
to decrease these losses by strengthening the infrastructure of Fishing Harbors 
and Fish Landing Centres and also by modernising them. 
 
Import in Fisheries Sector 
 
14. The Committee have been informed that there are certain fish varieties 
such as Haddock, Cod, Flat-Fish, Salmon, Pallock, Argentinean Red Shrimp, 
Norway Lobster which are found only in Temperate countries and certain 
varieties are being imported for supply to Hotel, Restaurants and Cafes and as 
such imports of these Fish varieties cannot be avoided.  The Committee have 
also been informed that L. Vannamei Shrimp constitutes almost 90 to 95 percent 
of our exports, however, the Mother Stock of L. Vannamei Shrimp is imported.  In 
this regard, the Committee recommend that urgent necessary action be taken to 
produce MOther Stock of L. Vannamei Shrimp in the Country thereby reducing 
the import dependency.  The Committee further note that to reduce this single 
species dependency on L. Vannamei  and species diversification two options are 
available i.e. P. Modonon and P. Indicus and accordingly recommend that the 
Department should make sure that the Genetic improvement Program by the 
Central Institute of Brackish water Aquaculture (CIBA) for development of P. 
Indicus (an indigenous Shrimp) and the Nucleus Breeding Centre (NBC) Project 
of Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) located at Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands for development of P. Monodon are fast tracked and 
completed in a time bound manner so that the Country moves up the ladder in 
achieving self-sufficiency by reducing import of Shrimp Brood Stocks and 
thereby living true to the sprit of the Atma Nirbhar Bharat. 
 
  

- 71 - 
Exports in Fisheries Sector 
 
15. The Committee understand that to achieve the export target set under the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY)  that is to double the export 
earnings to Rs. 1 lakh Crores by the year 2024-25, interventions in areas such as 
Shrimp productivity, post harvest infrastructure, improving certification and 
traceability and awareness of quality products are required.  The Committee   
appreciates the efforts taken by the Department for diversification of aquaculture 
species and Tilapia Fish in particular so as to increase its export by funding 
Tilapia Hatcheries and Tilapia Culture through Recirculation Aquaculture System 
(RAS), Cage culture and Pond Culture. Further, MPEDA- Rajiv Gandhi Centre for 
Aquaculture has also standardised the Hatchery and grow out farming 
technology of Genetically Improved Farmed Tilapia (GIFT).  In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that similar efforts and technological hand holding 
should be accorded to other Inland Fresh Water commercially important  Fish 
varieties such as Rohu, Catla, Magur, Vaam and Hilsa so that they contribute in 
achieving the targets set under the PMMSY.  The Committee note that Disease 
Management and Certification and Traceability are very important areas where 
intervention is needed so as to increase the export competitiveness of the 
Fisheries Sector and thus, a mechanism should be put in place which would 
make the Fish Farmers aware of the contents of the Aquaculture Inputs such as 
production booster used by them.  The Committee also recommend that the 
issues pertaining to Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) and Technical Barrier to 
Trade (TBT), which are hampering the exports to various countries need be 
addressed in a concrete manner and the Department should strive hard to 
overcome these issues. 
 

- 72 - 
Kisan Credit Card  
 
16. The Committee note that the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) facility was extended 
to Fisheries and Animal Husbandry Farmers in 2018-19 to help them meet their 
Working Capital needs.  The Rate of Interest on the Loans under KCC is 
presently 7% and 3% subvention is given by the Central Government in case of 
timely repayment by the Farmers.   However, some States are also giving another 
4% Subvention/Rebate from their own account to make the real rate of interest to 
Zero for the Farmers.  The Committee appreciate that separate Working Capital 
and Term Loan Targets for KCC have been accorded to the Fisheries Sector by 
the Department of Financial Services so as to improve the credit flow into the 
Sector.  The Committee further note that a large number of applications from 
Fishers Sector for KCC remain pending in many States/UTs.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that KCC be issued to all eligible persons without delay.  
The Committee also recommend that the Department should coordinate with all 
the States/UTs so as to explore the possibility of providing Interest Free Loans to 
Farmers under KCC as has been done by some States by extending another 4 
Percent of Interest Subvention/Rebate over and above the 3 Percent available, so 
that the interest rate under KCC becomes zero. 
 
Revenue Earning Potential of Fisheries Sector 
 
17. The Committee  note that  Inland Fisheries Sector is by and large, fully in 
the domain of State Governments, while Marine Sector is a shared responsibility 
between the Central and Coastal State Governments. According to Department 
of Fisheries, States will develop comprehensive Leasing and Licensing Policy for 
all Public Water Bodies by balancing competing objectives of resource 
development, livelihoods, welfare and revenue generation, etc. , with due priority 

- 73 - 
to local fishing communities and other stakeholders while respective agencies 
may continue to retain trusteeship/custodial rights of these resources.  The State 
wise details regarding revenue generation through fisheries are not readily 
available.  However, the Government has taken various steps to boost the 
Revenue Earning potential of the Fisheries Sector through steps taken for 
increasing fish production and productivity, reduction in post-harvest loses,  
disease management and risk reduction, establishment of artificial reefs,  
river/sea ranching and stocking of rivers and reservoirs.   The Fisheries Sector, 
which has been key in stimulating growth for both of Fisheries and Allied 
Sectors thereby directly and indirectly contributes to the National GVA.  A large 
section of people of the country are getting their livelihood and employment 
from Fisheries Sector.  Moreover, Fisheries Sector has now emerged as a 
sunrise sector and Fish and Fisheries Products are among the most traded food 
commodities in the World.   As such, this Sector possesses huge potential to 
contribute the much required revenues to the Government at different levels.   
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend for taking all necessary steps for 
the growth and development of Fisheries Sector of the country.   The Committee 
in particular recommend that the potential areas in Fisheries Sector of each 
State/UT be clearly identified and they should be duly encouraged and 
incentivized to ensure more capital investments and optimal utilization of 
Fisheries Resources in a Target-oriented manner and fixed time frame. 
 
  

- 74 - 
Employment Generation in Fisheries Sector 
 
18. The Committee note that the Fisheries Sector of the country is a fast-
growing sector in India, which besides providing income and employment to 
more than 2.80 Crore people also provides nutrition and food security to a large 
population of the country.  It is also growing as one of the important foreign 
exchange earner for the country.  The contribution of Fisheries Sector to Gross 
Value Added (GVA) at constant prices in 2022-23 has been estimated at 
Rs.1,37,716 crore.  Jobs in this Sector range from production and sale of inputs 
to fishing, fish-farming, harvesting, processing, marketing and distribution of 
fish. Fishing and aquaculture operations can be informal and small-scale as well 
as highly organized and industrial in nature.  Estimation of employment potential 
in Fisheries Sector quantitative terms is reportedly a complex task, as fish is a 
natural resource and its availability, demand and price realization is also highly 
dependent on multiple compounding factors such as environment market 
dynamics, climate change, changes in productivity, various regulations, quota-
based regime or a fusion of both etc.   However, in the last five years, the total 
employment generation under all Schemes of the Department is reportedly 
26,99,320.  
 Under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana, (PMMSY), total project 
cost worth of Rs 11,029.34 Crore have been approved and a total Investment of 
Rs.9866.67 Crore has been made since inception of the Scheme for various 
fisheries developmental activities with a view to generate nearly 7,64,380 direct 
employment in Fisheries Sector.  The Department plans to achieve an ambitious 
employment generation target of 55 Lakh by the year 2024-25 under PMMSY.  
The Committee appreciates the achievements made by the Department in the 
implementation of its various Schemes and Programmes, which has resulted in 

- 75 - 
generation of a substantial number of employment in the Fisheries Sector.  The 
Committee at the same time hold the view that the full potential of the Fisheries 
Sector yet remains to be realized in the Country.  The Committee, therefore,  
recommend that investments in Fisheries Sector, especially in the areas having 
the potential for enhancement of export, Post-harvest processing and import 
substitution, be increased to optimally utilize the resources available in this 
sector as it will bring about the necessary employment generation in this Sector.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this matter. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi             P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
06 February, 2024      Chairperson 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
             Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

- 76 - 
Annexure - I 
Component wise physical targets and their corresponding Achievements during the  
Financial Years - 2020-21 and 2021-22 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
Sl. 
No 
  
Components 
PMMSY year Targets Total Achievements  
(from inception till date)  
Physical Investment Physical 
(No.) 
Investment  GoI 
Share  
1 Establishment of  New Freshwater 
Finfish Hatcheries (Nos) 
320 8000.00 454 11115.00 3854.00 
2 Establishment of  New Freshwater 
Scampi Hatcheries (Nos) 
20 1000.00 4 200.00 69.00 
3 Construction of  New Rearing ponds 
(Ha) 
8100 56700.00 2970.7 20794.90 7007.33 
4 Construction of New Grow-out ponds 
(Ha) 
8100 56700.00 10892.6 77915.98 24974.30 
5 Inputs for fresh water Aquaculture 
including Composite fish culture, 
Scampi, Pangasius, Tilapia etc. (Ha) 
8100 32400.00 11134.12 44152.29 14462.99 
6 Establishment of  need based New 
Brackish Hatcheries(shell fish and fin 
fish) (Nos) 
55 2750.00 13 650.00 192.00 
7 Construction of New ponds for 
Brackish Water Aquaculture  
7300 58400.00 1325 10504.00 3058.56 
8 Construction of New ponds for Saline 
/Alkaline  areas  
3000 24000.00 1615 12600.00 3664.51 
9 Inputs for Brackish Water Aquaculture  7300 43800.00 1325 7950.00 2311.20 
10 Inputs for Saline /Alkaline  Water 
Aquaculture  
3000 18000.00 1465 10410.00 3595.66 
11 Stocking of Fingerling (FL) in 
Wetlands @2000FL/ha 
150000 9000.00 4971 149.13 55.53 
12 Stocking of Fingerlings in Reservoirs 
@1000FL/ha 
600000 18000.00 359605.39 12402.68 3826.47 
13 Establishment of  Small Marine Finfish 
Hatcheries  
17 8500.00 5 250.00 74.00 
14 Construction of large Marine Finfish 
Hatcheries   
5 1250.00 5 1250.00 390.00 
15 Marine Finfish Nurseries 100  1500.00 5 75.00 19.80 
16 Establishment of Open Sea cages 
(100-120 cubic meter volume) 
11000 55000.00 1556 7780.00 2105.40 
17 Establishment of Seaweed culture 
rafts including inputs   
354000 7080.00 54500 819.00 261.00 
18 Establishment of Seaweed culture with 
Monoline/tubenet Method including 
inputs  (one unit is approximately 
equal to 25 ropes of 25m length)  
354000 28320.00 63531 5082.48 1449.53 
19 Bivalve cultivation (mussels, clams, 
pearl etc.) 
25000 5000.00 320 63.60 23.25 
20 Establishment of  Trout Fish 
Hatcheries  
50 2500.00 26 1300.00 646.00 
21 Construction of Raceways  3000  9000.00 3131 9295.50 4401.03 
22 Inputs for Trout Rearing Units 3000  7500.00 3124 7810.00 3701.95 
23 Construction of New Ponds in 
Himalayan Region. 
500 5000.00 532.6 4440.80 2278.67 
24 Inputs for new Grow out ponds in 
Himalayan Region 
    312.6 1250.40 634.55 
25 Establishment of Medium RAS for cold 50 1000.00 22 360.00 163.60 

- 77 - 
Sl. 
No 
  
Components 
PMMSY year Targets Total Achievements  
(from inception till date)  
Physical Investment Physical 
(No.) 
Investment  GoI 
Share  
water fisheries  
26 Establishment of Large RAS for cold 
water fisheries  
20 1000.00 22 1100.00 551.00 
27 Input support for Integrated fish 
farming (paddy cum fish cultivation,   
livestock cum fish,  etc) 
2000 2000.00 2248.8 2248.80 1136.63 
28 Establishment of Cages in cold water 
regions 
1000 5000.00 0 0.00 0.00 
29 Backyard Ornamental fish Rearing unit 
(both Marine and Fresh water) 
1010 3030.00 1272 3816.00 1362.06 
30 Medium Scale Ornamental fish 
Rearing Unit (Marine and  Freshwater 
Fish) 
707 5656.00 313 2504.00 837.28 
31 Integrated Ornamental  fish unit  
(breeding and rearing for fresh water 
fish) 
404 10100.00 120 2802.00 913.00 
32 Integrated Ornamental  fish unit  
(breeding and rearing for marine fish) 
303 9090.00 3 90.00 25.20 
33 Establishment of Fresh water 
Ornamental Fish Brood Bank  
10 1000.00 2 200.00 48.00 
34 Promotion of Recreational Fisheries  Need 
Based/ 
DPR 
Need 
Based/ DPR 
71 3550.00 1503.00 
35 Establishment of large RAS (with 8 
tanks of minimum 90 m3/tank capacity 
40 ton/crop)/Biofloc (50 tanks of 4m 
dia and 1.5 high) culture system. 
550 27500.00 763 37760.00 12261.00 
36 Establishment of large Biofloc (50 
tanks of 4m dia and 1.5 high) culture 
system 
37 Establishment of Medium  RAS (with 6 
tank of minimum 30m3/tank capacity 
10 ton/crop)/Biofloc  culture system(25 
tanks of 4m dia and 1.5 high)  
770 19250.00 912 21882.00 7612.52 
38 Establishment of small RAS (with 1 
tank with 100m3 capacity/Biofloc (7 
tanks of 4m dia and 1.5 high)  culture 
system 
2000 8250.00 1994 33005.70 10695.60 
39 Establishment of small Biofloc (7 tanks 
of 4m dia and 1.5 high) culture system 
2000 2441 
40 Establishment of Backyard mini RAS 
units 
2200 1100.00 1603 801.50 245.49 
41 Installation of Cages in Reservoirs 20000 60000.00 18684 56052.00 18405.36 
42 Pen culture in open water bodies  2500  7500.00 301.7 905.10 329.03 
43 Post harvest and cold chain infrastructure         
44 Construction of Cold Storages/Ice 
Plants 10 tonne capacity 
242 36300.00 339 26744.00 8730.88 
45 Construction of Cold Storages/Ice 
Plants 20 tonne capacity 
46 Construction of Cold Storages/Ice 
Plants 30 tonne capacity 
47 Construction of Cold Storages/Ice 
Plants 50 tonne capacity 
48 Modernization of  Cold storage /Ice 
Plant  
174 8700.00 54 2700.00 762.00 
49 Refrigerated vehicles 600  15000.00 185 4625.00 1549.00 

- 78 - 
Sl. 
No 
  
Components 
PMMSY year Targets Total Achievements  
(from inception till date)  
Physical Investment Physical 
(No.) 
Investment  GoI 
Share  
50 Insulated vehicles 1100  22000.00 784 15750.00 4838.20 
51 Live fish vending Centres 500  2200.00 601 12020.00 3570.80 
52 Motor cycle with Ice Box  5500  4128.00 8195 6146.25 1911.84 
53 Cycle with Ice Boxes  5500  1100.00 4893 489.30 167.39 
54 Three wheeler with Ice Box including 
e-rickshaws for fish vending 
2200 6600.00 2867 8685.25 2719.66 
55 Fish Feed Mills (mini)   8250.00 498 25170.00 8461.80 
56 Fish Feed Mills (medium) 
57 Fish Feed Mills (large) 
58 Fish Feed Plants  55  35750.00 22 14300.00 4407.00 
59 Construction of fish retail markets 
including ornamental fish/aquarium 
markets.  
275 27500.00 185 15500.00 4338.00 
60 Construction of fish kiosks including 
kiosks of aquarium/ornamental fish    
1650 16500.00 5659 24703.75 7517.93 
61  Fish Value Add Enterprises Units  440  22000.00 91 4580.00 1739.80 
62 E-platform for e-trading and e-
marketing of fish and fisheries 
products  
DPR 
based 
2500.00 5 151.35 40.69 
63 Support for  acquisition of Deep sea 
fishing vessels for traditional 
fishermen 
400 48000.00 376 45120.00 12676.00 
64 Up gradation of existing fishing 
vessels for export Competency  
5000 75000.00 527 7199.63 2002.58 
65 Establishment of Bio-toilets in 
mechanised fishing vessels  
25000 12500.00 4250 2125.00 582.30 
66 Establishment of Disease diagnostic 
and quality testing labs 
210 5250.00 14 350.00 112.50 
67 Disease diagnostic and quality testing 
Mobile labs/clinics   
100 3500.00 21 735.00 214.20 
68 Communication  and /or Tracking 
Devices for traditional and motorised 
vessels like 
VHF/DAT/NAVIC/Transponders etc.  
50000 175.00 14900 5215.00 1418.27 
69 Support for providing safety kits for 
fishermen of Traditional and motorized 
fishing vessels (other than 
Communication and/or Tracking 
Device mentioned at 10.1 above) 
12000 120.00 1673 1216.36 588.20 
70 Providing  boats (replacement) and 
nets for traditional fishermen  
5000 25000.00 5018 20904.70 5998.41 
71 Support to Fishermen for PFZ devices 
and network including the cost of 
installation and maintenance etc. 
50000 60.00 1000 110.00 33.00 
72 Extension and support Services   25  400.00 70 1750.00 503.50 
73 Livelihood and nutritional support for 
socio-economically backward active 
traditional fishers’ families for 
conservation of fisheries resources 
during fishing ban/lean period. 
600000 135000.00 677462 99036.23 37970.72 
 Non-Beneficiary oriented activities 
under CSS of PMMSY 
          
74 Establishment of  Brood Banks 
(including seed banks for seaweeds) 
25 12500.00 10 4535.60 3194.04 
75 Integrated Development of Reservoirs  30 18000.00 19 5758.25 3964.95 
76 Integrated Aqua Parks  6  60000.00       

- 79 - 
Sl. 
No 
  
Components 
PMMSY year Targets Total Achievements  
(from inception till date)  
Physical Investment Physical 
(No.) 
Investment  GoI 
Share  
77 Support to states for import of 
germplasm 
Need 
Based 
1500.00 803 174.00 167.60 
78 Construction/Expansion of Fishing 
Harbours.  
12 240000.00 1 8286.00 4971.60 
79 Modernization/Up-gradation of existing 
Fishing Harbours 
5 25000.00 1 2626.00 1575.60 
80 Modern Integrated Fish Landing 
Centres 
25 62500.00 14 18763.32 10000.39 
81 Construction of state of art whole sale 
fish market. 
5 25000.00 3 12078.09 7152.65 
82 Integrated modern coastal fishing 
villages 
100 75000.00 1 899.85 899.85 
83 Aquatic Referral Labs for Quality  
testing  and Disease Diagnostics  
20 20000.00 4 2115.99 1269.43 
84 Multipurpose Support Services – 
SagarMitra (performance based 
incentives along with requisite  
IT/Communication   support like 
Tablet/mobile telephony etc. would be 
provided to SagarMitras)  
3477 43115.00 2489 7137.70 3450.70 
 
***** 
 
  

- 80 - 
Annexure - II 
State/UT wise list of employment under the Inland  Fisheries Sector along with 
the status of employment, viz. Full time, Part time, Casual etc. 
 
Sl. No States Full 
Time 
Part 
Time 
Occasional Unspecified Total 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 0  24265 0 0 24265 
2 Assam 126321  540637 29336 0 696294 
3 Bihar 56801  89294 71544 3870457 4088096 
4 Chhattisgarh 184746  17703 9939 8912 221300 
5 Gujarat 18931  27412 0 0 46343 
6 Haryana 4697  5579 1800 4200 16276 
7 Himachal Pradesh  5574  6301 0 0 11875 
8 Jharkhand 17700  47250 51900 40100 156950 
9 Karnataka 147118  285689 202745 17178 652730 
10 Kerala 183840  0 0 0 183840 
11 Madhya Pradesh 77974  99132 0 0 177106 
12 Maharashtra 202703  88941 36439 21630 349713 
13 Manipur  2983  6359 1127 2168 12637 
14 Meghalaya  2635  6413 6941 458 16447 
15 Mizoram 1609  2816 1112 752 6289 
16 Nagaland 255  537 2773 3037 6602 
17 Odisha 224264  197257 127814 250640 799975 
18 Punjab 0  0 0 0 0 
19 Rajasthan 6265  14128 920 0 21313 
20 Sikkim 2627  0 0 0 2627 
21 Tamil Nadu 0  70708 9003 29193 108904 
22 Telangana 401272  265378 260560 73736 1000946 
23 Tripura 4251  4893 675 0 9819 
24 Uttar Pradesh  120371  0 0 0 120371 
25 Uttarakhand  2340  6964 1253 467 11024 
26 Chandigarh 10  0 0 0 10 
27 Daman & Diu  794  964 420 0 2178 
28 Delhi  277  489 115 0 881 
29 Jammu & Kashmir 16286  880 0 230 17396 
30 Puducherry  2040  714 350 150 3254 
Total 1814684 1810703 816766 4323308 8765461 
 
  

- 81 - 
Annexure - III 
State/UT wise list of employment under the Marine Fisheries Sector along with 
the status of employment, viz. Full time, Part time, Casual etc. 
 
Sl. 
No 
States Full 
Time 
Part 
Time 
Occasional Unspecified Deep 
Sea 
Total 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands 
23868 612 0 0 0 24480 
2 Gujarat 108617  14405 0 0 0 123022 
3 Karnataka 100900  59407 9754 102812 21602 294475 
4 Kerala 604953  56155 0 0 0 661108 
5 Maharashtra 134870  47527 14336 6361 23008 226102 
6 Tamil Nadu 200628  233797 52381 86102 19500 592408 
7 Daman & Diu 5093  65389 52 0 0 70534 
8 Lakshadweep 3101  967 0 0 0 4068 
9 Puducherry 37177  6914 1800 12838 25 58754 
Total 1219207 485173 78323 208113 64135 2054951 
 
 

- 82 - 
Annexure - IV 
 
State/UT wise status of Issuance of KCC for Fisheries Sector 
 
S.N. State Name Number of Applications  
Received Sanctioned Pending 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 7,898 7,576 5 
2 Andhra Pradesh 33,839 20,619 29 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 217 15 1 
4 Assam 15,073 5,265 1,287 
5 Bihar 4,273 725 104 
6 Chandigarh 2 - - 
7 Chhattisgarh 4,919 1,277 613 
8 Dadra And Nagar Haveli 2 2 - 
9 Daman And Diu 321 310 - 
10 Delhi 24 - - 
11 Goa 464 442 3 
12 Gujarat 23,080 13,946 266 
13 Haryana 550 190 8 
14 Himachal Pradesh 982 842 7 
15 Jammu And Kashmir 1,167 824 5 
16 Jharkhand 7,972 1,987 24 
17 Karnataka 10,621 6,513 779 
18 Kerala 7,252 6,838 46 
19 Ladakh 132 132 - 
20 Lakshadweep 444 444 - 
21 Madhya Pradesh 56,280 22,511 2,624 
22 Maharashtra 18,449 11,369 205 
23 Manipur 514 407 2 
24 Meghalaya 190 170 - 
25 Mizoram 165 41 - 
26 Nagaland 197 8 - 
27 Odisha 6,185 1,257 105 
28 Pondicherry  2,876 1,611 23 
29 Punjab 810 268 49 
30 Rajasthan 6,418 4,886 2 
31 Sikkim 222 45 - 
32 Tamil Nadu 39,989 19,612 57 
33 Telangana 23,755 5,557 26 
34 Tripura 12,230 10,857 8 
35 Uttar Pradesh 18,502 10,983 612 
36 Uttarakhand 650 400 85 
37 West Bengal 11,369 8,123 37 
  Total 3,18,033 1,66,052 7,012 
Source : Department of Financial Services 
 
  

- 83 - 
Appendix-I 
 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
(2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty Second Sitting of the Committee 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 2nd August, 2022, from 1500 hours to 1635 
hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar –  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
3. Shri Horen Singh Bey 
4. Shri Devendra Singh ‘Bhole’ 
5. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
6. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
7. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
8. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel 
9. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
10. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
11. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
12. Shri Mohammad Sadique 
13. Shri Virendra Singh 
14. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
      Rajya Sabha 
16. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
17. Shri Kailash Soni 
18. Shri Vaiko 
 
 
 
                               Secretariat 
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar  - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Sundar Prasad Das - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
Witnesses 

- 84 - 
  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
 
[Department of Fisheries] 
 
 Name      Designation 
1. Shri Jatindra Nath Swain   Secretary  
2. Dr. Jujjavarapu Balaji   Joint Secretary (Marine Fisheries) 
3. Shri Sagar Mehra    Joint Secretary (Inland Fisheries) 
4. Dr. Niyati Joshi    Director (Fisheries Statistics) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to               
the Sitting convened for the briefing by the Representatives of the Ministry                          
of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) on the      
Subject ‘Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of Fisheries Sector'. 
Thereafter, the Representatives of the Department of Fisheries were called in. The 
Chairperson welcomed the Representatives to the Sitting of the Committee and 
apprised them that the discussion in the Sitting of the Committee is to be treated as 
confidential and should not be made public till the Report of the Committee is 
presented to Parliament.  
3. After the introduction by the witnesses, the Chairperson initiated the discussion, 
which was followed by a Power-point Presentation by the Representatives of the 
Department that covered Fisheries Sector Development Schemes such as, Blue 
Revolution, Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF), Measures undertaken for 
Increasing fish production and domestic fish consumption, Modernisation of fishing 
harbours, Insurance for fish farmers, Kisan Credit Card and Employment/Revenue 
Generation under various Schemes. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members of the 
Committee deliberated on several issues/points pertaining to the Subject under 

- 85 - 
discussion and also sought clarifications/information from the Department, as briefly 
mentioned below: 
a. Need to undertake steps so as to improve the Fisheries Sector which is 
predominately marine by improving harbours so as to reduce Post Harvest 
Losses and bring them down. 
b. To focus on increasing fish production to 22 Million Tonnes under the Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana and work closely with Marine Products Export 
Development Authority(MPEDA) to double the export earnings to Rs. One lakh 
Crore by the year 2024-25. 
c. To take steps to Increase the Aquaculture Production and also to increase the 
domestic fish consumption from 5 Kg to 12 Kg Per Capita Per Year. Formulation 
of Schemes after completion of the Demand Study Report of National Council of 
Applied Economic Research regarding increasing fish consumption.   
d. To promote and make available Frozen Fish as is done in case of Frozen Peas 
so that the consumption of fish can be increased up to the level of Japan’s 
consumption, which is about 24kg per capita by 2047. 
e. To focus on Ranching flower shrimps/ Sea Ranching in Pak Bay Region and 
further take steps for preservation of coastal fisheries and stabilizing them by 
creation of Artificial Reefs. 
f. To increase the Gross Value Added to fish production, which grew at the rate of 
9% (compound annual growth rate) in 2019-20 to 53.86% of Gross Value Added 
to fish production by the financial year 2024-25, thereby increasing the Revenue 
Generation. 
g. The target under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) to create 
an estimated total employment generation of 55 lac nation-wide by the year 
2025 should be subdivided and certain targets should be fixed for more 
populous states such as Bihar where employment is less and poverty is more. 
h. To focus on pursuing State Governments, particularly States of Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh to ensure that they utilize all the funds allocated to them under the 
PMMSY. Further, to undertake measures to exploit the full potential of Bihar and 

- 86 - 
make it self sufficient in fish seed production. Efforts to be made to make fish 
seeds available locally and also steps are to be taken to develop Hatcheries on 
a Public Private Partnership (PPP) Model. 
i. To focus on the status of total investment done up-till now under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) comparatively in Coastal as well as non 
Coastal States, particularly in the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
j. To formulate a Scheme for educated unemployed youth of Coastal 
Communities, like the Koli community, dwelling near big dams/lakes/ponds in 
coordination with National Banks and after imparting training by the Fisheries 
Department so as to provide meaningful employment and also increase fish 
production. To encourage unemployed youth to take up pond and Bio-Floc Fish 
Culture. 
k. To strive for developing fishing activities as the Pilot Project in Canals, which are 
predominant in the State of Rajasthan so that the migration of fishing 
communities from Rajasthan to Maharashtra can be stopped.  
l. To focus and take measures so that Institutional Finance is being made 
available to fishers, fish farmers and facilitate penetration of Kisan Credit Card to 
the fishermen. Further, building of Digital Portal by the Department along with 
SIDBI so that all the applications that are sent to the banks are being accounted 
for eventually enhancing the performance of KCC. 
m. Contribution to Fish Production is 70 percent by Inland Fisheries and 25 percent 
by Marine Fisheries, Hence, Budgetary allocation may also be cosidered in the 
ratio of 25:75 between Marine and Inland Fisheries. To increase Fish 
Production, focus also should be given on Inland Fisheries, since 70 percent of 
total fishermen are engaged in Inland Fisheries. 
n. To formulate an Insurance Scheme for the Fishers.   
o. To focus on Fish Landing Centers in Inland areas under Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), and to coordinate with State Governments for 
providing Cold Chain and Refrigeration Units to Fishermen in areas, which are 
flood prone. 

- 87 - 
p. To generate Centralized Data Bank regarding the locations of all the Ponds in 
the country which have an enormous potential for fishing. Further, to focus on 
the status of construction and Renovation of Ponds under the Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). 
q. To focus on implementation of Schemes such as providing of Housing, Auto-
rickshaws, Bicycles and Motorcycles with ice boxes to Fishermen. Further, many 
Fishermen don’t have Banking facility, hence measures should be taken so that 
the fishermen benefit from all these schemes.  
r. To take steps to ensure that model Detailed Project Reports (DPR’s) are made 
available on the Departments website as well as State Government offices so as 
to help entrepreneurs in the Fishing Sector in preparing their Project Reports. 
s. To increase the Specific Component Allocation for Ornamental fisheries 
depending upon the demand from respective State Governments. 
t. To take steps to include Inland Fresh Water Fish in total Fish Export of the 
Country. Measures to be taken to boost export of Tilapia fish, which forms the 
largest component of exports from inland sector and, to undertake Pilot Projects 
to promote the same. 
u. To take measures so that more information is made available through Digital 
Networks, enabling the producer/farmer to reach out to more people, whenever 
he/she is harvesting fish, thereby avoiding middle men and thus exploitation.  
v. To focus on Dissemination of relevant information to Fishers/Fish Farmers 
regarding welfare schemes that are being implemented by the Government 
under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) for their                      
upliftment. 
w. Strategise to reach the Export Target under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY). 
x. Total allocation of funds (mainly Capital Expenditure), so far made to the States 
under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and the Employment 
Generated thereby, State wise. 

- 88 - 
y. Houses so far constructed under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY). 
4. The Representatives of the Department responded to some of the queries 
raised by the Members. The Chairperson, then, thanked the witnesses for sharing 
valuable information with the Committee on the Subject and directed them to send, in 
writing, the requisite information on points / items, which were not readily available with 
them, to the Committee Secretariat by 12th August, 2022. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept separately.] 
 
  

- 89 - 
Appendix-II 
 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
(2022-23) 
 
Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15th November, 2022, from 1100hrs. to 
1245 hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar –  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri A Ganeshamurthi 
3. Shri Kanakmal Katara  
4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
5. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
6. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
7. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
      Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
9. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
10. Shri S.Kalyansundaram 
11. Shri Kailash Soni 
12. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 
 
                               Secretariat 
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Naval K. Verma  - Director 
3. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Additional Director 
4. Shri Prem Ranjan    - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri N. Amarathiagan  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Standing Committee and informed them that as directed by the Hon’ble Speaker, 
LAARDIS will make a presentation before the Committee so as to make the Members 
aware of the new initiatives taken towards capacity building for augmentation of 

- 90 - 
research, new initiatives in the Parliament Library, creating awareness about the rich 
resources/repositories of the Parliament Library, training programmes by PRIDE etc. 
Thereafter, Officers of LAARDIS made their Power Point Presentation.  
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following Action Taken 
Reports: 
 (i) Draft Action Taken Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the 
Committee on the Subject 'Status of Veterinary Services and Availability 
of Animal Vaccine in the Country' pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying); 
 (ii) Draft Action Taken Report on Action-taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report 
of the Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2022-23)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare); 
 (iii) Draft Action Taken Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Eighth Report of 
the Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2022-23)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education); 
 (iv) Draft Action Taken Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report of 
the Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2022-23)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries); 
 (v) Draft Action Taken Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report  of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2022-23)’ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying); and  
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on Action-taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report of 

- 91 - 
the  Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2022-23)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of  Cooperation. 
 
4. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Action Taken 
Reports without any modification and the Committee authorised the Chairperson to 
finalise and present these Reports to the Parliament. 
 
5. After Consideration and Adoption of the Six Action Taken Reports, the 
Representatives of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) were called in for taking Evidence in connection with 
examination of the Subject ‘Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of 
Fisheries Sector’. The following Representatives of the Department of Fisheries 
appeared as witnesses before the Committee: 
 
  Name      Designation 
1. Shri Jatindra Nath Swain   Secretary  
2. Shri Sagar Mehra    Joint Secretary (Inland Fisheries) 
3. Shri Shankar L    Joint Commissioner (Fisheries) 
4. Dr. Niyati Joshi    Director (Fisheries Statistics) 
 
6. The Chairperson welcomed the Representatives to the Sitting of the Committee 
and briefly informed them about the agenda of the Sitting. Hon'ble Chairperson also 
apprised them that the discussion in the Sitting of the Committee is to be treated as 
confidential and should not be made public till the Report of the Committee is 
presented to Parliament.  
7. After the introduction by the witnesses, the Chairperson initiated the discussion, 
which was followed by a briefing by the Representatives of the Department that 
covered the topics such as increasing Fish production to 22 million tonnes by 2025, 
reviving Coastal Fisheries, promotion of Cage Culture in reservoirs/ponds and marine 
waters, flow of credit to Fishing Sector, diversification of seed sources for Shrimp 
Culture and measures to increase the demand for Frozen Fish in the country. 
Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members of the Committee deliberated on several 
issues/points pertaining to the subject under discussion and also sought 
clarifications/information from the Department, as briefly mentioned below:  
 

- 92 - 
a) To take steps for reviving Coastal Fisheries by starting Artificial Reefs, and River 
Ranching so that the fishermen living besides the rivers are benefited; 
b) To take up Cage Culture in reservoirs and ponds and also in marine waters 
especially in the estuaries; 
c) To focus on increasing the credit flow in the Fisheries Sector and take 
necessary steps for the same; 
d)  To take necessary steps so that Shrimp Aquaculture gets a diverse source of 
their seeds and to develop a breed that can give an alternative to the farmers 
and reduce dependency exclusively on Vannamei Shrimp. 
e) To explore alternatives and ways to expand the market and increase the 
demand for Frozen Fish in the country; 
f) To explore the possibilities for creation of a separate Research Council for 
Fisheries Sector on the lines of Indian Council of Agricultural Research and 
bring all Fishery Research Institutes under one umbrella and attach them to the 
Ministry of Fisheries; 
g) To take steps to establish a specialised Research Institute for Shrimp Culture in 
Andhra Pradesh since it contributes more than 50 percent to Shrimp Culture; 
h) To address the issues like fish feed, fish processing technologies, storage, and 
marketing; 
i) To expedite the research on the challenges faced by cultured fish export like 
seed production, disease control, farm management techniques, harvesting, and 
post-harvesting technologies; 
j) To analyse the reasons for under utilisation of funds allocated under the 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) and 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY); 
k) To explore the possibilities, if, National Fisheries Development Board can be 
authorised to implement all the Central Sector Schemes including Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana; 
l) To design specific programmes for the youth belonging to the communities 
wholly dependent on fishing; 
m) To explore the possibilities if the ponds and reservoirs owned by State 
Government/ Zila Parishad can be reserved for the Organisations/Cooperatives 
formed by the fishermen communities; 

- 93 - 
n) To make available preservation facilities such as cold storages for the fishermen 
communities, so that they can capture the local market; 
o) To encourage Agriculture Universities researching on fisheries to go to grass 
root level and impart technical knowhow to fish farmers and farmers who are 
into culture of Basa fish which constitutes an important component of fish 
imports; 
p) To take measures to rope in Krishi Vigyan Kendras to impart knowledge and 
technical knowhow to fishers and thereby increase production; 
q) To take steps to increase the utilisation of funds by the state of Bihar and take 
measures to boost production and economic prosperity of the people of Bihar; 
r) To examine the reasons for less utilisation of funds in states such as Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands and Laddakh; 
s) To examine the probability of roping in Zilla Panchayats for upkeep of ponds and 
reservoirs; 
t) To take steps to educate and train the fishermen communities dwelling besides 
rivers/sea so that they can access information uploaded by the Department on 
its website; 
u) To examine the possibilities of providing interest free or minimum interest 
finance to Fish Farmers; 
v) To take steps to promote fresh water Inland fishes such as Katla; 
w) To explore the possibilities of providing insurance cover on the lines of Pradhan 
Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana to fish farmers who are affected due to overflowing of 
Dams during rainy season; 
x) To take steps to encourage cultivation of low prices species such as tilapia; 
y) To take steps to provide International market to farmers producing P. Monodon 
Shrimps and also explore the possibilities whether under the Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana each state can be given a Grant so that the states in 
turn can subsidise the electricity tariff of shrimp farmers; and 
z) To take steps for the promotion of Sea Weed Cultivation. 
 
8. The Representatives of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Fisheries) responded to most of the queries raised by the 
Members. The Chairperson, then, thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable 
information with the Committee on the Subject and directed them to send, in writing, 

- 94 - 
the requisite information on points / items, which were not readily available with them, 
to the Committee Secretariat by 25th November, 2022. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept separately.] 
 
 
 
  

- 95 - 
Appendix-III 
 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2023-24) 
 
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06th February, 2024 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in the Office of Chairperson, Room No. 103, Block-B, Extension to Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi.   
 
Present 
 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 4. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 5. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11. Shri Masthan Rao Beedha Yadav 
12. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
13. Shri Kailash Soni 
14. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
15. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
16. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan – Additional Secretary     
2. Shri Khakhai Zou   – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan            –   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria  – Deputy Secretary  
 
  

- 96 - 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of Draft 
Reports on the following Subjects: 
 *(i)   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 * (ii)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
 (iii)  Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of Fisheries 
Sector [Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries)] 
 * (iv) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  
 
  
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any 
modification.  The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present 
the Report to Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report 
 