69 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of 
‘Research and Development in Farm Mechanization for Small 
and Marginal Farmers in the Country
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Fifty-Eighth Report (17th
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022
SIXTY
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
FEBRUARY
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
f Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
 
 
Research and Development in Farm Mechanization for Small 
and Marginal Farmers in the Country’ 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23)} 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2024 /MAGHA 1945 (SAKA) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 
Agricultural Research and Education)  
Research and Development in Farm Mechanization for Small 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 

 
SIXTY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
‘Research and Development in Farm Mechanization for Small 
and Marginal Farmers in
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Fifty-Eighth Report (17th
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022
Presented to Lok Sabha on  
 Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
 
  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
FEBRUARY
 
  
-ii- 
SIXTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
f Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
 
 
Research and Development in Farm Mechanization for Small 
and Marginal Farmers in the Country’ 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23)} 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.02.2024 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.02.2024 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2024 /MAGHA 1945 (SAKA) 
 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)  
Research and Development in Farm Mechanization for Small 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 

-iii- 
 
COA No. 497 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
  

-iv- 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                   Page No. 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)…………………………… (v) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24)…………………………… (vi) 
   
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (viii) 
   
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ………………………………………… 1 
 
CHAPTER II Observations / Recommendations that have   
 been accepted by the Government  14 
 
CHAPTER III Observations / Recommendations which the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
 of the Government’s replies ………………….. 27 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations / Recommendations in respect  
 of which replies of the Government have   
 not been accepted by the Committee …………. 34 
 
CHAPTER V Observations / Recommendations in respect of  
 which final replies of the Government are still   
 awaited ……………………………………. 38 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Committee held on 06.02.2024 39  
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23) 41  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-v- 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
* Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav on 10.10.2022 vide Bulletin- Part II, 
Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022.  
#  Vacant w.e.f.29.04.2023 due to disqualification of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha Membership from the 
date of his conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with 
Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
  
 

-vi- 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Mohammad Sadique 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
21. VACANT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beedha Yadav 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Kailash Soni 
27.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar* 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 * Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar, MP, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Committee vide 
Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 7523 dated 29.09.2023 vice Shri Surendra Singh Nagar w.e.f. 
26.09.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-vii- 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan   - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
 
3. Shri N. Amarathiagan   - Under Secretary 
 
 4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan   - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-viii- 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2023-24), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Sixty-Ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23) 
on the subject ‘Research and Development in Farm Mechanization for Small and Marginal 
Farmers in the Country’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education).  
 
2. The Fifty-Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 
‘Research and Development in Farm Mechanization for Small and Marginal Farmers in the 
Country’ was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 21.07.2023.  The 
Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 18.10.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
06.02.2024 
 
4.  An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
 
           
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                            P.C. GADDIGOUDAR  
06 February, 2024                               Chairperson 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
                 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing   
 
  

-1- 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23) on the subject 'Research and Development in Farm 
Mechanization for Small and Marginal Farmers in the Country' pertaining to the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) which was presented on 21.07.2023 to the Lok Sabha and Laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 21.07.2023. 
  
1.2  The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) has furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 16 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as under: 
 
 
 Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
     Recommendation Nos. 2,5,6,8,9,10,11,15 and 16  
Chapter - II 
Total - 09 
 
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's Reply: 
 Recommendation Nos. 3,4,7 and 12 
Chapter - III 
Total - 04 
  
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Action Taken Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 Recommendation Nos. 1 and 14 
Chapter - IV 
Total - 02 
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 Recommendation No. 13 
Chapter - V 
Total - 01 

-2- 
 
1.3  The Committee believe that utmost importance would be given by the Ministry to 
implement the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. In cases, 
where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement the Recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter may be reported to the Committee with the reasons for 
Non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action-Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter - I and final replies in respect of 
Recommendations contained in Chapter - V of this Report be furnished to them at an 
early date. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
A.   STATUS OF AGRICULTURE MECHANIZATION IN INDIA  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
   
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:— 
 
 "The Committee note that Agriculture Mechanization is essential to modern 
agriculture to increase the productivity and for making judicious and cost-
effective use of inputs like seeds, fertilizers, chemicals & pesticides and natural 
resources like water, soil nutrients, etc. The Committee also note that for the 
purpose, the Government have undertaken several developmental Programmes, 
Schemes, reforms at policy level with the intent and focus to increase 
employment and income of the farmers. 
 The Committee further note that India accounts for only about 2.4% of the 
World’s geographical area and 4% of its water resources, but has to support 
about 17% of the world’s human population and 15% of the livestock. Agriculture 
is an important Sector of the Indian economy, approximately accounting for 20% 
of the Nation’s GDP. The Committee also note that Agriculture in India is 
currently growing at an average Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 
2.8%. About half of the population relies on agriculture as its principal source of 
income. 
 The Committee note that the overall Agriculture Mechanization Level of the 
country is 47% which is comparatively lower than that of other developing 
countries such as China (59.5%) and Brazil (75%).  Farmers need complete 
mechanization package for major crops. The Committee also note that 
contribution of Agricultural Mechanization in India leads to saving in seed 15-
20%, in fertilizer 15-20%, improvement in germination rate 7-25%, saving in time 
20-30%, in weed 20-40% in labour 20-30%, increase in cropping intensity 5-20% 
and increase in crop yield 13-23%. 

-3- 
 
 There are 86% Small and Marginal Farmers having less than 2 Hectare of 
land holdings. Unless machines appropriate for small holdings are made 
available or substantial farm amalgamation takes place, it is difficult for the Small 
and Marginal Farmers to purchase their own machinery. The Committee desire 
that Farm Machinery for majority of the farmers, who are Small and Marginal 
Farmers and who do not have adequate funds to purchase capital intensive 
implements should be developed and further incentivized. 
 The Committee have been apprised of the fact that if we compare our country 
with the developed nations then till date on an average only 47% Agriculture 
Mechanization has been done and it is expected that another 25 years are 
required to achieve the level of 75-80% mechanization from the present level of 
47%. The Government has taken various initiatives and is helping farmers by 
providing subsidy to procure machinery to improve farm input and farm - power 
availability. 
 The Committee do feel that economic growth in Indian Agricultural Sector 
lags behind the parallel growth in Industry and Services Sector, creating an ever -
widening rural-urban income disparity. The Agricultural Mechanization plays a 
key role in improving agricultural production, productivity and efficiency. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should strive hard to 
promote Agricultural Mechanization by according priority for development of 
small equipments/machines for Small and Marginal Farmers as there is an 
urgent need to bring in quality and value addition of the farm produce enabling 
the farmers to take second and subsequent crops making agriculture more 
attractive and profitable. Apart from this the Committee strongly desire that the 
Government must strive hard to achieve a level of 75% in farm mechanization 
from the present level of 47% in a much shorter period than that which has been 
stated by the Department to be 25 years." 
 
1.6 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated:- 
 
 "Some ICAR Institutes and Centres of the All India Coordinated Research 
Project (AICRP) are engaged in research and development of the 
equipment/machines for mechanization of agricultural production and post-
production activities for small and marginal farmers. The improved implement 
and machinery operated small tractor and power tiller are also developed for field 
and horticultural crops. The developed equipment/ technologies are being 

-4- 
 
commercialized and transferred to potential stakeholders. The average size of 
operational holdings is shrinking in all States and the percentage of marginal, 
small and semi-medium operational holdings is increasing due to continuing 
fragmentation of land which is making individual ownership of agricultural 
machinery progressively more difficult.  Smaller and fragmented land size is not 
suitable for mechanized operations and therefore there is regional disparity in the 
level of farm mechanization. Inadequacy of skilled manpower for operation, 
repair and maintenance of Tractors, Power tillers, Combines Harvesters and 
other Tractor & self-propelled agricultural Machinery is another area of concern.  
However, the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is actively boosting 
mechanization levels by implementing the Sub-Mission on Agricultural 
Mechanization (SMAM) to overcome existing constraints in agriculture.   The 
primary focus is to establish block-level custom hiring service infrastructure with 
comprehensive machinery sets for all major crop operations in the respective 
regions The Cooperative Societies of Farmers, Farmers Producer Organizations 
(FPOs), Self Help Groups (SHGs), Panchayats are supported with higher rate of 
financial assistance for establishment of Farm Machinery Banks at village levels. 
So far, farm machinery and equipment are available to the small and marginal 
farmers on rental basis as per their requirements. The availability of Custom 
Hiring Centres CHCs)/Village Level Farm Machinery Banks (FMBs) are being 
increased through the Aspirational Districts Programme by way of establishing at 
least 2 CHCs/FMBs in each block in the identified aspirational districts to address 
the regional disparity in level of mechanization. It will also address the issues of 
timely availability of appropriate machinery to the farmers engaged in 
underdeveloped regions of the country. Focus is also towards creating 
infrastructure of post-harvest processing and value addition through women Self 
Help Groups so that the facilities are available at the farmgate.  The Institute 
ICAR-CIAE, Bhopal; 25 centres of the AICRP on Farm Impalement and 
Machinery (FIM); and four of  Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institutes 
(FMTTIs) at Budni (MP), Hisar (Haryana),  Anantapur (Andhra Pradesh) and 
Biswanath Chariali in Assam, are imparting skill-oriented training in the area 
agricultural mechanization to various groups of beneficiaries like Farmers, Rural 
Youth technicians, undergraduate Agriculture /Mechanical, Diploma holder in ITI 

-5- 
 
trade Certificate in Tractor/agricultural Machinery operators /technician, 
Management /Supervisory level trainees from Government sectors and 
industries, etc. The existing capacity of all four FMTTIs has been increased and 
the existing infrastructure is also being augmented to meet the increasing 
demand. All these initiatives will help in increasing the level of mechanization at a 
faster pace." 
 
1.7  The Committee, had inter-alia recommended that the Government 
should strive hard to promote Agricultural Mechanization by according 
priority to the development of small equipments/machines for Small and 
Marginal Farmers.  The Committee had also expressed their desire that the 
Government must strive hard to achieve a level of 75% in Farm 
Mechanization from the present level of 47% in a much shorter period than  
the targeted time period of 25 years. 
  The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has given a detailed reply stating 
about various constraints in Farm Mechanization including the average 
size of operational holdings, which is Shrinking in all States and the 
increasing number of marginal, small and semi-medium operational 
holdings due to continuing fragmentation of land. The Committee have 
been informed that the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is 
actively boosting mechanization levels by implementing the Sub-Mission 
on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) to overcome existing constraints in 
Agriculture.   The primary focus is to establish block-level custom hiring 
service infrastructure with comprehensive machinery sets for all Major 
Crop Operations in the respective regions.  However, the Action Taken 
Reply is silent on the specific point hammered in the recommendation of 

-6- 
 
the Committee that the Government must strive hard to achieve the level of 
75% farm mechanization from the present level of 47% in a much shorter 
period than the set target of 25 years.  The Committee, therefore, once 
again stress upon the Department that the desired Farm Mechanization 
level should be achieved in a shorter period than the period, which has 
been stated by the Department.  The Committee would like to be informed 
of the action taken in this regard. 
 
B. AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT MARKET GROWTH 
   
Recommendation No. 2 
   
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:— 
 
 "The Committee observe that the Indian Agricultural Equipment Market is 
experiencing a rapid growth with strong potential for future growth as well. The 
demand for Agriculture Machinery in Asia-pacific Region was more than twice 
than in any other Region. The tractors, power tillers, combine harvesters, 
rotavators, threshers and rice trans-planters are some of the equipment for which 
a surge in demand has been witnessed over the past few years in our country 
also. 
 
 The Committee also note that no formal study has been conducted to assess 
the farm mechanization in the country. However, one objective has been 
mentioned in the Impact Study conducted for Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare (DA&FW). In the Report submitted by M/s WAPCOS Limited in 
August 2020, data of farm power availability (state wise, district wise) has been 
provided through which the state-wise mechanization gap has been identified 
and strategies have been formulated. However, a nation-wide study has not been 
made to make a proper plan based on need and gap. A proposal by ICAR has 
been submitted to DoA&FW for this purpose. The Committee feel that there is an 
urgent need to conduct a systematic study to know the Mechanization Level in 
the country in purely objective terms. 
 
 The Committee also suggest that the Department must look into the proposal 
of ICAR submitted to DoA&FW regarding State-wise mechanization gaps 
identified along with strategy so that real-time data can be procured to prepare 
hassle free implementable plan for requisite mechanization for Small and 
Marginal Farmers. 
 

-7- 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should strive hard to 
implement the Scheme as per the targets set by them in a properly planned 
manner." 
 
 1.9 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated:- 
 
 " In order to expand and strengthen the agricultural mechanization sector in 
the country by way of putting in place the support infrastructure for implementing 
the programmes and schemes with greater knowledge, better access and 
expanded opportunities for small and marginal farmers, a systematic study and 
availability of data is most important. Such information/data is normally available 
through an evaluation and impact assessment studies conducted periodically. 
ICAR and DA & FW have jointly prepared a proposal for nationwide 
mechanization studies, and they are currently finalizing plans and resources in 
collaboration." 
 
  
1.10  The Committee had Observed that no Formal Study was conducted to 
assess Farm Mechanization in the country and expressed their view that 
there was an urgent need to conduct a systematic study to know the 
mechanization level in the country in purely objective terms.  The 
Committee had also suggested that the Department must look into the 
proposal of ICAR for identification of State-wise mechanization gaps along 
with strategy to prepare hassle free implementable plan for requisite 
mechanization for Small and Marginal Farmers. 
  The Ministry in its Action taken reply has stated inter-alia that it is 
currently finalizing plans and resources in collaboration with ICAR for 
nationwide mechanization studies.  The Committee, while appreciating the 
progress in its efforts for agriculture mechanization, desire that the 
Ministry need to expedite their plans and resources for the proposed 
nation-wide mechanization studies for Small and Marginal farmers so that 
the desired objectives be achieved at the earliest.  The Committee would 
like to be informed of the progress made in this regard. 

-8- 
 
C. Upgradation of Testing Centres 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee note that there is need for streamlining of testing procedure, 
training of engineers and testing of farm equipments as technologies are 
changing fast and there is need for up-gradation of Testing Centres. The 
Committee also note that Test Centres of Agricultural Machines have been 
established at the selected Institutes for regularly testing of the machines for 
certification. Scientists are involved in evolving/updating standards for 
Agricultural Machines regularly through Bureau of Indian Standards. The 
Committee also note that these recognized Test Centres of Agricultural Machine 
Institutes are slowly upgrading their facilities from their own available resources. 
If financial support is given from time to time for this purpose, the upgradation 
process shall get accelerated.  
 The Committee feel that some mechanism should be evolved by the 
Government to allocate funds to these Institutes for testing Commercial 
Machines and upgradation of these testing centres by looking into the issue of 
non-availability of financial support. The Department should impress upon the 
Ministry of Finance to allocate the required funds so that the objective of 
Upgradation of Testing Centres can be achieved.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard." 
 
1.12 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated:- 
 
 " Creation and upgradation of facilities for testing at the Farm Machinery 
Training & Testing Institutes (FMTTIs) are being taken up through the Annual 
Action Plans of the FMTTIs and necessary budget is allocated to them. One-time 
grant (Maximum ₹1.50 Crores per institute) has also been released by DA&FW 
to the 17 identified institutes under State Governments, ICAR and State 
Agricultural Universities for creation/upgradation of infrastructure for testing of the 
agricultural machines and equipment under the provisions available in the 
scheme Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization. 
 A proposal for upgradation of the existing testing centres (Post-harvest 
Equipment/Machinery Testing Centre at ICAR-CIAE, Bhopal; and Farm 
Machinery and Post-harvest Equipment/Machinery testing centre, ICAR-CIAE 
Regional Station, Coimbatore) has also been submitted to DA&FW for 
consideration." 

-9- 
 
1.13 The Committee had expressed that some mechanism be evolved to allocate 
funds for upgradation of Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institutes 
(FMTTI) and recommended that the Department should impress upon the 
Ministry of Finance to allocate the required funds. The Ministry in its Action 
Taken Reply has stated that creation and upgradation of facilities at the 
FMTTIS are being taken up thorough the Annual Action Plans of FMTTIS 
and necessary budget is allocated to them and an one time grant of 
(maximum Rs. 1.50 Crore per Institute) has been released to the 17 
Identified Institutes.  Further a proposal for upgration of Post-Harvest 
Equipment/Machinery Testing Centre at ICAR - CIAE, Bhopal, and Farm 
Machinery and Post-Harvest Equipments/Machinery Testing Centre, ICAR-
CIAE, Regional Station Coimbatore has also been submitted to DA&FW for 
consideration. 
  In this regard, the Committee would like to know about the outcomes of 
the ongoing process of upgration of the existing Testing Centres 
undertaken by the DA&FW and emphasize that a fine tuned Mechanism be 
evolved for upgradation of FMTTIS.    
 
D. Custom Hiring Centres and Farm Machinery Banks 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:— 
 
 "The Committee observe that one of the major objectives of SMAM is to 
promote custom hiring of farm machinery centres and Farm Machinery Banks 
(maintain a set of required equipments and use on sharing basis), so that Small 
and Marginal Farmers can get the benefits of Agriculture Mechanization. The 
Custom Hiring Centres have been established under SMAM and it has proved to 
be a successful model in some States. The Committee also note that Tractor and 

-10- 
 
self-propelled high capacity farm implements and machinery are being promoted 
on custom hiring basis for use by small farm holders without owning the high 
value farm equipments/machines. The financial assistance @#40% of the Project 
Cost is also provided to rural youth and farmers as an entrepreneur to own and 
run Hiring/Custom Hiring Hubs/ Centres. 
 The Committee further note that Establishment of Custom Hiring 
Centers/Farm Machinery Banks scheme has enabled farmers to access/ hire Hi-
tech and high value machines, which cannot be purchased by the individual 
farmers. Since 2014-15 to till date total 37,097 Custom Hiring Centres have been 
established under SMAM. 
 The Committee note with satisfaction that Farm Machinery Banks have been 
established in almost all the States except the Union Territories of Ladakh and 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The States like Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Haryana, 
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and UP are the front runners in establishing 
these Centres. The Committee further note that a well equipped Custom Hiring 
Centre provides Farm Mechanization support to neighboring 100-200 farmers 
covering about 200 ha. in a cropping season.  
 The Committee also observe that a total of 17727 Farm Machinery Banks 
have been established at Village Level and number of Hi-Tech Hubs established 
is 403. 
 The Committee do feel that in spite the best efforts of the Government, the 
benefits of Farm Machinery banks have not percolated to Districts, Talukas, 
Panchayat and Gram Sabha Levels. The Committee feel that majority of the 
farmers are not aware of the benefits of the scheme of Farm Machinery Banks 
and are not able to benefit themselves from the advantages of scientific 
development. The Committee, therefore, recommend that wide publicity of the 
benefits of this Scheme should be given amongst all farmers especially, the 
Small and Marginal Farmers through social and electronic media. Moreover, the 
Committee do desire that an App like 'Krishak Mitra' be developed to be used by 
Small and Marginal Farmers to locate and contact the Custom Hiring Centres/ 
Farm Machinery Banks in their close vicinity." 
 
1.15 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated:- 
 
 " Awareness on the importance of SMAM are created through capacity 
building and demonstration of new technology machines  on the farmers’ fields 
conducted by the Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes, Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs), Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA), 
Institutes of  Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR),  State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs), other State and  Central Government Agricultural 
Institutions/Departments and Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) of Government 

-11- 
 
of India engaged in agricultural activities. A multi-lingual mobile app-based 
aggregator platform ‘FARMS’ (Farm Machinery Solutions) App has also been 
launched, which facilitates hiring and renting of farm machinery from and by the 
Custom Hiring Centres/owners of the farm machinery. This mobile app 
encompasses a fair and transparent rental process while focusing on quality, 
dependability and timely delivery of the services. So far 74,144 service providers 
have registered on this app with more than 172,404 machines for renting. More 
than 524,09,976 farmers/other users have also registered for availing the 
services through this app." 
 
1.16 The Committee had inter-alia recommended that wide publicity about the 
benefits of the Scheme should be given amongst all Farmers especially, 
Small and Marginal Farmers through social and electronic media and the 
Committee also expressed desire that an App like 'Krishak Mitra' be 
developed for use by Small and Marginal Farmers to locate and engage the 
Custom Hiring Centres/Farm Machinery Banks for their requirements. 
  The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply has stated that a Multi-lingual 
Mobile App based aggregator Platform 'FARMS' (Farm Machinery 
solutions) has been launched, which facilitates hiring and renting of Farm 
Machinery from the Custom Hiring Centres/ Owners of the Farm Machinery.    
This Mobile App encompasses fair and transparent rental process while 
focusing on quality, dependability and timely delivery of services.  74,144 
Services Providers with more than 172,404 Machines have been registered 
on this App for renting and more than 524,09,976 Farmers/other users have 
also registered for availing the services through this App. 
  The Committee in this regard, would like to be apprised of the functional 
profile and performance of the App 'FARMS', as also its role in improving 
the functioning of the Custom Hiring Centres/Farm Machinery Banks in the 
interest of farmers. 
  

-12- 
 
E. LOW HORSE POWER TRACTORS 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
1.17   The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:— 
 
 "The Committee note that the Tractors are most important Machines for 
Agriculture as these performs various farm operations. The selection of Horse 
Power for Tractor depends upon the size of the land and farm applications. The 
Committee note that the average farm size in India is small (1-08ha) and the 
small and marginal holdings of less than 2 Hectares account for 86% of the total 
operational holdings. The Committee feel that for Small and Marginal Farmers 
buying the Farm Equipments even after subsidy is very expensive. The 
Committee also note that Tractor parts and Components attract GST of 12%. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that GST for Tractor parts and 
components be reduced suitably for the Tractors upto 40 hp. in order to bring 
down the cost of such Tractors. The Committee feel that this will not only help the 
Small and Marginal Farmers but also provide the much needed succor to them 
for buying the most important Farm equipment."  
 
1.18 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated:- 
 
 "The GST rate slabs are decided by the GST Council. The Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare since 2017 is continuously pursuing 
reduction/rationalization in the GST rates for agricultural machines and 
equipment including tractors, power Tillers and Combine Harvesters." 
 
1.19 The Committee had noted that Tractor Parts and Components attract GST 
of 12% and that the Farm Equipment even after subsidy is very expansive 
for Small farmers.  The Committee therefore, had recommended that GST 
for Tractor Parts and components be reduced suitably for the Tractors upto 
40 Hp. 
  The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply has stated that the GST Rate 
Slabs are decided by the GST Council.  The Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare since 2017 is continuously pursuing reduction/ 
rationalization in the GST rates for Agricultural Machines and Equipments 
including Tractors, power tillers and combine harvesters.   

-13- 
 
  Feeling not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry, the Committee once 
again reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry should, impress 
upon the GST Council about the dire need to suitably reduce the GST for 
Tractor Parts and Components for Tractors upto 40 Hp. 
 
 
 
  

-14- 
 
CHAPTER - II 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT MARKET GROWTH    
 
Recommendation No. 2 
   
 The Committee observe that the Indian Agricultural Equipment Market is 
experiencing a rapid growth with strong potential for future growth as well. The demand 
for Agriculture Machinery in Asia-pacific Region was more than twice than in any other 
Region. The tractors, power tillers, combine harvesters, rotavators, threshers and rice 
trans-planters are some of the equipment for which a surge in demand has been 
witnessed over the past few years in our country also. 
 
 The Committee also note that no formal study has been conducted to assess the 
farm mechanization in the country. However, one objective has been mentioned in the 
Impact Study conducted for Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW). 
In the Report submitted by M/s WAPCOS Limited in August 2020, data of farm power 
availability (state wise, district wise) has been provided through which the state-wise 
mechanization gap has been identified and strategies have been formulated. However, 
a nation-wide study has not been made to make a proper plan based on need and gap. 
A proposal by ICAR has been submitted to DoA&FW for this purpose. The Committee 
feel that there is an urgent need to conduct a systematic study to know the 
Mechanization Level in the country in purely objective terms. 
 
 The Committee also suggest that the Department must look into the proposal of 
ICAR submitted to DoA&FW regarding State-wise mechanization gaps identified along 
with strategy so that real-time data can be procured to prepare hassle free 
implementable plan for requisite mechanization for Small and Marginal Farmers. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should strive hard to 
implement the Scheme as per the targets set by them in a properly planned manner. 
 

-15- 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 In order to expand and strengthen the agricultural mechanization sector in the 
country by way of putting in place the support infrastructure for implementing the 
programmes and schemes with greater knowledge, better access and expanded 
opportunities for small and marginal farmers, a systematic study and availability of data 
is most important. Such information/data is normally available through an evaluation 
and impact assessment studies conducted periodically. ICAR and DA & FW have jointly 
prepared a proposal for nationwide mechanization studies, and they are currently 
finalizing plans and resources in collaboration. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 1.10 of the Report. 
 
 
TRAINING AND ORGANIZING DEMONSTRATIONS  
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is 
providing training and organizing demonstrations in the area of Farm Machinery through 
its four dedicated Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institutes (FMTTIs) Tractor 
Nagar Budni, Madhya Pradesh, Northern Region Farm Machinery Training & Testing 
Institute Sirsa Road Hissar, Haryana, Southern Region Farm Machinery Training & 
Testing Institute Anantapur, A.P and the North Eastern Region Farm Machinery 
Training & Testing Institute, Assam. The Committee note that the Budget is being 
allocated for all 4 FMTTIs since 2014-15 to 2022-23. For the Financial year 2014-15 Rs. 
32.87 Crore, for 2015-16 Rs. 44.29 Crore, for 2016-17 Rs. 43.62 Crore, for 2017-18 Rs. 
52.58 Crore for 2018-19 Rs. 59.71 Crore, for 2019-20 Rs. 53.34 Crore, for 2020-21 Rs. 
56.98 Crore, for 2021-22 Rs. 54.55 Crore and 2022-23 Rs. 52.01 Crore has been 
allocated. The Committee has noted that funds allocation almost at constant level for 
the past few years and there has been some reduction in allocation of funds from 2021-
22 onwards as compared to the funds allocated for the Financial year 2018-19 and 
2020-21. The Committee have noted that there has been decrease in the fund 
allocation for the year 2021-22 and 2022-23 as compared to the year 2020-21. 
 

-16- 
 
The Committee further note that these Institutes are giving demonstrations on the 
advantageous usage of Farm Mechanization to Rural Youth and Farmers and 
encouraging for training them to establish the Custom Hiring Centres. The Committee 
feel that the Department should look into the issue of consistent and adequate 
allocation of funds and that the Department should impress upon the Finance Ministry 
not to reduce the budget allocations for this purpose. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that for overall development of the mechanization of Agriculture, adequate 
funds be allocated and these funds should be used judiciously.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 The funds are allocated to the FMTTIs based on their Annual Action Plan. 
DA&FW ensure to provide adequate budget for conducting training and demonstration 
activities to the FMTTIs. 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FOR SMALL AND MARGINAL FARM 
MECHANISATION 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee observe that the benefits of Research and Development for 
Small and Marginal Farmers are slowly percolating to villages and the level of 
mechanization in the country is increasing. The promotion of newly developed 
technology depends upon the state policy. ICAR has been constantly trying to 
popularize and promote its developed technologies and machines through the 
developmental Programmes including SMAM. 
 
The Committee further note that the awareness is being created among farmers 
about improved farm equipments and farm mechanization regularly through ICAR 
Institute, 25 All India Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP) Centres of Farm 
Implement and machinery, 9 AICRP Centre of  Utilization of Animal Energy by field 
demonstrations. Kisan Melas (731 Centres) also create awareness about Farm 
Mechanization among farmers in their respective districts. 
 

-17- 
 
The Committee also observe that the Department has Developed 158 improved 
equipments/machines, commercialized 47 technologies, manufactured 18500 machines 
and supplied to different centres, conducted prototype feasibility testing of 76 improved 
farm equipments for their adoption at 25 All India Coordinated Research Projects, 
Issued Test certificates of more than 400 commercial machines, Trained 7369 farmers 
by 188 training programmes, organized 16 Entrepreneurship Development Programme 
on Custom Hiring benefitting 450 rural youths, conducted Frontline Demonstrations of 
105 improved farm machinery in 11278 ha in 4386 locations, 6575 farmers benefited by 
the demonstration programmes, Technologies- demonstrated to 10 lakh farmers 
through Kisan mela industries meet and agri-exhibitions during the last five years. The 
Committee feel that as per the statistics it comes to 2 lakh farmers per year, which is 
very negligible keeping into account the huge size of Indian peasantry. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department should involve other agencies at District, Block 
and Village level, to give Technological Demonstration to all farmers at Grass Root 
Level. The Committee also feel that pamphlets and printed material in respect of new 
research in the field of machinery and tools along with a list of popular farm 
equipments/machines/tools for the use Small and Marginal Farmers be made available 
at all KVKs at District level. 
 
The Committee observe that the proportion of Budgetary Allocation (Revised 
Estimates) made in favour of the Department out of the Total Budget (RE) of the 
Government of India has been reduced from 0.32% in 2018-19 to 0.29 % in 2019-20 
and further to 0.22% in 2020-21. Further, the Committee note that the Department had 
proposed for the year BE 2021-22 Rs. 10241.68 Crore but has been allocated Rs 
8513.62 Crore. Likewise, the Proposed RE for 2021-22 was Rs. 9330.53 Crore, but the 
Government allocated Rs. 8513.62 Crore. Similarly, for the period 2022-23, the BE 
proposed was 9698.91 Crore and BE allocated was Rs 8513.62 Crore. This has 
resulted in proportionate reduction in inter-sectoral allocation within the Department. 
The Budget provided for R&D to Farm Mechanization Scheme (ICAR-CIAE, Bhopal + 4 
AICRPs+ 2 CRPs) during last four years shows around 30% less fund allocation during 
the year 2022-23 as compared to 2019-20. There has been continuous reduction in 
funds allocated for the Scheme during last few years i.e. for 2019-20 the allocated 

-18- 
 
amount was Rs. 2177.10 Lakh, for 2020-21 Rs. 1828.10 Lakh, for 2021-22 Rs 1797.14 
Lakh and for 2022-23 (BE) Rs. 1586.64. 
 
The Committee note that the Secretary, Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education had written DO letters dated 21.01.2022 and 11.11.2021 for additional 
allocation of funds to the Department. The issue was also discussed during the Pre-
budget Meeting held for discussion of expenditure ceilings with Secretary Expenditure 
and the Department is continuously requesting the Ministry of Finance for enhanced 
budgetary allocation through various means available in Government set up. The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the Department should impress upon the Ministry 
of Finance about the need of the hour for investing money in R&D for Farm 
Mechanization in general and particularly for Small and Marginal Farmers, as 
mechanization plays a key role in improving agricultural production and productivity.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 The list and other details of the popular farm equipment/machines/tools useful to 
the Small and Marginal Farmers is being shared with states, ATARIs and KVKs through 
e-mails. Hardcopy of the same will be sent to all ATARIs and KVKs after printing. The 
efforts were made to obtain adequate fund allocation from the Ministry of Finance/DARE 
for the Agricultural Mechanization scheme. The revised budget (RE) provided for R&D 
to Farm Mechanization Scheme (ICAR-CIAE, Bhopal + 4 AICRPs+ 2 CRPs) during 
2022-23 was₹1713.65 lakhs against the BE of ₹1586.64 lakhs. During 2022-23, 
₹1713.38 lakhs (99.98%) was spent out of allocated amount of ₹ 1713.64 lakhs. The BE 
of ₹1959 lakhs for year 2023-24 and ₹3045 lakhs for year 2024-25 have been proposed 
for the mechanization scheme. 
 
UPGRADATION OF TESTING CENTRES 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Committee note that there is need for streamlining of testing procedure, 
training of engineers and testing of farm equipments as technologies are changing fast 
and there is need for up-gradation of Testing Centres. The Committee also note that 
Test Centres of Agricultural Machines have been established at the selected Institutes 

-19- 
 
for regularly testing of the machines for certification. Scientists are involved in 
evolving/updating standards for Agricultural Machines regularly through Bureau of 
Indian Standards. The Committee also note that these recognized Test Centres of 
Agricultural Machine Institutes are slowly upgrading their facilities from their own 
available resources. If financial support is given from time to time for this purpose, the 
upgradation process shall get accelerated.  
 
The Committee feel that some mechanism should be evolved by the Government 
to allocate funds to these Institutes for testing Commercial Machines and upgradation of 
these testing centres by looking into the issue of non-availability of financial support. 
The Department should impress upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate the required 
funds so that the objective of Upgradation of Testing Centres can be achieved.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 Creation and upgradation of facilities for testing at the Farm Machinery Training 
& Testing Institutes (FMTTIs) are being taken up through the Annual Action Plans of the 
FMTTIs and necessary budget is allocated to them. One-time grant (Maximum ₹1.50 
Crores per institute) has also been released by DA&FW to the 17 identified institutes 
under State Governments, ICAR and State Agricultural Universities for creation/ 
upgradation of infrastructure for testing of the agricultural machines and equipment 
under the provisions available in the scheme Sub-Mission on Agricultural 
Mechanization. 
  
 A proposal for upgradation of the existing testing centres (Post-harvest 
Equipment/Machinery Testing Centre at ICAR-CIAE, Bhopal; and Farm Machinery and 
Post-harvest Equipment/Machinery testing centre, ICAR-CIAE Regional Station, 
Coimbatore) has also been submitted to DA&FW for consideration. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 1.13 of the Report. 

-20- 
 
ROLE OF SUB-MISSION ON AGRICULTURAL MECHANIZATION (SMAM) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
The Committee observe that the Government is implementing "Sub-Mission on 
Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM)" for which 40-50% of the cost of the equipments is 
being provided to the Small and Marginal Farmers for the purchase of Tractors, Power 
Tillers, Combine Harvesters, Rotavators and Rice transplanter. The Committee also 
note that the SMAM Scheme is implemented through State and UT Governments. 
SMAM has Central Sector Schemes Component, in which Government of India 
contributes 100%, whereas in case of Centrally Sponsored Schemes Government of 
India contributes 60% and States contribute 40% except for the North Eastern States 
and Himalayan region States where it is 90% (Central Share) and 10% (State Share). 
 
The Committee further note that Additional subsidy of 10% is provided to Small & 
Marginal Farmers over and above to general category farmers. The Small and Marginal 
Farmers are also using Tractors on rent basis. The Committee also note that SMAM 
has now been merged with the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) w.e.f. 30.09.2022. 
The Committee note that since the implementation of SMAM in 2014-15, total Rs. 
5377.7Crore has been released under SMAM against which 14,24,179 Machines were 
distributed.  
 
The Committee are of the opinion that in order to achieve the objective of 
increasing level of Farm Mechanization for the Small and Marginal Farmers, and with a 
view to offset the adverse economics of scale, arising due to small land holdings and 
high cost of individual ownership, the Government must promote low cost farm 
equipment. The Committee, further desire that the Government should try to promote 
this Scheme (SMAM) throughout the country by giving it wide publicity amongst the 
farmers so that they can take avail maximum benefits available on the purchase of 
Farm Equipments. However, the Committee further desire that with the merger of 
SMAM in RKVY, the mandate of SMAM should be kept intact and not diluted. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 On the recommendation of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), the Sub-
Mission on Agricultural Mechanization has been merged with Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 

-21- 
 
Yojana (RKVY). However, the interventions of agricultural mechanization will be 
implemented with the same objectives of  increasing the reach of farm mechanization to 
small and marginal farmers and to the regions where availability of farm power is low; 
promoting ‘Custom Hiring Centres’ and ‘Hi-tech Hubs of High Value Machines’ to offset 
the adverse economies of scale arising due to small landholding and high cost of 
individual ownership, creating awareness among stakeholders through demonstration 
and capacity building activities and ensuring performance testing and certification at 
designated testing centres. 
  
 Awareness on the importance of SMAM are created through capacity building 
and demonstration of advance machinery  at the farmers’ fields conducted by the Farm 
Machinery Training & Testing Institutes, Institutes of  Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR),  Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), State Agricultural Universities 
(SAUs), Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA), State and other Central 
Government Agricultural Institutions/Departments and Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs) of Government of India engaged in agricultural activities. 
 
CUSTOM HIRING CENTRES AND FARM MACHINERY BANKS 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee observe that one of the major objectives of SMAM is to promote 
custom hiring of farm machinery centres and Farm Machinery Banks (maintain a set of 
required equipments and use on sharing basis), so that Small and Marginal Farmers 
can get the benefits of Agriculture Mechanization. The Custom Hiring Centres have 
been established under SMAM and it has proved to be a successful model in some 
States. The Committee also note that Tractor and self-propelled high capacity farm 
implements and machinery are being promoted on custom hiring basis for use by small 
farm holders without owning the high value farm equipments/machines. The financial 
assistance @#40% of the Project Cost is also provided to rural youth and farmers as an 
entrepreneur to own and run Hiring/Custom Hiring Hubs/ Centres. 
 
 The Committee further note that Establishment of Custom Hiring Centers/Farm 
Machinery Banks scheme has enabled farmers to access/ hire Hi-tech and high value 

-22- 
 
machines, which cannot be purchased by the individual farmers. Since 2014-15 to till 
date total 37,097 Custom Hiring Centres have been established under SMAM. 
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that Farm Machinery Banks have been 
established in almost all the States except the Union Territories of Ladakh and Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli. The States like Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Haryana, Chhattisgarh, 
Madhya Pradesh and UP are the front runners in establishing these Centres. The 
Committee further note that a well equipped Custom Hiring Centre provides Farm 
Mechanization support to neighboring 100-200 farmers covering about 200 ha. in a 
cropping season.  
 
The Committee also observe that a total of 17727 Farm Machinery Banks have 
been established at Village Level and number of Hi-Tech Hubs established is 403. 
 
The Committee do feel that in spite the best efforts of the Government, the 
benefits of Farm Machinery banks have not percolated to Districts, Talukas, Panchayat 
and Gram Sabha Levels. The Committee feel that majority of the farmers are not aware 
of the benefits of the scheme of Farm Machinery Banks and are not able to benefit 
themselves from the advantages of scientific development. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that wide publicity of the benefits of this Scheme should be given amongst 
all farmers especially, the Small and Marginal Farmers through social and electronic 
media. Moreover, the Committee do desire that an App like 'Krishak Mitra' be developed 
to be used by Small and Marginal Farmers to locate and contact the Custom Hiring 
Centres/ Farm Machinery Banks in their close vicinity. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 Awareness on the importance of SMAM are created through capacity building 
and demonstration of new technology machines  on the farmers’ fields conducted by the 
Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA), Institutes of  Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR),  State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), otherState and  
Central Government Agricultural Institutions/Departments and Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs) of Government of India engaged in agricultural activities. A multi-

-23- 
 
lingual mobile app-based aggregator platform ‘FARMS’ (Farm Machinery Solutions) App 
has also been launched, which facilitates hiring and renting of farm machinery from and 
by the Custom Hiring Centres/owners of the farm machinery. This mobile app 
encompasses a fair and transparent rental process while focusing on quality, 
dependability and timely delivery of the services. So far 74,144 service providers have 
registered on this app with more than 172,404 machines for renting. More than 
524,09,976 farmers/other users have also registered for availing the services through 
this app. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 1.16 of the Report. 
 
FARM POWER AVAILABILITY 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
The Committee observe that there is a linear relationship between availability of 
Farm power and Farm yield. Therefore, there is a need to increase the availability of 
farm power from 2.49 KW per ha (2018-19), to 4.0 KW per ha by 2030 to cope up with 
increasing demand of food grains. About 86% of the total land holdings are in Small and 
Marginal Size Groups, which need special efforts for its mechanization. The Committee 
also note that the National (average) Farm power availability is 2.4888 kw. 
 
The Committee note that there is an urgent need to enhance the average farm 
power availability to minimum 4.00 KW/Ha to assure timeliness and quality in field 
operations by 2030. The Committee notice that the share of Tractor and Electric Motor 
in farm power availability increased from 6.8% to 45.8% and 14% to 26.8%, 
respectively. 
 
The Committee do observe that Agricultural Productivity is directly correlated to 
farm power (mechanical) availability. Hence, to increase productivity in different crops, 
the available farm power through mechanization needs to be increased. The Committee 
further observe that Government is training the farmers for different mechanization in 
different States through KVKs and providing subsidies for encouraging the availability of 
machinery to reduce disparity of farm power availability between the States. The ICAR 

-24- 
 
is having an umbrella MoU with State Agricultural Universities to implement All India 
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP) Scheme for locating specific research training 
centres. The Committee note the wide gap of power availability, for example, Punjab is 
having 6.011 KW/ha and Mizoram 0.693 (KW/ha). The Committee, therefore, feel that 
with the increase in power supply to Agriculture, more tasks can be completed at the 
right time and greater areas can be farmed to produce greater quantities of crops while 
conserving natural resources along with substantial savings on many fronts. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this direction. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 The adoption of mechanization by the farmers depends on various factors such 
as socioeconomic conditions, geographical conditions, crops grown, irrigation facilities 
etc.   There is disparity in achievement of level of mechanization among the States and 
the issues of such States are being addressed through  SMAM being implemented 
w.e.f. 2014-15 with the objectives of increasing the reach of farm mechanization to 
small and marginal farmers and to the regions where availability of farm power is low; 
promoting ‘Custom Hiring Centres’ and ‘Hi-tech Hubs of High Value Machines’ to offset 
the adverse economies of scale arising due to small landholding and high cost of 
individual ownership. Under this scheme, financial assistance @ 40% to 50% of the cost 
depending on the categories of farmers, is available for purchase of agricultural 
machines on individual ownership basis. Financial assistance @40% of the project cost 
is also available to rural youth & farmer as an entrepreneur, Cooperative Societies of 
Farmers, Registered Farmers Societies, Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) and 
Panchayats for establishment of Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) and Hi-tech hubs of 
high value agricultural machines. Financial assistance @ 80% of the project cost for the 
projects costing upto ₹10 Lakhs is available to the Cooperative Societies, Registered 
Farmer Societies, FPOs and Panchayats for setting up of village level Farm Machinery 
Banks (FMBs). The rate of financial assistance for the North Eastern States for 
establishment of Farm Machinery Bank is @95% of the project cost. 
 
  

-25- 
 
AGRICULTURE RESEARCH SERVICE (ARS) 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
The Committee observe that a centre for ‘Agri-electronics and Automation in 
Agriculture’ has been created at ICAR-CIAE, Bhopal and a Department of Sensor and 
Automation Engineering has been established at ICAR-CIPHET, Ludhiana. A new 
Agricultural Research Service (ARS) discipline of “Electronics and Instrumentations” for 
selection of scientists through all India Examination has also been started and the 
Government is working in these areas with very limited capacities.  
 
The Committee feel that Automation is the need of the hour in Agriculture as it 
not only improves harvest time and also improves efficiency and productivity both. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should train more engineers in 
field of Electronics and Instrumentation and for this the recruitment process of ARS 
should be taken up vigorously to meet the requirement of engineers. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 The Agricultural Scientific Recruitment Board (ASRB)-DARE is in the process of 
recruiting new scientists of discipline Electronics and Instrumentation to improve the 
automation in agriculture. The ASRB has brought out a notification (vide file no. 
1(8)/2023-Exam, dated 17th May 2023) for conducting ARS Examination-2023 for 
recruitment of new scientists under this notification, six posts have been advertised for 
“Electronics and Instrumentation” discipline. 
 
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AGRICULTURAL ROBOTICS AND ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE (AI) 
  
Recommendation No. 16 
 
 The Committee note that our lands are highly fragmented and will get further 
smaller and smaller in time to come. Tiny robots and Artificial Intelligence (AI) for Indian 
Farm Operations in future are urgently needed. A concerted effort with multidisciplinary 
approach is needed for timely development in this direction. Accordingly, a proposal for 
the National Institute of Agricultural Robotics and AI has been submitted in the SGoS-8 
Vision India-2047, an initiative of Hon’ble Prime Minister of India. 

-26- 
 
The Committee also feel that opening of National Institute of Agricultural 
Robotics & Artificial Intelligence is required to keep pace in development in agriculture 
at National and International level. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 The proposed initiative in the “SGoS-8 Vision India-2047” to establish the 
"National Institute of Agricultural Robotics & Artificial Intelligence" is poised to 
revolutionize India's agriculture sector. Furthermore, there are ongoing efforts to 
collaborate with private companies to create an academic institute dedicated to 
advancing Agricultural Robotics & Artificial Intelligence. This initiative promises to 
significantly impact modern Indian agriculture. 
 
  

-27- 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
PORTABILITY OF FARM EQUIPMENTS SUITABLE FOR SMALL AND MARGINAL 
FARMERS 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee observe that the Small and Marginal Agricultural Land Holdings 
(less than 2 Hectares) account for 86% of the total Operational holdings i.e. 47% of the 
total operated area. The average farm size in India is small (1.08 Ha). The Committee 
also observe that the farm machinery is very costly and small farmers find it difficult to 
purchase these equipments, as they are not in a position to use the equipments due to 
poor purchasing power. The Committee further note that the Government has 
introduced custom hiring of farm equipments, wherein a group of farmers can own and 
share the machines among themselves at mutually agreed charges by maintaining the 
Farm Machinery Bank. 
 
The Committee also note that Farm Machinery standardization is a multi-
ministerial complex issue. Government has to make a concrete policy in order to 
enforce compatibility/matching i.e. interchangeability in the manufacture of Agricultural 
Implements. Manufacturing of critical Components needs to be standardized and 
encouraged for mass production by medium and large-scale manufacturers. The 
Committee further note that it will also help in setting up of ancillary units, which can 
specialize in the manufacture of these standard Components thus increasing the 
product spectrum and enhance employment opportunity. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to find solution to the Multi-ministerial complex issue. The 
Committee feel that this can be achieved by standardization of design of 
equipments/attachments at Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) level and implementation 
of Standards at the Manufacturer levels and further, testing of equipment / attachment / 
parts manufactured by different manufacturers for ensuring their adherence to the BIS 
standards specifications.  The availability of standard parts makes production simpler 

-28- 
 
and improves components/attachments interchangeability and training of manufacturers 
in manufacturing technology on use of jigs-fixtures, die-punches, templates and other 
tooling aids for improving quality and compatibility/matching.  
  
 The Committee desire the Government to follow up with other allied Government 
Departments and try to find portability of farm equipments suitable to Small and 
Marginal Farmers as they are not in a position to buy huge farm equipment and cannot 
use these equipments in a cost effective way as their land holdings are very small. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete and specific action taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 The scientists of Agricultural Engineering Division, ICAR and officials of DA&FW 
are actively involved in different Sectional Committee of Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS) to prepare/adopt/modify the standards for agricultural equipment/machines. The 
BIS has brought out number of Standards or specification for testing and evaluation of 
farm equipment and machinery which helps in assurance of any product’s quality, 
reliability, portability and safety machines/equipment to the customers. During 
interaction meetings, the manufacturers are being encouraged to use/manufacture the 
standard component for manufacturing the equipment/machines to facilitate the 
interchangeability or replacement of parts. There are already, 4 FMTTI and 38 other 
DA&FW designated /approved testing Centers at ICAR institutes, SAUs and State 
Agricultural Departments which are testing the machines and equipment as per these 
standards and the test reports released by these institutions make the manufacturers 
clear about performance and durability of the equipment for proper/efficient utilization 
along with the technical information available to the farmers for proper selection of the 
required equipment.  
  
 Research and Development is an ongoing activity and is being carried out by the 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR). The machines and equipment including 
those developed for small and marginal farmers are included for financial assistance 
under the Scheme. Establishment of Custom Hiring Centres and Village Level Farm 
Machinery Banks are already addressing the issues of reach of farm mechanization to 

-29- 
 
small and marginal farmers and to the regions where availability of farm power is low. It 
also helps in offsetting the adverse economies of scale arising due to small landholding 
and high cost of individual ownership. The Department under scheme Sub-Mission on 
Agricultural Mechanization since its inception in 2014-15, established more than 43,900 
Custom Hiring Centres/Hi-tech Hubs/Farm Machinery Banks for the benefits of farmers. 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR PROCUREMENT OF AGRI-EQUIPMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Committee note that the Government is helping farmers by providing subsidy 
to procure machinery to improve farm input and farm power availability. The Ministry 
has allocated an amount of Rs.  ₹5490.82 Crore from the year 2014-15 to 2022-23 for 
this purpose. 
 
The Central DBT Portal for Agriculture Machinery Mechanization (maintained by 
DA&FW) has been well received in India as one of the important elements of 
modernization of Agriculture. The Portal helps in Single Window clearance for approval 
of equipment/machines procurement of Individual farmer/CHCs. However, present day’s 
electronic agricultural equipments/gadgets probably require clearance of department of 
electronics as well as DA&FW, which requires to be simplified. 
 
The Committee appreciate the idea of using Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Portal 
as a Single Window clearance for the approval of equipments/machines procurement by 
Individual farmer/Custom Hiring Centres. However, the Committee notice that for 
procurement of electronic agricultural equipments/gadgets, clearance of the Department 
of Electronics is also required. The Committee think that there must be some 
mechanism software with an automatic link in the DBT Portal for Department of 
Electronics to facilitate the clearance and approval in one go.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare has not come across any such 
issues that the farmers for purchase of agricultural machines and equipment fitted with 
the electronic components/gadgets need to take permission from the Department of 

-30- 
 
Electronics. However, the issues if any will be looked into and resolved in consultation 
with the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF DIRECTORATE OF AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
The Committee note that at present Directorate of Agricultural Engineering exist 
in two States (Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu). The Committee also note that ICAR is 
pursuing the case through the Ministry and the Hon'ble Union Minister had sent a DO 
letter to all the Chief Ministers of States to establish a Directorate of Agricultural  
Engineering in their States. 
 
The Secretary, Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) and 
ICAR Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering are also pursuing the issue through 
different forum and writing letters to different State Governments. The Committee 
observe that delivery points at Block and District Levels in case of Agricultural 
Machinery are almost missing. There is no engineering manpower to demonstrate, train, 
help in repairs/maintenance and guide farmers at their doorstep. There is an urgent 
need of Agricultural Engineers at Block and District Levels. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that to monitor and implement the government policy and Programme of 
mechanization more effectively and efficiently, a Directorate of Agricultural Engineering 
is needed in each State and instead of Sub-scheme on submission of Agricultural 
Mechanization, Government should have full-fledged Agriculture Mechanization 
Scheme to accelerate the process. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 Madhya Pradesh has a directorate with about three agricultural engineers per 
district. Tamil Nadu Directorate has around 1029 agricultural engineers located at the 
regional state offices and at state headquarter. Odisha has 30 districts, and the strength 
of agricultural engineers is 15 per district. The states which have Directorate of 
Agricultural Engineering are effectively implementing engineering centric govt. schemes 
and have better agricultural growth rate. Establishment of the "Directorate of Agricultural 

-31- 
 
Engineering" in state will strengthen agricultural mechanization, post-harvest 
processing, soil and water conservation & energy in agriculture. The matter is being 
pursued with state governments for establishment of Directorate of Agricultural 
Engineering in the state. One more letter has been written by Hon’ble Minister of 
Agriculture and farmers Welfare Shri Narendra Singh Tomer jee (vide letter no. A. Engg. 
14/93/2023-AE, dated 16.08.2023) to the Chief Minister of the states to establish 
“Directorate of Agricultural Engineering and create post of Agricultural Engineers at 
block and district level” to achieve mechanization goal at faster rate. 
 
 On the recommendation of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), the Sub-
Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) has been merged with Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana (RKVY). 
 
PROMOTION OF RURAL ENTREPRENURSHIP 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
The Committee note that the high-cost farm machinery is capital intensive and 
majority of Indian farmers are not able to acquire these assets. The Committee also 
note that matching equipment for tractors, power tillers and other prime movers are 
either not available or farmers are forced to make inappropriate selection in the absence 
of proper guidance, resulting in high input cost of production. 
 
The Committee also note that the quality and after sales service of farm 
machinery are the other concerns as the majority of farmers are cost conscious. There 
are inadequate service centers for proper up-keep of the machinery. In addition, the 
inability of local low cost manufacturers to come up to the levels of standard designs of 
equipment also poses a big challenge to Farm Mechanization. 
 
The Committee also find that a software i.e. Mobile App Krishi Yantra Mitra has 
been developed for Agro-climatic Zone wise, which should be given wide publicity and 
its benefit conveyed to all the farmers. Further, the Committee desire that in order to 
improve the quality of the machines and reduce frequent breakdowns, testing centres 
for the commercial machines/equipment as per BIS standards specifications should be 

-32- 
 
set up in all parts of the country. ICAR Institutes and manufacturers of farm equipment 
should have interaction at regular intervals to ensure that manufactures get information 
on new developments in the field.  
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that there is an urgent need to 
promote Rural Entrepreneurship for rural employed youth who are either under 
employed or unemployed. Keeping into account a huge demand for skilled workers in 
rural area particularly in Agro and Allied business thrust is needed on Agri-
entrepreneurship so that job opportunities are created and made available to these rural 
unemployed youth. The Committee think that it will reduce migration of rural people to 
urban areas in research of job and promote rural development by way of employment in 
villages itself to a great extent. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 Institute and research centres of the All-Indian Coordinated Research Project on 
Farm Implement and Machinery have been conducting interaction meeting with farm 
machinery manufacturers regularly to share information about newly development 
equipment/technologies.  During last five-year, 47 improved equipment/technologies 
have been commercialized. A meeting cum visit of All India Agricultural Machinery 
Manufacturers Association (AMMA-India) has been planned at ICAR-CIAE Bhopal on 
25 September, 2023 and information about newly developed machinery will be shared 
with the participating farm machinery manufacturers. 
 
 Four Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes (FMTTIs) of Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare and Institute ICAR-CIAE, Bhopal are organizing various 
training programmes to improve farm mechanization. The training courses are designed 
to accommodate participants from varied backgrounds such as rural youth/farmers, 
trainers, academicians, officials of state Governments, entrepreneurs, manufactures 
and apprentices from industries and colleges. Some training programmes at FMTTIs 
and Institute have been aligned with the National Skill Qualification Framework under 
the National Skill Development Mission with the aim of imparting employable skills. 
 
 

-33- 
 
 In order to hasten the process of testing of agricultural machinery, Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare has authorized 38 different institutes/centres across the 
country under ICAR/State Governments/SAUs for testing of agricultural machines and 
equipment apart from the 4 Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes (FMTTIs). 
 
  

-34- 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
STATUS OF AGRICULTURE MECHANIZATION IN INDIA 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
  
The Committee note that Agriculture Mechanization is essential to modern 
agriculture to increase the productivity and for making judicious and cost-effective use 
of inputs like seeds, fertilizers, chemicals & pesticides and natural resources like water, 
soil nutrients, etc. The Committee also note that for the purpose, the Government have 
undertaken several developmental Programmes, Schemes, reforms at policy level with 
the intent and focus to increase employment and income of the farmers. 
 
The Committee further note that India accounts for only about 2.4% of the 
World’s geographical area and 4% of its water resources, but has to support about 17% 
of the world’s human population and 15% of the livestock. Agriculture is an important 
Sector of the Indian economy, approximately accounting for 20% of the Nation’s GDP. 
The Committee also note that Agriculture in India is currently growing at an average 
Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 2.8%. About half of the population relies on 
agriculture as its principal source of income. 
 
The Committee note that the overall Agriculture Mechanization Level of the 
country is 47% which is comparatively lower than that of other developing countries 
such as China (59.5%) and Brazil (75%).  Farmers need complete mechanization 
package for major crops. The Committee also note that contribution of Agricultural 
Mechanization in India leads to saving in seed 15-20%, in fertilizer 15-20%, 
improvement in germination rate 7-25%, saving in time 20-30%, in weed 20-40% in 
labour 20-30%, increase in cropping intensity 5-20% and increase in crop yield 13-23%. 
 
There are 86% Small and Marginal Farmers having less than 2 Hectare of land 
holdings. Unless machines appropriate for small holdings are made available or 
substantial farm amalgamation takes place, it is difficult for the Small and Marginal 

-35- 
 
Farmers to purchase their own machinery. The Committee desire that Farm Machinery 
for majority of the farmers, who are Small and Marginal Farmers and who do not have 
adequate funds to purchase capital intensive implements should be developed and 
further incentivized. 
 
The Committee have been apprised of the fact that if we compare our country 
with the developed nations then till date on an average only 47% Agriculture 
Mechanization has been done and it is expected that another 25 years are required to 
achieve the level of 75-80% mechanization from the present level of 47%. The 
Government has taken various initiatives and is helping farmers by providing subsidy to 
procure machinery to improve farm input and farm - power availability. 
 
The Committee do feel that economic growth in Indian Agricultural Sector lags 
behind the parallel growth in Industry and Services Sector, creating an ever widening 
rural-urban income disparity. The Agricultural Mechanization plays a key role in 
improving agricultural production, productivity and efficiency. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should strive hard to promote Agricultural 
Mechanization by according priority for development of small equipments/machines for 
Small and Marginal Farmers as there is an urgent need to bring in quality and value 
addition of the farm produce enabling the farmers to take second and subsequent crops 
making agriculture more attractive and profitable. Apart from this the Committee 
strongly desire that the Government must strive hard to achieve a level of 75% in farm 
mechanization from the present level of 47% in a much shorter period than that which 
has been stated by the Department to be 25 years. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 Some ICAR Institutes and Centres of the All India Coordinated Research Project 
(AICRP) are engaged in research and development of the equipment/machines for 
mechanization of agricultural production and post-production activities for small and 
marginal farmers. The improved implement and machinery operated small tractor and 
power tiller are also developed for field and horticultural crops. The developed 
equipment/ technologies are being commercialized and transferred to potential 
stakeholders. The average size of operational holdings is shrinking in all States and the 

-36- 
 
percentage of marginal, small and semi-medium operational holdings is increasing due 
to continuing fragmentation of land which is making individual ownership of agricultural 
machinery progressively more difficult.  Smaller and fragmented land size is not suitable 
for mechanized operations and therefore there is regional disparity in the level of farm 
mechanization. Inadequacy of skilled manpower for operation, repair and maintenance 
of Tractors, Power tillers, Combines Harvesters and other Tractor & self-propelled 
agricultural Machinery is another area of concern.  However, the Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is actively boosting mechanization levels by 
implementing the Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) to overcome 
existing constraints in agriculture..   The primary focus is to establish block-level custom 
hiring service infrastructure with comprehensive machinery sets for all major crop 
operations in the respective regions The Cooperative Societies of Farmers, Farmers 
Producer Organizations (FPOs), Self Help Groups (SHGs), Panchayats are supported 
with higher rate of financial assistance for establishment of Farm Machinery Banks at 
village levels.So far, farm machinery and equipment are available to the small and 
marginal farmers on rental basis as per their requirements. The availability of Custom 
Hiring Centres CHCs)/Village Level Farm Machinery Banks (FMBs) are being increased 
through the Aspirational Districts Programme by way of establishing at least 2 
CHCs/FMBs in each block in the identified aspirational districts to address the regional 
disparity in level of mechanization. It will also address the issues of timely availability of 
appropriate machinery to the farmers engaged in underdeveloped regions of the 
country. Focus is also towards creating infrastructure of post-harvest processing and 
value addition through women Self Help Groups so that the facilities are available at the 
farmgate.  The Institute ICAR-CIAE, Bhopal; 25 centres of the AICRP on Farm 
Impalement and Machinery (FIM); and four of  Farm Machinery Training and Testing 
Institutes (FMTTIs) at Budni (MP), Hisar (Haryana),  Anantapur (Andhra Pradesh) and 
Biswanath Chariali in Assam, are imparting skill-oriented training in the area agricultural 
mechanization to various groups of beneficiaries like Farmers, Rural Youth technicians, 
undergraduate Agriculture /Mechanical, Diploma holder in ITI trade Certificate in 
Tractor/agricultural Machinery operators /technician, Management /Supervisory level 
trainees from Government sectors and industries, etc. The existing capacity of all four 
FMTTIs has been increased and the existing infrastructure is also being augmented to 

-37- 
 
meet the increasing demand. All these initiatives will help in increasing the level of 
mechanization at a faster pace. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 1.7 of the Report. 
 
 
LOW HORSE POWER TRACTORS 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
The Committee note that the Tractors are most important Machines for 
Agriculture as these performs various farm operations. The selection of Horse Power for 
Tractor depends upon the size of the land and farm applications. The Committee note 
that the average farm size in India is small (1-08ha) and the small and marginal 
holdings of less than 2 Hectares account for 86% of the total operational holdings. The 
Committee feel that for Small and Marginal Farmers buying the Farm Equipments even 
after subsidy is very expensive. The Committee also note that Tractor parts and 
Components attract GST of 12%. The Committee, therefore, recommend that GST for 
Tractor parts and components be reduced suitably for the Tractors upto 40 hp. in order 
to bring down the cost of such Tractors. The Committee feel that this will not only help 
the Small and Marginal Farmers but also provide the much needed succour to them for 
buying the most important Farm equipment. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 The GST rate slabs are decided by the GST Council. The Ministry of Agriculture 
& Farmers Welfare since 2017 is continuously pursuing reduction/rationalization in the 
GST rates for agricultural machines and equipment including tractors, power Tillers and 
Combine Harvesters. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 1.19 of the Report. 
  

-38- 
 
CHAPTER - V 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
SOIL PLANT ANALYSIS DEVELOPMENT (SPAD) 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
 
The Committee observe that with regard to development in precision and robotic 
machines, the Department had made Soil Plant Analysis Development (SPAD) Meter 
for checking Nitrogen status and spectral reflectance based variable application system 
developed by ICAR - Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal. The 
Committee also note that the SPAD Meter is a hand held low cost instrument and single 
button press will give readings. Further, Advisory Services/ User Manual will be 
provided by KVKs or Block Level Agencies/manufacturers. The Committee further note 
that the Department has given license to manufacturers for manufacturing the SPAD 
Meter to be made available in the market for different stake holders.    
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of by when the manufacturers who 
have been awarded license will start manufacturing of the SPAD Meter and sell the 
same in the open market. The Committee feel that the SPAD Meter will be a boon to 
farmers especially Small and Marginal Farmers. The Committee desire the Machines 
(SPAD Meter) to be made cost effective.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
 The manufacturer is conducting own experiments on different crops for building 
database for comparison of results. The manufacturer is demonstrating the hand-held 
device at various exhibitions/krishi melas and various state departments for generating 
demand. The manufacturer is ready to launch the SPAD meter in due course. 
 
 
 
New Delhi             P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
06 February, 2024      Chairperson 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
   Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
  

-39- 
 
Annexure 
 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2023-24) 
 
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06th February, 2024 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in the Office of Chairperson, Room No. 103, Block-B, Extension to Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi.   
 
Present 
 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 4. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 5. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11. Shri Masthan Rao Beedha Yadav 
12. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
13. Shri Kailash Soni 
14. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
15. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
16. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan – Additional Secretary     
2. Shri Khakhai Zou   – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan            –   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria  – Deputy Secretary  
 

-40- 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of Draft 
Reports on the following Subjects: 
*(i) xxxx   xxxx    xxxx    xxxx 
*(ii) xxxx   xxxx    xxxx    xxxx 
*(iii) xxxx   xxxx    xxxx    xxxx 
(iv) Action Taken Report on the Fifty-Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the 
Subject 'Research and Development in Farm Mechanization for Small and 
Marginal Farmers in the Country' pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
  
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any 
modification.  The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present 
the Report to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report 
 
 
  

-41- 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT (17TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              16 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Para Nos. 2,5,6,8,9,10,11,15 and 16    
Total          09    
Percentage                   56.25% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para Nos.     3,4,7 and 12         
Total                     04 
Percentage                     25% 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.     1 and 14   
Total            02 
Percentage                                      12.50 % 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para No.           13      
Total                     01  
Percentage                     06.25%  
 
 