STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
 (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
  
 
'PROMOTION OF CLIMATE RESILIENT FARMING' 
 
 
SIXTY- EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2024 /MAGHA 1945 (SAKA) 
 
68 

 
SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 
                 (2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
 (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
  
 
'PROMOTION OF CLIMATE RESILIENT FARMING' 
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on                07.02.2024 
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on          07.02.2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2024 /MAGHA 1945 (SAKA) 

 
 
COA No. 496
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in            
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 
 
 

<CONTENTS> 
              REPORT 
 
Abbreviations           (vii- ix) 
Page No.  
Part-I Climate Resilient Farming - An introduction             1 
 A. Changes Observed in Global Climate              1 
 B. Climate Change in India: Observed & Projected Changes            2 
(a) Increase in Temperature in India             2 
(b) Warming of the Indian Ocean              2 
(c) Changes in Rainfall               2 
(d) Droughts                3 
(e) Rise in Sea Levels               3 
(f) Tropical Cyclones               3 
(g) Changes in the Himalayas              4 
C. Risk and Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate Change          5 
D. Climate Resilient Villages               6 
E. National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC)            15 
F. National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)            19 
(a) Mission Strategy               21 
(b) Measurable Indicators for the NMSA Activities            22 
(c) Schemes under National Mission for Sustainable Development (NMSA)         23 
i) Rainfed Area Development (RAD)             23 
ii) Per Drop More Crop (PDMC)              24 
iii) Mission Organic Value Chain Development in North East Region (MOVCDNER)      25 
iv) Restructured National Bamboo Mission (NBM)            26 
v) Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)             26 
vi) System of Rice Intensification/ Direct Seeded Rice (SRI/DSR)           26 
vii) Crop Diversification                27 
viii) Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH)           28 
ix) Soil Health Card (SHC)/ Soil Health Management (SHM)           28 
x) Sub-Mission on Agroforestry               29 
G. National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)            32 
H. Sustainable Development Goal – 13               36 
I. Impact of Climate Change on India               37 
(a) Impact on Crops                38 
(b) Impact on Horticulture               40 
(c) Impact on Livestock                41 
(d) Impact on Fisheries sector               42 
J. Research Infrastructure on Climate Change              43 
K. Green House Gas (GHG) Emissions from Agriculture Sector            45 
L. Carbon Market in Agriculture                49 
M. Natural Resource Management               50 
N. Climate Resilient varieties                51 
(a) Food grains/Crops               51 
(b) Horticulture                52 
(c) Livestock                56 
(i) 

(d) Fisheries                58 
O. Pest modelling and forecasting              59 
P. Agroforestry and sequestration              59 
Q. Crop Residue Management through Farm Mechanization           60 
R. Agricultural Contingency Crop Planning and Agro Advisory Services          61 
S. Upscaling of Resilient Practices              64 
T. Human Resources in Climate Resilient Agriculture            66 
U. Creating Mass Awareness about Climate Change            68 
V. Digital Agriculture                69 
W. Promotion of Millets/Coarse grains              72 
X. Food and Nutrition Security               74 
Y. Role of Nuclear Technology in boosting Agricultural Productivity          76 
Z. Lifestyle for the Environment (LiFE)              77 
 
PART – II 
 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee                    79 
ANNEXURE 
I. Climate Resilient Varieties (Abiotic stress tolerant)            93 
II. Details of biotic stress tolerant field crop varieties develope d           94 
III. Location specific technologies developed and their benefits            97 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the 5 th Sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held on 31st January, 2023        99 
II. Minutes of the 20th Sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held on 24th August, 2023        101 
III. Minutes of the 5 th Sitting of the Committee (2023-24) held on 06th February, 2024        104 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan  
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni   
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
* Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav on 10.10.2022 - Bull etin- 
Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022. 
# Vacant w.e.f.29.04.2023 due to disqualification of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha M embership 
from the date of his conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of 
India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
 (iii) 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Pat el 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Mohammad Sadique 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Virendra Singh  
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
21. VACANT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beedha Yadav 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundar am 
26. Shri Kailash Soni 
27.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar * 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
* Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar, MP, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to  the Committee 
vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 7523 dated 29.09.2023 vice Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
w.e.f. 26.09.2023 
 
(iv) 
 
 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan  - Additional Secretary 
 
 2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
 
 3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar    - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2023-24), having been authorized by the Committee to submit  the Report on their 
behalf, present this Sixty-Eighth Report on the Subject ‘Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming' 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department  of Agriculture a nd 
Farmers Welfare). 
 
2. The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processin g had 
selected the Subject for examination during 2022-23 . Briefing on the Subject by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Departmen t of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare) was held at their Sitting on 31.01.2023. As the examination of the Subject 
could not be completed during 2022-23, the Subject was again selected for examination by the 
Committee during 2023-24. Evidence on the Subject was held at their Sitting on 24.08.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
06.02.2024.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report. 
 
5.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Mi nistry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare ), Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Ministry of Environment, Forests & C limate Change 
and Agrometeorological Advisory Services for appearing before the Committee and furnishing 
requisite information in connection with the examination of the Subject.  
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense appreciation for  the 
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat a ttached to the 
Committee.  
 
         
NEW DELHI;                          P.C. GADDIGOUDAR  
06 February, 2024                                     Chairperson, 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
                Animal Husbandry and Food Processing   
(vi) 

 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AF  Adaptation Fund  
AR  Assessment Report 
ATMA   Agriculture Technology Management Agency 
BBF    Broad Bred and Furrow  
BOQCLs   Bio-Fertilizer/Organic Fertilizer Quality Control Labs 
BPKP    Bharatiya Prakritik Krishi Paddhati Programme  
BSMA   Broad Subject Matter Committee  
CCEs    Crop Cutting Experiments  
CHC   Custom Hiring Centers  
CMIP5  Coupled Model Inter-comparison Project Phase 5  
CMLs   Commercial Microwave Links  
CRIDA  Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture  
CROPIC Collection of Real-time Photos and Observation of Crops 
CRPS  Climate Resilient Pen System  
CRTs   Climate Resilient Technologies  
CSS    Centrally Sponsored Scheme  
CTGC    CO2 Temperature Gradient Chambers  
DA&FW   Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
DACP  District Agriculture Contingency Plans  
DASD  Directorate of Arecanut and Spices Development  
DEA   Dehydrogenase Enzyme Activity 
DPI   Digital Public Infrastructure 
DSR   Direct Seeded Rice 
EEZ   Exclusive Economic Zone 
FAO  Food and Agriculture Organization 
FAPs   Farmers ’ Awareness Programmes  
FATE   Free Air Temperature Enrichment facility  
FIGs    Farmers Interest Groups  
FPCs   Farmers Producer Companies  
FPOs   Farmer Producer Organizations  
FQCLs  Fertilizer Quality Control Labs  
FYM   Farmyard Manure  
GCF   Green Climate Fund  
GEF   Global Environmental Facility  
GHG   Greenhouse Gases  
GKMS  Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva  
GVA   Gross Value Added  
GWP    Global Warming Potential 
(vii) 

 
 
HKH   Hindu Kush Himalayas 
HVYs   High Yielding Varieties  
IARI   Indian Agricultural Research Institute  
ICAR   Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
ICDS    Integrated Child Development Services  
IMD   Indian Meteorological Department 
INM   Integrated Nutrient Management  
IOT  Internet of Things  
IPCC   Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change 
IYM   International Year of Millets  
KDSS   Krishi Decision Support System  
KVKs   Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
LiFE   Lifestyle for the Environment 
LULC   Land Use And Land Cover  
MCs   Meteorological Centres  
MIDH   Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture  
MNRE  Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  
MoEFCC  Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
MoES   Ministry of Earth Sciences  
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
MOVCDNER Mission on Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region  
NAFED  National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India  
NAPCC  National Action Plan for Climate Change 
NAREES  National Agricultural Research and Education and Extension System  
NARP  National Agricultural Research Project  
NABM  National Agroforestry and Bamboo Mission 
NBM   National Bamboo Mission  
NBSS&LUP  National Bureau of Soil Survey & Land Use Planning  
NCAER National Council of Applied Economic Research  
NCIP   National Crop Insurance Portal  
NDC   Nationally Determined Contribution  
NeGPA  National e-Governance Plan in Agriculture 
NFSM  National Food Security Mission  
NICRA  National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture  
NMAE&T  National Mission for Agricultural Extension & Technology  
NMSA  National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture  
NPCA   National Plan for Conservation of Aquatic Ecosystems  
NPMCR  National Policy for Management of Crop Residues  
(viii) 
 

 
 
NRM   Natural Resource Management 
NWFC  National Weather Forecasting Centre  
ODOP  One District One Product  
OHC  Ocean Heat Content 
PGS  Participatory Guarantee Scheme 
OFWM  On Farm Water Management 
PDMC  Per Drop More Crop Scheme 
PKVY   Pramparagat Krishi VikasYojana  
PLISMBP  Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry for  
  Millet-based products  
PMFME  Pradhan Mantri Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises  
PMMSY  Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
PPP   Public Private Partnership  
PPR    Pesti-des Petits Ruminants  
RAD   Rainfed Area Development  
RAS   Re-Circulating Aquaculture System  
RCP   Representative Concentration Pathway 
RKVY  Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana  
RWCIS Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme 
RMCs  Regional Meteorological Centres  
SAPCC State Action Plans on Climate Change  
SAU   State Agricultural Universities 
SDG   Sustainable Development Goal 
SHC   Soil Health Card 
SHM   Soil Health Management 
SMAF  Sub Mission on Agroforestry 
SMAM  Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization  
SMBC  Soil Microbial Biomass Carbon  
SOC   Soil Organic Carbon  
SRI    System of Rice Intensification  
SST   Sea Surface Temperature 
STLs   Soil Testing Labs  
TDC  Technology Demonstration Component  
TPDS   Targeted Public Distribution System 
UFSI   Unified Farmer Service Interface  
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention/Conference on Climate Change 
VCRMC  Village Level Climate Risk Management Committees  
WINDS  Weather Information Network Data System  
YESTECH  Yield Estimation through Technology 
(ix) 

1 
 
PART-I 
Climate Resilient Farming - An introduction 
 Climate Change is currently one of the most significant challenges that hu manity 
is confronting in the present era. The alterations in the Earth's climate, which hav e 
shown a remarkable increase in the previous few decades, have had a profound  impact 
on all aspects of life and economic endeavors globally, including the sphere of 
Agriculture. In the realm of India, a nation that stands as one of the world's most rapidly 
developing economies, Agriculture assumes a crucial role, with a staggering 54.6% of 
the overall labour force engaged in it and its Allied Sectors, as indicated  by the 2011 
Census. Furthermore, the Agricultural Sector contributes a noteworthy 18.6% to In dia's 
Gross Value Added (GVA) at the present prices during the period o f 2021-22. Recently, 
Indian Agriculture has encountered extraordinary tribulations due to the ram ifications of 
Climate Change. This conundrum not only poses a threat to food productio n but also 
imperils the domains of mainly Livestock, Fisheries, and Horticulture. 
1.2 Climate Change is a worldwide occurrence that has disrupted phenolog ical 
patterns in all nations to some extent, as indicated by the Assessment Report (AR-6) for 
the year 2021 of the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which 
outlines the challenges posed by global warming. Nations are establishing internation al 
partnerships and alliances to mobilize resources for the purpose of mitigating the impact 
of Climate Change. The occurrence of Climate Change has necessitated th e demand 
for the adoption of new practices, particularly in the field of Agriculture, as well as an 
increased need for research and innovations. These measures are not only aimed at 
preventing loss of yield and income in the Agrarian Sector, but also at ensuring the 
long-term well-being of society and the economy. 
A. Changes Observed in Global Climate 
1.3 The observed alterations in the Earth's Climate on a Global Scale have been 
documented. Specifically, the average temperature of the Oceans has expe rienced an 
increase of approximately 1 degree Celsius since the time before industrialization. This 
significant and rapid change in temperature cannot be solely attributed to n atural 
fluctuations, but rather must take into consideration the influence of hum an activities. 
The release of greenhouse gases, the presence of aerosols in the atmosp here, and 
modifications to the utilization and coverage of land during the  industrial era have all 
had a substantial impact on the composition of the atmosphere and, co nsequently, the 
equilibrium of energy within the Planet. As a result, these factors are primarily 
responsible for the current state of Climate Change. Moreover, the warming tre nd that 
has been observed since the 1950s has already had a notable effect on the occurrence 
of extreme weather events and climatic irregularities on a global scale. Exam ples of 
these consequences include heat waves, droughts, heavy rainfall, and inte nse 
cyclones. Additionally, alterations in precipitation patterns and shifts in global monso on 
systems have been observed. The warming trend has also contributed to  the 
acidification and warning of the Earth's oceans, the melting of sea ice and glaciers, the 
rise in sea levels, and changes in both the Marine and Terrestrial Ecosystems. 

2 
 
Projected Changes in Global Climate 
1.4 Global Climate Models forecast a continuation of Climate Change cause d by 
human activities throughout the twenty-first century and beyond. If the current emission 
rates of greenhouse gases (GHG) persist, it is highly likely that the average g lobal 
temperature will increase by approximately 5 degrees Celsius, and potentially eve n 
more, by the conclusion of the twenty-first century. Even if all the commitments made 
under the 2015 Paris agreement, known as the "Nationally Determined Contri butions," 
are fulfilled, it is projected that global warming will surpass 3 degrees Celsius by the end 
of the century. Nevertheless, the rise in temperature will not occur uniformly across the 
globe; certain regions will experience greater warming compared to the global av erage. 
These substantial temperature changes will significantly expedite other ongo ing 
alterations in the climate system, such as shifts in rainfall patterns and an escalation in 
extreme temperatures. 
B. Climate Change in India: Observed and Projected Changes 
(a) Increase in Temperature in India 
1.5 The average temperature in India has witnessed an elevation of approx imately 
0.7 degrees Celsius between 1901 and 2018. This temperature rise is predominantly 
attributed to the warming effect caused by Green House Gases emissions, although it is 
partially offset by the impact of anthropogenic aerosols and alterations in land use and 
land cover (LULC). 
(b) Warming of the Indian Ocean 
1.6 The average Sea Surface Temperature (SST) of the tropical Indian Ocean  has 
experienced a rise of 1 Degree Celsius during the period from 1951 to  2015, which is 
significantly higher than the global average SST warming of 0.7 degrees Celsius ov er 
the same time frame. Furthermore, the upper 700 metres of the Tropical I ndian Ocean, 
known as the ocean heat content (OHC700), has displayed an upward trend over the 
past six decades (1955-2015), with the most recent two decades (1998-2015 ) 
witnessing a particularly abrupt increase. 
(c) Changes in Rainfall 
1.7 The precipitation during the summer monsoon season in India, which occu rs 
from June to September, has experienced a decline of approximately  6% between the 
years 1951 and 2015. This decrease is particularly noticeable over the Ind o-Gangetic 
Plains and the Western Ghats. Multiple datasets and simulations using climate model s 
have led to a growing consensus that the radiative effects of anthropoge nic aerosol in 
the Northern Hemisphere have counteracted the anticipated increase in precipitation 
due to greenhouse gas warming. As a result, this has contributed to the obse rved 
decline in Summer Monsoon precipitation. 
1.8 In recent years, there has been a notable shift towards more frequent d ry spells, 
with a 27% increase during the period of 1981-2011 compared to 19 51-1980. 
Additionally, there have been more intense wet spells during the summ er monsoon 

3 
 
season. This increase in localized heavy precipitation occurrences is a global 
phenomenon in response to the higher moisture content in the atmosphere. Specifically, 
in Central India, the frequency of daily precipitation extremes with rainfall inten sities 
exceeding 150 mm per day has risen by approximately 75% between 1950 and 2015. 
1.9 Based on the projections from the Coupled Model Inter-comparison  Project 
Phase 5 (CMIP5) models, continued global warming combined with expected reductions 
in anthropogenic aerosol emissions in the future will likely lead to an increase in bot h 
the average and variability of monsoon precipitation by the end of th e twenty-first 
century. These models also suggest significant increases in daily precipitation 
extremes. 
(d) Droughts 
1.10 The decrease in the seasonal Summer Monsoon rainfall over th e past 6- 7 
decades has resulted in a higher susceptibility to droughts in India. Both the frequ ency 
and spatial extent of droughts have significantly increased between 195 1 and 2016. 
Specifically, regions such as Central India, the South West coast, the Southern 
Peninsula, and North-Eastern India have experienced an average of more th an 2 
droughts per decade during this period. Furthermore, the area affected by drought has 
increased by 1.3% per decade during the same time frame. 
1.11 Climate Model Projections indicate a strong likelihood of increased frequ ency, 
intensity, and spatial coverage of drought conditions in India by the end o f the twenty-
first century under the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5 scenari o. This 
is expected due to the greater variability of monsoon precipitation and th e increased 
demand for water vapor in a warmer atmosphere. 
(e)  Rise in Sea Levels 
1.12 The global rise in sea levels is attributed to the melting of continental ice and the 
expansion of ocean water due to global warming. In the North Indian Ocean (NIO), the 
rate of sea-level rise was 1.06-1.75 mm per year from 1874 to 200 4, but it has 
accelerated to 3.3 mm per year in the last 25 years (1993-2017), which is comparable to 
the current global mean sea-level rise. 
1.13 According to projections, by the end of the twenty-first century, the steric sea 
level in the North Indian Ocean, which accounts for changes in ocean thermal 
expansion and salinity variations, is expected to rise by approximately 300 mm 
compared to the average from 1986 to 2005 under the RCP4.5 scenari o. The 
corresponding projection for the global mean rise is approximately 180 mm. 
(f) Tropical Cyclones 
1.14 In the NIO basin, there has been a significant decrease in the ann ual frequency 
of tropical cyclones since the mid-twentieth century (1951-2018). However, t he 
frequency of very severe cyclonic storms during the post-monsoon season h as shown a 
significant increase of one event per decade in the last two decades  (2000-2018). 

4 
 
Despite this, there is currently no clear evidence of anthropogenic influence on the se 
trends. 
Climate models predict an increase in the intensity of tropical cyclones in the NIO basin  
during the twenty-first century. 
(g) Changes in the Himalayas 
1.15 The Hindu Kush Himalayas (HKH) have experienced a temperature  increase of 
approximately 1.3 degrees Celsius from 1951 to 2014. Some areas in the HKH region 
have observed a decline in snowfall and glacial retreat in recent decade s. However, the 
high-elevation Karakoram Himalayas have experienced higher winter sno wfall, which 
has helped protect the region from glacier shrinkage. 
1.16 On being asked by the Committee to provide an overview of the Projecte d 
Climate Change for India for the next two-three decades and the reasons for increase in 
frequency of extreme Climactic events and to also enumerate steps/Standard Operating 
Procedures (SoPs) being taken / followed by the Department to tackle the af ter effects 
in this regard, the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare submitted:  
 
 “Ministry of Earth Sciences presents the projected climate change over India. 
Relative to the recent past (1976-2005), the annual mean temperatures are 
projected to increase by up to 2.03 ± 0.28 ℃ for the period 2040-2069 in the RCP4.5 
(Representative Concentration Pathway- an intermediate stabilization pathwa y that 
results in a Radiative Forcing of 4.5 W/m2 in 2100) scenario. Multi-model mean  
change suggests wetter condition over India in near and far future on a verage. 
Models projected an increase of 6% rainfall over India under RCP4.5 scenario. From 
1950 onwards, the number of extreme precipitation events over Indian landmass has 
also become more significant than it before. 
Emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs), aerosols and changes in land use and land 
cover (LULC) during the industrial period have substantially altered the atmosph eric 
composition, and consequently the planetary energy balance, and are thus p rimarily 
responsible for the present-day climate change. Observational data from In dia 
Meteorological Department indicate that over the past 122 years (1901-2022), 
annual mean temperature has tended to increase (trend of 0.64° C/100 years). This 
rise in temperature is largely on account of GHG-induced warming, partially offset by 
forcing due to anthropogenic aerosols and changes in land use and land co ver 
(LULC).  
 
  Further, the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) has also brought out a web based 
online “Climate Hazard & Vulnerability Atlas of India ” prepared for the thirteen most 
hazardous meteorological events, which cause extensive damages, economic, 
human, and animal losses. Further information may be obtained from the  Ministry of 
Earth Sciences/ IMD at https://imdpune.gov.in/hazardatlas/atlas_summary.html. The  
Department of Science and technology has also prepared a report titled ‘Climate 
Vulnerability Assessment for Adaptation Planning in India Using a Common 
Framework’, which identifies the most vulnerable states and districts in India with 
respect to current climate risk and key drivers of vulnerability.  

5 
 
 In context of reasons for increase in frequency of extreme climactic eve nts, it is 
submitted that IPCC report ‘Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis ’ 
inter-alia mentions that human influence has been detected in warming of the  
atmosphere and the ocean, in changes in the global water cycle, in reductions in  
snow and ice, in global mean sea level rise, and in changes in some climate  
extremes. It further mentions that continued emissions of greenhouse gases  will 
cause further warming and changes in all components of the climate system.  
 
The Government has launched many schemes and programs to scale up India ’s 
action on both, the adaptation and mitigation. Appropriate measures a re being taken 
under these schemes and programs across many sectors including water, 
Agriculture, forest, energy and enterprise, sustainability mobility and housing, waste  
management, circular economy and resource efficiency, etc. India ’s National Action 
Plan for Climate Change (NAPCC) provides the overarching policy framework for 
climate change mitigation and adaptation through its National Missions in specif ic 
areas of solar energy, energy efficiency, water, sustainable, Agriculture, health, 
Himalayan ecosystem, sustainable habitat, green India and strategic knowledge for 
climate change. The NAPCC represents multipronged, long term and integrated 
strategies for achieving key goals in the context of climate change. Thirty- four States 
/Union Territories (UTs) have prepared and some have updated their State  Action 
Plans on Climate Change (SAPCCs) in line with NAPCC taking into account the 
State-specific issues relating to climate change. These SAPCCs outline are sector -
specific and cross-sectoral priority actions, including adaptation.” 
  
C. Risk and Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate Change 
1.17 The assessment of risk and vulnerability in Indian Agriculture to climate change 
is conducted by taking into account the emerging conceptual and analytical methods, as 
well as relevant climatic (using IPCC AR-5 CMIP 5 climatic projections) and non-climatic 
information. The selected indicators are classified into different forms of capital 
endowments that determine the system's ability to cope with hazards. Consequ ently, 
fifteen indicators associated with five distinct dimensions of capital endowme nt - natural 
(such as annual rainfall, degraded and waste land, available water holding cap acity of 
soil, groundwater availability, and livestock density), human (literacy), social (ge nder 
gap and self-help groups), physical (net irrigated area, road connectivity, rural 
electrification, market access, and fertilizer use), and financial (income and income  
inequity) - are chosen to capture vulnerability. The five indicators chosen to represent 
exposure include net sown area, rural population density, small and marginal fa rmers, 
SC/ST population, and cross-bred cattle. The three indicators selected for hazards are 
drought proneness, flood proneness, and cyclone proneness. Risk is the outcome of the 
interaction among exposure, vulnerability, and hazard. The document provides 
information on
 the relative position of districts in the country in terms of Climate Change 
risk and various determinants such as exposure, vulnerability, and hazard. The stu dy 
revealed that out of the 573 districts, 109 were classified as very high risk prone and 
201 as highly prone. In the future, the risk and vulnerability assessment wil l be updated 
to incorporate the latest CMIP 6 climatic projections as and when they become available 
from Inter Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 

6 
 
1.18 Climate Resilient Farming is imperative given the susceptibility of Indian 
Agriculture to climate change. Approximately 51 percent of the cultivated area in India 
relies on rainfed conditions, rendering it highly vulnerable. The occurrence of frequent 
extreme weather events across different parts of the country has resulted in signif icant 
losses in crop yield and income for farmers at a micro level, as well as neg atively 
impacting the nation's economy at a macroeconomic level. The latest Assessmen t 
Report (AR-6) by the Inter Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) highli ghts 
the potential challenges that lie ahead for Sustainable Agriculture. These challenges 
include an increase in rainfall, heightened inter annual variability, intensified  and 
frequent heat waves, and a projected temperature rise of 1.5 to 4.0 De grees Celsius. 
Additionally, a rise in sea level by 300 mm is anticipated. In light of these findings, it is 
crucial to prioritize accelerated research in the development of resilient and intelligent 
technologies that can be implemented to combat climate change. These tech nologies 
should be mainstreamed through adaptation mechanisms to facilitate upscaling . 
Consequently, the Government of India has placed great importance on Research and 
Development (R&D) efforts aimed at addressing Climate Change, with a specific focu s 
on the Agricultural Sector. 
D. Climate Resilient Villages 
1.19 Location-specific Climate Resilient Technologies (CRTs) were showcased to 
address climate variability in vulnerable districts, with the aim of raising awareness and 
enhancing the capacity of farmers and other stakeholders. These efforts also sou ght to 
establish innovative institutional mechanisms at the village level in order to ena ble 
communities to effectively respond to climate stresses. The interventions were 
categorized into four modules, namely natural resource management, crop produ ction, 
livestock, and fisheries. To support and sustain these activities, various innovativ e 
Institutional interventions were implemented in the NICRA villages, including the 
establishment of Village Climate Risk Management Committees (VCRMCs), Custom 
Hiring Centers (CHCs) for farm implements, seed and fodder production systems, 
establishment of commodity groups, water sharing groups, community nurseries, and  
the initiation of collective marketing through value chains. These initiatives were aim ed 
at facilitating and expanding the interventions. Demonstrations of location-specific  
climate resilient technologies have been carried out in 151 climatically vulnerable 
districts, with the goal of enhancing adaptive capacity and resilience against climatic 
variability. This has been achieved through the participation of Krishi V igyan Kendras 
(KVKs) and farmer engagement, focusing on addressing climate vulnerabilities such as  
droughts, floods, cyclones, heat waves, high temperature stress, cold waves, and f rost. 
The selection of interventions is based on the vulnerability of the distri ct to climate 
change, prevailing farming conditions, and the available resources in the village. 
1.20 Upon this, the Committee desired to know about the State wise and  district wise 
risk-prone areas in the country.  The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfa re, in 
its reply, submitted as under: 
“Climate change risk and vulnerability is an essential and initial step in deve loping 
the effective adaptation and mitigation policies for Agriculture sector. Districts with 
different levels of climate change risk were identified following the framework given 

7 
 
by IPCC in its Fifth Assessment Report. Addressing the source of risk is a better way 
of risk reduction and resilience building. As many as 310 districts categorize d under 
risk-prone in the country, of which 109 districts are 'very high ’ risk and 201 districts 
are ‘high’ risk. List of districts that are at high risk due to climate change as per the  
risk and vulnerability assessment is as follows - 
State District  Risk Category  
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Anantapur Very High 
Srikakulam, East Godavari, Kurnool  High 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Upper Siang Very High 
Tawang , Lower Subansiri 
West Siang, East Siang, Lohit, Dibang valley 
High 
Assam Nalbari, Darrang Very High 
Kokrajhar, Dhubri, Barpeta, Morigaon, 
Dhemaji 
High 
Bihar Sitamarhi, Madhubani 
Supaul, Kishanganj, Katihar, Saharsa, 
Darbhanga, Lakhisarai, Sheikhpura, Nalanda 
Very High 
Champaran(West), Champaran(East), Purnea 
Madhepura, Gopalganj, Siwan, Samastipur, 
Begusarai, Khagaria, Bhagalpur, Patna, 
Bhojpur, Buxom 
High 
Chhattisgarh Jashpur, Raigadh, Korba, Durg, 
Mahasamund, Kanker 
High 
Gujarat Panchmahal, Dahod Very High 
Banaskantha 
Patan, Anand, Kheda, Narmada, Dang 
High 
Haryana Fatehabad, Bhiwani, Mahendragarh Very High 
Kaithal, Jind, Sirsa 
Hissar, Rohtak, Jhajjar, Rewari, Gurgaon 
High 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Chamba, Mandi Very High 
Kangra, Kullu, Hamirpur, Bilaspur, Shimla, 
Kinnaur 
High 
Jammu & Leh (Ladakh), Poonch, Kathua Very High 

8 
 
Kashmir Baramulla, Budgam 
Anantnag, Kargil, Doda, Udhampur, Rajouri 
High 
Jharkhand Garhwa, Godda, Sahibganj, Pakur, Gumla 
West Singbhum 
High 
Karnataka Bagalkot, Gulbarga, Bidar, Koppal, Dharwad, 
Bellary, TumkurKolar, Bangalore (Rural), 
Hassan, Mysore, Chamarajanagar 
High 
Kerala Kasaragod, Kozhikode, Ernakulam, Kottayam, 
Alappuzha, Pathanamthitta, Kollam, 
Thiruvanathapuram 
Very High 
Kannur, Wayanad, Malappuram, Palakkad, 
Thrissur 
High 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bhind, Jhabua Very High 
Morena, Datia, Tikamgarh, Chhatarpur, 
Panna, Rewa, Shahdol, Sidhi, Mandsaur, 
Ratlam, Barwani, Betul, Dindori, Mandla 
High 
Maharashtra Nanded, Need  Very High 
Nandurbar, Akola, Washim, Wardha, 
Chandrapur, Hingoli, Parbhani, Jalna, 
Ahmednagar, Latur, Osmanabad 
High 
Manipur Senapati, Churachandpur, Thoubal, Imphal 
East, Ukhrul, Chandel 
 
Meghalaya West Garo Hills, East Garo Hills, South Garo 
Hills, West Khasi Hills, East Khasi Hills, 
Jaintia Hills 
Very High 
Ri-Bhoi High 
Mizoram Lawngtlai, Saiha Very High 
Kolasib, Aizawl, Champhai, Serchhip, Lunglei High 
Nagaland Tuensang Very High 
Mon, Mokokchung, Zunheboto, Wokha, Phek High 

9 
 
Odisha Baragarh, Mayurbhanj, Bhadrak, Dhenkanal, 
Nayagarh, Khurda, Ganjam, Gajapati, 
Bolangir, Nuapada, Kalahandi, Rayagada, 
Nabarangpur 
High 
Punjab Gurdaspur, Jalandhar, Moga, Faridkot, 
Bathinda 
Very High 
Firozpur, Muktsar, Mansa, Sangrur High 
Rajasthan Ganganagar, Hanumangarh, Churu, 
Jhunjhunu, Alwar, Karauli, Dausa, Sikar, 
Nagaur, Jodhpur, Jaisalmer, Barmer, Jalore, 
Pali, Bhilwara, Dungarpur, Banswara 
Very High 
Bikaner, Bharatpur, Dholpur, Jaipur, Sirohi, 
Ajmer, Tonk, Bundi, Rajsamand, Udaipur 
High 
Sikkim South Very High 
North, West, East High 
Tamil Nadu Dharmapuri, Villupuram, Coimbatore, 
Perambalur, Ramanathapuram 
High 
Telangana Adilabad, Mahabubnagar High 
Uttar Pradesh Bagpat, Unnao, Kannauj, Etawah, Auraiya,  
Kanpur (Dehat), Jalaun, Jhansi, Hamirpur, 
Mahoba, Banda, Chitrakut, Fatehpur, 
Kaushambi, Allahabad, Bahraich, Shravasti, 
Balrampur, Gonda, Basti, Jaunpur, Sant 
Ravidas Nagar 
 
Very High 
Saharanpur, Rampur, Jyotiba Phule Nagar, 
Aligarh, Hathras, Mathura, Agra, Budaun, 
Pilibhit, Shahjahanpur, Sitapur, Rae-Bareily, 
Farrukhabad, Kanpur City, Lalitpur, 
Pratapgarh, Ambedkar Nagar, Siddharth 
Nagar, Sant Kabir Nagar, Maharajganj, 
Gorakhpur, Kushi Nagar, Deoria, Varanasi, 
Mirzapur, Sonbhadra 
High 
Uttarakhand Uttarkashi, Rudraprayag, Tehri Garwal, 
Pithoragarh, Bageshwar, Almora, Champawat 
Very High 
Chamoli, Pauri Garhwal High 

10 
 
West Bengal Malda, 24-Paraganas (North), 24-Paraganas 
(South) 
Very High 
Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri, Cooch Behar, Dinajpur 
(Uttar), Dinajpur (Dakshin), Murshidabad, 
Birbhum, Nadia, Purulia, Howrah, Midnapore 
High 
 
1.21 On being asked to enlist the benefits of Climate Resilient Villages (CRVs) a nd 
the technologies currently being used & to elaborate its effects in different climac tic 
conditions, the Department submitted as under:  
“The benefits of climate resilient villages are as given below: 
▪ 
Establishment of Climate Resilient Villages ( CRV) is a comprehensive 
approach to manage climatic risks with the involvement of communities in the 
village and by establishment of village institutions. 
▪ CRVs essentially aim at enhancing the capacity of the system to cope u p 
the climate risks such as drought, floods, heat wave, cold wave, uneven  rains, dry 
weather, frost, cyclones and hailstorms etc. and minimize the impact by building 
the capacity of the farmers for quick recovery. The Climate Resilient Villages 
involve scaling and adoption of multiple technologies representing natural 
resource management, crops and livestock. 
▪ The CRVs involve adoption of portfolio of interventions that cover the full 
spectrum of farm activities for adapting to climate change and variabil ity and to 
minimize greenhouse gas emissions wherever possible.  Adoption of technologies 
resulted in significant improvement in yield and income. 
▪ 
CRVs principally focus on minimizing the impact of climatic change and 
variability in less resource endowed regions where variability in rainfall seriously 
impacts the crop growth and production and aims at minimizing the impact of such 
events so that communities can realize acceptable yields and sustain livelih oods. 
Aims at achieving resilience by prioritizing and scaling promising location spe cific 
practices and also through livelihood diversification.
 
▪ Development of CRVs enables establishment of a host of enabling 
mechanisms such as custom hiring centers, seed systems and fodder production  
systems and village institutions to mobilize and empower communities in the 
decision-making process to manage and recover from climate risks in a 
continuous manner even after the withdrawal of the project. 
▪ CRVs of low rainfall regions, crop based resilient practices are relatively 
promising for achieving resilience whereas CRVs of medium to high rainfall 
regions, in-situ coupled with water harvesting and its utilization are key to 
minimize the impact of drought and to enhance the cropping intensity during  
favorable seasons. Creation of water storage potential lead to multiple benefits b y 
way of diversification and cropping intensification and income gains.  

11 
 
▪ Scaling of location specific promising technologies which are having 
mitigation co-benefits leads to enhancement of sinks and reduction of the sources 
leading to carbon neutral villages.” 
 
1.21(a)   Some of the location-specific climate resilient technologies which proved as a  
game changer are: 
▪ Zero till planting of wheat has advanced the wheat sowing than conventio nal 
planting in Punjab and Haryana. Demonstrations of wheat sowing with “happy 
seeder” helped farmers to get convinced about the germination and crop stand with 
the machine and resulted in significant adoption in NICRA villages. 
▪ Location specific in-situ moisture conservation measures such as broad bred and 
furrow (BBF) in soybean, compartmental bunding in pearl millet, tied ridging in 
sorghum, conservation furrows in finger millet + pigeon pea intercropping syste m at 
several locations produced higher yield (up to 63%) compared to flat method of 
sowing. 
▪ Crop diversification from water-intensive paddy to alternative crops like p ulses, 
oilseeds, maize, cotton and to agroforestry plantation. Through NICRA project,  shift 
from rice-rice to rice-pulse (green gram/ black gram) cropping system is promoted in 
eastern India (specifically in Odisha). 
▪ Integration of crop residues with reduced use of synthetic fertilizers provide 
climate resilient management and increase nitrogen use efficiency. For rice- wheat 
systems of Indo Gangetic Plain, cutting down inorganic fertilizers to almost half  and 
supplementing with Sesbania-based green manuring or with grain legume  cropping 
and incorporation of its biomass into the soil at harvest proved to be the be st 
strategy. 
 
1.22 The Committee desired to know the tentative schedule by which the Depa rtment 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare plan to ensure that all the villages a cross the 
country shall be able to adopt Climate Resilient Practices and also whether additional 
funds have been earmarked for the same or not.  The Departm ent, in its reply 
submitted: 
 
“The National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) is one of the 8 M issions 
launched under the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) in 2008. The 
Mission aims to evolve and implement strategies to make Indian Agriculture resilient 
to climate change. The NMSA document was approved by the Prime Ministe r’s 
Council on Climate Change in September, 2010 with an outlay of Rs.1, 08,000 crore 
for six years. During XII Plan, important activities taken up were Rainfed Area 
Development, Soil Health Management, (soil testing, Bio fertilizers etc.) and On 
Farm Water Management (SRI, Precision irrigation etc.). Remaining Mission 
deliverables were accommodated under other Missions and schemes taken up  by 
DAHD&F and DARE.  
▪ The Government is taking several steps to promote climate resilient farming in 

12 
 
the country through several schemes aligned to meet the challenges of cli mate 
change under NMSA. National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) be ing 
implemented by Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is one of the  Missions 
within the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC). Under NMSA, Per 
Drop More Crop (PDMC) scheme was launched during 2015-16 to increase water 
use efficiency at the farm level through Micro Irrigation technologies i.e. drip and 
sprinkler irrigation systems. Till date an area of 78.48 lakh hectare has been 
covered under Micro irrigation through the PDMC scheme from the year 20 15-
16.Rainfed Area Development (RAD)scheme is being implemented as a component 
under National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) from 2014-15 in the 
country. RAD focuses on Integrated Farming System (IFS) for enhancing 
productivity and minimizing risks associated with climatic variability. Till date an 
area of 7.11 lakh hectares has been covered under RAD programme from  the year 
2014-15.The restructured National Bamboo Mission (NBM) was launched during  
2018-19 as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) subsequent to the histo rical 
amendment of the Indian Forest Act during 2017 to exclude bamboo f rom the 
definition of tree. During the year 2022-23 the NBM has been merged wi th Mission 
for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) scheme. Soil Health Card (SHC) 
/ Soil Health Management (SHM) scheme is operational through the State 
Governments under National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility. Now, 
this scheme has been merged as Soil Health Component of Rashtriya K rishi Vikas 
Yojana (RKVY) from the year 2022-23. The main objective of the sch eme is to 
assist states in promoting Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) through judicious 
use of chemical fertilizers including secondary and micro nutrients in conjunction 
with organic manures & bio-fertilizers for improving soil health and its produ ctivity. 
Soil Health Card provides information to farmers on soil nutrient status of their  soil 
and recommendation on appropriate dosage of nutrients to be appl ied for improving 
soil health and its fertility. So far 22.71 crore grid based soil health cards have been 
distributed to farmers under the scheme. For promoting organic farming, u nder 
Mission Organic Value Chain Development in North East Region (MOVCDNER), 
379 Farmer Producer Companies have been formed comprising of 1.89 lak h 
farmers and covering an area of 1.73 lakh ha. Mission for Integrated Development 
of Horticulture (MIDH) is being implemented in which an area of 11.26 lakh ha has 
been covered. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) was initiated to prom ote 
organic farming in the country and so far 11.80 lakh ha area has bee n covered. 
Government is also promoting natural farming since 2019-2020 through a sub -
scheme namely Bharatiya Prakritik Krishi Paddhati (BPKP) under Parampara gat 
Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY). So far 4.09 lakh ha area has been brought under 
natural farming in 8 states viz. Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu under BPKP.” 
 
1.23 Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare was asked to furnish budg et for 
previous three years for Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming and to also share 
details of funds allocated to various Institutes/Bodies/ Schemes/Programmes for the last 
three years for the same on yearly basis & to state whether the desired 

13 
 
objectives/targets have been met and if not, the reasons therefor. In response, the 
Department stated as under - 
 
"Expenditure made by the Department for Promotion of Climate Resilient Farm ing for 
the last three years is given below:   
Schemes Expenditure (Rs. Crore) 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Pramparagat Krishi VikasYojana (PKVY) 500.00 450.00 469.34 
Mission on Organic Value Chain Development 
for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) 
175.00 200.00 198.00 
Crops Diversification 120.00 120.00 95.00 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) 1213.12 810.97 900.00 
Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 202.50 180.00 100.00 
Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) Scheme 2563.00 1796.00 1901.00 
Mission for Integrated Development of 
Horticulture (MIDH) 
1511.92 1509.76 
1100.00 
National Bamboo Mission (NBM) 94.00 70.00 
National Innovations in Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (NICRA) 
44.74 46.06 40.87 
 
1.24 On being asked to list the Programmes being implemented in ecologically fragile  
Areas/Districts and the impact made thereof, the Department submitted: 
 
"District level risk and vulnerability assessment of Indian Agriculture to climate 
change has been revised as per IPCC AR-5 guidelines by ICAR-NICRA and is 
widely used by policy makers and research managers for prioritization of  resources 
related to climate change action plans. Agricultural contingency plans are ready  for 
650 districts and updated for 386 districts. 
▪ Location specific technologies developed under the National Agricultural Research 
System (NARS) which can build resilience against climatic vulnerability are being 
demonstrated in 151 climatically vulnerable districts/ clusters covering 454 villages. 
▪ Village level institutional mechanisms such as Village Level Climate Risk 
Management Committees (VCRMC), custom hiring centers are established for 
managing infrastructure created and to improve the timeliness of operation s during 
the limited window periods of moisture availability in rainfed areas and to promote 
small farm mechanization for adoption of climate resilient practices. These 
interventions helped farmers to reduce the yield losses and enhanced the ir adaptive 
capacity against climatic variability. 
▪ In fragile regions of North-Eastern states and Western Himalayan states like 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and UTs of J&K and Ladakh, Mission Organic Value 
Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) and Paramparagat 
Krishi Vikas Yojna (PKVY) are implemented on cluster basis for promotion of organic 
farming.  This has resulted in bringing 1.73 lakh ha area in 8 states of NER under the 

14 
 
chemical free organic farming.  Similarly, area covered under organic farm ing is 
17700 ha in Himachal Pradesh,140, 540 ha in Uttarakhand, 10000 ha in L adakh and 
560 ha in J&K. 
▪ A large-scale capacity building program on climate resilient Agriculture is being 
undertaken with more than 1200 scientists, 874 research scholars and 160s of 
doctoral and post graduate students are involved on climate change rese arch and 
dissemination of climate resilient technology across the country. These resilient 
practices are being adopted by communities and spreading beyond NICRA villa ges. 
In the past ten years 16,958 training programs were conducted throughout the 
country under NICRA project to educate stakeholders on various aspects of cli mate 
change and resilient technologies, covering 5,14,816 stakeholders so as to ena ble 
wider adoption of climate resilient technologies and increase in yields." 
 
1.25 On being asked that given India's diverse spectrum of meteorological entities, 
steps taken to preserve Natural Capital in Agriculture at national and regional level a nd 
convergence of Schematic interventions across different Departments/Ministries such  
as that of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampa da 
Yojana (PMMSY), Integrated Development of Horticulture etc. to prevent vulnerabilities 
of Farmers and develop a sustainable income pattern beside creating a low carbo n path 
for the Farming community be furnished, the Department submitted:- 
"Several schemes have been initiated by the Government of India to preven t 
vulnerabilities of Farmers and develop a sustainable income pattern besides 
creating a low carbon path for the Farming community . The Rainfed Area 
Development (RAD) program under National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture 
(NMSA) aims to make rainfed Agriculture more productive, sustainable, 
remunerative and climate resilient. The sub-mission on Agroforestry aims to 
increase tree cover in non-forest areas for higher carbon sequestration. The 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) aims to improve on-farm w ater 
use efficiency, enhance the adoption of precision irrigation and other water saving 
technologies (more crop per drop) and enhance recharge of aquifers. The Pradhan 
Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) initiated to provide the full insured amount on 
crop losses due to natural calamities. In addition, programs like Paramparagat 
Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) aims to improvement of soil health. The scheme  
Bharatiya Prakritik Krishi Paddhati Programme (BPKP) aims to promote traditional  
indigenous practices and to create awareness and capacity building of farmers.  
National Horticulture Mission, National Agroforestry & Bamboo Mission (NABM) 
and National Policy for Management of Crop Residues (NPMCR) also aim to 
increase climate resilience. 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has launched a flagship network 
project ‘National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture ’ (NICRA) in 2011 with 
an aim to develop and promote climate resilient technologies in Agriculture which 
will address vulnerable areas of the country. The outputs of the project will help the 
districts and regions to cope with extreme weather conditions like droughts, floods, 
cyclone, frost, heat waves etc. Contingency planning is one of the major strategies 

15 
 
of preparedness for tackling aberrant weather events. In the face  of increasing 
climate variability, adoption and implementation of the District Level Con tingency 
Plans (DACP) is a priority for many state governments. ICAR prepared DACPs for 
650 districts of the country recommending location specific climate resilient crops 
and varieties and management practices for use by the state departmen ts of 
Agriculture and farmers. 
 The PMMSY envisages suitable linkages and convergence with various Centra l 
government schemes wherever feasible such as Sagarmala Programme, Pradhan 
Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana, National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission, Kisan Credit Card (KCC).  PMMSY promotes Promotion of 
Fish Farmers Producer Organizations/Companies (FFPOs/Cs) to economically 
empower the fishers and fish farmers and enhance their bargaining po wer. 
Technology demonstration and Genetic improvement programmes for sustainab le 
and climate resilient aquaculture is being promoted under PMMSY in collab oration 
with Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) and Department 
of Commerce (MPEDA).PMMSY provides the flexibility to the State Governments 
to converge PMMSY with other schemes  
 
To promote sustainability in fisheries and aquaculture, Department of Fisherie s 
(DoF) has taken several initiatives under PMMSY including:  
 
a. Promotion and support for sustainable fish production systems/methods with  
minimal environmental impacts (more crop per drop-RAS, Biofloc, Aquaponic), to 
develop eco-friendly diversified fishing practices for responsible and sustainable  
fishing and the development of islands fisheries in a sustainable and respon sible 
manner. Under PMMSY the efforts are being made to design a fuel efficie nt 
fishing vessels using solar energy, LPG and LNG. Deep sea fishing vessels are 
being promoted to reduce the fishing pressure on coastal fisheries resources. 
  
b. To promote sustainability of marine fisheries resources, focus areas have  been 
identified such as sea ranching and artificial reefs, for replenishing and 
rejuvenating natural marine fish stocks in marine waters. Similarly, in case of 
inland fisheries, River ranching has been undertaken for replenishing fish stocks 
in major river systems namely Ganges and its tributaries, Brahmaputra & Barak  
rivers’ tributaries, Mahanadi, Godavari, Cauvery, Narmada, and Indus.  
 
c. For sustainable development of climate resilient aquaculture, efforts have been  
made for species diversification and genetic improvement programmes.  
 
d. For the conservation and effective management of fishery resources and also for 
sea safety reason, the Ministry is also imposing a 61-days uniform ban on fishing 
by all fishing vessels in the Indian EEZ beyond territorial waters on the East Coast 
and West Coast." 
 
 

16 
 
E. National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) 
1.26 The National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), formulated b y the Prime 
Minister, has identified the National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) as one  
of the eight National Missions. Its aim is to address the challenge s posed by the 
changing climate to domestic food production and contribute valuable insights on  
adaptation and mitigation in Agriculture on a global scale, particularly for forums such as 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). In Februa ry 
2011, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and the Ministry of Agri culture 
and Farmers Welfare, Government of India, launched a flagship project calle d the 
National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). This project is primarily 
focused on enhancing the resilience of Indian Agriculture to climate variab ility and 
change through the application of improved technologies and new poli cies. Additionally, 
during the global brainstorming session of the COP26 Climate Summit in Glasgow,  
Scotland (2021), the Government of India announced five commitments (know n as 
Panchamrit) to address the challenges of Climate Change - 
• To raise the non-fossil fuel-based energy capacity of the country to  500 GW by 
2030. 
• By 2030, 50 % of the country ’s energy requirements would be met using 
renewable energy sources. 
• The country will reduce the total projected carbon emission by one billio n tonnes  
between now and the year 2030. 
• The carbon intensity of the economy would be reduced to less than 45% by 2030 
as compared to that of 2005. 
• India to become carbon neutral and achieve net zero emissions by th e year 
2070. 
 
1.27 The Working Group II (WG II) Report of the Intergovernmental Pane l on Climate 
Change (IPCC) AR 6 has indicated that Climate Change is expected to cause 
significant damages, surpassing initial expectations. Regions and populations facing 
development constraints are particularly vulnerable to these adverse effects. One  such 
vulnerable hotspot is South Asia, where the impact of climate change intensif ies the 
pressure on food production and access to it. The report highlights that climate ch ange 
will increasingly strain food production and accessibility, particularly in regions alread y 
at risk, thereby undermining food security, nutrition, and exacerbating the p roblem of 
malnutrition (IPCC, 2022). The frequency, intensity, and severity of droughts, floods, 
heat waves, and rising sea levels are projected to escalate, posing greater risks to f ood 
security. Moreover, the report forecasts a gradual deterioration in soil health, resulting in 
diminished soil carbon and nitrogen levels, leading to ecosystem degradation. Th is 
degradation would affect pollination, increase susceptibility to pests and diseases, a nd 
further reduce water availability for agricultural purposes. Within the Indian region, it is 
anticipated that maize yields could decrease by 20% to 30% without adaptation 
measures, while impacts on wheat, soyabean, and rice will vary. Nonethe less, the 
report emphasizes that implementing appropriate adaptations can significantly m itigate 
the adverse impacts. Cultivar improvements, agroforestry, community-based 
adaptation, farm and landscape diversification, urban Agriculture, on-farm water 

17 
 
management, water storage, soil moisture conservation, and irrigation are amon g the 
most commonly recommended adaptation responses. These adaptations not on ly 
reduce vulnerability but also offer economic, institutional, and ecological benefits. 
1.28 On being asked regarding the plan to finance for Climate Chang e initiatives 
relating to Agriculture Sector, the Department submitted:- 
"The Government is taking several steps to address the challenges of Climate Change 
and promote crop diversity in the country. National Action Plan on Climate Ch ange 
(NAPCC) was launched by the Government in 2008 which provides an overarching  
policy framework for climate action in the country. National Mission for Sustainab le 
Agriculture (NMSA) being implemented by Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
is one of the Missions within the National Action Plan on Climate Change (N APCC). 
The Mission aims to evolve and implement strategies to make Indian Ag riculture more 
resilient to the changing climate. NMSA was approved for three major components i.e. 
Rainfed Area Development (RAD); On Farm Water Management (OFWM); and Soil 
Health Management (SHM). Subsequently, new programmes such as namely So il 
Health Card (SHC), Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Mission Organic 
Value Chain Development in North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER), Per Drop More 
Crop, National Bamboo Mission (NBM) etc. were also included.” 
 
The details of scheme-wise allocations made in the agricultural budget to address 
the challenges of climate change and promote crop diversity in the country  are given 
below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The desired objectives/targets have also been successfully met by utilizing the allocated 
budget. However, there is need for concerted efforts to converge the schem es for 
upscaling climate resilient agriculture in vulnerable areas.” 
 
1.29 The Department added that the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) be ing a 
Centrally Sponsored (State Plan) Scheme provides flexibility and autonomy for 
selection, planning approval and execution of projects/programs under the sche me as 
per their need, priorities and agro-climate requirements.  
Pramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 469.85 
Mission on Organic Value Chain Development for North 
Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) 
200.00 
Crops Diversification 95.00 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) 1623.00 
Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 227.93 
Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) Scheme 2655.45 
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture 
(MIDH) 
1965.98 
National Bamboo Mission (NBM) 50.00 
National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture 
(NICRA) 
48.15 

18 
 
1.30 On being specifically asked by the Committee as to how the Departmen t of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has enhanced Climate Resilience by implem enting 
short and long-term Climate mitigation and adaptation strategies and to also sta te as to 
whether the process was transparent and inclusive participation of multiple actors an d 
stakeholders in decision-making and management processes was ensured, the 
Department submitted:- 
 "The Government of India is implementing the National Action Plan on Climate 
Change (NAPCC) which provides an overarching policy framework for climate action 
in the country. National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) is one of the 
Missions within the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC). The mission 
aims to evolve and implement strategies to make Indian Agriculture more resilient t o 
the changing climate. NMSA was approved for three major components i.e. Rainfed 
Area Development (RAD); On Farm Water Management (OFWM); and Soil Health 
Management (SHM). Subsequently, four new programmes were introduced n amely 
Soil Health Card (SHC), Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Mission Organic 
Value Chain Development in North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) and Per Drop 
More Crop. In addition to aforementioned programmes under NMSA, restructured 
National Bamboo Mission (NBM) was launched in April 2018. 
To meet the challenges of sustaining domestic food production in the face o f 
changing climate, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India launched a flagship network 
project ‘National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture ’ (NICRA) in 2011. The 
project aims to develop and promote climate resilient technologies in Agriculture 
which will address vulnerable areas of the country and the outputs of th e project will 
help the districts and regions prone to extreme weather conditions like droughts, 
floods, frost, heat waves, etc. to cope with such extremes. The project is 
implemented through components viz. strategic research, technology demonstration 
& dissemination and capacity building in 151 clusters of villages in each one o f the 
identified climatically vulnerable districts. The program is being implemented in 446  
villages involving an area about 2,03,649 hectares with 1,83,753 hou seholds 
distributed in 28 States and one Union Territory. Demonstrations of proven 
technologies (location specific) were given to farmers to enhance adaptive  capacity 
and to cope with current climatic variability. The interventions are divided into  natural 
resource management, crop production, livestock and fisheries and creation of 
institutional structures. ICAR-CRIDA in association with other ICAR Institutes, SAUs 
and KVKs has prepared district agricultural contingency plans for about 650 districts. 
These plans for implementing the contingency plans for delayed Monsoons and 
other extreme weather events. These contingency plans are hosted on th e Websites 
of ICAR-CRIDA and Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare. 
The process was transparent and inclusive participation of multiple actors and 
stakeholders. Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming was carried out through 
Extension Activities: 
• Climate resilient technologies are disseminated among farmers through differe nt 
Extension activities under ATMA Scheme and through State Government/KVKs. 

19 
 
• Extension activities under the scheme include farmers ’ training, demonstrations, 
exposure visits, Kisan Melas, Mobilization of Farmer’s Interest Groups, Setting up 
of Farm Schools in the fields of awardee farmers etc.  
• Climate Resilient Technology is covered under ATMA Guidelines. It is also one of 
the National Priority Areas for carrying out various extension activities under 
ATMA for enhancing outreach among farmers." 
1.31 On being asked that  given the three level tier of governance in India viz at 
Centre, State and local level and differences in priorities between  National Actio n Plan 
on Climate Change (NAPCC) and State Action Plan on Climate Change(SA PCC) due 
to financial constraints, institutional heterogeneity  et al.,  how does the Departmen t 
plan to ensure 'Climate justice' (a term Indian delegations had been invoking strongly 
on International Fora over the past years) , to Small and Marginalized Farmers 
especially from SC/ST across diverse geographical locations ranging from Thar Desert 
to North Eastern Himalayan region and from Indo Gangetic Plains to Central Hig hlands 
& Deccan Plateau till Coastal regions, the Department have stated as under-   
"To support the objectives of NAPCC, as on date 34 States and Union T erritories 
have already prepared their State Action Plan on Climate Change (SAPCC) to 
address State specific actions. States/UTs were asked to revise the SAPCC 
based on the SAPCC guidelines issued in the year 2019 from the Ministry  of 
Environment Forest and Climate Change. So far seven States had revised th e 
SAPCC." 
F. National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) 
1.32 The Committee were
 informed that the Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare is implementing the National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA ) as 
part of the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) to promote sust ainable 
agricultural practices with environmental considerations. The NMSA aims to transform 
Indian Agriculture into an ecologically sustainable and climate resilient production 
system while ensuring food security, employment, and livelihood oppo rtunities in rural 
areas. Climate Resilient Agriculture technologies are promoted through various mission 
schemes under the NMSA. Initially, the NMSA was approved for three major 
components: Rainfed Area Development (RAD), On Farm Water Management 
(OFWM), and Soil Health Management (SHM). Subsequently, four new programs were 
introduced, namely Soil Health Card (SHC), Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), 
Mission Organic Value Chain Development in the North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER), 
and Sub Mission on Agroforestry (SMAF). In the year 2015-16, the Pradha n Mantri 
Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) was launched, which incorporated the OFWM 
component of the NMSA under the Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) component of PMKSY. 
In addition to the aforementioned programs under the NMSA, the Restructu red National 
Bamboo Mission (NBM) was launched in April 2018. 
1.33
 On being asked to  elaborate the vision and strategy of National Mission for 
Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA), the Department of Agriculture and Farmers W elfare 
stated:-  
"National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA): Vision and Objectives 

20 
 
The National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) aims at transforming 
Indian Agriculture into an ecologically sustainable climate resilient production 
system, while ensuring food security, employment and livelihood op portunities in 
rural areas. Adequate food grain production despite variable climate contributes to  
economic stability at national level. The Mission builds on the on-going schem es of 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and also leverages related 
interventions from other Missions. 
 The Vision 
● Bring resilience in agricultural production against climate variability and change.  
● Conserve natural resources like soil, water, pollinators & biodiversity to achieve 
sustainable crop and livestock production. 
● Increase green cover & carbon stocks. 
● Ensure food security and economic stability. 
 
i.The Mission will address key priorities like rainfed Agriculture, soil health, water 
use efficiency and climate ready crops/ cropping patterns and farming systems 
through major functional areas like research & development, technology 
adoption and upscaling, infrastructure, and capacity building. 
 
ii. NMSA focuses on following key elements for sustaining Agriculture growth. 
Key Focus Areas 
● Science based strategic interventions for climate change adaptation and 
mitigation. 
● Focusing on vulnerable regions like rainfed, hilly and coastal and agriculturally 
important heritage sites. 
● Upscaling successful practices assessed under the National Innovations on 
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). 
● Comprehensive coverage of Agriculture and allied sectors including animal 
husbandry, dairy, fishery, poultry and agroforestry/ bamboo. 
● Addressing issues beyond production like value chain and risk management. 
 
iv. Since climate change will have major impact on crop growth and water  
availability, NMSA will support R & D on climate ready crop varieties toleran t to 
drought, heat stress and submergence, cropping patterns and integrated farm ing 
systems suitable for different agro climatic conditions, pest forewarning, soil health 
improvement, rain water harvesting and ground water recharge. Adaptation and  
mitigation technologies already available will be upscaled through the  schemes of 
the Department of Agriculture, Co-operation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) and 
new initiatives will be launched wherever required. 
 
v. Agriculture waste management, post-harvest processing & value addition, ag ro 
forestry including bamboo and organic farming are the new areas that will receive  
focused approach to bring more sustainability and additional income to farmers. 
 

21 
 
vi. Conserve globally, nationally, or regionally important agricultural heritage sites,  
wetlands, inland fresh water lakes, seasonally flooded swamp forests, eco systems  
and riverine lands to protect the livelihoods and cultures of the local communities. 
 
vii. Encourage efficient energy use in Agriculture through need based 
mechanization and use of solar energy in Agriculture, zero tillage, residue 
management to avoid crop residue burning and crop diversification matching w ith 
water availability. 
 
viii. Strong linkage to be established with Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) 
for utilization of short range and medium range weather forecasting at t aluka level 
along with micro-level information of agromet field units (AMFU) for timely 
dissemination of weather based agro advisories to farmers. 
 
ix. A major shift in the approaches of capacity building of farmers will be u ndertaken 
by collaborating with State Government and Non-Government organizations. For 
this the ongoing extension mechanism will be revitalized with reinforcemen t of 
effective institutional system and modules. 
 
x. The Mission will have convergence with other Missions like Water, Green  India, 
Energy Efficiency, Solar Energy, Himalayan Eco system and Strategic Knowled ge 
for formulating strategic interventions and knowledge exchange. 
 
xi. A strong review, monitoring and evaluation mechanism will be part of the Mission 
with provision for mid-course correction. 
 
(a) Mission Strategy 
To achieve these objectives, NMSA will have following multi-pronged strategy:  
 
i. Promoting integrated farming system covering crops, livestock & fishery, 
plantation and pasture based composite farming for enhancing livelihood 
opportunities, ensuring food security and minimizing risks from crop failure 
through supplementary/ residual production systems; 
 
ii. Popularizing resource conservation technologies (both on-farm and off-farm)  
and introducing practices that will support mitigation efforts in times of extreme 
climatic events or disasters like prolonged dry spells, floods etc. Promoting 
effective management of available water resources and enhancing water u se 
efficiency through application of technologies coupled with demand and su pply 
side management solutions; 
 
iii. Encouraging improved agronomic practices for higher farm productivity, 
improved soil treatment, increased water holding capacity, judicious use of 
chemicals/ energy and enhanced soil carbon storage; 
 
iv. Creating database on soil resources through land use survey, soil profile study  
and soil analysis on GIS platform to facilitate adoption of location an d soil specific 
crop management practices & optimize fertilizer use;  

22 
 
v. Promoting location and crop specific integrated nutrient management pra ctices 
for improving soil health, enhancing crop productivity and maintaining quality of 
land and water resources; 
 
vi. Involving knowledge institutions and professionals in developing climate 
change adaptation and mitigation strategies for specific agro climatic situations 
and promoting them through appropriate farming systems; 
 
vii. Programmatic interventions as per land capability and conducive to climatic 
parameters in select blocks as pilots for ensuring integrated development through 
dissemination and adoption of rainfed technologies with greater reach in 
disadvantaged areas & location specific planning by way of coordination, 
convergence and leveraging investments from other Schemes/Missions like 
MGNREGS, IWMP, RKVY, National Food Security Mission (NFSM), Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), National Mission for Agricultural 
Extension & Technology (NMAE&T) etc. A consortium approach may be evolved 
with various stake holders including knowledge partners like State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs), Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) Centres, professional organizations etc. by the State 
Government to provide single window service/knowledge provider system for the 
benefit of farming community; 
 
viii. State Government may engage reputed NGOs for implementation of clus ter/ 
village development plan in case of limited govt. infrastructure is available in th at 
area through a transparent system of selection and defined process of supervision 
and monitoring through a line department; 
 
ix. Strong technical monitoring and feedback systems on climate change 
mitigation and adaptation issues to the National Advisory council for regular 
updates on technical feasibility of various components and their effectiveness in  
bringing about the climate resilience. The experts of central institutes and st ate 
agricultural universities would be part of such technical monitoring/feedback. The  
capacity building of the implementing agencies would be steered by MANAGE; 
 
x. Establishing platform to liaison, review and coordinate implementation of 
interventions outlined in Mission Document of NMSA under aegis of National 
Action Plan on Climate Change."
 
 
(b) Measurable Indicators for the NMSA Activities 
1.34 Measurable indicators for the mission activities can be observed through vari ous 
factors. These include the area of land dedicated to organic farming, the p roduction of 
bio-fertilizers, the implementation of precision irrigation techniques, the adopti on of 
SRI/Direct Seeded Rice from Transplant method, crop diversification, the expan sion of 
plantation areas in arable land, the identification and release of climate resilient 
varieties, the discovery of genotypes with enhanced CO 2 fixation potential and reduced 
water and nutrient consumption, and the development of genotypes th at are resilient to 
drought, flood, salinity, and high temperature. 
1.35 On being further asked to enumerate schemes and contingency plans put in 
place to deal with adverse climate situations especially in drought and flood prone areas 

23 
 
and the infrastructure being created to aid farmers in these areas, the Departme nt have 
submitted here as under - 
“Several schemes have been initiated by the Government of India to deal with the 
adverse climate situations in the Agriculture sector across the country. The Rainfed 
area development (RAD) program under National Mission on Sustainable 
Agriculture (NMSA) aims to make rainfed Agriculture more productive, sustainable, 
remunerative and climate resilient. The sub-mission on Agroforestry aims to 
increase tree cover in non-forest areas for higher carbon sequestration. The 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) aims to improve on-far m water 
use efficiency, enhance the adoption of precision irrigation and oth er water saving 
technologies (more crop per drop) and enhance recharge of aquifers. The Pr adhan 
Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) initiated to provide the full insured amount o n 
crop losses due to natural calamities. In addition, programs like Paramparagat 
Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) aims to improvement of soil health. The schem e 
Bharatiya Prakritik Krishi Paddhati Programme (BPKP) aims to promote traditional 
indigenous practices and to create awareness and capacity building of farmers.  
National Horticulture Mission, National Agroforestry & Bamboo Mission (NABM) and 
National Policy for Management of Crop Residues (NPMCR) also aim to increase 
climate resilience. 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has launched a flagship network 
project ‘National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture ’ (NICRA) in 2011 with 
an aim to develop and promote climate resilient technologies in Agricu lture which 
will address vulnerable areas of the country. The outputs of the project w ill help the 
districts and regions to cope with extreme weather conditions like droughts, fl oods, 
cyclone, frost, heat waves etc. Contingency planning is one of the major strateg ies 
of preparedness for tackling aberrant weather events. In the face of increasing 
climate variability, adoption and implementation of the District Level Conti ngency 
Plans (DACP) is a priority for many state governments. ICAR prepared DACPs for 
650 districts of the country recommending location specific climate resilient crops 
and varieties and management practices for use by the state departments o f 
Agriculture and farmers.” 
 
(c) Schemes under National Mission for Sustainable Development (NMSA) 
(i)  Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 
One of the schemes under the National Mission for Sustainable Develop ment (NMSA) 
is the Rainfed Area Development (RAD). This scheme is implemented as a compone nt 
of NMSA in a cluster approach, taking into account the type and extent of n atural 
resources, assets, and commodities that have already been developed or sup ported. 
RAD focuses on the integration of farming systems with activities such as agroforestry, 
horticulture, livestock, fishery, and apiculture. This integration aims to enhance 
productivity and minimize risks associated with climatic variability, such as droughts,  
floods, and extreme weather events. By integrating various activities, RAD provides 
income opportunities for farmers even during crop damage. 

24 
 
RAD has been implemented in all states and union territories (except Punja b and Goa) 
since 2014-15. An amount of Rs. 1511.56 crore has been released for this sche me, 
covering an area of 6.74 lakh hectares up to the year 2021-22. 
(ii) Per Drop More Crop (PDMC)  
Another important scheme is the Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) scheme, which has been 
implemented by the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) since 
2015-16. PDMC focuses on enhancing water use efficiency at the farm level through the 
adoption of micro irrigation systems, such as drip and sprinkler irrigation . These 
systems not only save water but also reduce fertilizer usage, labor expenses, an d other 
input costs. They contribute to sustaining soil health and enhancing ove rall income for 
farmers. So far, a total amount of Rs. 16815.66 crore has been released f or the Micro 
Irrigation scheme, covering an area of 70.04 lakh hectares. This includes an area of 
1,03,696.49 lakh hectares achieved in Namami Gange areas in the states of 
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, and Jharkhand. Evaluation studies 
conducted by NITI Aayog on the PMKSY-PDMC scheme have shown that water use 
efficiency has improved by around 30% to 70% through micro irrigation ad option, water 
savings range from 30% to 50%, farmers' income has increased by 10% to 69%, an d 
the scheme has created direct and indirect employment opportunities. 
1.36 The Committee desired to know from the Department about the plans to counter 
the challenges of Micro irrigation in Himalayan States and Hilly districts in oth er states 
of the country and to mention any schemes, in the offing, of providing tax 
incentives/subsidies to Farmers in these mountain areas.  In response thereto, t he 
Department stated: 
"Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is implementing Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme of Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) in the country from 2015- 16. 
During the year 2015-16 to 2021-22, the PDMC was implemented a comp onent of 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY). From the year 2022- 23, the 
PDMC is being implemented under the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY). 
PDMC focuses on enhancing water use efficiency at farm level through Micro  
Irrigation namely, Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation Systems.  
Micro Irrigation helps in water saving as well as reduced fertilizer usage throug h 
fertigation, labour expenses, other input costs and overall income enhancement of 
farmers. Recent evaluation studies of the scheme have reiterated that Micro 
Irrigation is relevant in achieving national priorities such as improving on-farm 
water use efficiency, enhancing crop productivity, improving quality of Agri/Horti. 
products etc.  
● The Government provides financial assistance @ 55% for small and marginal 
farmers and @ 45% for other farmers for installation of Drip and Sprinkler 
systems under the PDMC which will be met by both Central Government and 
State Government in the ratio of 60:40 for all states except the North Eastern 
and Himalayan states. In the case of these states, ratio of sharing is 9 0:10. For 
the Union Territories, funding pattern is 100% grant by the Central Government. 

25 
 
● The subsidy computation is as per to the unit costs specified in the Operational  
Guidelines of the scheme. 25% higher amounts are taken into calculation of 
subsidy for the North Eastern & Himalayan States and UTs of JK & Ladakh  and 
15% higher for States with low penetration of Micro Irrigation (Where ado ption 
of Micro Irrigation is lesser). 
● The Assistance for installation of Micro Irrigation systems is up to 5 hectares  per 
beneficiary.   
● The Operational Guideline of Per Drop More Crop has been revised recently . In 
the revised guidelines, GST applicable on the Micro Irrigation Systems has 
been included in the unit cost of Micro Irrigation system on which subsidy will be 
admissible for the beneficiary. This will help to reduce the financial bu rden on 
the beneficiary. 
● Besides, the PDMC also promotes Other Intervention (OI) activities to be taken 
up based on actual requirement. Under OI, micro level water harvesting/ storage 
viz. Farm Pond, Secondary storage structure, Construction of Tube wells / Bore 
wells (Shallow / Medium), Restoration / Renovation of small tank, Recharge of 
defunct bore well etc. are promoted. The States can plan for these activities to 
be restricted upto 40% of the total allocation for North East & Himalayan  
States/UTs & 20% for other States/UTs. The OI activities are to be mandatorily 
linked with Micro Irrigation to make potential use of the available water for higher 
water use efficiency. 
Achievements made under PDMC: 
Year Central Assistance 
released (Rs. in crore) 
Area covered under Micro 
Irrigation (in lakh ha) 
2015-16 1556.73 5.73 
2016-17 1991.24 8.40 
2017-18 2819.39 10.49 
2018-19 2918.38 11.59 
2019-20 2700.02 11.73 
2020-21 2562.19 9.37 
2021-22 1796.12 10.15 
2022-23 1901.37 11.02 
Total 18245.44 78.48 
For the year 2023-24, Central Assistance of Rs 2656.43 crore (BE) has been all ocated 
for implementation of PDMC under RKVY." 
 
(iii) Mission Organic Value Chain Development in North East Region 
(MOVCDNER) 
The Mission Organic Value Chain Development in North East Region (MOVCDNER) 
scheme aims to harness the potential of organic farming in the North Easte rn Region of 
the country. This Scheme, implemented from 2015-16 to 2017-18, focus es on the 
development of certified organic production in a value chain mode, li nking growers with 

26 
 
consumers. The Scheme supports the entire value chain, including inputs, seeds, 
certification, and the creation of facilities for collection, aggregation, processing , 
marketing, and brand building. Currently, 379 Farmer Producer Companies have b een 
formed under this scheme, consisting of 1.89 lakh farmers and covering a n area of 1.73 
lakh hectares. 
(iv) Restructured National Bamboo Mission (NBM) 
The Restructured National Bamboo Mission (NBM) launched in 2018-19, aim s to 
develop the complete value chain of the bamboo sector. This includes activ ities such as 
plantation, the creation of facilities for collection, aggregation, processing, marketing, 
and brand building. The objectives of the NBM are to increase the area und er bamboo 
plantation in non-forest government and private lands, supplement f arm income, meet 
the raw material requirement of industries, increase the green cover, and enh ance 
carbon sequestration potential. 
(v) Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
 The Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) was introduced in 2015-16 as an 
unprecedented initiative in the nation, with the purpose of promoting chemic al-free 
organic farming through a cluster approach, along with the implementation of th e 
Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) certification. This Scheme aims to uphold so il 
health, reduce cultivation costs, empower farmers through institutional building, and  
provide support to farmers in terms of value addition and marketing linkage for their 
organic products. The objectives of this Scheme include the promotion of integrated and 
climate-resilient farming systems that are based on natural resources, ens uring the 
enhancement of soil fertility, conservation of natural resources, on-farm nutrient 
recycling, and reducing farmers' reliance on external inputs. Additionally, the Sch eme 
aims to decrease cultivation costs, thereby increasing farmers' net income, produce 
chemical-free and healthy food for human consumption in a sustaina ble manner, and 
protect the environment from hazardous inorganic chemicals by adopting eco- friendly 
and low-cost traditional techniques, as well as farmer-friendly technologies. 
 Under this Scheme, assistance is provided to farmers for various activities such 
as cluster formation, capacity building, procuring inputs, processing, packing, labeling, 
branding, and marketing of organic products. Currently, an area of 11.80 lakh hectares 
has been covered, benefiting 16.19 lakh farmers. 
(vi)  System of Rice Intensification/ Direct Seeded Rice (SRI/DSR) 
The System of Rice Intensification/Direct Seeded Rice (SRI/DSR) is included in 
the National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and Bringing Green Revolution to Eastern 
India (BGREI) programs. The NFSM was launched in 2007-08 with the aim to increa se 
the production of rice, wheat, and pulses through expanding the cultivation  area and 
enhancing productivity, restoring soil fertility and productivity, creating employmen t 
opportunities, and improving the farm-level economy. Coarse cereals were included in  
the NFSM from 2014-15 onwards. The mission has continued during the  12th Five-Year 
Plan with a new target of additional food grain production of 25 million t onnes, including 

27 
 
10 million tonnes of rice, 8 million tonnes of wheat, 4 million tonnes of pulses, and 3 
million tonnes of coarse cereals by the end of the 12th Plan. Be yond the 12th Plan, the 
mission is being continued with a new additional target of 13 million tonnes of food 
grains, comprising 5 million tonnes of rice, 3 million tonnes of wheat, 3  million tonnes of 
pulses, and 2 million tonnes of nutri-cum-coarse cereals from 2017-18 to 2019-20. 
(vii) Crop Diversification 
 Crop diversification is a Programme that has been implemented in the orig inal 
Green Revolution states, namely Punjab, Haryana, and Western Uttar Pradesh, as a  
sub-scheme of the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) since 2013-14. The g oal of 
this Programme is to divert the cultivation area from water-intensive paddy to alternative 
crops such as pulses, oilseeds, coarse/nutri cereals, cotton, and agroforestry, with the 
objective of addressing the issues of declining soil fertility and depleting w ater table in 
these states. 
(viii) Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 
 Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) is a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme that has been implemented since 2014-15 to p romote the holistic 
growth of the Horticulture Sector. This includes fruits, vegetables, root and tuber crops,  
mushrooms, spices, flowers, aromatic plants, coconut, cashew, and cocoa. The m ain 
objectives of this mission are to encourage the comprehensive development of  the 
horticulture sector, including coconut, through regionally differentiated strategies based  
on the comparative advantage of each state/region and its diverse agri-clim atic 
features. This includes research, technology promotion, extension services, post-
harvest management, processing, and marketing. The mission also aims to en courage 
the formation of farmers' groups such as Farmers Interest Groups (FIGs), Farmer 
Producer Organizations (FPOs), and Farmers Producer Companies (FPCs) to achieve 
economies of scale and scope, enhance horticulture production, increase farme rs' 
income, strengthen nutritional security, improve productivity through the use of qu ality 
germplasm, planting material, and water-efficient technologies like micro-irriga tion, 
support skill development, and create employment opportunities for rural youth in 
horticulture and post-harvest management, particularly in the cold chain se ctor. 
Furthermore, the mission provides support for capacity building of farmers and  
technicians in adopting improved technologies through existing institutions such as 
State Agriculture Universities, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, and institutes with departmen ts of 
horticulture in states. Currently, Rs. 13300.08 crore has been released, covering an 
area of 11.26 lakh hectares. 
(ix) Soil Health Card (SHC)/ Soil Health Management (SHM) 
The Soil Health Card (SHC)/Soil Health Management (SHM) scheme, initially under th e 
National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility, is now a component of the 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) from the year 2022-23. The main objective  of this 
Scheme is to assist states in promoting Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) by  
judiciously using chemical fertilizers, including secondary and micronutrients, in 
conjunction with organic manures and bio-fertilizers, to improve soil health  and 

28 
 
productivity. This Scheme includes sub-components such as the 
establishment/strengthening of Soil Testing, Fertilizers/Bio-fertilizers & Organic  
fertilizers Quality Control Labs, promotion of micro-nutrients, and testing soil samples to  
issue Soil Health Cards. The soil samples should be processed following standardized 
procedures and analyzed for various parameters such as pH, electrical conductiv ity 
(EC), organic carbon, available N, P, K, S, and micronutrients (Zn, Cu, Fe, Mn, B). Soil 
Health Card facilitates farmers with valuable information regarding the nutrient status  of 
their soil and offers suggestions on the optimal dosage of nutrients th at should be 
administered in order to enhance the soil's well-being and fertility. The g overnment has 
already allocated a substantial sum of Rs. 1335.68 Crore for the impleme ntation of this 
Scheme. 
Soil Health Management 
(a) Establishment of Soil Testing Labs 
The management of soil health encompasses several key activities. Firstly , there 
has been a significant effort in establishing soil testing laboratories. A total of 499 
new static soil testing labs (STLs), along with 113 new mobile STLs, have b een 
sanctioned. Additionally, the existing STLs have been strengthened with the 
establishment of 864 new units. Furthermore, 8811 mini STLs and 2395  village 
level STLs have also been approved for various states and union territories  
under this scheme. 
(b)  Establishment of Quality Control Labs 
Another aspect of soil health management is the establishment of quality control 
laboratories. Specifically, 11 new fertilizer quality control labs (FQCLs) and 123  
strengthened FQCLs have been sanctioned. Moreover, 17 new bio-
fertilizer/organic fertilizer quality control labs (BOQCLs) and 16 strengthened 
BOQCLs have also been approved under this scheme. 
 
(c) Establishment of Bio-fertilizer Production Units and Compost Unit 
In addition to soil testing and quality control, there has been a focus o n 
establishing bio-fertilizer production units and a compost unit. A total of 25  bio-
fertilizer production units and 31 strengthened units have been established . 
Furthermore, one compost unit has also been established/strengthened as part 
of this scheme. 
(d) Miscellaneous Activities 
Lastly, under the promotion and distribution of micro-nutrients in the scheme, an  
area of 1,029,355 hectares has been covered. This highlights the comprehe nsive 
efforts being made to improve soil health through various activities. 
 

29 
 
Overall, these initiatives demonstrate the commitment to soil health managem ent 
and the recognition of its importance in agricultural practices. 
 
Soil Health Card (SHC) 
(a) Distribution of SHCs to Farmers 
Soil Health Cards (SHCs) have been distributed to farmers in large numbers over 
the years. In the first cycle from 2015 to 2017, a staggering 10.74 crore grid -
based soil health cards were distributed. The distribution continued in the second 
cycle from 2017 to 2019 with 11.97 crore cards reaching the farmers. 
Additionally, in the Model Village Programme of 2019-20, 19.64 lakh land-h olding 
based soil health cards were distributed nationwide. The distribution efforts 
persisted in the year 2020-21, as 11.52 lakh land-holding based Soil Health 
Cards were distributed, including in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh. 
(b) Organizing various types of Trainings 
The Scheme focused on organizing various types of trainings to educate  and 
empower individuals. Specifically, 1904 trainings were conducted for soil 
chemists, 1827 trainings were organized for extension staff, and a staggeri ng 
93781 trainings were provided to farmers for the implementation of SHC 
recommendations. These trainings were held in different states and union 
territories under the scheme. 
(c) Organizing Demonstrations, Farmer Melas and Workshops 
Demonstrations, farmer melas, and workshops were also organized to further 
promote the adoption of SHC recommendations. A total of 6.45 lakh 
demonstrations, 7425 Farmer Melas, and 79 workshops were conducted in 
various States and Union Territories as the part of this Scheme. 
(x) Sub-Mission on Agroforestry 
The Sub-Mission on Agroforestry, introduced in 2016-17 by the Governmen t of India, 
aimed to encourage tree plantation on farm land. This scheme, known as "Har Medh 
Par Ped" promotes the simultaneous cultivation of trees and crops. It is b eing 
implemented in 21 States and Union Territories, including Andhra Pradesh, B ihar, 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and Uttar Pradesh, among others. Th e 
scheme facilitates the planting of selected tree species in States that have relaxe d 
transit regulations for such trees. The objective is to create an additional source of 
income for farmers and contribute to carbon sequestration. 
Agroforestry encompasses the cultivation of multipurpose tree species that yield short, 
medium, and long-term returns. This approach enables farmers to generate a dditional 
income at regular intervals by cultivating fruits, fodder, medicinal plants, and timber  
species. It also promotes tree plantation in farmland, thereby enhancing soil  organic 
matter and improving nutrient uptake by crops. Agroforestry not only provide s income 
and savings opportunities for farmers, but also acts as a safeguard against crop 

30 
 
damage. Furthermore, it contributes to carbon sequestration and aligns with  national 
initiatives on climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
The impact of agroforestry on soil health is measured through the soil h ealth card, 
which is periodically issued to farmers. The card reflects the soil health status an d 
provides valuable insights into the organic matter content and nutrient uptake b y crops 
at different stages of the program. 
1.37 When asked to furnish the details of the effectiveness of the Sch eme in 
adaptation/ mitigating the side effects of Climate Change especially in Backward/ Tribal / 
Drought Prone/Flood prone regions of the country alongwith relevant examples, th e 
Department stated as under -  
 “The effectiveness of the Scheme in adaptation/ mitigating the side effects of 
Climate Change through various schemes of NMSA can be summarized as: 
 To promote efficient use of water and fertilizer through micro-irrigatio n, Per Drop 
More Crop (PDMC) scheme is being implemented for which an amount of Rs. 
16815.66 crore has been incurred with area coverage of 70.04 lakh ha.  Rainfed 
Area Development (RAD) scheme is being implemented to promote sustainable 
Integrated Farming System with area coverage of 6.74 lakh ha. for which an 
expenditure of Rs. 1511.56 crore has been incurred. For promoting organic farm ing, 
under Mission Organic Value Chain Development in North East Region 
(MOVCDNER), 379 Farmer Producer Companies have been formed comprising of 
1.89 lakh farmers and covering an area of 1.73 lakh ha. Mission for Integrated 
Development of Horticulture (MIDH) is being implemented in which so far Rs. 
13300.08 crore has been released with area coverage of 11.26 lakh ha. 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) was initiated to promote organic farming 
in the country and so far 11.80 lakh ha area has been covered with 1 6.19 lakh 
farmers being benefitted. Soil health Cards/Soil Health Management Scheme  is 
being implemented for which an expenditure of Rs. 1335.68 crore has been  incurred 
so far for various activities for improving soil health and its fertility. Till now 22.71 
crore grid based soil health cards have been distributed to farmers under the 
scheme. Although climate change is understood to have its negative impa ct on food 
crops, through the help of technology, the negative impacts have been de alt with 
effectively.” 
1.38 On being asked to furnish details of schemes being implemented by the 
Department to safeguard interests of the Farmers and those employed in Allied  Sector 
from the adverse effects of Climate Change and to also provide details o f the Schemes 
to supplement income of Farmers apart from credit enhancement to protect th eir 
livelihood with deleterious effects of Climate Change, the Department stated: 
“National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) is one of the Missions within 
the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) under Hon ’ble Prime 
Minister’s Council for Climate Change. The mission aims to evolve and implement 
strategies to make Indian Agriculture more resilient to the changing climate.  NMSA 
was approved for three major components i.e. Rainfed Area Development (RAD); 
On Farm Water Management (OFWM); and Soil Health Management 
(SHM).Subsequently, four new programmes were introduced namely Soil Health 

31 
 
Card (SHC), Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Mission Organic Value 
Chain Development in North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) and Sub Mission on 
Agroforestry (SMAF). During 2015-16, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojan a 
(PMKSY) was operationalised wherein the OFWM component of NMSA was 
subsumed under Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) component of PMKSY. In addition  to 
aforementioned programmes under NMSA, Restructured National Bamboo Mission 
(NBM) was launched in April 2018. 
 Government introduced flagship yield based Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Y ojana 
(PMFBY) along with weather index based Restructured Weather Based Crop 
Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) from Kharif 2016.  The scheme aims at 
supporting sustainable production in Agriculture sector by way of providing finan cial 
support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out of unforeseen nat ural 
calamities, adverse weather incidence and to help in stabilize the income of farmers 
to ensure their continuance in farming.   Comprehensive risk insurance to farmers is 
provided against non-preventable natural calamities such as drought, dry-spells, 
flood, hailstorm and inundation etc. under the scheme for entire crop cycle including 
pre-sowing to post-harvest losses. 
       The Scheme is being implemented on actuarial/bidded premium  rate basis.  
However, farmers have to pay a minimum uniform fixed premium rate maximum 2% 
for Kharif, 1.5% for Rabi food and oilseed crops and 5% for annual 
commercial/horticultural crops, with balance of actuarial/bidded premium being 
shared by the Central and State Government on 50:50 basis except in North Eastern 
States (from Kharif 2020) and Himalayan States (from Kharif 2023), where it is 
90:10.    The scheme is voluntary for the States since inception and f or all farmers 
w.e.f. Kharif 2020. 
      The Scheme envisages coverage of all food crops, oilseeds and comme rcial/ 
horticultural crops subject to availability of specified past yield/weather data. The 
crops for which requisite past yield data is not available can be covered under  
RWBCIS.  Actual crop under the scheme is notified by the concerned State  
Government.    
   The Scheme envisages use of improved technology in implementation of the 
scheme.  Accordingly, various measures have been taken by the Governme nt to 
infuse technology for better results in the implantation of the Scheme, viz.,  
capturing of    yield data/Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) data through CCE-Agri 
App &uploading them on the National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP), allowing 
insurance companies to witness the conduct of CCEs,  Yield Estimation through 
Technology (YESTECH), Weather Information Network Data System (WINDS), 
Collection of Real-time Photos and Observation of Crops (CROPIC), integration of 
State land records with NCIP etc. to improve timely settlement of the claims to  
farmers, launch of DIGIClaim Payment Module  for Direct claim disbursement to  
farmers account through NCIP via DIGICLAIM under the scheme along with penalty 
provisions for delay in settlement of claims. These technological advancements  
have taken PMFBY one step further towards modernization of the scheme.  PMFBY 
is one of the area based scheme globally to use technology so extensivel y in its 
implementation 

32 
 
 Since inception of the scheme in 2016-17 to 2022-23, 4,814 lakh fam er applications 
have been enrolled over an area of 3,479 lakh ha. for a sum insured of  Rs. 
14,37,645  crore. Claims of Rs. 1,35,248 crore have already been paid to 1,346 lakh 
farmer applications which includes partial claims for Kharif-22 also (As on 30- 04-
2023).” 
G. National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) 
1.39 National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) is a network 
project of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) launched in February, 
2011. The Project aims to enhance resilience of Indian Agriculture to clima te change 
and climate vulnerability through strategic research and technology demonstration. The 
research on adaptation and mitigation covers crops, livestock, fisheries and natural  
resource management. The project consists of four components viz. Strategic 
Research, Technology Demonstration, Capacity Building and Sponsored/Competitive 
Grants. 
 
Project Components 
 
1.40 Both short term and long term outputs are expected from the Proje ct in terms of 
new and improved varieties of Crops, Livestock breeds, management pract ices that 
help in adaptation and mitigation and inputs for policy making to mainstream climate 
resilient Agriculture in the developmental planning. The overall expected outc ome is 
enhanced resilience of agricultural production to climate variability in vulnerable regions. 
The project is comprised of four components. 
1) Strategic research on adaptation and mitigation 
2) Technology demonstration on farmers’ fields to cope with current climate variability 
3) Sponsored and competitive research grants to fill critical research gaps 
4) Capacity building of different stake holders 
 
1.41 On being asked to provide the objectives of National Innovations in Climate 
Resilient Agriculture(NICRA) programme and the difficulties faced in its implementation 
along with subsequent actions taken thereon to overcome the same, the Dep artment 
stated:- 
“The objectives of NICRA project are: 
 To enhance the resilience of Indian Agriculture to climatic variability and  climate 
change through strategic research on adaptation and mitigation,  
 To validate and demonstrate climate resilient technologies on farmer ’s fields,  
 To strengthen the capacity of scientists and other stakeholders in climate resilient 
Agriculture and  
 To draw policy guidelines for wider scale adoption of resilience-enh ancing 
technologies and options.  
Budget allocation for NICRA is insufficient. However, through convergence with 
ongoing schemes of different ministries some of the expenditure for techn ology 
demonstration component is met.” 

33 
 
1.42 The Committee inquired as to how Climate risk screening was done for 
finalization of villages to be adopted/ covered under NICRA (National Inn ovations in 
Climate Resilient Agriculture) and the complete procedure followed and the parameters 
taken into account in this regard may please be stated. In response thereto, th e 
Department submitted: 
 “Following the framework given in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) Fifth Assessment Report, risk and vulnerability of Agriculture to climate 
change were assessed at district level. Climate change risk was assessed in terms 
of an index that combines indices of exposure, vulnerability and hazard which 
were constructed by aggregating relevant indicators. Climate change projections 
derived from CMIP-5 climate models based on the scenario Representative 
Concentration Pathway 4.5 (RCP 4.5) for the period 2020-49 were used to  
represent hazard. Climate change risk was found to be 'very' high' in 109 districts 
and 'high' in 201 districts. Districts with 'very high' climate change risk are located  
in the states of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala, Uttarakhand, Odisha, etc. 
while those with 'high' risk are in Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Rajasthan, Karnataka, Maharashtra, etc. After identifying the risk prone districts in 
the country, representative villages in each of the identified districts were selected 
for implementing the NICRA programme.”  
1.43 On being asked to state the comparative differences in performance o f villages 
adopted/ covered under NICRA and others who were not in the past five years and 
additionally, state as to how NICRA has brought changes in social and economic 
criterion in villages wherein it has been implemented, the Department submitted:- 
 “As part of the Technology Demonstration Component (TDC) of National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA), demonstration of location 
specific climate resilient technologies is being taken up to minimize crop losses 
and enable farmers to cope with the adverse weather conditions. The 
demonstrations are taken up in farmers ’ fields in 151 risk prone districts of the 
country. Climate resilient technologies which can minimize the impact of dry 
spells, drought, flood and heat wave are being taken up in a clust er of villages in 
each of the district to make the farmers aware about the new technologies by 
way of demonstrations and by training them so that they can adopt these  
technologies to minimize crop losses and to enable them to become resilient 
even under variable climatic conditions. 
Adoption of the technologies led to minimization of the impact of climatic stresses 
and reduced the yield loss during the stress years. Short-duration and drough t-
tolerant varieties of pigeon pea (BDN-708), green gram (BM 2002-1), and chick  
pea (Digvijay and Vijay) were introduced on selected farmers ’ fields in 
Aurangabad district of Maharashtra (rainfall of 645 mm), which gave 20 –25% 
higher yield than the local varieties under deficient rainfall situations. Dro ught-
tolerant, short-duration varieties of sorghum (CSH-14) and pigeon pea (AK T-
8811) introduced in several NICRA villages gave about 60 and 37% highe r 
yields, respectively compared to local varieties of farmers who were not covered 
under NICRA. In regions where depth of water was more than 1 m and dura tion 
of flooding was more than 10 days submergence-tolerant rice varieties, such  as 

34 
 
Jalashree and Jalkuwari produced about 53% higher grain yield compared to 
traditional rice varieties in Dhubri district, Assam. Adoption of in-situ conservation 
practices such as conservation furrows helped to improve the soil moisture 
availability at the root zone and eventually increased the productivit y of crops by 
15–20% in dry regions compared to the traditional practices of farmers. Crops 
performed better under ridge and furrow method of sowing an d the seed yields 
increased by 22% in pigeon pea, 28% in black gram, 39% in green gram, an d 
27% in soybean when compared to farmers ’ practice of flatbed method of sowing 
in several locations. Formation of broad bed and furrow in soybean in Vertisols o f 
Central India served as conservation as well as for draining excess water and 
increased yields to the extent of 23% and also enhanced net benefit by Rs. 6223 
per hectare than that of flat method of sowing. 
Harvesting water contributed to improvement in the area under irrigation in 
several NICRA villages and contributed to increase in cropping intensity to 139%. 
Efficient methods of irrigation such as sprinkler and drip methods resulted in  
reducing the application losses and enhanced the income of farmers through 
high value crops with optimum use of harvested water. In some of the locatio ns, 
critical irrigations saved the crop from drought and contributed to yield 
improvement up to 100%. Introduction of fish and duck in the dugout pon d 
resulting in an additional revenue of Rs. 60,200 per hectare per year which wa s 
significantly higher than that of sole arable cropping. Balanced ration coupled 
with feeding of urea molasses bricks and mineral mixture supplementation 
resulted in average improvement in milk yield by 15 –20% in livestock. Improved 
shelter resulted in decreased mortality in animals from 4 to 10% and expend iture 
for treatment of affected animals was also avoided.” 
 
1.44 On being asked to provide the details of major impact created by National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture since 2011 till date in the country and  its 
contribution in the uplifting the agricultural yield and to also list some speci fic 
technologies in this field which have proved to be a game changer, the Depart ment 
stated: 
 “The NICRA project aims at strategic research on adaptation and mitigation, 
demonstration of technologies on farmers ’ fields and creating awareness among 
farmers and other stakeholders to minimize the impacts of climate change on 
Agriculture. The major impact created by the project so far is given below: 
▪ Studied the impact of elevated CO 2 and temp on crops, livestock, fisheries, soil, 
water, pests and diseases using simulation models. This helps to develop new 
and innovative climate resilient technologies to minimize the adverse impact o f 
climate change. 
▪ GHG inventorization and C sequestration potential of predominant production 
systems in the country is being carried out, contributing to India ’s Biannual 
Update Reports (BUR) being submitted to UNFCCC.  
▪ Developed climate resilient varieties for different abiotic and biotic stresses in 
major crops. So far 15new varieties/hybrids were released in rice, wheat, green 

35 
 
gram, maize, lentil and tomato under NICRA. Apart from this, 177 climate 
resilient varieties have been evaluated for different climatic stresses in 151 
vulnerable districts across the country. These climate resilient varieties can be 
upscaled by State Governments. 
▪ District level risk and vulnerability assessment of Indian Agriculture to climate 
change is documented. The document contains information on relative position of 
districts of the country in relation to climate change risk and study showed th at 
out of 573 districts, 109 were falling under very high risk prone and 201 are 
highly prone. This document is being extensively used by different Ministries,  
Developmental Departments and financial institutions viz., NABARD and World 
Bank for prioritizing resources for climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
▪ Prepared district agricultural contingency plans (650 districts), updated (386 
districts), validated (23 village clusters in 15 states) and sensitized State officials 
for preparedness through 60 State-level interface meetings. 
▪ Dynamic crop-weather calendar for farm level decisions, agro-climatic atlas for 
Maharashtra and Bihar, and contributed to 'Meghdoot App' for accessing rea l-
time weather information (> 2 crore users). 
▪ Climate-induced pest and disease outbreaks in the country were studied in 9 
crops viz., rice, wheat, sorghum, chickpea, mustard, safflower, potato, tomato 
and onion (10 insects and 29 diseases) to build pest and disease forewarning  
models. Web enabled and mobile App for Forewarning Blue Tongue Disea se in 
cattle have been developed and made available to farmers. 
▪ To generate awareness and build capacity of farmers and other stakeholders and 
to evolve innovative institutional mechanisms at village level innovative 
institutional interventions viz., Village Climate Risk Management Committee 
(VCRMC), Custom Hiring Center(CHC), seed and fodder production systems  
etc., were established in the NICRA villages enabled to sustain the activities 
envisaged and scaling up of interventions.  
▪ Participatory Technology Development is a unique feature of the NICRA Proje ct. 
It involved farmers in risk assessment and adaptation techniques in 151 
vulnerable district clusters covering 454 villages. Large-scale on-going 
demonstrations of location specific resilient technologies were undertaken to 
address major climatic vulnerabilities. Capacity building programs have been 
taken up involving 5.16 lakhs comprising researchers, farmers, entrepreneurs, 
line department officials, policy makers and NGOs in the field of climate resilient 
Agriculture. 
▪ The outcome of NICRA is shared in several international fora viz., G-20, SAARC, 
BIMSTEC, ASEAN, QUAD, UNFCCC, FAO etc. and the climate change initiative 
of India is highly appreciated.” 
 
1.45 On being asked that in India, States such as Maharashtra and Odisha are  
implementing programmes similar to NICRA and adaptation and mitigation processes  
are being upscaled in several State Governments across the country and to name  

36 
 
States other than Maharashtra and Odisha, which are upscaling the ada ptation and 
mitigation practices, the Department have stated as under:  
 “Upscaling the adaptation and mitigation practices are being taken up in the 
 following states  
• Scaling-up Climate Resilient Agriculture Practices towards Climate Smart 
Villages (Haryana) 
• Scaling Climate Smart Agriculture through mainstreaming Climate Smart 
Villages (Bihar) 
• Resilient Agricultural Households through Adaptation to Climate Change in 
Mahbubnagar District (Telangana).” 
 
H. Sustainable Development Goal - 13 
1.46 The Department was asked to furnished to detailed roadmap in regard to  
Sustainable Development Goal 13 (SDG 13) of United Nations and the key 
issues/challenges being faced by the Department at various levels and as to  how does 
it plan to address successful implementation of SDG 13 to minimize the cha llenges 
being posed by Climate Change and to enlist the steps/measures alre ady taken in this 
regard. In response thereto, the Department submitted: 
 
 “India is a party to UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement. Despite having no binding  
mitigation obligation under the Convention, the Government of India had announced, 
in 2010, a voluntary goal of reducing the emission intensity of its GDP by 20- 25% 
from 2005 levels by 2020. India has achieved a reduction of 24% in em ission 
intensity of its GDP between 2005 and 2016, thereby achieving this volunta ry goal. 
For the post 2020 period, India submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC) in 2015 outlining eight targets. India submitted its updated NDC in Aug ust 
2022 translating Panchamrit targets announced by Hon'ble PM at COP-26  in 
Glasgow. India’s NDC is ambitious and makes a significant contribution towards 
achieving the targets of the Paris Agreement. Achievement of India ’s NDC will be 
captured as its progress in achievement of SDG 13 on climate action. 
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) is one of the Missions under  
the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) in the Hon ’ble Prime 
Minister’s Council for Climate Change. The mission aims to evolve and implement 
strategies to make Indian Agriculture more resilient to the changing climate.  NMSA  
was approved for three major components viz. Rainfed Area Development (RAD); 
On Farm Water Management (OFWM); and Soil Health Management (SHM) in the 
beginning. Subsequently, four new programmes were introduced namely Soil He alth 
Card (SHC), Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Mission Organic Value 
Chain Development in North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) and Sub Mission on 
Agroforestry (SMAF). During 2015-16, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojan a 
(PMKSY) was operationalised wherein the OFWM component of NMSA was 
subsumed under Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) component of PMKSY. In addition  to 
aforementioned programmes under NMSA, Restructured National Bamboo Mission 
(NBM) was also launched in April 2018 to address successful implementation o f 
SDG-13. 

37 
 
Further, National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA), a flagship 
network project of ICAR was initiated in the year 2011. NICRA project is a multi-
sectoral, multi-location carrying the major mandate of addressing climate chang e 
and variability, and addressing range of stake holders needs across the country . 
Research, demonstration and capacity building are the three major components 
besides providing policy briefs on several aspects related to Agriculture and cli mate 
change. Given the persistent challenges of poverty and malnutrition, role of 
sustainable agricultural development in addressing these challenges assume 
importance. Climate change accentuates all other problems that threate n 
sustainability of Indian Agriculture.”  
I. Impact of Climate Change on India  
(a) Impact on Crops 
1.47 The effects of climate change on the cultivation of major crops, includ ing rice, 
wheat, maize, and onion were examined. It utilized an integrated simulat ion modeling 
framework to analyze the impact of rising temperatures and carbon dioxide on  soil 
organic carbon. Without the implementation of adaptation measures, it is proje cted that 
rainfed rice yields in India will decline by 20% in 2050 and 47% in 2080 scenarios. 
Similarly, irrigated rice yields are expected to decrease by 3.5% in 2050 and 5% in 2080 
scenarios. The study also reveals that climate change will reduce wheat yield by 19.3% 
in 2050 and 40% in 2080 scenarios, with significant spatial and temporal varia tions. 
Furthermore, the research indicates that the kharif maize yields may decrease by  18 to 
23% in 2050 and 2080 scenarios. However, kharif groundnut yields are projected  to 
increase by 7% in 2050 scenario, but decline by 5% in 2080 scenario. It is anticipated 
that future climates will benefit chickpea cultivation, resulting in increased productivit y 
(NICRA, 2019). 
1.48 On being inquired as to whether the Government have conducted  any study on 
the would- be-impact on Indian Agriculture and if so, the details of such study and 
remedial measures/steps taken in this regard, may please be shared, the Depart ment 
submitted: 
“Impact of climate change on crops was studied using integrated simulation 
modelling framework. The results indicate that in the absence of adoption of 
adaptation measures, climate change projections are likely to reduce rainfed ri ce 
yields by 20% in 2050 and 47% in 2080 scenarios while, irrigated rice yields b y 
3.5% in 2050 and 5% in 2080 scenarios, wheat yield by 19.3% in 205 0 and 40% 
in 2080 scenarios and kharif maize yields by 18 to 23% in 2050 and 2080 
scenarios. Kharif groundnut yields are projected to be increased by 7% in 2050 
scenario where as in 2080 scenario the yield is likely to decline by 5%. Clim ate 
fluctuations such as drought, flooding, hailstorm etc. associated with global 
warming can prove disastrous to farmers engaged horticulture cropping. Flooding 
for 24 hours severely affects tomato during flowering stage. Onion during b lub 
stage is highly sensitive to flooding, whereas warmer temperatures shorten the 
duration of onion bulb development leading to lower yields. Similarly, soil  
warming adversely affects several cucurbits. Reduction in chilling temperature in 

38 
 
the recent years in Himachal Pradesh drastically affected apple production, a nd 
the farmers are shifting from apple to kiwi, pomegranate and other vegetab les. 
Also, climate change is likely to alter the biology and forging behaviour of 
pollinators that play key role in several horticulture crops. 
▪ To meet the challenges of sustaining domestic food production in the fa ce of 
changing climate, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India launched a flagship 
network project NICRA in 2011. Location specific climate resilient technologies 
were demonstrated for coping with climate variability in vulnerable districts, to  
generate awareness and build capacity of farmers and other stakeholde rs and to 
evolve innovative institutional mechanisms at village level so as to enable the 
communities to respond to climate change. The interventions are broadly divided 
into four modules viz., natural resource management, crop production, livestock 
and fisheries and creation of institutional structures for sustaining the activities 
envisaged and scaling up of interventions. Climatic vulnerabilities viz., droughts, 
floods, cyclone, heat wave, high temperature stress, cold wave and frost are  
being addressed. Prioritization of interventions is done based on the climate  
vulnerability of the district, predominant farming situations and the resource 
endowments of the village. Location-specific climate resilient technologies hav e 
been tested and validated at on-farm sites of 151 climatically vulnerab le districts 
for adoption by the farmers. One village cluster from each of the 151 d istricts 
were selected by the respective Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) in the district and 
the program is implemented through farmer participatory approach. During the 
past decade, 19,564 capacity building programs were conducted throughout  the 
country under NICRA project to educate stakeholders on various aspects of 
climate change and resilient technologies, covering 5,60,016 different 
stakeholders including farmers so as to enable wider adoption of climate resilient  
technologies.” 
1.49  The Committee desired the Department to elaborate  the adverse impact of 
Climate Change on crops & crop patterns and the adaptation/mitigation measures in 
form of Schemes being implemented/ proposed along their efficacy. In resp onse 
thereto, the Department stated:  
 “The climatic stresses have been affecting the productivity of crops. For instance,  
recent heat wave during March, 2022 second fortnight affected the  wheat 
production by about 3.5 Mt. Similarly, in 2014, 2015 unseasonal rainf all coinciding 
pod maturation phase of soybean affected production significantly.  
 Rice: the negative effects of climate change on rice yield have been proje cted, 
with 4% loss in irrigated rice yield and 6% loss in rain-fed rice yield projected for 
the 2020 (2010 –2039) scenario in India. With adaptation, however, the irrigated 
rice yield increases by 17%, while the increase in yield of rain-fed rice is 20%.  
 Wheat: climate change is projected to affect wheat yield in India ranging from 6% 
to 23% up to 2060s, without any specific adaptation. The yield would reduce  in 
areas with current seasonal maximum mean temperatures in excess of 27°C an d 
13°C for minimum, respectively. Sowing a suitable variety, adjusting sowing time 
and fertiliser and irrigation management may be a low-cost and practical  

39 
 
adaptation strategy that can significantly increase wheat yield in changing 
climates. Earlier studies have indicated that a 1°C increase in growing season 
temperature can result in a loss of 4–5 Mt of wheat yield. 
 Maize: climate change is projected to affect the yield of maize in the Kharif 
season by 18% up to 2039. However, adaptation measures can significantly 
increase yields. 
 Sorghum: the projected effects of climate change on rain-fed sorghum show a 
reduction in yield of about 2.5% in the 2020 scenario (2010 –2039). Simple 
adaptation options, however, can improve productivity by 8%.  
 Mustard: In India, climate change is projected to affect mustard seed yield by 
about 2% in the 2020 (2010 –2039) scenario. Areas with current mean seasonal 
temperatures (max/max) in excess of 25/10°C will lose mustard yield due to th e 
temperature rise. A reduced climatically suitable window for the cultivation of 
mustard is also projected. Therefore, short-duration cultivars (<130 days) with a 
63% period for pod filling can adapt better. 
 Other crops such as chick pea, cotton and pigeon pea are projected to have 
either beneficial effects due to reduced frost events or no significant advers e 
effects in large areas.  Potato yield are projected to be negatively impacted in  
eastern India while in north-west India it may benefit due to reduced frost e vents 
and slight increase in rainfall during rabi season.  
 The coconut yields are projected to increase in western coast, parts of Tamil 
Nadu and Karnataka and in NE region, while yields are projected to reduce in  
eastern coast, Odisha and West Bengal and adaptation can significantly im prove 
the productivity. 
 It is also predicted that due to warming, there will be a shift in crop zones of 
Apple and other temperate crops. 
 Climate analogues also showed that the spice area may be expande d in both the 
Western and Eastern Ghat regions. 
 Under NMSA different programs such as Micro Irrigation, Rainfed Area 
Development, Agroforestry, Organic Farming, Systems of Rice Intensification 
(SRI) / Direct Seeded Rice (DSR), Crop Diversification, Additional area under 
plantation in arable land (MIDH/ SMAF/NBM) etc. are operational and an area 
coverage of these schemes is 71.84 lakh ha during last five years. Soil Health 
Cards/Soil Health Management Scheme is being implemented for improving soil 
health and its fertility. Till now 22.71 crore grid based soil health cards have been 
distributed to farmers under the scheme. ICAR has developed 2279 varieties, out 
of which 1888 are climate resilient varieties. 407 abiotic stress tolerant varietie s 
and 1481 are biotic stress tolerant. These varieties are being promoted throu gh 
various schemes of DA&FW, KVKs and state extension functionaries.” 
 
1.50 On being asked to furnish details of different Agro Climactic Zones drawn by the 
Department to chalk out relevant planning and requisite implementation strategy 
accordingly, the Department stated:  

40 
 
“National Agricultural Research Project (NARP) was launched by ICAR for initiating 
agricultural research in the agro-climatic zones of the country. The objective was to 
set up or upgrade a zonal research station in each agro-climatic zone for gene rating 
location specific, need based research targeted for specific agro-ecological 
situations. The focus was on analyzing agro-ecological conditions and cropping 
patterns and come out with a programme directly targeted to solve the major bottle 
necks of agricultural growth in a zone based on natural resources, major crops, 
farming systems, production constraints and socio-economic conditions prevalent in 
that zone. Stress was on technology generation. In NARP, the country was divide d 
into 127 agro climatic zones.  
Subsequently the Planning Commission of India, as a result of the mid-ter m 
appraisal of the planning targets of the Seventh Plan, has divided the country  into 
fifteen broad agro-climatic zones based on physiography, soils, geological  
formation, Climate, cropping patterns, and development of irrigation and  mineral 
resources for broad agricultural planning and developing future strategies. These 
are further divided into more homogeneous 72 sub-zones. Fourteen reg ions were in 
the main land and the remaining one in the islands of Bay of Beng al and the 
Arabian Sea. The main objective was to integrate plans of the agro-climatic regions 
with the state and national plans to enable policy development based on  techno-
agro-climatic considerations. In the agro-climatic regional planning, further sub -
regionalization was possible based on agro-ecological parameters. 
The National Bureau of Soil Survey & Land Use Planning (NBSS&LUP) ca me up 
with twenty agro-ecological regions based on the growing period as integrat ed 
criteria of effective rainfall, soil groups, delineated boundaries adjusted to district 
boundaries with a minimal number of regions. Subsequently, these twenty agro-
ecological regions were sub- divided into 60 sub-regions.  The agro ecological 
regions developed by ICAR are scientific and also take in to consideration th e 
length of growing period which is very important to chalk out the relevant plan ning 
and requisite implementation strategy accordingly.” 
(b) Impact on Horticulture 
1.51 The Horticulture Sector is susceptible to severe impacts caused by unseasonal  
rains and fluctuations in temperature. Global warming-induced phenomena such as 
droughts, floods, and hailstorms can prove disastrous for farmers engage d in 
horticulture cropping. Hailstorms occurring during the flowering and fruit set stage 
(March-June) result in reduced fruit yields in mango. Additionally, flooding for 24 hours 
significantly affects tomato crops during the flowering stage. Flooding du ring the bulb 
stage of onion cultivation leads to diminished yields. Moreover, the reduction in chil ling 
temperatures in Himachal Pradesh may necessitate the shifting of apple cu ltivation to 
higher elevations. In recent years, the drastic decrease in chilling temp erature has had 
a substantial impact on apple production in Himachal Pradesh, prompting diversi fication 
towards kiwi, pomegranate, and vegetables. It is noteworthy that temperature a nd 
carbon dioxide levels are likely to influence the biology and foraging behaviour of 
pollinators, which play a crucial role in the cultivation of various horticulture crops. 
 

41 
 
(c) Impact on Livestock 
1.52 The Livestock Sector is expected to be affected by the rise in te mperature 
caused by climate change. This increase in temperature is likely to have an  impact on 
the physiological responses and energy expenditure of livestock, resulting in a decrease 
in productivity in terms of milk, meat, wool, and draught power. If no adaptati on 
measures are taken, it is estimated that global warming could lead to a loss of 15 Mt of 
milk production by 2050. In India alone, the annual loss of milk yield due  to heat stress 
in cattle and buffalo is approximately 1.8-2 million tonnes, resulting in an  economic loss 
of Rs. 5953.65 crore per year. The States most affected by these losses are Utt ar 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, and West Bengal. Furthermore, climate change ma y 
also impact animal health by causing the emergence and re-emergence of infectious 
diseases, particularly those transmitted by vectors, parasites, and protozoa. In th e 
poultry sector, heat stress not only increases mortality rates but also reduces feed 
intake, egg production, egg weight, shell quality, and overall productiv ity. High ambient 
temperatures (>350oC) combined with high humidity (>65%) significantly reduce fe ed 
consumption (up to 25%) and ultimately lead to lower body weight gain (15 0-250g/bird) 
in broilers, as well as decreased egg production (about 10 eggs/bird) during the summer 
season. 
1.53 The Committee specifically desired to know  as to how Climate Cha nge would 
adversely impact Livestock production & animal health in terms of productivity a nd GDP 
(in economic terms) of the country along with the likely changes to be face d by the 
Livestock during to Global warming & the steps being taken/proposed to be taken in this 
regard. The Department submitted:  
 “Increasing temperature due to climate change is likely to impact livestock 
production and health. Although, the impacts of climate change are global, countries 
like India are more vulnerable in view of the high livestock population. Climate 
change is likely to impact the physiological reactions and energy expenditure of 
livestock resulting into a decline in productivity in terms of milk, meat, wool and 
draught power. In India, significant negative impacts have been implied with  
medium-term (2010-2039) climate change. The estimated annual mil k loss due to 
heat stress in cattle and buffalo in India is about 1.8 –2 million tonnes. The losses in 
productivity on account of climate changes are higher in crossbreds than indige nous 
cattle and buffaloes. Global warming is likely to lead to a loss of 1.6 Mt o f milk 
production by 2020 and 15 Mt by 2050 if no adaptation is follow ed. The losses may 
be highest in UP followed by Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan and West Bengal. Increased  
number of heat stress days and probable decline in availability of wa ter may further 
impact animal productivity. 
 Animal health may also be impacted by climate change by emerge nce and re-
emergence of many infectious diseases especially vector-borne diseases critically 
dependent on environmental and climatic conditions. Climate change aff ects the 
diseases and parasitic challenges and increases incidence of parasitic and 
protozoan diseases. It has been reported that the transmission of wind-bo rne 
diseases such as foot and mouth disease and infections transmitted by ticks, 
mosquitoes, midges and other arthropods may be of great concern with respect to 
climate change. Inadequate resources and infrastructure is likely to put stress on 

42 
 
livestock and livestock production system with further and substantial increase 
(160%) in stressful days due to climate change. The temperature rise due t o global 
warming is likely to cause a change in the composition of species, breeds and their 
mix at farm level. India is also likely to face a major water crisis that will severel y 
impact livestock and livestock production system.  
 Several location specific climate resilient technologies viz., feed supplements with 
mineral mixtures, making available improved fodder seedlings, breed improvement  
in cattle using indigenous breeds, shelter management techniques in large and small 
ruminants etc. have been developed and demonstrated on large scale through  
NICRA KVKs in 151 climatically vulnerable districts across the country.” 
 
(d) Impact on Fisheries sector 
1.54 In the Fisheries Sector, even a slight increase in temperature of 1°C ca n have a 
profound impact on the survival and distribution of various freshwater a nd marine fish 
species. This temperature rise is likely to affect fish migrations and habitats, leading to 
an increase in fish stocks in some areas and a decrease in others. It may even  result in 
the permanent displacement of fish stocks to new habitats. Shrimp culture is a lso 
vulnerable to the impact of severe cyclonic storms. Post-cyclonic heavy rains can 
reduce salinity levels, mineral composition, and ionic ratio, while increasing pond wate r 
turbidity, all of which cause stress to shrimp in the culture pond. A zone-wise 
vulnerability assessment of 68 commercially important species shows that some 
species are highly vulnerable, while others have medium or low vulnerability. Cha nges 
in the metabolic activities of fish species have been observed due to the  increase in 
temperature. For example, the Indian mackerel, Rastrelliger Kanagurta, has been found 
to descend to deeper waters in the last two decades due to variations in su rface-water 
temperature. Furthermore, there is a negative correlation between marine pla nkton 
concentration and sea surface temperature (SST), indicating that as SST increases, 
plankton concentration decreases. With future scenarios predicting an increase in S ST 
according to the IPCC, there will likely be a reduction in plankton concentrations in  
coastal waters, which could have a significant negative impact on the survival, grow th, 
and overall population of fish larvae and adult fish. 
1.55 On being asked to share details as to how rise in temperatures would impa ct the 
survival and migration/habitat of different fresh water and marine fish species, what are 
the adverse effects of rise of Sea Surface Temperature (SST), how doe s the 
Department plan to handle the scenario and the list of programmes  being run/proposed 
& measures being taken/proposed to be taken, the Department stated: 
 “Relationship of temperature and spawning in marine and freshwater fisheries is 
elucidated so that fish catch in different regions can be predicted by temperature  
monitoring.  Relationship was established between increase in Sea Surface 
Temperature (SST) and catch and spawning in major marine fish species. 
Simulation modelling was used to understand the climate change and im pacts at 
regional/national level. A shift in the spawning season of oil sardine was observed  
off the Chennai coast from January-March season to June-July. Optimum 
temperature for highest hatching percentage was determined in Cobia.  A closed 
poly house technology was standardized for enhancing the hatching rate of common 

43 
 
carp during winter season.  An e-Atlas of freshwater inland capture fisheries was 
prepared which helps in contingency planning during aberrant weather. For the first 
time a greenhouse gas emission measurement system was standardized for 
brackish water aquaculture ponds.  Cost effective adaptation strategies like aeration 
and addition of immuno-stimulant in the high energy floating feed helpe d freshwater 
fish to cope with salinity stress as a result of seawater inundation in Sundarba n 
islands.  
As per the India’s Second National Communication to the UNFCCC, the hydrological 
changes in the flow pattern of river Ganga related to changes in the climatic pat terns 
have been a major factor resulting in erratic breeding and decline in fish spawn  
availability. There is also a perceptible shift in geographic distribution of fish in 
Ganga. The warm water fish species earlier available only in the middle stretch o f 
the River Ganga, are now available in the colder stretch of the river aroun d Haridwar 
due to increase in river water temperature. The phenomenon of maturin g and 
spawning of Indian major carps has been observed as early as March in We st 
Bengal. Its breeding season has also extended from 110 days to 12 0 days (pre-
1980–85) to 160 days to 170 days (2000 –05). As a result, it has been possible to 
breed these fishes biannually at an interval ranging from 30 –60 days. A prime factor 
influencing this trend is elevated temperature, which stimulates the endocrine glands 
of fish and helps in the maturation of the gonads. 
Sea surface temperature in the Indian seas may increase by about 3 oC by 2100. 
This is likely to affect fish breeding, migration, and harvests. If the sea su rface 
temperature in the southern latitudes increases beyond the physiological optimum of 
the fish, it is possible that the population may be driven away from t he southern 
latitudes, which will reduce the catches along the southwest and south-east coa sts 
in the future.” 
J. Research Infrastructure on Climate Change 
1.56 ICAR has established state- of-the-art infrastructure facilities in the National 
Agricultural Research and Education and Extension System (NAREES) throughout the  
country. These facilities have been put in place to support research on climate change. 
Noteworthy infrastructure facilities include High Throughput Plant Phonemics, the Free 
Air Temperature Enrichment facility (FATE), the Free Air CO 2 Enrichment facility 
(FACE), CO 2 Temperature Gradient Chambers (CTGC), eddy flux towers, gas 
chromatography, atomic absorption spectrophotometers, thermal imaging system, 
psychometric chambers, automatic weather stations, growth chambers, rainout shelters, 
animal calorimeter, shipping vessel, flux towers, and a satellite data receiving station. 
These facilities have been established across various ICAR institutes to investigate th e 
impact of climate change on crops, livestock, fisheries, soil organic carbon, and  
irrigation water (CCRI, 2019). Multiple ICAR institutes are currently engaged in research 
that covers areas such as the development of stress-tolerant crop genotypes, n atural 
resource management, quantification of greenhouse gas emissions in Agricu lture, 
development of technologies for their reduction, climate resilient horticulture, marine , 
brackish and inland fisheries, heat-tolerant livestock, as well as mitigation and 
adaptation to changing climate in small ruminants and poultry. 

44 
 
1.57 On being asked by the Committee to state steps being taken by the  Department 
to develop and upgrade infrastructure facilities aligned to global standards p an India to 
facilitate Climate Change research, to list outstanding achievements in terms of 
research breakthroughs in regard to Climate Resilient Technologies, Developments 
made in poultry, fisheries, etc. being achieved by institutes of ICAR along w ith plans of 
monetizing the innovations made by these Research Institutes by way of seeking 
patents and so on, the Department stated: 
“State of the art infrastructure required or climate change research such as high 
through-put phenotyping platforms, free air temperature enrichment (FAT E), carbon 
dioxide and temperature gradient tunnels (CTGC), high performance computers,  
automatic weather stations, growth chambers, rainout shelters, animal calorimeter, 
shipping vessel, flux towers and satellite receiving station were established in the 
research institutes across the country under National Innovations in Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project of ICAR. These facilities enabled to Scientists 
to understand the impact of climate change on crops, livestock and fisheries and 
develop innovative technologies to minimize the adverse impact. The salient 
achievements under NICRA are as below: 
▪ Studied impact of elevated temperature and CO 2 on crops (rice, wheat, maize and 
onion), livestock, fisheries, soil carbon, pests and diseases using integrated 
simulation modelling framework.  
▪ In rice, wheat, maize, pigeon pea and tomato crops, core sets of gen etic resources 
were assembled and field phenotyped to identify sources of tolerance to  climatic 
stresses.  
▪ District level risk and vulnerability assessment of Indian Agriculture to climate 
change has been revised as per IPCC AR-5 guidelines and is widely used by policy 
makers and research managers for prioritization of resources related to climate  
change action plans. Agricultural contingency plans are ready for 650 districts and  
updated for 386 districts.  
▪ Developed Agriculture Contingency Plans for 650 districts, and 350 plans are 
updated.  
▪ Established location specific GHG inventory for different cropping systems and 
production systems and quantified carbon sequestration potential through agro -
forestry systems and major cropping systems.  
▪ Forecasted area expansion of black pepper (97 to 133 districts) and cardamom (24  
to 104 districts) using climate analogues for habitat suitability in the future chan ging 
climate.  
▪ Developed an environmentally safe spray formulation for synchronization of 
flowering in mango. Efforts are made to characterize heat stock proteins and h eat 
stress induced genes in native breeds that can be used as biomarkers to induce 
resilience.  
▪ Developed rainbow trout farming in Re-Circulating Aquaculture System (RAS) to 
improve fish production in high altitude areas.  

45 
 
▪ Several resources use efficient technologies and low carbon technologies are 
identified for rice (DSR, SRI, Alternate wetting and drying of rice, neem oil coa ted 
urea, etc) and demonstrated in the farmers’ fields.” 
 
K. Green House Gas (GHG) Emissions from Agriculture Sector 
1.58 Another aspect of concern within the Agricultural Sector pertains to the em ission 
of Green House Gases (GHGs), specifically methane (CH 4) and nitrous oxide (N 2O), 
which constitute a significant portion. CH 4 emissions primarily arise from livestock 
rearing (via enteric fermentation and manure management) as well a s rice cultivation. 
On the other hand, N2O emissions are mainly a result of the application of  fertilizers to 
agricultural soils. In the year 2016, the Agricultural Sector in India emitted 40 7,821 Gg 
of CO 2, accounting for 14% of the country's total emissions. This figure represents a 
decrease of 2.25% compared to the levels observed in 2014 (Ministry of Envir onment, 
Forest and Climate Change [MoEFCC], 2021). Within the Agricultural Sector, ente ric 
fermentation accounted for the largest share of GHG emissions (54.6%), follo wed by 
rice cultivation (17.5%), fertilizer application to agricultural soils (19.1%), manure 
management (6.7%), and field burning of agricultural residues (2.2%). The burnin g of 
crop residues leads to the release of gases such as CH 4, CO, N2O, and NOx, as well as 
particulate matter. This practice not only results in the loss of plant nutrients bu t also 
has adverse effects on the atmospheric environment and soil health . Approximately 80-
90% of carbon (C), 25% of nitrogen (N), 20% of phosphorus (P), 20% of potassiu m (K), 
and 50% of sulfur (S) present in crop residues are lost in the form of va rious gaseous 
and particulate matters, contributing to atmospheric pollution. Additionally, it is  
estimated that approximately 70% of CO 2, 7% of CO, 0.66% of CH 4, and 2.1% of N are 
emitted as N2O through the burning of crop residues, thereby exerting an impact on the  
environment. Burning one tonne of rice residue releases 13 kg of p articulate matter, 
60kg of CO, 1460kg of CO 2, 3.5kg of NO x, and 0.2kg of SO 2. In North-West India, the 
burning of 23 million tonnes of rice residues annually results in a loss o f approximately 
9.2 million tonnes of carbon equivalent (equivalent to about 34 million  tonnes of CO 2) 
and a loss of around 1.4×105 tonnes of nitrogen (equivalent to Rs 200 cror e) per year. 
In addition to these losses, straw burning also leads to the deterioration of s oil physical 
health, health hazards and accidents, air pollution, emissions of greenhou se gases, and 
a loss of micro-biodiversity. The rice-wheat system is a significant contributor to  
greenhouse gas emissions in North-west India. Implementing conservation Agriculture 
(CA)-based production technologies within the rice-wheat cropping system can greatly 
enhance system productivity while minimizing global warming potential (GWP). By 
diversifying crops, adopting demand-driven nitrogen application, and im plementing 
zero-till (ZT) permanent broad bed with residue practices, GHG emissions can be 
reduced by a substantial margin (16-19%). Moreover, the CA-based cotton-whe at, 
maize-wheat-green gram systems hold promise as viable alternatives to the rice- wheat 
system, serving as important strategies for both adaptation and mitigation of Climate 
Change. These alternatives could be adopted particularly in the northern a nd north-
western regions of the country where the rice-wheat cropping system is currently 
prevalent. 

46 
 
1.59 On being asked by the Committee to state the Programmes being undertak en by 
the Department to reduce the emission of Green House Gases (GHG) in Agricultural 
Sector in the last 5 years and the achievements in this regard, if any, the Department 
submitted:  
“From Agriculture sector GHG emissions like methane (CH 4) and nitrous oxide (N 2O) 
form the major share. CH 4 emissions occur mainly due to livestock rearing (enteric 
fermentation and manure management) and rice cultivation. N 2O emissions are 
mainly due to the application of fertilizers to agricultural soils. Agriculture sector 
emitted 407,821 Gg of CO 2e (14% of the emissions of India) in 2016, which is 2.25% 
low compared to 2014. Within Agriculture sector, the major share of GHG emissi ons 
was due to enteric fermentation (54.6%), followed by rice cultivation (17.5%), fertilizer 
applied to agricultural soils (19.1%), manure management (6.7%) and field burning o f 
agricultural residues (2.2%).  
ICAR has developed several climate resilient technologies that helps in reducing 
emissions from Agriculture sector. The mitigation of GHG emissions can be achieve d 
by implementation of technologies like System of Rice Intensification (SRI) cultivation 
as alternative to transplanted paddy, Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) cultivation, us e of 
slow release nitrogen fertilizers, integrated nutrient management practices, soil health 
card based fertilizer application, leaf color charts based N fertilizer applica tion, 
integration of trees especially fruit trees in the arable systems, integrated farming  
systems in reducing emissions, replacing fossil fuels with biogas and vermi 
composting, micro-irrigation (drip and sprinkler), balanced ration for livestock, Nee m-
coated urea, solar pumps, avoidance of crop residue burning by promoting z ero 
tillage cultivation in rice-wheat. Demonstration of zero-till cultivation in NICRA villages 
has resulted in 26 villages as residue burning-free villages in the two states o f 
Haryana and Punjab. 
The Government has made all the Urea Neem oil coated which is repo rted to 
reduce the nitrous oxide emissions by up to 9%. In addition, the use of solar e nergy 
is being promoted. The other low GHG emitting technologies/ approaches such as 
direct seeded rice, SRI, etc. and improved nutrient and water use efficie nt 
technologies are being promoted. In livestock sector, efforts are on to promote the  
technologies to reduce the enteric fermentation related methane emission. 
In order to modernize traditional animal husbandry practices and adopt new 
technologies in Animal Husbandry to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from 
livestock, following steps has been taken by the Department and are implemented by 
the States: 
(i) Breed Improvement:  Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying is 
promoting breed improvement under Rashtriya Gokul Mission to enhance milk 
production and productivity, genetic upgradation of indigenous bovine popul ation 
thereby making dairying more green and sustainable.   
(ii) Balanced Feeding:  Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying is 
promoting green fodder production, silage making, chaff cutting, and total mixed  
ration under National Livestock Mission. Ration Balancing Programme is promoted 
under National Dairy Plan-I. Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying has 

47 
 
launched e Gopala App on 10.9.2020 for farmers, this app is guiding farme rs for 
balanced feeding of animals. 
(iii) Improving Feed Quality:  To reduce the ill-effects of poor quality fe ed, the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying has issued advisory to the State s for 
urea-molasses treatment of straw, silage making, and chopping of fodder be fore 
feeding livestock. 
(iv) Improvement in Health Status:  In order to control and eradicate animal 
diseases the Department is implementing disease control programme for control of 
FMD, Brucellosis, Pesti-des Petits Ruminants  (PPR) and Classical Swine Fever 
(CSF) through carpet vaccination for all eligible livestock in the country. Funds are  
made available to States for establishment of Mobile Veterinary Units in o rder to 
deliver quality livestock health services at the farmer's doorstep. 
(v) Better management of cow dung is promoted by the Department o f Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying. With the efforts made by the Department, National Dairy 
Development Board has taken up a establishment of 4000 cubic meter biogas plant 
at Varanasi Milk union, which will use 100 MT per day of dung purchased  from 
farmers. The biogas is used to produce thermal and electrical energy required  for 
milk processing of the dairy plant. Bio slurry obtained from the plant will be  converted 
in bio fertilizer and made available to member farmers at reasonable rates. 
Banaskantha Milk Union has installed 2000 cubic meter of biogas plant. A round 
40 Tonnes of dung is purchased by the union from its farmers to pro duce the biogas. 
The biogas produced is purified and compressed to produce CBG which is used  as 
fuel in vehicles. An exclusive CBG fuel station is setup by the Banaskant ha Milk 
Union. Bio slurry produced from the biogas plant is utilized to produce value a dded 
organic fertilizer and sold at reasonable rates to dairy farmers. 
The programs under NMSA promote sustainable Agriculture practices and 
farming methods which has the potential for carbon sequestration and reducing 
emission. The Ministry has come out with framework for the voluntary carbon 
markets in the Agriculture sector to promote development of a market-based  
mechanism to incentivize sustainable agricultural practices. Farmers can embrace 
regenerative farming and increase carbon sequestration/reduce emission in their 
farm.”  
 
1.60 On being asked by the Committee to state projections in regard to reduction of 
GHG emissions from the Agriculture Sector in the next two decades, for a period  for 5 
year cycle viz. from 2023-2028, 2029-2034 and so on, the Department submitted: 
  “One of the targets under India ’s NDC is “To better adapt to climate change by 
enhancing investments in development programmes in sectors vulnerable to climate 
change, particularly Agriculture, water resources, Himalayan region, coastal regions, 
health and disaster management ”. Hence, Agriculture sector is one the sectors 
identified for climate adaptation actions.  Further, it has been clarified  that India ’s 
NDC do not bind it to any sector specific mitigation obligation or action, including i n 
Agriculture sector. India ’s goal is to reduce overall emission intensity and improve 

48 
 
energy efficiency of its economy over time and at the same time protecti ng the 
vulnerable sectors of economy and segments of our society. 
About 86% of farmers in India are small and marginal (less than 2.0 ha ). Additional 
investments towards mitigating greenhouse gases like methane will be an add itional 
burden for the resource poor farmers. Any commitment towards methane redu ction 
from Agriculture sector for the next 10 years period would require hug e investment 
and support from the Government for up-scaling the proven resilient practice s. As 
per the commitment of Government of India in the NDC, Agriculture is not part of 
economy-wide emission intensity reduction goal. 
 The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) under National Innovations in 
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project has developed several technologies 
with mitigation potential for methane from rice viz., Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) (30-
50%), System of Rice Intensification (SRI) (25-30%), intermittent drying (25-30%) 
and promotion of short duration varieties (15-20%). 
 The National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) implemented by the  
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is up-scaling the several climate resilien t 
practices including the methane reduction practices in rice. These practices 
contribute to substantial reduction of methane emissions. Over the past eleven years 
(2012-2023), 11.84 lakh ha area has been brought under SRI/DSR cultivation  from 
traditional transplanted rice. 
 The Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization being implemented from the yea r 
2016 has resulted in substantial reduction of residue burning in States like Punjab,  
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. So far, a total of 2,00,570 crop residue managem ent 
machinery have been provided to the farmers across the country. A study by ICAR 
on real-time monitoring of residue burning in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Prades h 
using satellite data has shown reduction of burning events by 13.2% in 2 021 
compared to 2016.  
 The conventionally cultivated rice-wheat in the trans Indo Gangetic plains, wherein 
transplanted puddled rice followed by conventional tilled wheat is converted  to zero 
tilled direct seeded rice (ZTDSR) followed by zero tilled wheat (ZTW), th is will result 
in a 60% reduction in global warming potential. By 2023-2028, if 1 Mha  rice-wheat 
area under conventional cultivation in trans- Indo-Gangetic plains is converted to  
ZTDSR-ZTW, the reduction in GHG emissions will be approx. 3 Mt CO2 eq. By 2023-
2028, if 1 Mha rice-wheat area under conventional cultivation in trans Indo Gangetic 
plains is diversified to maize-wheat or cotton wheat, the reduction in GHG em issions 
will be approx. 1.5 Mt CO 2 eq. Several technologies have been developed to reduce 
the GHG emissions from rice cultivation and agricultural soils. Crop establishmen t 
technologies of Direct seeding in rice has the potential to mitigate GHG by 1.6 t CO 2 
eq. ha−1 whereas, and Zero tillage wheat (ZTW) and permanent bed planting has the 
potential to mitigate GHG by 1.3 t CO2 eq. ha−1 and 0.9 t CO 2 eq. ha−1, respectively. 
If rice residue is retained in soil in ZTW instead of burning it, the GHG mitigatio n 
potential can be increased by 0.5 t CO 2 eq. ha−1.  Sub surface drip irrigation has the 
potential to reduce GHG by 1.0 t CO2 eq. ha−1, and diversifying from rice to maize in 

49 
 
rice-wheat system can mitigate GHG by 0.5 t CO2 eq. ha−1.  All these GHG mitigation 
techniques have the additional benefit of water saving and productivity gain.”  
 
L. Carbon market in Agriculture 
1.61 The Agriculture sector contributes approximately 14% to the country's 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The Government is actively promoting various 
measures to mitigate GHG emissions in Agriculture. Implementation of technologies 
such as System of Rice Intensification (SRI) cultivation, Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) 
cultivation, use of slow-release nitrogen fertilizers (particularly neem-coated urea),  
integrated nutrient management practices, Soil health card-based fertilizer a pplication, 
leaf color charts-based N fertilizer application, integration of fruit trees in arable 
systems, and integrated farming systems can help achieve the reduction of GHG 
emissions. Other effective methods include replacing fossil fuels with biogas and v ermi 
composting, adopting micro-irrigation techniques (such as drip and sprinkler), prov iding 
balanced ration for livestock, utilizing green energy through solar pumps, and  promoting 
zero-tillage cultivation to avoid crop residue burning in rice-wheat farming in the Ind o-
Gangetic plains. The demonstration of zero-till cultivation in NICRA villages has 
successfully resulted in 26 residue burning-free villages in Haryana and Punja b. By 
embracing regenerative farming practices, farmers can transform their land from being a 
net emitter of GHG to becoming a carbon sink, effectively sequestering carbon and 
earning carbon credits. To facilitate this, the Ministry is initiating a carbon market in the 
Agriculture sector, allowing farmers who adopt regenerative Agriculture practices to 
earn additional income by mitigating emissions and sequestering carbon. In order to  
develop a framework and mechanism for the carbon market in the Agriculture sector, a 
separate Cell has been established in the Natural Resource Management (NRM) 
Division of the Department of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare. 
 
1.62 On being asked to furnish details of steps being taken for initiation of  Carbon 
Market in Agriculture by the Department, list the foreseeable challenges likely to be 
faced by the Department in this regard, state as to how does the Departmen t plan 
sequestration of Carbon Dioxide(CO 2) to enable farmers develop an alternative source 
of income and to also state plans, if any, to appointment any third p arty auditor to check 
the veracity of claims made in regard to carbon credit, the Department submitted: 
 
“India’s NDC do not bind it to any sector specific mitigation obligation or action, 
including in Agriculture sector. India’s goal is to reduce overall emission intensity and 
improve energy efficiency of its economy over time and at the same time  protecting 
the vulnerable sectors of economy and segments of our society. There is a grow ing 
demand for sustainably produced food, which can create new markets and value 
added opportunities for farmers. By adopting these practices, farmers can tap into 
these markets and capture higher prices for their produce.  Besides this, Soil organic 
carbon (SOC) is a crucial component of healthy soils and sustainable Agriculture. It 
refers to the amount of carbon stored in soil in the form of organic matter, such as 
decomposed plant and animal materials. SOC plays a vital role in soil fertility, w ater 

50 
 
retention, and erosion prevention, as well as in mitigating climate change. Carbon 
sequestration through SOC restoration can have significant environmental and 
economic benefits. Therefore, a voluntary carbon market in India can incentivize Soil 
Organic Carbon (SOC) restoration by providing a financial mechanism for farmers to 
adopt sustainable practices such as conservation tillage, agroforestry, cover 
cropping, and nutrient management, which promote SOC accumulation. By creating  
a demand for carbon credits generated from SOC sequestration, the voluntary  
carbon market can provide financial incentives for farmers to adopt climate-s mart 
agricultural practices that improve soil health and mitigate climate change. In the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, a committee has been constitute d 
to look in to the prospects of carbon markets in Agriculture.” 
M. Natural Resource Management 
1.63 The frequency of high-intensity rainfall, reaching about 20-30 cm  in a day, has 
been increasing in recent times, leading to significant yield losses, soil erosion, and 
flooding in low-lying areas. To address this issue, it is crucial to maximize rainwater 
harvesting at the location where it falls. As a response, ex situ and in situ wa ter 
harvesting technologies have been developed and demonstrated to suit v arious agro-
ecologies. Location-specific technologies, such as farm ponds, percolation tanks, and 
check dams, have been put in place to meet contingencies in rainwater harvestin g. 
Additionally, technologies for groundwater recharge, including open well and tub e well 
recharge models, have been developed and scaled up. The construction of  in-situ and 
ex-situ water harvesting structures, along with efficient utilization of harvested water,  
has resulted in higher yields and net returns, particularly under deficit rainfall  conditions 
in various crops and locations. In some low rainfall regions with higher variabil ity, critical 
irrigation has led to yield improvements of up to 85%. The utilization of harvested water 
has also increased cropping intensity, particularly in rabi crops such as wheat, musta rd, 
chickpea, and vegetable crops, resulting in enhanced yields and returns. 
1.64 Apart from water management, soil health management plays a vital role in 
promoting sustainable Agriculture. It involves the implementation of practices tailored to  
specific crops and locations, including residue management, organic farming 
techniques, nutrient management, balanced fertilizer application, and minimizing soil 
erosion and degradation. Conservation treatments have shown improvement in so il 
aggregates and water stability. Recent studies on maize-based cropping systems in the  
North-Eastern Hill region have demonstrated that the application of biochar a t a rate of 
5.0 t ha-1, along with 75% recommended dose of fertilizer (RDF) and 4  t ha-1 of 
farmyard manure (FYM), enhances productivity, nutrient use efficiency, and ca rbon 
sequestration potential. Furthermore, the application of biochar has led to signif icant 
improvements in Soil Microbial Biomass Carbon (SMBC), Dehydrogenase Enzyme 
Activity (DEA), and Soil Organic Carbon (SOC), while reducing exchangeable aluminum 
and exchangeable acidity. Achieving balanced fertilization and implementin g integrated 
nutrient management systems are crucial for sustainable crop production, as they 
contribute to the buildup of carbon, structural stability, crop yield, and climat e mitigation 
options. 
 

51 
 
N. Climate Resilient Varieties 
 
(a)  Food grains/Crops 
 The process of evaluating a wide range of germ plasms, including local genetic  
resources, in multiple crops such as rice, wheat, maize, black gram, green gram, pigeon 
pea, chickpea, and lentil, for various abiotic stresses like drought, heat, salinity, nitrogen 
use efficiency, and submergence tolerance, plays a crucial role in the identification of 
stress-tolerant donors. Moreover, the use of molecular techniques has facilitated  the 
identification and characterization of genes responsible for conferring resistance to 
climatic stresses in field crops. Extensive screening of numerous wild germplasm lines 
collected from various locations across the country has allowed the identificatio n of new 
sources that can be utilized in future breeding programs to develop novel, stress-
tolerant varieties that can withstand drought, flood, and heat stress. The contin uous 
efforts of research have led to the development of improved varieties of rice (CR Dhan 
201, NICRA Aerobic Dhan 1, CR Dhan 412), mungbean (Virat, Varsha, Heera, Kanika),  
and lentil (IPL 534) that exhibit resistance to diseases and extreme weather conditions. 
These climate-resilient varieties have been widely adopted by farme rs in drought, flood, 
and heat wave affected districts, resulting in increased crop yields and economic returns 
in different regions. Simulation studies have indicated that the adoption of improve d 
varieties, coupled with enhanced agronomic management practices, can signi ficantly 
enhance rice yields by 17% in irrigated conditions and by 35% in rainfed cond itions, as 
well as wheat yields by 40% and maize yields by 10%. On-farm evaluation s of multiple 
climate-resilient varieties in various crops, including rice (74 varieties), soybean (9 
varieties), finger millet (11 varieties), maize (17 varieties), black gram (20 varieties), 
mung bean (20 varieties), groundnut (14 varieties), pigeon pea (31 varieties), sesame (9 
varieties), wheat (3 varieties), pearl millet (4 varieties), and 51 varieties in othe r crops, 
have been successfully demonstrated and integrated into developmental programs in 
climatically vulnerable districts. In order to address the challenges posed by climat e 
change, concerted efforts are being made to breed climate-resilient varietie s across 
ICAR institutes, encompassing crops that play a vital role in ensuring the food secu rity 
of the country. Substantial achievements have been made in this directio n, with the 
development of 400 climate-resilient varieties tolerant to drought/moisture stress, water 
submergence/flood/water logging, salinity /alkalinity /sodicity, frost/low 
temperature/chilling, and high temperature/heat stress over the past eight yea rs. The 
utilization of modern molecular tools has now become an integral part of crop 
improvement programs, enabling the precise introgression of genes responsible for 
various biotic and abiotic stresses, thereby ensuring foolproof tolerance/resistance to 
specific stressors. To date, a total of 71 varieties of different crops have b een bred 
using genomic tools, including 12 varieties of rice for submergence tolerance, 4  
varieties for drought tolerance, 1 variety for salinity, and 3 varieties of chickpea for 
drought tolerance. These varieties are being promoted among farmers to  address the 
challenges posed by climate change. Additionally, ICAR has established  the unique 
Phenomics Facility at IARI Pusa Campus, New Delhi, which was dedicated to the nation 
by the Honorable Prime Minister in 2017 in the name of Shri Nanaji Deshmukh Pla nt 
Phenomics Facility. This facility serves as a platform for conducting research on th e 
identification of donors with high temperature tolerance, drought tolerance,  and salinity 

52 
 
tolerance. Currently, the major focus of research programs at this facility is on whea t 
and rice, but it can also be extended to other crops. The identification of 
resistant/tolerant donors for various abiotic stresses is a critical activity that serves as 
the foundation for breeding climate-resilient varieties. Genome editing has em erged as 
a novel tool for improving varieties with enhanced tolerance to both biot ic and abiotic 
stresses. ICAR has initiated work on breeding salt and drought tolerant varieties through 
genome editing since 2018, and one of the popular rice varieties, MTU 1010, has 
already been edited to enhance its drought and salt tolerance, resulting in a yield 
increase of over 20% compared to the original MTU 1010. This edited vari ety is now 
ready for field evaluation and is expected to be released within the next 3-4 years. 
1.65 On being asked about the challenges being faced by the Depart ment in 
implementing climate resilient varieties of crops across the country including inhibitions 
of farmers faced, and how the modern molecular tools have contributed to the crop 
improvement programs, the Department submitted: 
“Efforts were made in exploring the available genetic resources for evaluation and  
characterization having tolerance to climatic stresses (drought, heat and flood) in 
different crops. The identified genetic resources were further used for genetic 
enhancement using various breeding tools including molecular marker assisted 
selection approaches. In the process number of tightly linked molecular markers/ 
QTLs were identified for the trait of interest for the respective crops. The 
introgression of these traits was carried out using various molecular tools into 
suitable agronomic background leading to development of climate resilient crop 
varieties. So far, this has resulted into the development of 1622 resilient cro p 
varieties by ICAR. 
Adoption of heat tolerant varieties developed by ICAR-IIWBR, Karnal and ICAR-IARI, 
New Delhi ( e.g.HDCSW-18, HD-3410, HD-3385, DBW-187, DBW-222) by the 
farmers in Punjab, Haryana and UP has minimized the heat wave experienced during 
the previous season (March 2022) and also likely to benefit in the current season 
(February 2023). 
Large scale demonstrations of climate resilient varieties in the farmers ’ fields through 
KVKs in 151 vulnerable districts in the country enable wide scale adoption of th ese 
varieties by farmers. Attempts are also being made to produce sufficient q uantity of 
quality seeds for easy access to the farming community. However, production is not 
sufficient to meet the demand.  Concerted efforts are initiated to address this issue 
through various mechanisms including the initiative taken under seed hubs.” 
 
 (b) Horticulture 
 A Study on Climate analogues for habitat suitability in the future changing  climate 
has indicated that there is a potential expansion of black pepper cultivation  from 97 to 
133 districts, as well as an increase in cardamom cultivation from 24 to 10 4 districts. 
The changing climate has also led to the issue of staggered flowering in m ango, which 
is a major concern. To address this, a spray formulation that is environmentally safe has 
been developed under the NICRA program. This formulation, when sprayed on ce in 
September/October at a concentration of 60 to 75 ml/l, has successfully indu ced 

53 
 
synchronized flowering in various mango varieties such as Alphonso, Dasheha ri, Kesar, 
Langra, Amrapali, and Banganapalli. Additionally, a technique for inter -specific grafting 
of tomato onto brinjal has been standardized to withstand drought a nd flooding. 
Furthermore, the use of osmotolerant bacterial strains for microbial inoculation has been 
found to improve yield under limited moisture stress in tomato. 
1.66 On being asked to list the challenges likely to be faced by the Horticulture Sector  
due to Climate Change and  also stating measures taken/Programmes 
implemented/proposed to be undertaken to mitigate the adverse impact on  this Sector 
as well as list out adaptive measures being implemented/proposed to be i mplemented, 
the Department submitted as under : 
 “As per the Third BUR report, there is a consistent increase in production of both food 
grains and horticulture in India which indicate resilience to climate change made 
possible by development of climate resilient varieties, appropriate farming system 
and other interventions. Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 
promotes holistic growth of horticulture sector, duly ensuring backward and forward  
linkages. The Mission includes various activities of Coconut Development Board, 
Horticulture Development Board and Development of Commercial Horticulture 
through production and post-harvest management, capital investment subsidy for 
construction, expansion, modernization of cold storages for horticulture produce, 
technology development and transfer for horticulture produce.” 
1.67 The major challenges likely to be faced by the Horticulture Sector due to Climate 
change are: 
● Influencing the performance of horticultural crops including annual and perennia l 
horticulture crops.  
● Reduction in production of fruits and vegetables is likely to be caused by short  
growing period, which will have negative impact on growth and deve lopment 
particularly due to terminal heat stress and decreased water availability.  
● In the normal condition, cashew and cocoa are not much affected d ue to climatic 
vagaries but during the critical periods i.e. flowering and fruit setting, a ny major 
changes in the climatic factors adversely affect the flowering and fruit setting. 
Unseasonal rainfall, low morning temperature followed by dew and temperature  
more than 42 0C are detrimental factors especially for cashew production and 
productivity. These climatic factors are beyond the control of human interference and 
too little extent any adverse affects of high temperature can be subd ued by following 
some cultural practices.  
● Spices are very sensitive to climate changes Different abiotic factors, especially 
temperature, rainfall, photoperiod, sunshine hours, wind, etc. directly or indirectly 
influence different physiological growth stages like flowering, fruit setting, fruit 
development, seed setting and final reproductive or vegetative yield of s pice crops. 
The intrinsic quality and storage life is also affected by climatic factors. Climat e 
change affect the major spice crops like Black pepper, Cardamom, Chilli, Nutmeg, 
Clove, Cinnamon, Ginger, Turmeric, seed spices etc. 
i. High temperature causes spike shedding in black pepper and heavy rainfall 
results in development of quick wilt disease.  

54 
 
ii. Prolonged dry season may cause reduced pollination and abortion of 
cardamom flowers.  
iii. Excessive rainfall during NE monsoon had favoured the establishment of  thrips 
which in turn resulted 40 per cent of crop loss to chilli in Andhra Pradesh durin g 
last year. 
iv. All the seed spices are very sensitive to temperature in terms of their  
production and quality. Germination of seeds also affected by high 
temperatures. High rainfall and humidity invite pests like aphid and diseases 
like powdery mildew in most of the seed spices viz., coriander, fenugreek, 
cumin, etc. Crop damage due to frost is also reported in seed spices.  
v. The stress effect of environment also influences the seed production and 
storage life of the spice crops. 
vi. High rain fall leads to the occurrence of disease like rhizome rot and w ilt in 
ginger. In case of turmeric, high temperature leads to early maturing of 
rhizomes and poor development of curcumin.  
vii. Leaf spot disease of Areca nut, which was a minor disease earlier has b ecome 
an epidemic in Karnataka region due to the changes in rainfall pattern, high 
humidity, prolonged leaf wetness, windy weather etc. Average yield loss due to 
the incidence of leaf spot was more than 50%. 
Adaptive Measures 
● To achieve the targeted production, it needs climate smart horticultur e 
interventions which are highly location specific and knowledge-intensive for 
improving production in the challenged environment.  
● Use of recommended production systems for improved wat er-use efficiency and 
to adapt to the hot and dry conditions. Strategies like changing sowing or planting 
dates in order to combat the likely increase in temperature and water stress 
periods during the crop-growing season should be adopted.  
● Develop new varieties suitable to different agro-ecological regions under 
changing climatic conditions. 
● In order to mitigate climatic vagaries farmers have been trained to a dopt cultural 
practices to avoid loss to the minimum extent especially during summer season. 
● Under the development programmes implemented by the Directorate of Arecanut 
and Spices Development (DASD) Calicut, production and distribution of quality 
planting materials of climate resilient varieties of spices developed by SAUs / 
ICAR institutes are promoted.  
The spices varieties tolerant to abiotic / biotic stress promoted under MIDH are 
listed below.  
S.No Crop Variety Tolerance/Resistant 
1 Black Pepper  IISR Thevam Tolerant to Phytophthora foot rot    
   IISR Shakthi Tolerant to Phytophthora foot rot    
   Pournami Tolerant to root-knot nematode 
  Panniyur 8 Tolerant to Phytophthora foot rot and drought 
   Panniyur 9 Tolerant to quick wilt and drought. 
2 Turmeric IISR Pragati Resistant to nematode 

55 
 
NDH 98 Tolerance to salinity 
BSR 2 Resistant to scale insects 
Suguna Resistant to rhoizome rot  
Co 1 Resistant to rhoizome rot  
3 Ginger IISR Mahima Resistant to M.  incognita (Nematode)  
Athira,Karthika Tolerant to soft rot and bacterial wilt disease 
4 Chilly LCA 334 Tolerant to viruses and abiotic stresses 
5 Cumin GC 1 Resistance to wilt 
GC4 Resistance to wilt 
6 Coriander ACr 1 Resistant to stem gall and tolerance to 
powdery mildew 
Co 2 Suitable for saline and alkaline prone area 
Azad Dhania 1 Tolerant to moisture stress 
 
i. Demonstrations on judicious water utilization following drip / sprinkler irrigation 
are established in locations with water shortage.  
ii. Adoption of plant tissue culture / micro rhizome techniques in ginger/ turmeric 
crops helps to assure availability of disease free seed material. 
iii. To save the seed material from sudden change in the climatic condition s after 
harvesting, safe storage& processing facilities are established at main production 
centres. 
iv. Climate smart Techniques for off season production (polyhouse / rain shelters) 
are promoted in spices  
v. Cropping system approach promoted under demonstration programmes like 
Arecanut based multi species cropping system, intercropping cinnamon in Coconut 
gardens etc ensures better utilization of GHGs. 
vi. Cinnamon is a hardy crop and tolerant to drought. It is promoted under t he 
programme by DASD. 
vii. Nutmeg was found to recuperate fast from flooded condition. It is also promoted 
by DASD. 
 
1.68 Climate Change impacts several horticultural crops in the country. Flooding fo r 
24 hours severely affects tomato during flowering stage. Onion during blub  stage is 
highly sensitive to flooding, whereas warmer temperatures shorten the duration of  onion 
bulb development leading to lower yields. Similarly, soil warming adversely affe cts 
several cucurbits. Reduction in chilling temperature in the recent years in Himachal 
Pradesh drastically affected apple production, and the farmers are shifting from ap ple to 
kiwi, pomegranate and other vegetables. More importantly, temperature and ca rbon 
dioxide are likely to alter the biology and forging behavior of pollinators th at play key 
role in several horticulture crops.  

56 
 
1.69 High throughput screening of germplasm and rainout shelter facility enab led to 
characterize large number of germplasm lines and identifies suitable dono rs for 
breeding against drought, heat stress and flooding in tomato, brinjal and onion.  
1.70 Forecasted area expansion of black pepper (97 to 133 districts) and cardamo m 
(24 to 104 districts) using climate analogues for habitat suitability in the future cha nging 
climate. Staggered flowering in mango is one of the major issues ind uced by changing 
climate. An environmentally safe spray formulation has been for sy nchronization of 
flowering in mango. Spray of this formulation (60 to 75 ml/l) once in Se ptember/October 
helped induction of synchronized flowering in several mango varieties (Alphonso,  
Dashehari, Kesar, Langra, Amrapali and Banganapalli). 
1.71 The technique for inter-specific grafting of tomato over brinjal ha s been 
standardized and large-scale demonstrations have been taken up to withstand drought 
and flooding in tomato. A microbial inoculation with osmotolerant bacterial strains has 
been developed to improve yield under limited moisture stress in tomato. Several 
resilient horticulture technologies viz., resilient varieties, mulching and inter-cultivation of 
cauliflower/cabbage in apple orchards, anti-hail nets in apple orchards, spur typ e of 
apple cultivation, ridge and furrow cultivation of green pea in North east, pa ddy straw 
and crop residue mulching in ginger, plastic mulching and micro irrigation in marigo ld, 
protected cultivation of vegetables in poly house, micro irrigation system in v egetables 
for efficient use of harvested water to increasing the water productivity, frost 
management by smoke pockets in onion, crop diversification of brinjal and tom ato, zero 
tillage in field pea, community vegetable seedling nursery for timely availa bility of 
improved varieties, broad bed ridge and furrow in brinjal and chilli crop s have been 
demonstrated in farmers ’ fields in climatically vulnerable districts across the country 
through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). Large-scale adoption of these climate  resilient 
technologies enable to adopt to the changes associated with global warming  and also 
keep pace with increasing demand for horticulture products in the country in the yea rs 
to come.' 
(c) Livestock 
1.72  Cross-breed cattle are more susceptible to the effects of climate chan ge 
compared to indigenous breeds. Efforts have been made to characterize  heat shock 
proteins in order to understand their role in heat stress resilience. Biomarkers for heat 
stress have been identified in the genes of native breeds and can b e utilized to induce 
resilience. Among the 833 heat shock proteins identified so far, 566 were fo und to be 
differentially down-regulated and 86 were up-regulated in Tharparkar (an indigeno us 
breed) compared to Karan fries (a cross breed). Various feed supplements have b een 
identified and successfully tested to mitigate heat stress in cattle. Supplem entation of 
animal diets with Vitamin E and selenium has shown beneficial effects on thermal stress 
in both breeds of cattle. Additionally, supplementation of betaine at a rate o f 25 
g/day/animal has been found to be effective in mitigating heat stress as it imp roves 
reproductive and growth performance in dairy cows. Custom-designed shelter sy stems 
and feed supplementation with chromium propionate and mineral supplements (C u, Mg, 
Ca, and Zn) in both feed and fodder have significantly improved the a bility of cattle to 
withstand heat stress. Local birds have shown higher tolerance to common p oultry 

57 
 
diseases. Nutritional and management approaches have been implemented  to sustain 
and enhance the performance of both rural and commercial chicken during thermal/heat 
stress conditions. Supplementation of betaine at a rate of 0.1% and the inclusion o f 
prebiotics such as MOS/FOS at a rate of 0.1% have been found to reduce th e negative 
effects of heat stress in broiler and rural chicken. Furthermore, the inclusion of herba l 
extracts such as Aswagandha, Tulsi, Amla, and Turmeric at a rate of 0.2 to 1% in the 
diet has shown improvements in growth in broilers under heat stress. Moringa lea f meal 
and pomegranate peel meal have been found to enhance immune  responses in 
broilers. A herbal crude powder-based tablet called Stressol-G has been  developed to 
reduce climatic stress in goats. Malpura ewes have shown signs of recovery from h eat 
stress (42-46oC) within a period of one week. 
1.73 On being inquired by the Committee as to whether the Departmen t propose to 
promote integration of Livestock with crop production system and if so, furnish the  
details thereof, and if not, furnish specific reasons therefore, the Department submitted: 
 “To promote Natural Farming, a traditional farming system based on the integration  
of livestock and local resources, National Mission of Natural Farming is being 
proposed as centrally sponsored scheme with an out lay of Rs. 2841 crores (Rs. 
1584 crores GoI share) for the period from 2023-24 to 2025-26 with the f ollowing 
objectives. 
● To promote alternative system of farming for freedom from external purchased  
inputs, cost reduction and thereby increasing income of farmers. 
● To popularize integrated Agriculture- animal husbandry models based o n 
livestock and local resources. 
● To collect, validate and document natural farming being practiced across the 
country and encourage participatory research with farmers on upscaling of t he 
mission. 
● To undertake activities for awareness creation, capacity building, promotion a nd 
demonstration of natural farming. 
● To create standards, certification procedure and branding for natural farming 
products. 
 ICAR-Indian Institute of Farming Systems Research through AICRP on 
Integrated Farming Systems and All India Network Programme on Organic Farming 
developed 71 Integrated farming system models including 8 integrated organic f arming 
system models suitable to 26 States/UTs. In all the IFS models, location specif ic 
livestock components such as dairy (cow & buffalo), poultry, goat, sheep and pig are 
integrated along with cropping systems of the region to enhance the sustainability  and 
profitability. Out of 64 models evaluated for carbon neutrality, 52 were fou nd carbon 
neutral and positive. Out of 38 models evaluated for credit financing, 32 w ere found 
bankable as per NABARD assessment. IFS models developed for Jammu and Kashmir, 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Odisha are implemented through State schemes coveri ng 
about 80,000 farm households.” 
 

58 
 
1.74 On being asked to state as to whether Bio gas digesters and like technologies  
are being promoted by the Department or not and if so, the details there of, the 
Department have submitted as under:  
“Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) is promoting biogas digesters and 
similar technologies to process scientifically the organic wastes/ Biomass waste as 
feed stocks for the purpose of setting up Biogas Plants as a source of Renew able 
Energy. Under the schemes material such as cattle dung/ animal wastes, foo d & 
kitchen waste, poultry dropping waste in single mode or with mix of poultry waste  
and cattle dung/ goat & sheep dropping, paddy straw, green grass including 
elephant grass/ Napier grass grown especially for biogas production are used as a 
feed stock. Also wastes from rural Industries such as residue /effluents from Agro 
Processing Industries and Food Processing Industries/ Food Processing Parks, 
Agricultural Farms/ Dairy Farms, Gaushalas and Milk processing effluent from all 
dairies are also converted in to biogas. Creation of biogas plant facilities for 
Farmers/ Dairy Farmers / Individual organizations in Rural Areas is being promoted.” 
 
(d) Fisheries 
1.75 The vulnerability assessment of Indian marine fishes to climate change , using 
impact and adaptation attributes and mitigation options to combat vulnerab ility, was 
investigated. The vulnerability of 68 key marine species (24 Pelagic, 24 Demersal, 1 5 
Crustacean, and 5 Mollusc) was assessed and ranked based on their vulne rability in 
different zones. Measures such as establishing basic community infrastructure, 
strengthening seawalls, and implementing bio shields have been taken t o enhance the 
preparedness of fishing communities. Additionally, an e-commerce system has been 
developed to improve the income of fisher communities through the u se of information 
and communication techniques. The implementation of a climate resilient te chnology, 
known as Rainbow trout farming in Re-Circulating Aquaculture System (RAS), has been 
developed to improve fish production in high altitude areas. The adoption of  climate 
resilient adaptation techniques can contribute to the improvement of liveli hood security 
and restoration of indigenous fishes in wetlands. As part of this effort, a Clim ate 
Resilient Pen System (CRPS) was developed and demonstrated in five wetland s across 
three states. Furthermore, culture-based fisheries, which involve the stocking of f ish 
fingerlings of Indian Major Carps in wetlands to enhance fish production, hav e been 
practiced in India. This approach not only boosts fish production but also contributes to 
the conservation of indigenous fishes, thereby increasing the adaptive capa city of 
fishers in the face of changing climate conditions. The carbon sequestration p otential of 
six wetlands in Assam and West Bengal was found to be significantly high er (1.6 to 4.2 
times) than that of the reference upland sites, highlighting the effectiveness o f wetlands 
as carbon sinks for mitigating global warming. Studies on the biomass and carbon sto ck 
of mangroves in different estuarine wetlands of North Kerala revealed their  profound 
role in sequestering atmospheric carbon and storing carbon in their biomass and 
sediments. The estimated carbon assimilation potential of the above-g round mangrove 
biomass in the Punnakayal, Palayakayal, and Tuticorin region of Tamil Nadu was found 
to be 635.6 Gigagram carbon per year based on Landsat satellite imagery. 
 

59 
 
O. Pest Modelling and Forecasting 
1.76 The Study examined the occurrence of pest and disease outb reaks caused by 
climate change in the country, focusing on nine crops, namely rice, whe at, sorghum, 
chickpea, mustard, safflower, potato, tomato, and onion. The study aimed to d evelop 
models for predicting and warning against such pest and disease outbreaks. To 
facilitate this, a nationwide system for pest surveillance and monitoring, combine d with 
the monitoring of weather parameters, was established. Furthermore, several mobile 
applications were developed to predict and identify pests, as well as to  provide 
appropriate control measures. These applications are freely available f or download and 
use by farmers through the Krishi Portal. 
1.77 On being asked to furnish details on Pest Modelling and Forecasting and en list 
latest technologies including Artificial Intelligence, IoT, Robotics being used, if any  as 
disruptive practices, the Department have submitted as under:  
“Climate-induced pest and disease outbreaks in the country were studied acros s 
6(six) agro climatic zones covering major pests and diseases in 4 crops (rice, pigeon 
pea, groundnut and tomato). Digital tools in the form of mobile apps fo r using 
pesticides (insecticide and fungicide calculator) and Integrated Pest Management  
(IPM) for rice, pigeon pea, groundnut and tomato have been developed  and is 
available in the Google Play store for free download by the users. Studies are un der 
progress on use of Artificial Intelligence, IoT, Robotics for detection of pe st damage 
and develop application in pest management.” 
P. Agroforestry and sequestration 
1.78 The quantification of the potential for carbon sequestration in agrofo restry 
systems has been completed in 17 states, covering 60 districts. The carbon 
sequestration potential of agroforestry systems on farmers' fields is estimated to be 0.35 
tons of carbon per hectare per year. The total carbon sequestration poten tial of these 
systems across the 17 states is projected to be 8.13 million tonnes. These findings were 
reported by the National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) in 2019.  
Additionally, the total soil organic carbon in agroforestry systems on farmers' fields  
varied between 46.59 to 100.13 tons of carbon per hectare in the 0-90 cm soil depth 
across different states. 
1.79 On being asked to furnish the list of steps taken by the Ministry of Envir onment, 
Forests and Climate Change to preserve natural carbon-rich ecosystems such as 
forests and wetlands in the last 5 years which in turn can boost agricultural prod uctivity 
and sequester carbon dioxide, the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Clim ate 
Change (MoEFCC) submitted as under:
 
“National Mission for a Green India (GIM) is one of the eight Missions outlined 
under the National Action Plan on Climate Change. It aims at protecting, rest oring, 
and enhancing India's forest cover and responding to Climate Change by 
undertaking the GIM activities in the forest and non-forest areas in the selected 
landscapes in different category including plantation on moderately dense fo rest 
showing degradation, eco restoration of degraded open forests, restoration of 

60 
 
grasslands, rehabilitation of shifting cultivation areas, restoring scrub lands, ravine 
reclamation, restoration of abandoned mining areas, farmers land including current 
fallows, shelterbelt plantation, Highways/rural roads/canals/ tank bunds. During the 
last 5 years Rs. 591.86 Crore have been released to the Sixteen States and  one 
union territory for taking up the GIM activities in the selected landscapes. 
Wetlands are essential components of global carbon and nitrogen cycles. Wetland s 
act as long-term carbon sinks, preserving atmospheric CO 2 in their sediments at 
high-rate intensities for centuries. Altogether, the wetlands store almost one third  of 
the world’s total carbon. 
● MoEF&CC is implementing a centrally sponsored scheme namely, National P lan 
for Conservation of Aquatic Ecosystems (NPCA) for conservation and managemen t 
of wetlands, including Ramsar Sites, in the country on cost sharing basis betwe en 
Central Government and respective State/UT Governments. The scheme aims at 
holistic conservation and restoration of wetlands, besides improvement in 
biodiversity and ecosystems. It promotes mainstreaming of wetlands in 
developmental programming with States by supporting formulation and 
implementation of integrated management plans, capacity building and research.  
During the last 5 years, an amount of about Rs. 152 crore (central share) was 
provided for the conservation and management of 28 wetlands in the country.  
● As a significant milestone during 75 th year of independence, India designated 75 
wetlands as Ramsar sites i.e. Wetlands of International Importance, from only 26 in 
year 2014, making it home to the second largest network of Ramsar sites in Asia. 
● MoEF&CC ’s recently announced Amrit Dharohar Initiative aims to build on the 
role of a healthy network of Ramsar Sites in climate change mitigation by supporting 
the several activities such as establishing a baseline GHG account of Ramsar Sites 
with specific focus on carbon stock and sequestration rates, interventions to 
conserve wetlands carbon by restoring degraded wetlands, linking conservation o f 
Ramsar Sites with the Green Credit programme etc. 
In this regard, an expert consultation workshop was held for developing a climate  
co-benefit assessment methodology for wetlands on 26 th April, 2023. Based on the 
outcome of the workshop, the methodology is being developed in collabo ration with 
national and international experts and knowledge partners.” 
Q. Crop Residue Management through Farm Mechanization 
1.80 In order to address the issue of burning crop residues and reduce winter sm og 
pollution, the government launched a Central Sector Scheme in 2018. This scheme, 
titled "Promotion of Agricultural Mechanization for In-situ Management of Crop Residue 
in States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, and NCT of Delhi," is operated  by the 
M&T division of the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare in New Delh i. The 
scheme was initially allocated a budget of Rs 1151.80 crore for two years (Rs 591.65 
crore in 2018-19 and Rs 560.15 crore in 2019-20), and it has been exten ded for an 
additional year (2020-21) with a budget allocation of Rs 600 crore. Furtherm ore, it has 
been further extended for one more year (2021-22) with a fund allocation of Rs 700 
crore. Under this scheme, financial assistance is provided for the purchase of variou s 
straw management implements. These include the Super Straw Management System 

61 
 
(Super SMS), Happy Seeder, Paddy Straw Chopper/Shredder/Mulcher, Shrub 
Master/Cutter cum Spreader, Hydraulic Reversible M.B. Plough, Rotary Slasher, Zero 
Till Seed cum Fertilizer Drill, Super seeder, and Rotavator. Individual f armers receive 
50% of the cost of the implement as financial assistance; while Custom Hiri ng Centres 
(CHCs) operated by co-operative societies of farmers, groups or self-help group s 
(SHGs), Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), and private entrepreneurs receive 
80% of the cost of the implements.  The progress made under this Scheme is detailed 
here as under: 
• During past four years, totally 2.13 lakhs equipments/machines were 
 supplied in these  states (Punjab- 85386, Haryana- 72237, and UP-55711)  
• 39,391 Custom hiring centres were established in Punjab (25403) ,  Haryana 
 (6775) and Uttar Pradesh (7213) for making easy availability of 
 equipments/machines to the small and marginal farmers on hire basis. 
• Mobile app-based aggregator platform to facilitate hiring of machines from  
Custom  Hiring Centres was created. 
• The ICAR-KVKs  have  put  tremendous  effort  for creating awareness among  
farmers  to use machines to use the machines for in-situ crop residue 
management through  Information Education and Communication (IEC) 
activities in Punjab (22 KVKs), Haryana (15 KVKs) and Uttar Pradesh (23 
KVKs). 
• Survey conducted by the ICAR-KVKs in Punjab and Haryana revealed tha t the 
Happy seeder sown (in-situ crop residue managed) resulted in 2.7% higher 
wheat yield with  saving of  25% water for irrigation (usually one irrigation) and 20 
kg urea/ha. 
• Burning events were monitored by multiple satellites with thermal sensors during 
the harvest period from 01-Oct to 30-Nov every year in the states of P unjab, 
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. The  burning events recorded during 2019 were 
18.8% less as compared during 2018, 31% less as compared to 2017, and 5 2% 
less as compared to 2016. 
 
R. Agricultural Contingency Crop Planning and Agro Advisory Services 
1.81 ICAR-CRIDA, in collaboration with other ICAR institutes and State Agricultural 
Universities, has developed District Agriculture Contingency Plans (DACP) for 650 
districts. These plans recommend location-specific climate-resilient crops, varieties, and 
management practices for use by state departments of Agriculture and farm ers. The 
contingency plans cover various weather aberrations, such as drought in rain fed and 
irrigated areas, floods, unseasonal rains, and extreme weather events like  heat waves, 
cold waves, frost, hailstorms, and cyclones. The plans are designed to enhance  
preparedness and facilitate real-time implementation to ensure the sustainab ility of 
agricultural production systems in the face of weather aberrations and extreme  climatic 
events. The plans have been updated in 386 districts and validated in 23 village clusters 
across 15 states. Sensitization workshops for preparedness are conducted annually 
through state-level interface meetings. Over the past 8 years, a total of 54 me etings 
have been held based on the prevailing contingency needs. Addition ally, dynamic crop-
weather calendars for farm-level decision-making and agro-climatic atlases for 
Maharashtra and Bihar have been prepared. The Indian Meteorological Departm ent 

62 
 
(IMD), in collaboration with ICAR, has also developed the 'Meghdoot App' for accessing 
real-time weather information, which is currently used by more than 2 crore users . 
Furthermore, algorithm-based software has been developed to enhance the accuracy of 
climate predictions. National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) recently 
conducted an assessment on the impact of Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva (GKMS) 
provided by the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD). The assessment revealed that 
farming households that implemented 1 to 4 crop management practices experi enced 
an average annual income of Rs. 2.43 lakh per hectare. Similarly, those  farmers who 
modified 5 to 8 practices had an average income of Rs. 2.45 lakhs, wh ile those who 
adopted all nine practices had an income of Rs. 3.02 lakhs. In contrast, farmers w ho did 
not adopt the Agricultural Advisory Services (AAS) had an income of Rs. 1.98 lakh. 
1.82 On being asked as to how the District Agriculture Contingency Plans (DACPs) 
fared & whether they have been effective in districts prone to extreme we ather 
events/conditions and to furnish a few examples to display the effectiveness o f DACPs 
in combating adverse effects of Climate Change, the Department have sub mitted as 
under: 
 “The District Agricultural Contingency Plans (DACPs) are technical documents 
detailing the interventions to be taken up for different weather aberrations. Both 
preparedness measures and real time interventions are listed in these documen ts. 
Utilizing these plans, the State Governments are preparing their state action plans 
for input supply (improved varieties, alternate crops, in case of delay in 
monsoon/early season drought etc.). The impact of these interventions could be 
seen at district level where the shift in cropping pattern observed due to  delay or 
deficiency of monsoon. Preparedness mechanisms such as promotion of in-situ 
water conservation mechanisms through adoption of appropriate farm machi nery, 
identification of sources for supplemental irrigation etc. are taken up by State  
governments. Response to DACPs is increasing by various State governments over 
a period of time as evidenced by more number of interface meetin gs organized 
based on forecast of information. 
For example, in case of Natural resource management, technologies such as in-situ 
moisture conservation, water harvesting and efficient use, biomass mulching, 
residue incorporation instead of burning, supplemental irrigation, improved drainage 
in flood prone areas, conservation tillage where appropriate, artificial ground wate r 
recharge and water saving irrigation methods, etc. have resulted in yield 
improvement of 8 to 48 per cent in different locations and crops.  
Similarly in case of crops, drought/heat stress tolerant varieties, advancement o f 
planting dates of rabi crops in areas with terminal heat stress, water saving paddy 
cultivation methods (SRI, aerobic, direct seeding), frost management in horticulture 
through fumigation, staggered community nurseries for delayed monsoon, cus tom 
hiring centers for timely completion of farm operations, location specific 
intercropping systems with high sustainable yield index, etc. have shown efficacy of 
increasing yield in the range of 7 to 104 per cent in different crops under variou s 
adverse weather conditions.” 

63 
 
1.83 On being inquired as to how the Department of Agriculture & Farmers W elfare 
plan for timely dissemination of weather based agro advisories to farmers residing in 
remote areas having low bandwidth and inadequate technological infrastructure , the 
Department have submitted as under: 
“India Meteorological Department (IMD) runs an operational Agrometeorological 
Advisory Services (AAS) viz., Gramin Krishi Mausam Sewa (GKMS) scheme 
specifically for the benefit of farming community in the country. Under the schem e, 
medium range weather forecast for next 5 days at district and block leve l and also 
subsequent week Met Sub-division wise rainfall and temperature forecas t are 
generated by IMD. Based on the forecast, 130 Agromet Field Units (AMFUs), located 
at State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), institutes of Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) and Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) etc., prepare Agromet 
Advisories on every Tuesday and Friday for the districts under their jurisdiction and 
for the blocks of the district of their location and communicate to the far mers to take 
decision on day- to-day agricultural operations. AAS rendered by IMD is a step 
towards weather-based crop and livestock management strategies and ope rations 
dedicated to enhancing crop production and food security besides reducing crop 
damage and loss due to unusual weather. 
After successful implementation of district level AAS, District Agromet Units (DAMUs) 
have been established at Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) in collaboration with ICAR to 
implement block level AAS. Till date, 199 District Agromet Units (DAMUs) have been  
established at KVKs across the country under ICAR network and these DAMUs 
prepare district and block level Agromet Advisories based on district and block level 
weather forecasts for their respective districts and communicate to the farmers on 
every Tuesday and Friday. Block level weather forecast and Agromet Advisori es aid 
the farmers in taking decision on day- to-day agricultural operations at micro-level. 
Along with the biweekly bulletins, daily weather forecast and now cast information are 
also disseminated to the farmers by Regional Meteorological Centres (RMCs) and 
Meteorological Centres (MCs) of IMD. Impact based forecast (IBFs) for Agriculture 
are also being prepared by AMFUs and DAMUs based on the severe weather 
warnings for different districts of various States and UTs across the country issued by 
National Weather Forecasting Centre (NWFC), New Delhi and RMCs and MCs of 
IMD. The Agromet Services mentioned above takes care of the impact on d ifferent 
crops due to extreme weather scenario including extreme temperatures along w ith 
the necessary guidelines for farming operations during such occasions. 
Agromet Advisories are disseminated to the farmers through multichannel 
dissemination system like print and electronic media, Doordarshan, radio, internet 
etc. including SMS using mobile phones through Kisan Portal and also throug h 
private companies under Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. SMS-based  alerts 
and warnings along with suitable remedial measures are being sent during extre me 
weather events like cyclone, deep depression etc. through Kisan Portal. With the 
advancement of ICT, Farmers access the weather information including alerts and 
related agromet advisories specific to their districts through the mobile App  viz., 
‘Meghdoot’ launched by Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India. These 
weather details are also accessible by farmers through another App ‘Kisan Suvidha’, 

64 
 
launched by Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare. Also, a few AMFUs have 
developed mobile Apps to facilitate quick dissemination of agromet advisories to the 
farmers of their region. Social media like ‘WhatsApp’ is also used for quicker 
dissemination of forecast and advisories to the farmers. At present farmers of 
1,25,695 villages in 3,998 blocks have been covered through 17,591 Wh atsApp 
groups. State Agriculture Department officials of District and Block level are also 
included in these WhatsApp groups. Continuous efforts are being made to increa se 
the number of farmers and villages covered to disseminate Agromet advisories u sing 
WhatsApp. 
In addition to above, advisories are also being circulated through a number of 
Facebook pages created by AMFUs and DAMUs. Initiative on collaboration with 
State Government has been taken up for integration of weather forecast and Agromet 
advisories with state government mobile apps and websites. The integration ha s 
been completed for Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttarakhand states and about 15.6 million farmers of above-mentioned states are 
getting benefitted from weather forecast and agromet advisories.  IMD is also taking  
continuous efforts to popularize the services among the farming community  by 
organizing Farmers ’ Awareness Programmes (FAPs) in collaboration with AMFUs 
and DAMUs in various parts of the country. IMD along with the experts from AM FUs 
and DAMUs also participate in Kisan Melas, Farmers ’ Day, Field visits etc. to create 
awareness about the services, so that more farmers get benefitted.” 
S. Upscaling of Resilient Practices 
1.84 The scaling up of proven resilient technologies in the district requires close  
collaboration with development departments. Over the past decade, numerous resilient 
technologies have been demonstrated in farmers' fields across the country, be nefiting 
many farmers in vulnerable districts. Some of these resilient technologies have be en 
adopted by developmental departments in their respective states. Expanding  the 
demonstration of such resilient technologies in farmers' fields nationwide will bring 
benefits to a large number of farmers in vulnerable districts. To further scale u p climate 
resilient Agriculture practices, it is crucial to involve civil society and tap into funding 
opportunities provided by social corporate responsibility initiatives. The Climate 
Resilient Villages (CRVs) models established under the NICRA project have already 
been adopted by some state governments (Maharashtra and Bihar) as well  as various 
national and international funding agencies (NABARD, ADB, World Bank, etc.) through 
platforms like the Green Climate Fund (GCF), Global Environmental Facility (GEF), an d 
Adaptation Fund (AF). 
1.85 In response to list steps taken to popularize resource conservation technologies 
(both on-farm and off-farm) that would support mitigation efforts in times of e xtreme 
climatic events and to also specify measures taken to promote location and crop 
specific integrated nutrient management practices, the Department submitted: 
“The Department is implementing, Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization 
(SMAM) in all the States and UTs and Crop Residue Management Schem e in the 
States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, NCT of Delhi and Madhya Pradesh. 

65 
 
Under both the schemes, the funds are released for various activities such as training 
of farmers, testing of machinery for quality check, demonstration of tec hnologies on 
farmer’s field for its speedy adoption.  Subsidy is also provided for purchase of 
agricultural machines by the farmers on individual ownership basis, establishment of 
Custom Hiring Centres, Hi-tech hubs of high cost machinery and village level Farm 
Machinery Banks to ensure easy availability of agricultural machines and equipmen t 
to the farmers on rental basis. 
The machines and equipment for resources conservation are also promoted under 
these schemes which include the following: 
1) Zero or minimum tillage sowing technologies such as Happy Seeder, Super 
Seeder, Zero Till Seed cum Fertilizer Drill, Spatial Zero Till Drill, Strip Till Dri ll 
(Smart Seeder), Surface Seeder 
2) Crop residue management machines such as Super Straw Management  
Systems (SMS), Straw Chopper, Rotary Mulcher, Shrub Master/Rotary Slasher, 
Straw Balers, Tractor operated harvester cum straw collector, Straw Reaper/Straw 
Combine, Hydraulic Reversible Plough. 
3) Resources Conservation Technologies such as Laser Guided Land Leveller, 
Rotavator, Direct Seeded Rice 
4) Precision Farming Technologies such as agricultural Drones 
As part of the Technology Demonstration Component (TDC) of National Innov ations 
in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA), demonstration of location specific climate 
resilient technologies is being taken up to minimize crop losses and enable f armers 
to cope with the extreme weather conditions. The demonstrations are take n up in 
farmers’ fields in 151 risk prone districts of the country. Climate resilient technologies 
which can minimize the impact of dry spells, drought, flood and heat wave  are being 
taken up in a cluster of villages in each of the district. The objective is to make the 
farmers aware about the new technologies by way of demonstrations and b y training 
them so that they can adopt these technologies to minimize crop losses and to  
enable them to become resilient even under variable climatic conditions. The  
program is being taken up in 28 states and 5 union territories. The details of the 
technologies demonstrated are as follows: 
As part of NICRA-TDC several resource conservation technologies which can 
minimize the impact of climatic stresses were demonstrated such as in-situ moisture 
conservation, biomass mulching, residue incorporation instead of burning, wate r 
harvesting and recycling for supplemental irrigation, improved drainage in flood prone 
areas, conservation tillage where appropriate, artificial ground water recharge an d 
water saving irrigation methods, etc. depending on the crops grown and the resource 
endowments of the farmers. Location specific and crop specific integrated nutri ent 
management practices such as green manuring, residue management, site spe cific 
nutrient management practices such as soil test-based fertilizer application , 
correction of micro nutrient deficiencies, vermi composting, techniques for comp ost 
preparation etc.” 
 

66 
 
T. Human Resources in Climate Resilient Agriculture 
1.86 Capacity building of various stakeholders is a crucial aspect to consider. 
Currently, the Climate Change research network project involves 1,200 scientists and 
872 young research fellows from 41 research institutes and 121 KVKs. T he 
establishment of skilled scientific manpower and state- of-the-art infrastructure through 
NICRA has motivated numerous students to engage in research activities, resulting in 
the award of 105 Ph.D. and 51 M.Sc. degrees. Furthermore, a total of 1 6,958 capacity 
building programs have been conducted, benefiting 514,816 stakeholders. In terms of 
publications, 280 research papers in high-impact international journals, 113 book 
chapters, 174 technical bulletins, and 9 policy briefs have been pu blished, all of which 
are related to climate change research. The presence of these young talents,  as well as 
trained and experienced researchers, will undoubtedly play a significant role in the 
future of climate resilient Agriculture. Additionally, a meta-analysis of research 
publications from NICRA was conducted, which included 424 research publications 
contributed by 1,336 authors from 53 ICAR institutes. The collaboration ind ex of 3.1 
indicated that each publication involved three or more institutes and more th an six 
authors. It is worth noting that the number of publications is increasing at an an nual rate 
of 20.87%. 
1.87 On being asked by the Committee to furnish  details about steps being taken to 
introduce the syllabus on Climate Change/Climate Resilient Farming In Indian 
Agricultural Universities and Research Institutions & whether the Department plan to 
introduce the topics of Climate Change, Climate Resilient Farming at school level 
syllabus to create awareness among the youth and also whether any consultations have 
so far been held or has been proposed to be held with Ministry of Human Resources 
Development in regard to introduction of syllabus at School Level in this regard, the  
Department have submitted as under:  
 “The details of the steps initiated to introduce the syllabus on climate cha nge / 
 climate resilient farming in Indian agricultural universities is as given below. 
i. To make the students aware on the different environment-related issues and 
its conservation and to know about the basic disaster management practices 
a common course “Environmental Science and Disaster Management ” for 
Undergraduate students has been introduced by VI Deans committee. 
ii. The M.Sc / Ph.D degrees are offered in the discipline of the Environmental 
sciences. 
iii. A Postgraduate course in Organic Farming has been initiated after its 
approval from Broad Subject Matter Committee (BSMA) 2022. 
iv. Introduction of syllabus pertaining to the above-mentioned issue in sch ool 
education does not come under the purview of ICAR. However, ICAR deals with  
Higher Agriculture Education only. 
v. The Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi is having a 
course on Climate Change and Climate Smart Agriculture being taught for M . Sc 

67 
 
and Ph. D students. Also, the classes and training courses are offered to various  
levels of scientists, students and other stakeholders.” 
 
1.88 On being asked to enlist steps taken by the Department to harness the poten tial 
of Knowledge platforms and research partnerships of Central and State/Private  
Universities/ Professional Institutions like IITs etc to leapfrog innovations in Agriculture, 
the Department have submitted as under: 
 “There are two collaborative projects with IIT, Delhi as given below:  
i.  Feasibility study for developing renewable energy system for tea 
plantation in Assam.   Under research collaboration between ICAR and IITD 
(Extramural Fund).IASRI-ProjectCode:AGEDIASRICOP202000100160 Centre for 
rural Development and Technology, IIT, Delhi   
ii.  Artificial intelligence based mobile app for identification and adv isory of 
maize diseases and insect pests. Funded by NASF ICAR. IASRI-Project-
Code:AGEDIASRISOL201901000156 (ICAR-IASRI as Lead Centre and IIT, Delhi 
and IIMR, Ludhiana as Cooperative Centers).” 
 
1.89 On being asked to furnish the outcome of the National Agricultural Research and  
Education and Extension System (NAREES) and how much has the system be en 
effective in providing assistance to the farmers and tribal communities across the 
country in dealing with adverse impact of climate change, the Department submitted: 
 
“The climate change research infrastructure established in many institutes across th e 
country in NAREES enabled to understand the impact of climate change on crops, 
livestock, fisheries and natural resources. It also helped to develop new and 
innovative technologies and build capacities of different stakeholders including 
farmers on climate resilient Agriculture. A large number of climate resilient vari eties 
such as drought escaping, short duration and flood tolerant varieties are being 
developed using advanced molecular breeding techniques. These varieties a re 
evaluated under farmers ’ fields in the climatically vulnerable districts and found to 
have improved yield and resilience. Some of these varieties are being cultivate d in 
large scale in farmer ’s fields across the country. The climate resilient crop varieties 
developed help in minimizing impact of climate change and their by risk to farmers 
and tribal communities across the country.” 
 
1.90 On being asked by the Committee to furnish the number of Farmers trained by 
KVKs annually in Climate Resilient Farming related programmes in the last three years 
and also provide the number of Farmers who were trained for the first time by KVKs, the 
Department submitted: 
 
“The number of farmers trained during the last three years on various a spects of 
climate resilient farming is as follows: 
Year No. of programmes Farmers involved 
2020-21 1293 34270 
2021-22 1381 39395 
2022-23 1519 44452 
Number of farmers who were trained for the 
first time  
- 16594 

68 
 
U. Creating Mass Awareness about Climate Change 
1.91 On being asked as to how does the Department plan to involve Private S ector 
and Civil Society Groups to achieve the targets of Climate Change and raise awareness 
among the common masses and list out the Programmes being run, campa igns done if 
any along with notable achievements and the challenges faced in raisin g awareness 
among masses especially in under developed/backward regions with low literacy rates 
of the country, the Department submitted as under: 
“To enhance the outreach of activities, events and achievements under va rious 
schemes/missions and sub-missions of Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare (DA&FW), Extension Division is implementing various communication 
strategies using electronic, print & social media.  
a) Electronic Media 
Doordarshan, DD Kisan and All India Radio telecast & broadcast the sponsored 
Agriculture and allied sector programmes. Krishi  Darshan programme being 
telecast through 18Regional Kendras of  Doordarshan, 03  programmes  namely  
Krishi  Darshan, Hello Kisan and Choupal Churcha (05  days  a  week)  on  DD 
Kisan & 30 minutes of programmes namely  Kisan  Vani  (06  days  a  week)  
through 97 Rural FM Radio Stations of All India  Radio  are being utilized to 
broadcast. Success stories compiled by ICAR are telecasted through DD Kisan. 
Coordination with 310 Community Radio Centre (CRS) and Resident 
Commissioners of States and UTs for wider outreach of activities/events under 
various schemes, Production of Audio spot/ Jingles, Video spots, Films, 
Documentaries for publicity of schemes of DA&FW.  
b) Print Media 
Publicity & awareness is also carried out by Outdoor publicity through 
Banners/Hoardings/Digital panels as well as through print advertisements in 
leading newspapers across the country. 
c) Social Media 
In view of growth in spread of mobiles and internet usage even in the rural areas, 
social media platforms viz. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, Koo, Public 
app etc. are also utilized for the publicity of various schemes/missions. Tweets/ 
Retweets/ Posts from line Ministries/Departments, creative info graphics and 
short audio-video clips on new schemes, successful startups, success stories of 
farmers, collage viral video of the Event (Summing up and Conclusions of the 
event) etc. are prepared and utilized for amplification of outreach activities for 
wider publicity among masses.  
d) Krishi Melas 
To highlight the achievements of Agriculture, dissemination of information and 
latest technologies among farmers and stake-holders various Krishi Melas are 
organized at regular intervals which bring all the stakeholders on one platform 
and create market for agro-products at International/National level.” 
V. Digital Agriculture 
1.92 On being asked to furnish as to how the Department plans to harness the 
disruptive power of Digital Agriculture and whether any Schemes/Programmes h ave 

69 
 
being envisaged for the same, expected contribution of Digital Agriculture to the GDP of 
the country by 2030 and how can Digital Agriculture can enhance ada ptation 
Plans/Programmes across the country, the Department submitted as under: 
“The Department have been promoting the use of implementation of eme rging 
technologies, i.e., Artificial Intelligence, Data Analytics, Drones, Robotics etc. in 
Agriculture through its NeGP-A scheme. The guidelines of the NeGP-A scheme 
were revised in June 2020, in line with recommendations of Doubling Farmers  
Income Committee to promote the usage of emerging technologies. 
Further, the Department as a roadmap for digital interventions is also working 
towards enabling Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) for Agriculture. The DPIs wil l 
enable delivery of digital services at a national scale.  As part of the initiative  the 
Department is working towards enabling: 
1. Agri Stack with, 
● Registries ( i.e., Federated Farmers Registry, Geo-referenced Village Maps, 
and Crop Sown Registry) 
● Digital Crop Survey to enable the Crop Sown Registry 
● Unified Farmer Service Interface (UFSI) 
● Agri Data Exchange 
2. Krishi Decision Support System (KDSS) 
Details about the above initiatives: 
i. Agri Stack is a Digital Public Infrastructure for Agriculture that will open up  the 
data in the Agriculture sector for the development of innovative so lutions and 
services. Further, Agri Stack seeks to bring interoperability in the Digital 
Agriculture ecosystem by establishing Data Standardization in the form of a 
common vocabulary for the entire ecosystem. Agri Stack will enable use-cases in 
key focus areas of Access to Finance, Access to Inputs, Access to Markets an d 
Access to Advisory.  
ii. As part of the Agri Stack initiative, the Department is also enabling the Digital 
Crop Survey. The Digital Crop Survey would help to establish a clear p icture of 
crops being sown across all farmlands in the country with proofs in the form  of 
geo-tagged photos. The project aims to create one verified source of truth  about 
the farmers’ crop sown data.  
iii. Krishi DSS is being developed using geo-spatial technologies and related 
databases to enhance the evidence based decision making capability of all 
stakeholders in the Agriculture sector. Krishi DSS will also enable development 
of solutions based on geo-spatial technologies and enable cross domain so lution 
development using thematic layers, i.e., Disaster Management, Crop Forecasting 
etc. 
Using the Digital Public Infrastructures, the ecosystem participants, i.e., Central 
Government, State Government, will get access to data, technologies, solutions 
and services that will enable them to better monitor, plan and impleme nt schemes 
and services and reach a higher level of inclusion in line with the GoI vision of 
100% inclusion.” 

70 
 
1.93 On being asked to state the Institutional, Technological and Financial b arriers 
identified in implementation of Digital Agriculture and the steps planned /being taken to 
overcome them and the challenges being faced in providing equitable acc ess to Digital 
Agriculture to Small and Marginalized Farmers specially from Scheduled Castes an d 
Tribal Communities, the Department submitted: 
 “Institutional Barriers identified: Since Agriculture is a State Subject, Agri 
Stack is being built in a federated manner with the State Governments. Th is 
requires active participation from the States w.r.t. the implementation of Agri 
Stack. 
 Technological Barriers identified: Enabling DPIs in Agriculture is a complex 
task, requiring a highly specialized knowledge of DPIs and Solution 
Architecture. 
 Financial Barriers identified: Data Storage: Heaps of year wise data 
generated would require a lot of Cloud hosting space and associated 
management costs. 
 
 The Department have engaged Managed Cloud Service Provider for mana ging 
data usage and its storage. In future, it may require more funds to implem ent solutions 
around this data. An Agri Stack Technical Committee has been established with  key 
members from the industry with experience in designing and implementing Aad haar, 
UPI, NDEAR, NDHM etc. that advises the Agri Stack Team as and when required. 
Steering Committee and Implementation Committees have been esta blished in every 
State chaired by Chief Secretary to ensure the Agri Stack project is implement ed in a 
fast and efficient manner. 
 
Challenges faced for providing equitable access: 
 Linking of geo-referenced and geo-fenced Agriculture plots in State 
 Mapping of community and temple land in the country for the purpose of 
Agriculture 
 Crop Assessment & Loss Assessment 
 Farmer Based specific Crop Advisories.” 
 
1.94 On being asked to state as to whether the Department intends to tap m obile 
networks available in the country to measure rainfall using Commercial Microwave Links 
(CML), which may provide real time rainfall observations in remote areas/flood prone 
areas and may be of high use to farmers especially those with small hol dings and the 
strategies being developed jointly with Indian Meteorological Department (IMD), if any, 
in this regard may be furnished, the Department submitted: 
“The wireless Commercial Microwave Links (CMLs) are widely deployed, 
because rainfall causes attenuation to the radio signals between transmitter an d 
receiver stations in the network, CMLs can be used to draw reliable rainfall 
estimates based on changes observed in the quality of the signal. Howev er, at 
present there is no on-going or proposed activity in IMD for measurement of 
rainfall using Commercial Microwave Links.” 
 

71 
 
1.95 On being asked to furnish a roadmap regarding Agri Digital Financial services in 
the country and the projections for the next five years, the Department subm itted as 
under: 
“The Department as a roadmap for digital interventions is working towards 
enabling Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) for Agriculture. The DPIs will enable 
delivery of digital services at a national scale.  As part of the initiative the 
Department is working towards enabling: 
1. Agri Stack with, 
 Registries ( i.e., Federated Farmers Registry, Geo-referenced Village 
Maps, and Crop Sown Registry) 
 Digital Crop Survey to enable the Crop Sown Registry 
 Unified Farmer Service Interface (UFSI) 
 Agri Data Exchange 
2. Krishi Decision Support System (KDSS) 
These DPIs will enable the delivery of innovative services and solutions by  
Government and Private sector in key focus areas, i.e., Access to Finance, Access 
to Inputs, Access to Markets and Access to Advisory for the Indian Farmers. Under 
the key area of Access to Finance, the Ministry is working with Department of 
Financial Services to enable delivery of KCC using the JanSamarth and Agri  Stack 
infrastructure. The enablement of KCC using these infrastructures will enable th e 
farmers to get quick and easy access to KCC, without the need to submit ma nual 
documents and with reduced time to get the KCC Cards. Further, the same 
infrastructure can be used by other Authorized Service Providers to enable be tter 
Financial Inclusion and access to financial products for the Indian Farmers. F urther, 
the Agri Stack project also enables the various Departments/Ministries of State an d 
Central Government to get access to verified information on the Farmers with 
consent. This will enable the Government to increase inclusion and reduce 
leakages in their beneficiary oriented Schemes.” 
 
1.96 On being asked to enlist steps being taken by the Department to incentivize 
Private Sector engagement in Digital Agriculture alongwith steps taken to synerg ize the 
energies of Public Private Partnership(PPP) expertise in Digital Agriculture and 
coordination at various levels of governance viz. State, District, region among various 
Government Agencies, the Department submitted :  
“This Department is working on building registries viz. farmers ’ registry and crop 
registry would likely to be in place for about 75% of the states by Decem ber, 2023. 
Further, this Department has signed MoUs with 10 Agritech Players on Pro-bono  
basis. Also, based upon the completion of MoUs outcome of the collabo ration with 
Agribazzar and ESRI India Limited has been integrated with Farmers’ Database.” 
 
1.97 On being asked to enlist the steps taken to train and raise awareness among 
farmers across the country regarding use of Artificial Intelligence Techniques and other 
innovations and how does the Department plan to ensure that Startups in Agriculture 

72 
 
Sector dealing with latest technologies pertaining to Climate Change, which have been 
provided Financial Assistance and other aid through various Government Sche mes 
provide latest innovations available from the Agricultural Sector at optimal rates to Small 
and Marginalized farmers, the Department submitted as under : 
“The Department have been promoting the use of implementation of e merging 
technologies, i.e. Artificial Intelligence, Data Analytics, Drones, Robotics etc. in 
Agriculture through its NeGP-A scheme. The guidelines of the NeGP-A Scheme  
were revised in June 2020, in line with recommendations of Doubling Farmers 
Income Committee to promote the usage of emerging technologies. Further, the  
Department have been working towards enabling a Digital Public Infrastruct ure for 
Agriculture, i.e., Agri Stack. The Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) for Agriculture will 
open up the data in Agriculture sector for the development of innovativ e services 
and solutions by Government and Private sector. A key focus of the DPI is to enable 
innovative use-cases such as Crop Advisory using Artificial Intelligence, Ease of 
Access to Credit etc.” 
W. Promotion of Millets/Coarse grains 
1.98 On being asked to state as to how the Department plans to incentivize Farmers 
to grow Millets and subsequently boost mass consumption of these coarse grains 
including millets which are priced higher to rice, wheat and so on, the Departme nt 
submitted as under:  
“Under NFSM-Nutri Cereals, the assistance is being provided to farmers through 
state governments on following interventions; 
● Demonstrations on latest crop production & protection technologies. 
● Seed distribution of certified seeds of hybrids & High Yielding Varieties (HYVs). 
● Seed production of Certified seeds of High Yielding Varieties (HVYs). 
● Integrated Nutrient & Pest Management Technologies. 
● Improved Farm Implements/tools, Water application tools (Sprinkler). 
● Cropping system based trainings to farmers. 
● Organizing Events / workshops etc. 
 
Other initiatives taken for promotion of Nutri Cereals/millets: 
● Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) in cluster areas (50 Nos.) 
● Creation of processing units for FPOs. 
● Centers of Excellence (CoE) on Nutri Cereals (For Bajra at Hisar, for 
 Jowar at Hyderabad, for small millets at Bengaluru). 
● Creation of Seed Hubs (for production of quality seeds: 19 Nos). 
● Publicity through print and electronic media etc.  
● Distribution of seed mini kits of millets free of cost to the farmers. ' 
 
1.99 On being categorically asked to elucidate measures taken to popularize Millets 
among the masses, provide the details of expenditure incurred in publicity/  
advertisement budget in this regard to create awareness and what innovativ e measures 
are being planned to push for consumption of millets and millet based pro ducts, the 
Department submitted: 

73 
 
“The Government of India is implementing a multi stakeholder approach to wards 
celebration of International Year of Millets (IYM) - 2023. The action plan of IYM-
2023 focuses on strategies to enhance production and productivity, consump tion, 
export, strengthening value chain, branding, creating awareness for health benef its 
etc. To promote Shree Anna a yearlong action plan for monthly activity  has been 
prepared by Central Ministries, State Governments and Indian Embassies. In order 
to increase production and productivity of Shree Anna, the Department o f 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is implementing a Sub-Mission on  Nutri-
Cereals under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) in all districts of 28 States & 
2 Union Territories viz. Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. Under NFSM –Nutri Cereals, 
the incentives are provided to the farmers, through the States/UTs, on crop 
production and protection technologies, cropping system based demonstrations, 
production & distribution of certified seeds of newly released varieties/hy brids, 
Integrated Nutrient and Pest Management techniques, improved farm 
implements/tools/resource conservation machineries, water saving devices, 
capacity building of farmers through trainings during cropping season, organizing  
events/workshops, distribution of seed minikits, publicity through print and electronic 
media etc. The interventions such as formation of Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs) for Shree Anna, setting up Centers of Excellence (CoE) and seed hub s for 
Shree Anna have also been supported under NFSM. In addition, stat es such as 
Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh have initiated Millet 
Missions in the States to promote Shree Anna. To make India a global hub  for 
'Shree Anna', the Indian Institute of Millets Research (IIMR), Hyderabad has been 
declared as the Centre of Excellence for sharing best practices, research and 
technologies at the national and international level.  
Shree Anna are also included under the Poshan Abhiyan of the Min istry of Women 
and Child Development. Further, the Ministry of Food and Public Distributio n has 
revised its guidelines to increase the procurement of Shree Anna under the 
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), Integrated Child Development 
Services (ICDS) and Mid-Day Meal. The Ministry has also advised the State 
Governments and Union Territories to increase the procurement of Shree Anna. A n 
Export Promotion Forum dedicated to promotion of Shree Anna in the internatio nal 
market has been set up to facilitate promotion, marketing and development of 
Shree Anna exports from India. Under the Eat Right campaign, the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is creating awareness to promote the use of 
Shree Anna as part of a healthy and varied diet.  
 Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has implemented the Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry for Millet-based produ cts 
(PLISMBP) during 2022- 23 to 2026-27 with an outlay of Rs. 800 cr ore. The 
Pradhan Mantri Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) 
Scheme, launched under the Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan is currently being 
implemented in 35 States and Union Territories (UTs). The Government is also 
popularizing Agri-Infrastructure Fund Scheme to invite farmers/FPOs/Entrepreneurs 
to avail the benefit of interest subvention on loans up to 2 crore for setting  up 

74 
 
primary processing units in Shree Anna. Government is also promoting Shree Anna 
based startups to increase the demand of Shree Anna.  
 As a part of promotional activities of IYM 2023, the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers welfare is promoting Shree Anna during India ’s G20 presidency. Shree 
Anna are also showcased in various events such as International Trade Fair, Suraj  
Kund Mela etc. A key event organized towards International Year of Millets was the 
Global Millets (Shree Anna) Conference, held from 18 th – 19th March 2023 at IARI 
Pusa campus, New Delhi which was inaugurated by the Hon ’ble Prime Minister. In 
continuation to the efforts towards mainstreaming Shree Anna, a ‘Millets Experience 
Centre (MEC)’ has been opened at Dilli Haat, INA, New Delhi with an aim to raise 
awareness on Shree Anna and encourage its adoption among general pu blic. In 
order to encourage consumption of Shree Anna among government em ployees, all 
Government offices have been advised to include Shree Anna snacks in 
departmental trainings/meetings and Shree Anna based food items in dep artmental 
canteens. DA&FW has also installed vending machines for Shree Anna prod ucts 
through National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India (NAFED) to 
various Ministries/Departments. Shree Anna and its products have been identified  
as One District One Product (ODOP) in 19 districts of 10 States.  
Further, there is no separate budget provision under NFSM-Nutri Cereals for 
publicity/advertisement.” 
 
1.100   Further, DA&FW was asked to list steps taken to develop and promo te 
plant based protein value chains in farming and allied areas to create low carbo n 
footprints. In response, the Department submitted:  
“However, Under NFSM programme, the NFSM-Pulses is being implemented all 28 
states and 2 UTs viz. Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. Under NFSM assistance is 
given to farmers for demonstration on latest crop production and protectio n 
technology, distribution and production of seeds of HYVs / Hybrids, INM and IPM 
technologies, improved farm implements/tools, water saving devices, capacity 
building of farmers etc.  In addition, distribution of seed mini kits of p ulses free of 
cost to the farmers.” 
X. Food and Nutrition Security 
1.101  Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare was asked to furnish as to 
how does it plan to ensure Food security for the country in times of ad verse impact on 
Agricultural productivity due to increasing events of extreme weather conditions as In dia 
has become the most populous Nation and to share a roadmap in this rega rd alongwith 
all relevant details. In response, the Department submitted as under: 
“The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is implementing National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM) in 28 states and 2 UTs viz. Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh 
with the objective to increase food grain production through area expansion and  
productivity enhancement. Under NFSM, the assistance is given to farmers for 
demonstration on latest crop production and protection technology, distribution and 
production of seeds of HYVs / Hybrids, INM and IPM technologies, improved  farm 

75 
 
implements/tools, water saving devices, capacity building of farmers etc. In addition,  
the programme implementing states are advised to use climate resilient/stress 
tolerant varieties of seeds under demonstrations and seed distribution interventions.  
In order to ensure food security in case of adverse condition,  the programme adopts 
various strategies for sustaining the production of food grains such as focus o n low 
productivity and high potential districts, implementation of cropping system cen tric 
interventions in a mission mode approach, agro-climatic zone wise planning an d 
cluster approach, focus on pulse production through utilization of rice fallows, rice 
bunds and inter-cropping of pulses with coarse cereals, oilseeds and commercial 
crops etc. In addition, under NFSM cluster front line demonstrations of new 
technologies are organized through ICAR- Krishi Vigyan Kendras, seeds of new 
varieties of pulses and nutri-cereals are distributed in the form of seed m ini kits free 
of cost to the farmers.  
Further flexibility is also given to the NFSM programme implementing states to tak e 
up local initiatives as per their needs for enhancing production and productivity o f 
food grains.” 
1.102  International Food Policy Research Institute through their Report 'Global 
Food Policy 2022' have stated that due to Climate Change, global popu lation about 65 
million including 17 million from India would face hunger by 2030. It is further stated in 
the Report that there would be 60% growth in Global Food production by 20 50 but 50 
Crore Indians would be facing hunger risk. On being asked the response of t he 
Government in regard to the aforesaid, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the Global Food Policy Report 2022 of the IFPRI, Washington DC clima te 
change is likely to slow down the progress towards hunger reduction in India, with 
around 16.0 million people remaining at risk of hunger in 2030. Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research under the network of project on National Innovations in Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) has planned to develop and promote climate resilien t 
Agriculture to address vulnerable areas of the country and help the districts and 
regions to cope up with extreme weather conditions like droughts, floods, frost, heat 
waves, etc. It has three components viz. strategic research, technology 
demonstration and capacity building. The main thrust areas include (i) identification of 
the most vulnerable districts/regions, (ii) development of crop varieties and 
management practices for adaptation and mitigation and (iii) assessme nt of climate 
change impacts on livestock, fisheries and poultry vis-a-vis identification of 
adaptation strategies. 
Despite the climate change is impacting Indian Agriculture, the food grain productio n 
has been increasing since decades due to interventions made through several 
schemes under NMSA. Further, National Food Security Mission launched in the 
country aided the country to maintain the food production levels.”  
 
1.103  On being asked to list steps taken to ensure food and nutrition secu rity 
especially in tribal dominated areas/backward regions/underdeveloped regions, the 
Department have submitted as under: 

76 
 
“Under NICRA, location-specific Climate Resilient Technologies (CRTs) were 
demonstrated in tribal dominated/backward regions/underdeveloped regions of 11 
vulnerable districts in Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, 
Telangana and Tamil Nadu to cope with climate variability. Apart from 
demonstration, capacity building programs were also taken up to farmers and other 
stakeholders and to evolve innovative institutional mechanisms at village level so as 
to enable the communities to respond to climate stresses and to ensure fo od and 
nutrition security. Climatic vulnerabilities viz., droughts, floods, cyclone, heat wave, 
high temperature stress, cold wave and frost are being addressed in NICRA 
villages.” 
 
Y. Role of Nuclear Technology in boosting Agricultural Productivity 
1.104  Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare was asked to share the role 
of nuclear technology in improving Agricultural productivity and its applications in 
ensuring Food security for the country. In response thereto, the Depart ment submitted 
as under: 
“The nuclear technology such as gamma radiation is being used in muta tion 
breeding. Several varieties have been developed and released by using ga mma 
radiation induced mutagenesis in crops. Gamma irradiation is being used to 
developing mutant populations in crops, particularly in crops having limited natural 
genetic diversity. Besides crop improvement, radioisotope induced mutation is also 
used to improve microbes. Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) has develope d 
a mutant of the bio control agent Trichodermavirens using gamma radiation. Radio 
isotopes are used as tracer molecules in studying nutrient uptake and utiliz ation 
efficiency, understand the metabolic processes, Stable isotope technology is being  
used to identify the germplasm with high water use efficiency and water pollution 
studies.” 
 
1.105  On being asked as to how does the Department plan to tap nuclear  
technology to address present and future challenges in Agriculture, the Departmen t 
have submitted as under: 
 
“The Department will continue to use nuclear technology in crop improvement 
through mutation breeding, and use for basic research on water and nutrient use 
efficiency and plant metabolism as tracer molecule.” 
 
1.106  On being asked to list the challenges being faced by the Departme nt in 
implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) in various States a nd to 
elucidate the measures taken by the Department to overcome these challen ges and the 
change in results achieved, if any, the Department submitted as under: 
 

77 
 
“The Ministry faces certain challenges while planning and implementing the 
schemes/programs with the State/UT Governments. There are challenges in planning 
stage in ensuring the State plan meets the scheme objectives and othe r priorities. In 
some cases, State/UT Governments do not prepare/submit Annual Action Plan in  
time which results in delay in implementation of the scheme.  
During the implementation the major problem faced is in timely release of funds to 
State Governments as per approved allocation in view of high unspent b alance of 
earlier released fund on the part of the State/UT Governments. Some time , Stat e 
Governments have high unspent balance more than the permissible limit prescribed 
by Ministry of Finance, Government of India for releasing funds. 
Further due to non- submission of utilization certificate or other related do cuments by 
the State/UT Governments, funds could not be released in time, resulting in delay  of 
implementation of schemes. 
Such problems calls for a more comprehensive and coordinated approach on the part 
of Central and State governments, in terms of planning and implementatio n of 
various government programs and schemes. State governments have been asked to 
draw up a comprehensive strategic plan for the Agriculture sector of the State, 
keeping in view their priorities. Further States/UTs while formulating their plan s under 
different schemes should have an articulation of the overall strategy and th e 
schemes/programs should be linked with the program objectives. States are alread y 
preparing State and District level Agriculture Plans. Regular meetings/interaction has 
been held with the States/UTs while formulating the State plans, to en sure 
convergence with schemes of other Departments, as well as those imp lemented by 
the State government. 
To overcome problems of progress in the implementation on the part of the 
States/UTs, Ministry conducts meeting regularly with the State/UT Governments ’ 
representatives to review implementation of this schemes and sensitizing them to fast 
track the process / mechanism of utilization of unspent fund.” 
  
Z. Lifestyle for the Environment (LiFE) 
1.107  On being asked to furnish key highlights of the Department's global 
initiative to combat Climate Change —‘Lifestyle for the Environment (LiFE) Movement ’, 
its objectives and the manner in which the Department plans to proceed ahe ad to fulfill 
the objectives of the Movement, the Department submitted as under: 
 “Mission LiFE was introduced by Hon ’ble PM Shri Narendra Modiji at COP-26 in 
Glasgow on 1 st November 2021.It is a mass movement for mindful utilization 
instead of mindless consumption. Mission LiFE aims to create Pro-Planet People 
by nudging them to take simple climate-friendly actions in their daily liv es. The 
Mission focuses on 7 themes, viz. Energy Saved, Water Saved, Sin gle Use Plastic 
Reduced, E-waste Reduced, Sustainable Food Systems Adopted, Waste Reduced  
(Swachhata Actions), Healthy Lifestyles Adopted, and encompasses a 
comprehensive but non-exhaustive list of 75 LiFE Actions which individua ls can 

78 
 
take to live a more sustainable lifestyle. It is a behavioural change framework on 
transitioning to a circular economy by influencing individual and community 
behaviour. 
 The relevant themes of the Mission LiFE are integrated in ongoing scheme s fo r 
achieving energy efficiency and water productivity while adopting sustainable fo od 
production system.  In addition to this, waste reduction through recycling of waste s 
in Agriculture is also being adopted. Wherever plastics are used in Agriculture, 
efforts are made to reduce the single use plastics.  As part of advocacy and  
awareness, the Department have organized series of campaign programmes 
covering the themes of Soil Health Management, Drone application in Agriculture, 
Promotion of Climate Resilient crops/ varieties /seeds, rainwater harvesting and its 
efficient use, Waste to Wealth/ Composting and Sensitizing FPOs for Integration 
Mission LiFE. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare organized Mega Event on Missi on 
LiFE on the occasion of “World Environment Day ”, 5 th June 2023.  The program 
included tree plantation activity and an exhibition on Natural and Organic Farming  
showcasing and creating awareness on the sustainable agricultural practices 
symbolizing Mission LiFE. 
The Ministry of Agriculture prepared Plan of Action (POA)/ strategy for mass 
mobilization through various activities. The various campaign programmes 
organized as per the plan of action were uploaded on Meri LiFE portal. Presently 
the dashboard of Meri LiFE portal shows a total of 789 awareness eve nts and 875 
action events have been organized with 62426 no. of participants and  total 58703 
people took pledge under Mission LiFE so far. For publicity of the even ts, the 
Ministries/Departments were utilized their own social media handles viz. Facebook, 
Twitter, Instagram, etc. and posted creatives and activities on social media for 
maximum outreach. Additionally, a number of competitions for school and  college 
students such as drawing, poster, declamation, quiz etc were also conducted by 
various participating Organizations.” 
 
********************** 

79 
 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
1. Creation of Single Nodal Agency at National Level to deal with issues of 
Climate Change. 
 Several studies have now unequivocally established that the phenomenon 
of climate change has a detrimental effect on crop yields and agricultural 
productivity. The impact can be negated by implementing both modern and 
traditional adaptation measures, with the necessary Institutional and Policy 
support. Every Ministry/Department is mandated to prepare a Disaster 
Management Plan under Sections 36/37 of Disaster Management (DM) Act, 2005. 
Accordingly, Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare also prepare a 
National Agriculture Disaster Management Plan (NADMP) to include key aspects 
of Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) that addresses Climate Change adaptation and 
sustainable development goals related to the Agriculture Sector. However,  a 
unified command at the National Level is  required for having seamless 
coordination among various Ministries, acting dynamically as and when the 
situation so requires, take swift decisions on urgent issues effecting Agriculture 
coming under the ambit of several ministries viz.  Ministry of Science & 
Technology, Ministry of Earth Sciences, Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of 
Environment, Forests & Climate Change.  
 Making any single Ministry as the Nodal Agency to deal with Climate 
Change in Agriculture would not be able to create the desired impact as it cannot 
use its powers effectively over other Ministries/Departments or do seamless 
liaisoning with different State Governments or take swift decisions nor it can be 
held responsible for the Subjects lying under the jurisdiction of other 
Ministries/Departments which a National Level Authority with unified command 
can do or achieve.  
The Committee, therefore, are of the firm view that the issues pertaining to 
ground water, Meteorological events and advisories, Agro advisories and other 
overlapping areas related to Agriculture or covertly connected with it, require the 
need for a National Authority, especially in times of calamitous events & extreme 
phenological events to work in close cooperation with various stakeholders 
including State Governments and their Agencies and take swift decisions and to 
deal with all Climate Change issues holistically.  
The Committee are further of the considered view in this regard that issues 
related to Climate Change and its effects impacting Agriculture needs to be 
handled by a single Authority at the National level on the pattern of National 
Disaster Management Authority(NDMA)which can be named as National 
Agriculture Disaster Management Authority(NADMA).  The Committee further 
desire that the proposed NADMA may consist of experts having rich experience 
in the relevant fields for the purpose. This will not only enhance dynamism in 
decision making but also fix accountability which is presently missing in the 

80 
 
system. The Committee again express their suggestion that formation of NADMA 
will act as a catalyst and game changer and enhance the responsive mechanism 
of the government. 
2. Nationwide implementation of  Comprehensive and Integrated Approach to 
mitigate adverse impact of Climate Change on Agriculture- Implementation of 
NICRA Scheme in all Risk Prone Villages due to Climate Change 
 Climate change impacts are not evenly distributed among different 
populations and countries. Developing countries, which heavily rely on the 
Agriculture and lack the necessary technologies and finances for risk 
management, face greater vulnerability to climate risks. Research has found tha t 
elevated temperatures have a more detrimental effect on the Agricultural growth 
in developing countries as compared to developed ones. Recent studies have 
demonstrated that Climate Change has resulted in a substantial decrease in the 
productivity growth of global Agriculture in the last five- six decades.  With a 
more pronounced impact on developing countries, similar evidence has been 
reported for India, where climatic hazards have led to a substantive reduction in 
productivity growth, especially in low-income and agrarian States. The socio-
economic consequences of Climate Change ’s negative impact on agriculture are 
also more significant for developing countries. Studies have indicated that 
climatic shocks have disproportionately increased undernutrition and poverty 
rates in the South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa compared to other regions of the 
world. Numerous other studies have also documented a significant decline in 
household income and consumption expenditure due to adverse rainfall shocks. 
 The long-term consequences of repeated exposure to multiple risks can be 
devastating. They can deplete household savings, force the sale of assets, 
increase indebtedness, discourage the adoption of new technologies and 
innovations, and degrade natural resources and ecosystem services. There are 
concerns that, without mitigation and adaptation measures, poor farmers may 
find it difficult to fully recover from the impacts of climatic shocks and remain 
trapped in a cycle of low-income, debt, and poverty. The adverse impacts of 
Climate Change on Agriculture and Agriculture-based livelihoods can be reduced 
by implementing comprehensive and integrated approaches. These approaches 
include technological advancements in agriculture, meteorology, information and 
communication, data sciences, and the incorporation of traditional farming 
practices. Depending on risk aversion, resource availability, and access to 
information and finances, farm households adopt various measures to manage 
climate risks. Extensive analysis of adaptation literature has shown that 
integrating scientific innovations with traditional practices is a strong strategy for 
enhancing productivity, sustainability, and resilience in smallholder-dominated 
agrarian economies.  
 Against this backdrop, the Committee desire that NICRA (National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture) Scheme should be implemented in 

81 
 
all identified risk prone/vulnerable villages to empower the farmers and shield 
them from the vagaries of natural events & meteorological incidents and thus 
enabling them to usher in a new era of financial security. 
3. Giving prominence to Village Panchayats to raise awareness about impact 
of Climate Change and its effects on Agriculture 
 The most challenging political issue in the Climate Change policy arises 
from the inadequate acknowledgement and recognition of the changing climate 
by Village Panchayats or Local Self-governing Bodies. An enlightened or aware 
Sarpanch will act as a force multiplier and in turn educate the farmers who are the 
front line warriors about the effects of Climate Change on Agriculture and the 
need for adoption of Climate Resilient practices. The farmers need to be 
enlightened clearly that the impact of climate risks could transmit along the 
Supply or Value chains from genetics to end-consumption, affecting the 
efficiency and sustainability of the entire chain and the livelihoods of chain 
actors.  
 Until a village Sarpanch is made aware of the need to align the 
development strategies of a Gram Panchayat with the goal of adapting agriculture 
to climate variability, any efforts made at higher levels of governance may not 
yield the desired outcomes. The institution of a Panchayat possesses the ability  
to leverage funds from a multitude of Govt. schemes. Funds provided under Govt. 
Schemes can be utilized in adaptation and mitigation strategies for enhancing 
Climate Resilience by working on agro forestry and plantation, soil & water 
management, creation of water ponds/reservoirs and so on. Workshops 
containing information for Beginners, Medium and Advance Level Training and 
Refresher courses for Village Sarpanchs and Panchayats on Climate Change 
issues need to be conducted on a regular basis at District, Regional and National 
Level to keep them attuned to the developments happening worldwide. 
National/regional Level ranking of villages adopting best Climate Resilient 
practices may be started and those topping the charts may be felicitated to 
motivate others to follow the suit.  
 The Committee are of the considered opinion that to enhance awareness 
regarding impact of Climate Change on Agriculture, in villages especially among 
the farming community and Village Sarpanchs, messages may be broadcast on 
social media platforms extensively in Hindi, English as well as in vernacular 
languages across the country. Focus on dissemination of these informative 
messages regarding impact of Climate Change on Agriculture in remote areas 
with sub optimal connectivity and border areas may be given prominence so that 
farmers residing there  do not remain oblivious about the adverse impact of 
Climate Change  and adopt essential adaptative and mitigative practices. 
 

82 
 
4. Role of Krishi Vigyan Kendras(KVKs) and the need for transformation 
 The Committee note that significant contribution has been made by the 
KVKs (Krishi Vigyan Kendras) towards the overall enhancement of farmers' 
quality of life. These contributions include  in the areas of income generation, 
agricultural productivity, the introduction of state- of-the-art technologies, 
approaches to resource conservation, the promotion of organic farming, 
diversification of agricultural activities, Training Programmes for rural youth and 
farm women to foster entrepreneurial endeavors, the development of integrated 
farming systems, models for climate-resilient agriculture, and the utilization of 
information and communication technology (ICT) for effective dissemination of 
information. It is an established fact, as revealed by field-based stakeholder 
analysis, that the presence of a KVK in each district has led to tangible progress 
in the Agrarian sector. This progress is attributed to the provision of a Single-
Window Platform that offers technology and services - within easy reach of all 
stakeholders.  
 The Committee think that time has arrived wherein infrastructural and 
technological facilities in KVKs need a boost to enable them to cater training to 
farmers in the latest technological Agrarian practices. The record keeping of 
KVKs especially in regard to records of training being imparted to the Farmers, 
also needs to be spruced up. KVKs should resort to data analytics to ensure that 
all farmers are imparted training in the relevant fields.  The KVKs need to utilize 
Artificial Intelligence and other latest innovations to act as Knowledge Centres 
where information/Knowledge can be imparted in Vernacular languages too, 
through online mode 24 x7 as and when queries are raised by the farmers. These 
changes will revamp the existing system and KVKs will usher in a new version 
KVK 2.0 fully equipped and geared to meet not only the challenges of Climate 
Change but other exigencies too, as and when the need arises. These changes 
will also enable KVKs to provide courses in Capacity Building Programmes for 
Farmers and Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs). 
5. Ensuring Food and Nutritional Security for all 
 At the core of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) lie objectives to 
terminate the state of hunger, accomplish food security, and enhance nutrition. 
The issue of food security remains of utmost importance for India, within its 
roster of developmental concerns as a result of the nation's comparably elevated 
levels of economic advancement. Achieving and sustaining Food and Nutritional 
security remains a challenge for India, the world's most populous Nation. In the 
last three decades or so, India has transitioned itself from a food deficit nation to 
a self sufficient food producing nation. In this context, merely achieving 
satisfactory levels of food production is not sufficient to guarantee a nation's 
food security. The National Food Security Act(NFSA) 2013 aims to provide for 
food and nutritional security by ensuring access to adequate quantities of quality 

83 
 
food at affordable prices to the most vulnerable segments of the Society through 
various Schemes and Programmes. 
 The primary issue encountered in Indian agriculture pertains to the 
insufficiency of productivity. The Nation necessitates an escalated level of public 
investment in the advancement and dissemination of crop varieties that exhibit 
heightened tolerance towards fluctuations in temperature and precipitation, while 
also being more proficient in water and nutrient utilization. The Committee are of 
the considerate view that Agricultural Policy ought to prioritize the enhancement 
of crop productivity, while concurrently formulating safety nets to effectively 
cope with the associated risks posed by Climate Change. 
 The introduction of the POSHAN Abhiyan (Nutrition Mission) in March 2018 
by the Government of India has reoriented the national focus on nutrition. This 
initiative aims to enhance productivity and ensure food security for individuals as 
well as their families and communities. Poor nutrition is a major risk factor in no n 
communicable diseases (NCD). The Committee strongly recommend that latest 
technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Big Data Analytics etc. may be 
utilized to ensure food and nutritional security for the masses especially 
vulnerable sections of the society, rural population in fulfillment of Sustainable 
Development Goals and for overall growth of the Agriculture sector. 
6. Need for giving priority to Crop Diversification and Water conservation 
 Diversification and modification of crop species and variety portfolios are 
commonly employed strategies by farmers to address environmental and socio-
economic variability and to effectively respond to transformative shifts, such as 
climate change. Despite the undeniable importance of crop diversity in enabling 
agro ecosystems for successful adaptation to climate change as current public 
policies and development interventions offer inadequate assistance in promoting 
crop diversification. The Committee feel that understanding the dynamics of 
alterations in the crop portfolios of farmers, the intricate interaction between 
climate and other factors that drive these changes, and the consequences for the 
food security, nutrition, and income of farmers assumes paramount importance 
in providing valuable insights for agricultural decision-making, which is primarily 
crucial in designing feasible approaches for enduring adaptation in a swiftly 
evolving global context. The Committee recommend that as Crop Diversification 
is an efficient tool in ensuring food security, enhancing soil fertility, controlling 
pests & diseases , brings about yield stability and more importantly, mitigate 
effects of Climate Change and hence it should be actively promoted by the 
Ministry and all possible assistance rendered to farmers in pursuance of the 
same across the country. 
 Better management of water resources must be a key feature  of 
sustainable Agriculture. Water Supply Management Options such as new 
storages and water harvesting are important, especially in the water-stressed 
regions of North-western India. Water use efficiency in Ag riculture needs to be 

84 
 
enhanced. India ’s irrigation infrastructure needs to be upgraded; particular 
attention needs to be given to north-western India, the  country ’s food basket 
that is prone to climate-induced droughts. Despite the bene fits of drip irrigation, 
it is still largely adopted for high-value horticultur al crops. To enhance the area 
under micro and drip irrigation, the government needs t o take a nuanced stance 
on the subsidy on electricity for drawing water for irri gation purposes, which 
has been a major contributor to declining groundwater leve ls, towards the 
adoption of Drip Irrigation techniques. 
 In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly recommend the use of 
latest technologies such as Artificial algorithms, which will optimize irrigation 
schedules, conserve water and minimize environmental impact, particularly in the 
light of growing water scarcity issues. 
7. Impetus to Research in Climate Smart Practices and Big Data Analytics 
 Climate Change is anticipated to modify pest behavior, specifically in terms 
of infestation levels, resistance and resurgence, and the emergence of novel 
pests in response to altered climatic conditions. Numerous research studies have 
examined the influence of climate change on Indian Agriculture using diverse 
datasets and estimation methods. In the realm of biological science, controlled 
experiments are often employed to quantitatively assess the effects of weath er 
parameter fluctuations, particularly temperature, on crop yields. With all other 
factors held constant, these controlled conditions expose crops to varying 
temperature levels, enabling the determination of the extent of yield reduction.  
 The Committee having noticed the importance of modern technologies in 
agriculture,  do recommend that Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
should give top priority to the advancement of research in emerging areas of 
Climate Science in order to develop technologies that encompass pest 
surveillance and forecasting systems, simulation modeling, and big data 
analytics, among others. The implementation of digital agriculture, utilizing ICT 
(Information and Communication Technology) and emerging technologies, has 
the potential to play a crucial role in facilitating the adoption of various climate-
smart interventions. Emphasizing agricultural research and innovation is 
necessary to ensure the efficient utilization of resources such as water and 
nutrients, carbon sequestration, and the assessment of Greenhouse Gas 
emissions from the Agricultural sector. This requires an augmented allocation of 
budgetary support and the establishment of collaborations and partnerships. 
Therefore, the Committee further recommend that the Ministry/Department should 
ensure sufficient allocation for this purpose from the resources available with 
them.
  
 
 

85 
 
8. Availability of Farm inputs and finance  
 Climate Change is the most defining challenge for Agriculture, human 
development and ecological well being in the 21 st century.  Climate Change has 
forced farmers to use adaptative and mitigation methods to lessen the impact. 
The Committee do recommend that seeds of Climate Resilient Varieties may be 
provided to the farmers and accordingly, Seed Hubs need to be promoted on a 
large scale and indigenous breeds in Animal Husbandry may be made available 
alongwith necessary food supplements at affordable prices. Climate Resilient 
varieties may be popularized be it Horticulture or Fisheries. These Climate 
Resilient varieties would ultimately help in reduction of GHG emissions and pave 
for enhanced agricultural yields too in uncertain times.  
9. Promotion of Organic/Natural Farming: 
 Organic Farming have the potential to contribute to the mitigation of 
climate change through two main mechanisms. Firstly, by minimizing the release 
of Green House Gases (GHGs), and secondly, by sequestering Carbon dioxide 
(CO2) from the atmosphere within the soil. The impact of Traditional Agricultural 
Practices on Global Warming is significantly impacted by the application of 
synthetic Nitrogen Fertilizers and the presence of high levels of Nitrogen in soil. 
In contrast, Organic Agriculture is capable of sustaining itself with Nitrogen. 
Mixed organic farms engage in highly efficient recycling of manures from 
livestock and crop residues through the process of composting. Additionally, 
Leguminous Crops contribute an ample amount of nitrogen, particularly on 
stockless organic farms where it serves as the primary source. 
 The emission levels of Nitrous Oxide are directly correlated to the 
concentration of easily accessible mineral Nitrogen in soil. Following the 
application of fertilizers, high rates of emission are observed, displaying 
significant variability. However, in Organic Agriculture, the prohibition of mineral 
Nitrogen and the decreased number of livestock units per hectare substantially 
decrease the concentration of easily available mineral nitrogen in soil, 
consequently resulting in reduced N2O emissions. The implementation of 
diversified crop rotations with the use of green manure enhances soil structure 
and diminishes the release of Nitrous Oxide and organically managed soils 
possess improved aeration and significantly lower levels of mobile Nitrogen 
concentrations, both of which lead to decreased emissions of Nitrous Oxides. 
 The Committee strongly feel that as Organic Farming/ Natural Farming has 
the potential to reduce GHG emissions, enhance soil fertility and strengthen 
Climate resilience, hence Ministry should help farmers adapt to Climate Change 
by promoting Organic Farming through research and extension services. 
Government Schemes such as Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(RKVY), National 
Mission on Natural Farming, MOVCD-NER(Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for North East Region),One District One Product(ODOP) are steps 

86 
 
taken in the right direction. The Committee recommend that inputs at affordable 
prices may be made available to the farmers, latest technologies such as AI and 
IoT (Internet) of Things used extensively in the certification process and 
awareness may be created among various stakeholders, be it farmers or 
consumers, by using social media platforms too, regarding the benefits of 
Organic/natural Farming which would go a long way in not only increasing the 
prosperity of farmers, but also, improve health of common man and more 
importantly, mitigate effect of Climate Change. 
 10. Upgradation/Digitization of Agriculture Markets 
 Since independence, India has traversed a long journey in agriculture 
marketing but still numerous problem such as fragmented and non-compressed 
value chains that involve numerous intermediaries, the lack of transparency in 
price discovery mechanisms and the absence of scientifically advanced storage 
and logistics systems etc remain a big challenge to overcome.  Agricultural 
market reforms were introduced through Agricultural Produce Market Committee 
(APMC) Act, 2003, which were enacted by State Governments. The reforms 
encompasses several key aspects, including the facilitation of direct trading 
between farmers and buyers, promotion of contract farming, the encouragement 
of private sector involvement in constructing market infrastructure, such as 
warehousing, cold chains, and other logistical systems, and the move towards 
establishing a unified national market. The virtual market platform, e-
NAM(National Agriculture Market), since its inception in April 2016, has been 
consistently enhanced in terms of new technology, innovation, the enhancement 
of transparency in transactions, digital payments, and user-friendly attributes. In 
July 2022, the e-NAM platform, through the introduction of the Platform of 
Platforms (PoPs) as a comprehensive unified structure, has served as a Single 
platform for all stakeholders in the value chain, including farmers, Farmer 
Producer Organizations (FPOs), e-platform service providers, transport service 
providers, quality assaying service providers, value addition, processors, 
exporters, Fintech, storage, etc. Various service platforms have been enlisted 
under the following 10 service categories on the Platform of Platforms(PoP) 
module, namely Quality Assaying, Transportation, Warehousing, Fin-tech, 
Trading platforms, Agri advisory, Market information, Institutional buyers, Sorting 
and grading, and Agri input aggregators.   
 Having analyzed the spectrum of this phenomenon in holistic spectrum, 
the Committee are of the considerate view that disruptive technological solutions 
in the agricultural marketing sphere is the need of the hour. Measures need to be 
taken to ensure that participants in these markets can assess each other's 
credibility by way of providing ratings to each other which in turn is visible to 
other users which will significantly enhance transparency and enhance the 
reputation of the system. Similarly, digitization of entire FPOs may be done which 
would enable the traceability of produce back to individual farmers. In addition, 
Intelligent Vision Capabilities may also be devised to pave the way for the sorting 

87 
 
of fruits, vegetables, and staples based on buyer specifications. The Committee 
desire that Fintech products that integrate warehousing with Credit and 
Insurance need to be developed, technological advancements need to be 
deployed to offer modular and energy-efficient storage systems at the farm level 
at affordable prices and a combination of machine learning data systems, 
blockchain, IoT  and sensors utilized to create end- to-end traceability within the 
Food Supply Chains. The Committee do feel that all Agricultural markets across 
the country may be  linked to e-NAM portal at the earliest to ensure seamle ss 
transactions and to create a win-win situation for both the farmers who can sell 
their produce to fetch good prices and the buyers who purchase produce of their 
choice at competitive rates. 
11. Need for promotion of Forest conservation and Natural wetlands 
 Forests are the best shield against Climate Change and act as carbon 
sinks.  Their role in segregating and absorbing carbon from the atmosphere is 
non pareil. They form the first line of defence against Climate Change and hence 
need to be given utmost prominence . Forests have long been part of Indian 
society & culture and have been eulogized for their importance in human lives.  
 Wetlands, such as swamps and marshes, are renowned for being 
ecosystems abundant in wildlife, making them some of the most bio diverse 
habitats on Earth. These wetlands possess shallow waters and thrive plant life, 
providing sustenance for a wide array of organisms ranging from insects to water 
fowls and so on. These wetlands, along with lakes, rivers, and other aqueous 
environments worldwide, face imminent threats. Many of these areas have fallen 
victim to pollution and degradation, a consequence of both climate change and 
human development. Safeguarding and rehabilitation of Natural habitats is not 
only imperative for the preservation of biodiversity but also as a means to combat 
the climate crisis. 
 In November 2022, the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands elevated the 
prominence of wetlands and underscored their pivotal role in attaining the 
Sustainable Development Goals, which serve as humanity's blueprint for a more 
promising future. The subsequent month, at the United Nations Biodiversity 
Conference, countries achieved a groundbreaking agreement to protect nature. 
This accord encompassed a provision to restore a minimum of 30 percent of 
deteriorated inland water bodies and to preserve healthy freshwater ecosystems 
in an equitable manner. 
 It is noteworthy that coastal and freshwater wetland ecosystems harbour a 
significant percentage of the world's biodiversity. In particular, peatlands, a 
distinct type of vegetated wetland, possess the capacity to store twice as much 
carbon as the entirety of the world's forests. Despite these remarkable attributes, 
wetlands have been subjected to drainage for agricultural purposes or to 
facilitate infrastructure development over the past two centuries. 

88 
 
 Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that as Forests and 
wetlands are of profound ecological significance, concerted efforts are imperative 
to safeguard these invaluable habitats which would overtly and covertly assist 
Agriculture to stand up against extreme phenological events. The rights of 
forests communities also need to be taken care of while formulating policies.  
Also, the goals and vision of Sub-Mission on Agroforestry and Green India 
Mission  need to be popularized and advertised more prominently to create 
awareness among different stakeholders, seeds & saplings provided at affordable 
rates to Farmers especially in High Risk Prone Areas/Districts affected or likely to 
be affected from Climate Change and even financial incentives be provided to 
them to make these Programmes a success and as such will ensure farmers with  
additional source of income which is an avowed objective of the present 
Government policies. The Committee desire that sustainable forest management 
needs to be done in an integrated and inclusive manner, while combating climate 
change and using biodiversity in a sustainable way.   
12. Promotion of Millets and Coarse grains 
 The proposition of Indian Government to designate 2023 as the 
International Year of Millets(IYM) has been well acknowledged by the United 
Nations. The International Year of Millets (IYM 2023) presents an occasion to 
enhance awareness regarding the nutritional and health advantages of millets, 
while also directing policy focus towards their cultivation in adverse and evolving 
climatic conditions. Millets possess the capacity to thrive in arid lands with 
minimal resources and exhibit resilience towards climate variations. 
Consequently, they offer an ideal solution for nations seeking to augment self-
sufficiency and diminish reliance on imported cereal grains. 
 The Committee note that unlike rice and wheat, which thrive in irrigated 
environments, millets flourish in marginal ecologies, which expand the range of 
options available for swift and adaptable adaptation in the face of uncertain future 
conditions. These coarse grains need to be part of Public Distribution System 
which would encourage farmers to do their cultivation. 
 The Committee express happiness over the fact that the due importance 
given to coarse grains within policy frameworks by the Government, would yield 
benefits for both human health and the Climate since they require lesser amount 
of pesticides and fertilizers, enhance crop diversity and also provide protection 
against soil erosion. The Committee strongly feel that farmers who switch from 
growing traditional crops like rice and wheat to millets or coarse grains, need to 
be given financial protection as incentives for initial two years minimum to boost 
their confidence. 
 
 

89 
 
13. Carbon market in Agriculture 
 The escalating global population has led to an increased demand for food, 
consequently resulting in the emission of Carbon dioxide from agricultural 
activities, which continues to have a detrimental impact on the environment. Over 
the previous decade, there has been a notable increase in interest and discourse 
encompassing carbon markets, indicating the potential for a robust global market 
for carbon and emissions. In India, both the Public and Private sectors have 
continued to establish standards for emissions reduction and advance efforts in 
Voluntary Carbon Markets (VCM), scrutiny of carbon market practices and the 
associated climate impact has intensified. Specialized carbon markets that cater 
to farming and agricultural activities are emerging, garnering growing interest 
from farmers, the Private sector, and Governments worldwide. 
 Although agriculture is a contributing factor to this issue, it also possesses 
the potential to be part of the solution. In the developed nations, as custodians of 
the land and agricultural resources, farmers and ranchers are actively engaging 
in carbon sequestration through the implementation of sustainable practices in 
soil management, crop cultivation, livestock rearing, and agroforestry. 
Conversely, Private Sector investments in carbon markets are gaining traction 
and are primarily driven by three factors namely -(i) Legal obligations (ii) 
Voluntary goals, such as corporations, industrial entities, or municipal operations 
aiming to fulfill publicly stated environmental targets (iii) Shareholder or 
consumer expectations. 
 The government plays a crucial role in establishing protocols and 
certifying mechanisms to accurately verify efforts in carbon offsetting. 
 The growth of the Carbon Market will necessitate the involvement of 
various stakeholders viz. farmers, industry and so on. Alternatively, in certain 
cases, the Committee feel that offerings that fail to promote collaboration or 
support a transparent, consistent, efficient, and high-quality Carbon Market in 
Agriculture will become obsolete in the next phase of Carbon Market expansion, 
while those who successfully mitigate current uncertainties could derive 
significant benefits and generate substantial impact. 
14. Availability of information regarding Latest Technological advances and 
conduct of training workshops for Farmers 
 The implementation of AI(Artificial intelligence) in agriculture holds 
immense potential to revolutionize the industry by increasing productivity, 
reducing costs, promoting sustainability, and addressing the challenges posed 
by climate change and resource scarcity. AI is reshaping every aspect of 
agriculture be it increased productivity, enhanced efficiency, promotion of 
sustainability, and reduction of waste. AI will assist the industry in adapting to 

90 
 
climate change by analyzing historical climate data to predict weather patterns, 
thereby optimizing water usage and reducing emissions. 
 AI-powered farm management software will streamline farming operations 
by integrating data from various sources, optimizing resource allocation, and 
enhancing productivity and profitability. The integration of AI and computer 
vision into self-driving machines will revolutionize agriculture by automating 
essential tasks such as ploughing, planting, and harvesting. This transformation 
promises heightened productivity, reduced labor costs, and optimized resource 
utilization. AI-driven analytics and decision support systems will aid farmers in 
making informed choices by processing extensive amounts of data, including 
weather patterns and soil conditions .Through the incorporation of AI, plant 
health sensors will enable real-time monitoring of crops, detecting diseases, 
nutrient deficiencies, and pest infestations for timely intervention. Drones and 
robots equipped with AI capabilities will provide precise insights into crop 
conditions and perform labor-intensive tasks, thereby reducing the requirements 
for manual labor. AI will assist the industry in adapting to climate change by 
analyzing historical climate data to predict weather patterns, thereby optimizing 
water usage and reducing emissions. 
 The Committee strongly feel that the integration of AI with the Internet of 
Things (IoT) will automate and optimize farming operations, leading to higher 
yields, resource conservation,  enhanced sustainability and AI will enhance the 
resiliency of agricultural supply chains by providing predictive insights, 
optimizing logistics, and reducing wastage & also expedite agricultural 
biotechnology by accelerating breeding processes and facilitating gene editing 
techniques to develop more resilient and high-performing crops. Therefore, the 
Committee do recommend that Farmers and FPOs may be trained in KVKs and 
other relevant training institutes in all latest adaptative and mitigative 
technologies providing them the essential know how thereby enabling to use 
these for their own betterment and in larger societal &  national interests. 
15.  Reduction in emission of Green House Gases (GHG) from Agriculture in a 
time bound manner 
 India is a signatory to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), as well as its Kyoto Protocol (KP) and the Paris 
Agreement (PA). As a participant in the UNFCCC, India regularly submits its 
National Communications (NCs) and Biennial Update Reports (BURs) to the 
UNFCCC, which include a National Greenhouse Gas (GHG) inventory, containing 
information on Methane emissions. Under the Paris Agreement, India has 
submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), which does not impos e 
any Sector-specific mitigation obligation or action. However, India remains 
steadfast in its commitment to formulating and implementing measures to 
address climate change.  

91 
 
 The Committee are optimistic that nationwide implementation of National 
Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA), which incorporates Climate-Resilient 
practices that contribute to significant Methane reduction in rice cultivation be 
accorded priority. The technologies such as System for Rice Intensification(SRI) 
and Direct Seeded Rice(DSR)  developed by Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) under the National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture 
(NICRA) Project, aimed at mitigating methane emissions from rice cultivation be 
made available provided across the country. System for Rice Intensification(SRI), 
has the potential to increase rice yield by 36-49% while using 22-35% less water 
than conventional methods while Direct Seeded Rice(DSR) reduces methane 
emissions by eliminating the need for raising nurseries, puddling, and 
transplanting. 
 National Livestock Mission, being implemented by Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (DAHD), which includes initiatives for breed 
improvement and balanced rationing, by feeding livestock with high-quality 
balanced rations,  which helps reduce methane emissions from the livestock 
sector needs to implemented expeditiously . 
 The production of green fodder, silage making, chaff cutting, and total 
mixed ration under the National Livestock Mission being promoted by the Union 
Government, with the aim of reducing methane emissions from livestock, needs 
to be implemented at a faster pace nationwide, at the earliest. 
 Initiatives such as the 'Gobar Dhan' (Galvanizing Organic Bio-Agro 
Resources) -   Scheme and the New National Biogas and Organic Manure 
Programme incentivize the utilization of cattle waste, while also promoting the 
production of clean energy in villages. The Gobar Dhan Scheme which 
specifically supports the recovery and conversion of biodegradable waste into 
resources, leading to a reduction in Methane emissions needs to be more 
popularized across the country for the benefit of farmers as well as the society a t 
large. The Committee strongly recommend that while formulating and 
implementation Schemes to reduce GHG(Green House Gases) emissions, 
legitimate interests of vulnerable sections and those communities/segments 
residing in remote areas, also need to be given priority and safeguarded. 
16. Increasing budgetary allocation for Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare 
 Agriculture sector in India is now at the cusp of a transformation backed by 
Union Government initiatives such as Digital Public Infrastructure, Agriculture 
Infrastructure Fund schemes and so on. The scalability of these Schemes needs 
to be enhanced so that their impact is more tangible and areas across the country 
start getting benefits simultaneously. The Committee feel that without adequate 
financial support and backing by the government, most of the Schemes will not 
be able to create the desired impact. 

92 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that budgetary allocation of the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare needs to be enhanced to boost public 
spending in Agriculture & Allied Sectors, to tackle issues related to Climate 
Change as India is among the top ten countries to be affected by extreme 
meteorological events, to train farmers and FPOs in the latest technological 
advances to combat adverse impact of phenological events, to ensure farm 
inputs across the length and breadth of the country, invest more in research in 
farm methods  and technologies & related demands of Allied Sectors and so on.  
17. Issue of Manpower in Research Institutes and bodies attached to Ministry 
of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
 A robust and strategic knowledge system is imperative for the 
identification, formulation, planning, and execution of policy-driven measures, 
while upholding the requisite rate of economic growth. This strategic knowledge 
system, aimed at informing and supporting actions sensitive to climate change, 
must encompass several objectives. These objectives entail addressing climate 
science through modeling specific to regions; evaluating various technological 
scenarios and alternatives to meet national objectives; harnessing international 
cooperation and enhancing our endeavors to select and develop new 
technologies for adaptation and mitigation; and ensuring the bridging of 
knowledge gaps. It is of utmost importance to sustain the vitality of the 
knowledge enterprise that addresses Climate Change issues through th e 
promotion of human and institutional capacity-building. Such measures are 
indispensable in the crafting of policy responses and implementation approaches 
at the national level and in providing inputs for negotiations at the international 
fora by designated Departments. The role of Research Institutes in sustaining the 
vitality of knowledge systems, ICAR in the present context, is of immense 
importance in combating the effects of Climate Change. Manpower is the most 
important asset of any organization and more so, in the case of research 
institutes such as ICAR, Coconut Development Board (CDB) and so on.  
The Committee note that the Posts are lying vacant in certain crucial 
Research Institutes like Coconut Development Board (CDB), Central Institute of 
Fisheries Training (CIFT) and Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute 
(CMFRI), etc. The Committee feel that the Recruitment Processes need to be 
expedited and Officials appointed to increase the efficiency of the functioning of 
all the Research Institutes. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                             P.C. GADDIGOUDA R  
06 February, 2024                                      Chairperson, 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
                Animal Husbandry and Food Processing   

93 
 
Annexure- I 
Climate Resilient Varieties (Abiotic stress tolerant) 
Traits Crops (no. of varieties) 
A. Flood/ water 
submergence/water logging 
tolerant varieties (72) 
Rice (49), Maize (2), Sorghum (1), Jute (4), Rice bean 
(1), Sugarcane (15) 
B. Drought/moisture stress /water 
stress tolerant varieties (217: Field 
Crops– 214; Potato - 3) 
CEREALS (114):Rice (51), Wheat (17), Maize (18), 
Sorghum (7), Pearl Millet (10), Little millet (3), Kodo 
millet (3), Finger Millet (5) 
OILSEEDS (22): Soybean (5), Groundnut (4), Sesame 
(2), Indian Mustard (6), Niger (1), Toria (3), Taramira (1) 
PULSES (31): Urdbean (2), Pigeonopea (15), Horse 
gram (2), Cluster bean (1), Chickpea (5), Lentil (2), 
Cowpea (2), Mothbean (1), Faba bean (1) 
FIBER CROPS (9): Cotton (6), Roselle (2), Jute (1) 
FORAGES (15): Pearl Millet (2), Forage Sorghum (1), 
Forage Maize (1), Napier Bajra Hybrid (1), Cowpea (1), 
Fescue Grass (1), Guinea Grass (2), Rice bean (2), 
Marvel Grass (1), Anjan Grass (1), Forage Sewan Grass 
(1), Setaria Grass (1) 
SUGARCROPS (23): Sugarcane (23) 
VEGETABLES (3): Potato (3) 
C. Salinity/Alkalinity/Sodic soils 
tolerant varieties (49) 
Rice (28), Wheat (2), Barley (3), Indian Mustard (3), 
Lentil (2), Sesbania (1), Sugarcane (10) 
D. Heat stress/ high temperature 
tolerant varieties (49: Field Crops – 
47; Potato – 2) 
Cereals (34): Rice (9), Maize (4), Pearl Millet (4), Wheat 
(17) 
Oilseeds (6): Sesame (1), Indian Mustard (4), Yellow 
Sarson (1) 
Pulses (4):Chickpea (1), Lentil (3) 
Fiber Crop (3):Cotton (3) 
Vegetable crops (2):Potato (2) 
E. Cold tolerant/Frost/ winter 
chilling tolerant field crop varieties 
(13) 
Cereals (7): Rice (5), Maize (2) 
 Pulses (1):Lentil (1) 
 Forage Crops (3):Setaria Grass (1),Fescue Grass (1), 
NepierBajra Hybrid (1) 
 Fiber Crop (2): Cotton (2) 
 

94 
 
Annexure- II 
Details of biotic stress tolerant field crop varieties developed 
 
Crop Name Number of total varieties 
released during 2014 – 
2022 
Number of Biotic Stress 
tolerant varieties 
Kharif Season 
Cereals   
Rice 516 435 
Maize 183 152 
Sorghum 64 55 
Pearl Millet 66 61 
Little Millet 17 11 
Proso Millet 6 3 
Kodo Millet 10 9 
Finger Millet 39 36 
Foxtail Millet 10 7 
Brown top Millet 1 0 
Barnyad Millet 5 3 
Total Kharif Cereals 917 772 
Oilseeds   
Soybean 80 74 
Groundnut 55 48 
Sesame 23 19 
Niger 10 9 
Sunflower 18 14 
Castor 15 15 
Total Kharif Oilseeds 201 179 
Pulses   
Mungbean 46 44 
Urdbean 45 42 
Pigeonpea 55 53 
Cowpea 22 19 
Horsegram 9 8 
Rajmash 7 7 
Cluster bean/Guar 4 4 
Faba bean 4 4 
Moth bean 1 1 
Indian bean 2 2 
Total Kharif Pulses 195 184 
Forage Crops   
Forage Pearl Millet 13 10 
Forage Maize 4 4 
Forage  Oats 1 1 

95 
 
Forage Sorghum 22 16 
Forage Cowpea 8 7 
Guinea grass 3 3 
Fescue grass 1 0 
Rice bean 5 4 
Marvel grass 4 4 
Anjan grass 4 3 
Dhaman grass 2 2 
Setaria grass 1 0 
Ryegrass 2 2 
Black Kolukattai grass 1 1 
Bajra Napier Hybrid 8 5 
BundelBajraSquamulatum 1 1 
Aparajita 1 1 
JawaharVicia 1 0 
Forage Sewan grass 2 2 
Sesbania 1 1 
Total Kharif Forages 85 67 
Fibre crops   
Cotton 122 100 
Bt Cotton 121 121 
Jute 17 15 
Mesta (Roselle) 9 7 
Mesta (Kenaf) 7 7 
Sunhemp 2 1 
Ramie 1 0 
Fibre flax 1 0 
Total Fibre Crops 279 251 
Sugarcane 68 64 
Other crops   
Grain Amaranth 9 5 
Kalingada seed 2 1 
Quinoa 1 0 
Asalio 1 1 
Buckwheat 1 0 
Winged bean 1 0 
Broad bean 1 1 
Total Other Crops 16 8 
Total 1761 1525 
Rabi Season Varieties 
Cereals   
Wheat 156 149 
Barley 20 12 
Oilseeds   
Indian Mustard 49 24 

96 
 
Yellow Sarson 5 1 
Brown Sarson 3 2 
GobhiSarson 7 5 
Toria 13 9 
Taramira 3 1 
Karan Rai 1 1 
Linseed 40 38 
Safflower 21 17 
Pulses   
Chickpea 87 68 
Lentil 36 32 
Field pea 24 22 
Lathyrus 1 1 
Forage Crops   
Oats 36 31 
Lucerne 5 5 
Hedge Lucerne 1 1 
Berseem 9 8 
Other Crop   
White Clover 1 1 
Total 518 428 
Grand Total 2279 1953 
 
  

97 
 
Annexure- III 
Location specific technologies developed and their benefits 
Technology Productivity gain (%) 
over farmers’ 
practice 
Income gain (Rs./ha) 
over farmers’ practice 
Trench cum bunding 10-15 9250 
Conservation furrow 23-63 22200 
Land shaping in Sundarban area of 
West Bengal 
85-112 112500 
Farm bunding 12-22 8250 
Ridge and furrow  15-24 10500 
Summer deep ploughing 15-30 11250 
Broad bed furrow 21-33 21000 
Efficient utilization of harvested 
water by drip and sprinkler 
30 28000 
Artificial ground water recharge for 
open well and bore well 
20-28 15000-28000 
Conservation tillage 10 10450 
Rainwater harvesting by farm ponds 25-80 30000-75000 
Jalkunds 50-120 20000-54000 
Rainwater harvesting by check 
dams 
30-112 20000-52000 
Rainwater harvesting by sand bag 
check dams 
28-65 30000-66000 
Short duration and drought 
escaping varieties 
20-28 7800-11000 
Drought tolerant crops and varieties 15-25 7000-10000 
Intercropping systems 18-55 12000-18000 
Flood tolerant varieties 33 10000-12200 
Salt tolerant varieties 33-52 25000 
Contingency crops suitable for 
delayed sowing 
30-50 9000 
Cropping intensification 60 15000 
Heat tolerant varieties 25-45 8000 
Protected cultivation 35 72000 
Direct seeding of rice/ 
Drum seeding of rice 
10 8000 
System of rice intensification 10-12 12000 

98 
 
Zero till wheat sowing 15-18 8000 
Crop diversification 25-45 18000-25000 
Foliar spray to mitigate the dry 
spells 
10-12 10000 
Dryland horticulture crops 40-60 12000-35000 
Improved shelter to animals 25-45 Rs.5000/animal 
Improved breeds -Goatery 35 Rs.5000/animal 
Mineral mixture supplementation 10-12 Rs.4000/animal 
UMMB blocks 10-12 Rs.5000/animal 
High yielding green fodder varieties 15-18 Rs.5000/animal 
Silage making 25-30 Rs.5000/animal 
Backyard poultry 10-15 Rs.250/bird 
Backyard duckery 10 Rs.350/bird 
Integrated farming systems 25-45 Rs.55000/module 
Fisheries: Composite fish culture 30 Rs.75000 
Custom hiring centers 15-50 Rs.15000-35000 
 
 
  
 
  

99 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31 st January 2023 from 1500 hours to 1640 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar –  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
3. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
4. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
5. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
6. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Shri Vinayak Raut  
9. Shri Pochha Brahmananda Reddy 
10. Shri Virendra Singh  
 
 
      Rajya Sabha 
11. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
12. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
13. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
14. Shri S.Kalyansundaram 
15. Shri Kailash Soni 
16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 
                               Secretariat 
  
  1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri Naval K. Verma  -  Director 
  3. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Additional Director 
   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee  to the 
Sitting convened for having a Briefing by the Representatives of the M inistry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) on  
the Subject ‘Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming'. Thereafter, the Representatives of 
the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare and Indian Council of Agricultu ral 

100 
 
Research (ICAR) were called in. The Chairperson welcomed the Representatives and 
apprised them of the provisions of Directions 58 of the Directions by the S peaker, Lok 
Sabha, regarding Confidentiality of the Proceedings.  
3. After introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion, followed by a Power -
point Presentation by the Representatives of the Department. The Chairperson and 
Members of the Committee raised inter-alia several issues / points, as briefly mentioned 
below and sought clarifications / information from the Department : 
i) Impact of Climate Change on various sectors of economy and the dem and for 
adaptation of practices especially in Agriculture. 
ii) Measures taken by the Department to involve the farmers and make t hem 
aware of the likely adverse impact. 
iii) Steps taken for promotion of varieties of indigenous breeds of crops, liv estock 
and fisheries in building resilience and application of traditional know ledge to 
improve their growth, productivity and nutritional value. 
iv) Measures taken for farm mechanization and agro advisory services including 
promotion of location specific climate resilient technologies to ensure 
sustainable agriculture. 
v) Steps  taken by the Department to make Agriculture Climate neutra l and build 
up resilient food system which are vital for food and nutrition security 
vi) Promotion of Organic Farming and Value Chain marketing to extend green 
cover of farmlands 
vii) Role of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVK) as force multiplier and making it a mo re 
potent to deliver tangible benefits to farmers. 
4. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of the queries raised 
by the Members. The Chairperson, then, thanked the witnesses for sharing va luable 
information with the Committee on the Subject and directed them to send, in writing, the 
requisite information on points / items, which were not readily available with them, to the 
Committee Secretariat by 10th February, 2023. 
The Meeting then adjourned. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept separately.] 
 

101 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 24 th August 2023 from 1100 hours to 1305 
hours in Committee Room 3, First Floor, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar –  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri A Ganeshmurthi 
3. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
4. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
5. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil  
6. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh  
7. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
 
      Rajya Sabha 
8. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
9. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
11. Shri Kailash Soni 
 
                               Secretariat 
  
1. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Director 
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar   -  Executive Officer 
   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee  to the 
Sitting convened for taking Oral Evidence of the Representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) on  
the Subject ‘Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming'. Thereafter, the Representatives of 
the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Indian Council of Agricultural  
Research (ICAR), Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change and 
Agrometeorological Advisory Services, Division of IMD were  were called in. The 
Chairperson welcomed the Representatives and apprised them of the provisions of 

102 
 
Directions 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, regarding Confidentiali ty of 
the Proceedings.  
3. After introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion, followed by a Power -
Point Presentation by the Representatives of the concerned Department. The 
Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised inter-alia several issues / points, as 
briefly mentioned below and sought clarifications / information from the Department : 
 i) Steps taken by the Department to enhance Climate Resilience by   
  implementing short and long term Climat ic mitigation and adaptation  
  strategies. 
ii)   the   impact  of  Climate  Change  on  Crops  as  also  with   special  
 reference to Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)- 13  related to 
 Climate Action. 
iii) Contribution of Agriculture as such to emission of Green House Gases in 
Indian context. 
iv)  Objectives of National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture(NICRA) 
Programme, District Agriculture Contingency Plans (DACP) and achieving 
resilience under various Climatic conditions be it Heat or Cold Wave, 
drought prone and Flood Prone regions. 
v) Minimizing impact of Climate Change on Livestock sector, increase in Sea 
Surface Temperature(SST) affecting Spatial Distribution and Phenology of 
Fish. 
vi) Promotion of Micro Irrigation- Per Drop More Crop(PDMC) to counter 
challenges of Micro irrigation in Himalayan States and Hilly Districts in 
other States of the Country. 
vii) Rainfed Area Development and Infrastructure development for Climate 
Resilient Sustainable Integrated Farming Systems. 
viii) Growing of Millets as solution for Food & Nutritional Security and 
interventions across the value chain in Millets. 
ix) Natural Farming, Sustainable Soil Health for Global Food Security & 
Community based Climate Resilient Agriculture,  

103 
 
x) Sustainable Agriculture & Carbon Market including establishing Carbon 
Neutral Villages through adoption of Climate Resilient Technologies. 
xi) Agri Stack and its various components, Digital Crop Survey, Krishi-
DSS(geo spatial Decision Support System), Salient Features of Krishi 
MApper- both Mobile and Web Platform, Integrated Command and Control 
Centre(ICCC), Mobile Face Authentication App for e-KYC in PM KISAN 
Mobile App.  
4. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of the queries raised 
by the Members. The Chairperson, then, thanked the witnesses for sharing va luable 
information with the Committee on the Subject under examination and d irected them to 
send, in writing, the requisite information on points / items, which were no t readily 
available with them to the Committee Secretariat by 04th September, 2023. 
The Meeting then adjourned. 
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept separately.] 
  

104 
 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2023-24) 
 
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06 th February, 2024 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Office of Chairperson, Room No. 103, Block-B, Extension to Parliament Hou se Annexe, New 
Delhi.  
Present 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 4. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 5. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11. Shri Masthan Rao Beedha Yadav 
12. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
13. Shri Kailash Soni 
14. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
15. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
16. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan  – Additional Secretary     
2. Shri Khakhai Zou   – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan            –   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria  – Deputy Secretary  
 

105 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the  Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of Draft Reports on the 
following Subjects: 
*(i)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  XXXX 
 
(ii) Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming [Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare)] 
 
*(iii)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  XXXX 
 
*(iv)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  XXXX 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any 
modification.  The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the Report 
to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 