 
 
SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL  
HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING)  
 
[Spread of lumpy skin disease in cattle in the country and issues related therewith] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2023 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2023 /Agrahayana 1945 (Saka) 


 
 
COA No. 488 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi - 110 001 

(i) 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)…………………………………………………. (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24).………………………………………………… (v) 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………..……………………………………………. (vii) 
 REPORT  
 Part I  
A. Introductory………………………………………………………………………….. 1 
B. Advent and Spread of Lumpy Skin Disease in the Country……………………. 1 
C. Latest Status in respect of Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD)………………………… 3 
D. Causes of the Outbreak and Spread……………………………………………... 4 
E. Tackling (Control and Containment) of Lumpy Skin Disease…………………. 5 
F. Vaccination……………………………………..……………………………………. 5 
G. Bio-security Measures and Vector Control………………………………………. 6 
H. Disposal of Carcasses……………………………………………………………… 7 
I. Raising awareness for prevention and precautio ns against Lumpy Skin 
Disease ………………………………………..……………………………………. 8 
J. Ethno-Veterinary Medicine and Treatment………………………………………. 9 
K. Availability of Funds……………………………………..………………………….. 10 
L. Veterinary Infrastructure and Veterinary Manpower……………………………. 12 
M. Accuracy of data and methodology therein……………………………………… 13 
N. Compensation to Livestock Owners……………………………………………… 15 
O. Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)/Protocol for Lumpy Skin  Disease 
and similar other Outbreaks……………………………………………………….. 15 
   
 Part II  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee…………………………….. 17 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Guidelines for prevention of LSD (lumpy skin disease)………………………… 21 
II. Indicative management and treatment of lumpy skin diseases (LSD)  in 
animals……………………………………..………………………………………… 27 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the 3 rd Sitting of the Committee (2022 -23) held on  
20th December, 2022……………………………………..……………………… 30 
II. Minutes of the 3 rd Sitting of the Committee (2023 -24) held on  
13th December, 2023……………………………………..………………………… 33 
  

(ii) 
  

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar   –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
3.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  Vacant * 
21. Vacant # 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 

(iv) 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mu layam Singh Yadav on 10.10.2022,  
Bulletin-Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022. 
# Vacant w.e.f. 29.04.2023 due to disqualification of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha Membership from the date of his 
conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with Section 8 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951.  

(v) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar  —  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Mohammad Sadique 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Kailash Soni 
27.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 

(vi) 
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar* 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan  — Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  — Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   — Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar, MP, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Committee vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 
7523 dated 29.09.2023 vice Shri Surendra Singh Nagar w.e.f. 26.09.2023 
 
  

(vii) 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2023-24), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Sixty-Sixth Report on the Subject 'Spread of Lumpy Skin Disease in Cattle in 
the Country and issues related therewith'  of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying). 
2. The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing had 
selected the  Subject for examination during 2022 -23. Briefing on the Subject by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying) was held at their Sitting on 20.12.2022. As the examination of  
the Subject could not be completed during 2022 -23, the Subject was again selected for 
examination by the Committee during 2023-24. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
13.12.2023.  
4. For facility of reference  and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report. 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Depar tment of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) for 
appearing before the Committee and furnishing requisite information in connection with the 
examination of the Subject.  
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense appreciation for the 
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.  
 
      NEW DELHI; P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
13 December, 2023 Chairperson 
22 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry  
and Food Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(viii) 
 
 
  

1 
REPORT 
PART I 
A.   Introductory 
Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) is an infectious viral disease pertaining to Cattle and Buffaloes, 
transmitted by vectors like mosquitoes, biting flies, ticks, etc. and can be transmitted by touch 
also. The disease is characterized by mild fever for 2 -3 days followed by development of stiff, 
round cutaneous nodules on the skin - all over the animal’s body. Morbidity rate is around  
10-20%, the mortali ty rate is around 1 -5%. Animal R ecovery Time is  2-3 W eeks and the 
treatment is symptomatic. 
B.   Advent and Spread of Lumpy Skin Disease in the Country 
1.2 Lumpy Skin Disease was init ially in the recent past  suspected from Odisha based on 
the Test R eport of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( IVRI), Bareilly. Team of scientists 
from Indian Council of Agricultural Research - National Institute of Veterinary Epidemiology & 
Disease Informatics (ICAR-NIVEDI) Bengaluru, Indian Council of Agricultural Research - 
National Institute of High Security Animal Disease (ICAR-NIHSAD), Bhopal  and IC AR-IVRI, 
Bareilly was constituted in August 2019  for investigation of suspected Lumpy Skin Disease and 
Capripox disease in Odisha. Centre for Animal Disease Research and Diagnosis ( CADRAD), 
IVRI and College of Veterinary Sciences and Animal Husbandry (CoVSc), Odisha University of 
Agriculture and Technology ( OUAT) confirmed the presence of Capripox virus by O ffice 
International des Epizooties (O IE) prescribed Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) in the animals. 
ICAR-NIHSAD, Bhopal the Designated L aboratory for diagnosis of exotic diseases, also 
confirmed the disease in the state of Odisha by PCR and nucleotide sequencing using the OIE 
prescribed methods for LSD agent identifica tion. Accordingly, R eport on LSD was submitted to 
OIE on 18.11.2019. 
1.3 The Department further took immediate and proactive steps to control the Lumpy Skin 
Disease and Capripox disease in Odisha and other states. Directions were also issued to 
National Institute of High Security Animal Disease ( NIHSAD), Bhopal and National Institute of 
Veterinary Epidemiology & Disease Informatics (NIVEDI), Bangalore to carry out the 
Epidemiological Investigation in the States of West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Telangana, Andhra 
Pradesh and Karnataka. The Ring Vaccination S trategy with available Goat pox vac cine was 
also communicated to be carried out in and around affected villages in Odisha and to complete 
the entire operation in definite time line. Advisory developed by the Department  in consultation 
with the ICAR I nstitutes (ICAR -IVRI and ICAR -NIHSAD) has also issued to all states/UTs for 
taking bio-security measures and necessary advice to all stake holders including farmers. 
Advisory also was sent to the States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and Odisha regarding 
starting of clinical surveillance and vetting of seed virus by Indian Veterinary Research Institute 
(IVRI) for field application. The Department  also released a sum of Rs. 10 C rore to the affec ted 
state of Odisha for taking up ring vaccination. Further, based on the confirmation of LSD by 
NIHSAD, Bhopal the advisory - in respect of taking bio-security measures and to complete the 
ring vaccination as per the strategy was sent to other states to control the disease in definite time 
frame.  
1.4 During 2022 -23, twenty three states namely Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, 
Maharashtra, Goa, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, D elhi, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Telangana, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Sikkim have reported case of Lumpy 
Skin Disease (LSD).     

2 
1.5 State/Union Territory wise details of number of Cattle affected, died, vaccinated and 
recovered as on 21.02.2023 are as under: 
Update on Lumpy Skin disease (LSD) as on 21.02.2023 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Number of 
cattle 
affected 
Number of 
animals died 
due to LSD 
Number of 
animal 
vaccinated 
against LSD 
Number of 
Animals 
recovered 
% of animal 
recovered 
1. Gujarat 176094 6193 6319005 169901 96% 
2. Himachal Pradesh 140187 11275 807091 128269 91% 
3. Punjab 174927 17932 921615 156995 90% 
4. Rajasthan 1567217 76030 10859291 1491187 95% 
5. Uttarakhand 36323 921 705808 35402 97% 
6. Madhya Pradesh 32580 696 3715303 31884 98% 
7. Jammu & Kashmir 71377 2698 1964241 68679 96% 
8. Uttar Pradesh 112201 655 15787400 111546 99% 
9. Haryana 114844 2938 1736348 111906 97% 
10. Maharashtra 454516 34711 14231372 392610 86% 
11. Goa 32 1 21895 31 97% 
12. West Bengal 60 0 2600 60 100% 
13. Andhra Pradesh 1473 276 134840 1098 75% 
14. Delhi 828 0 25067 828 100% 
15. Bihar 1442 2 12104171 1440 100% 
16. Tamil Nadu 204 1 121700 203 100% 
17. Jharkhand 169 0 176274 169 100% 
18. Karnataka 326487 30973 10112423 272873 84% 
19. Telangana 9030 70 3206369 8852 98% 
20. Kerala 13335 354 673172 7269 55% 
21. Chhattisgarh 10 0 2474 10 100% 
22. Odisha 40394 113 4548900 39505 98% 
23. Sikkim 32 2 290 30 94% 
 Total 3273762 185841 88177649 3030747 93% 
1.6 From the information provided by the Department the Committee observed that the 
instances of Lumpy Skin Disease are rampant in the Western States of Rajasthan, Maharashtra 
and Gujarat; the Northern States of Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Haryana; and also in  the 
Southern State of Karnataka as compared to the rest of the country.  
1.7 The Committee desired to know the specific reasons behind this particular pattern of 
spread of the disease, the Department, in its reply, submitted: 
“The States were experiencing the sudden outbreaks of the LSD for the first time in such a 
large scale. The factors like availability of resources, mobilization of the resources,  
presence of stray animals with co morbidity, large number of underfed stray animal s, 
coordination between local bodies and state Animal Husbandry Departments, awareness 
and sensitization, vaccination, movement control of affected animals, movement of sub -

3 
clinical animals, long incubation period in some cases, presence of more vectors, long virus 
survival rate, movement of vehicle and persons handling animals etc affect the pattern and 
spread of diseases. In some states, extended rains in the later part of the monsoon created 
stress on the animals compromising their immunity. Also this ha s created favourable 
environment for the vector growth at the same time minimizing effectiveness of vector 
control measures. Under such circumstances the spread of the disease is very fast up to 
long distances through vectors. However, presently the states  are very well aware of the 
control, treatment and vaccination guidelines and gained the experience in LSD control 
programmes which is evident as disease is showing the decreasing trends and is under 
control with zero active cases in many states and high recovery rates.” 
1.8 The Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying also informed that there is no 
instance of Lumpy Skin Disease in Buffaloes in the country and also not confirmed by the 
laboratory diagnosis. However, advisories were issued to the states to protect the buffaloes by 
adopting strict bio -security measures like isolation from affected cattle, regular disinfection and 
vector control in the area, provision of nutritional feed and fodder, regular veterinary supervision 
and care.  
1.9 Further no o utbreaks of Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) have been observed in any mil ch 
animals such as Goats and other non -conventional sources of milk like Yaks, Camels , etc other 
than Cattle in the country.  
1.10 Regarding the susceptibility of the Indigenous breeds of Cattle vis-a-vis other breeds, 
the Department stated that  Indigenous breeds are also susceptible for Lumpy Skin disease 
infection and degree of severity may not vary breed to breed. The disease is viral in nature and 
may affect the cattle of any breed. Howe ver, malnourished animals with or without co morbidity 
are more susceptible for the disease. The unhygienic conditions, no preventive vaccination and 
less care by animals may increase the severity of the disease. 
1.11 To a query by the Committee whether sp read of Lumpy Skin Disease infection was 
more in Domestic Cattle as compared to Stray Cattle, the Department stated that there is no 
scientific evidence and field observation that spread of Lumpy Skin Disease infection was more 
in domestic cattle as compared to Stray Cattle. The disease is viral in nature and may affect the 
cattle of any age group. However, malnourished animals with or without co morbidity is more 
susceptible for the disease. 
C.   Latest Status in respect of Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) 
1.12 As per the information provided by the Department , the Committee observe that the 
Lumpy Skin Disease was presently under control and showing less infection with good recovery  
and less mortality in affected states indicating the decrease in severity of infection. Active Cases 
presently are only 14983 , which are mainly in animals with co -morbidity, weak nutritional status, 
animals under stress and under less care by animal owners and is sporadic in nature. More than 
6.02 Crore animals have been vaccinated  so far in the affected S tates and the vaccination and 
other biosecurity measures are underway. 
1.13 The Disease is currently reported in the States given below with - more Active Cases 
in Maharashtra ( Active Cases 10928), Sikkim (1164 Active Cases ), Megha laya (937 Active 
Cases), Himachal Pradesh (492 Active Cases). Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, 
Kerala, Uttarakhand, Nagaland are having very less Active Cases (less than 500). The details in 

4 
respect to animals affected, died, vaccinated, recov ered and active cases are stated to be as  
under: 
Update on Lumpy Skin disease (LSD) as on 30.10.2023 
Sl. No. State/UT Number of 
animals 
affected 
Cumulative 
(till date) 
during the 
year 2023 
Number of 
animals died 
Cumulative (till 
date) during the 
year 2023 
Number of 
animals 
vaccinated 
Cumulative 
(till date) 
during the 
year 2023 
Number of 
animals 
recovered 
Cumulative 
(till date) 
during the 
year 2023 
Total 
active 
cases 
1. Bihar 13655 4 13679792 13305 346 
2. Uttar Pradesh 10763 69 15917200 10277 417 
3. Odisha  11128 8 3003800 11053 67 
4. Meghalaya  8739 123 36975 7679 937 
5. Himachal Pradesh  9453 985 794193 7976 492 
6. Kerala  12731 674 886248 11870 187 
7. Madhya Pradesh 10850 81 9888309 10739 30 
8. Maharashtra  169620 16820 14280493 141872 10928 
9. Uttarakhand  23864 786 1648109 23073 5 
10. Sikkim  15500 2714 79714 11622 1164 
11. Nagaland 981 49 1782 522 410 
  Total 287284 22313 60216615 249988 14983 
1.14 On this aspect, the Department further submitted that it was taking all necessary steps 
including funding and technical support for timely control and prevention of LSD in the country. 
However, the field implementation lies with the State Governments as Animal Husbandry is the 
State Subject. The Central Teams are being deputed regularly for on ground monitoring and 
technical inspections in the States/UTs for better field implementation of control strategies to 
control the disease in a definite time-line. 
D.   Causes of the Outbreak and Spread 
1.15 The causes for the sudden outbreak and spread of this disease in Cattle in the recent 
past are related to factors like adaptation of virus in the environment, increase of in vector 
population due to rainy season, dela y in adopting the bio -security measures and vaccination by 
the states as per Central guidelines/advisories, presence of secondary infections in the animals, 
delay/lack of movement restrictions of affected/sub clinical animals by the states and presence of 
large number of stray animals in some States. 
1.16 To a query of the Committee asked about the specific causes of the excessive 
outbreak of the Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) in the State of Rajasthan and whether the disease 
spread to other parts of the country from there, the Department stated the same causes of the 
spread as stated above and also informed that there is no evidence that the disease spread to 
other parts of the country from Rajasthan as the virus was present in other states also and the 
states delayed the implementation of bio -security measures and vaccination including the 
movement control of affe cted/sub-clinical animals. However, the spread of infection from the 
state of Rajasthan to the bordering districts of other states was possible due to movement of 
stray animals and lack of strict movement control of affected/sub-clinical animals.  

5 
E.   Tackling (Control and Containment) of Lumpy Skin Disease 
1.17 In this regard the Committee were informed that the Department of Animal Husbandry 
& Dairying, Government of India has taken all necessary steps to support States / UTs to control 
and contain LSD w hich include financial and technical support. Central teams also visited the 
states / UTs and physical and virtual meetings are conducted to sensitize the states / UTs 
authorities. The Guidelines/Advisories for control of LSD including vaccination have bee n 
circulated to States / UTs for implementation so as to control and contain the disease within a 
definite timeline  (Annexure I & II) . Disease is presently showing less infection and death in 
affected states indicating the decrease in severity of infection. 
1.18 The Committee were further apprised that a ll the concerned States/UTs have been 
asked to adopt carpet and controlled vaccination strategy with available Goat pox vaccine 
(Uttarakashi strain)  in cattle with immediate effect. Department deputed Central teams 
comprising Departmental veterinarians and Indian Council of Agricultural Research  - National 
Institute of High Security Animal Disease (ICAR -NIHSAD) scientists to the affected states for 
taking first hand stock of the outbreak of Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) in coordination with State 
Animal Husbandry Department for investigations and suggestions in respect to control and 
containment of LSD in definite time line as per the guidelines. Advisories  issued to non-affected 
states also for awareness and advance preparedness. The Department has established the 
control room and also advised the States/UTs to establish the control room to address the issues 
of animal owners including awareness at all times.  
1.19 It was added by the Department that the Funds have been provided to affected States 
for undertaking trainings, awareness campaigns and vaccination under Assistance to States for 
Control of Animal Disease (ASCAD) as per the demand. States are also advised the possibility to 
utilize the emergency funds of the state/district for control operations. Financial assistance 
provided to the States / UT for procurement of vaccines and accessories for control of LSD under 
Assistance to States for Control of A nimal Diseases (ASCAD) during F inancial Year 2022-23. 
Department also communicated the animal certification and identification guidelines under items 
and norms in regard to eligibility for compensation on animal mortality to Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA) in respect to assistance to states through SDRF and NDRF. 
F.   Vaccination 
1.20 Vaccination of Cattle was stated to be  an important part of the strategy of the 
Government to tackle the spread of Lumpy Skin Disease  among cattle  in the country . The 
detailed protocols for vaccination have been provided in the 'Guidelines for prevention of Lumpy 
Skin Disease' issued by the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying and communicated to 
the States/Union Territories.  
1.21 Replying about the status of availability of vaccine against Lumpy Skin Disease in the 
country, the Department stated that as per the Central advisories/guidelines, the vaccination of 
eligible and healthy susceptible cattle is underway by available Goat pox vaccin e- Uttarakashi 
Strain and more than 8.1 crore cattle have been vaccinated. Further, t here are no reports of 
shortage of vaccine in any state or UT. 
1.22 Responding to the concern expressed by the Committee about the reasons behind nil 
vaccination in the State of Bihar and low rates of vaccination in States like West Bengal, Kerala, 
Goa, Delhi and Tamil Nadu despite there being no shortage of Goat Pox vaccine in the country , 
the Department stated: 
“Based on the Department advisory on control, vaccination and  treatment, the States/UTs 
undertake the vaccination programme by using their manpower and infrastructure including 
the purchase of the vaccines. Some state took time to mobilize their resources including 

6 
completing the administrative procedures related to  vaccine purchase. However, due to 
regular communication and follow up with the states/UTs, the vaccination of eligible and 
susceptible cattle is underway covering almost all eligible and susceptible cattle population 
as per the state risk plans and priority.” 
1.23 On being asked about the steps being taken by the Department to increase vaccine 
production and to ensure safe administration of vaccine to Livestock in the country , the 
Department submitted: 
“Department issued the vaccination guidelines and advi sories for carpet/preventive 
vaccination, controlled vaccination along with protocols related to animal eligibility, dose 
and route of vaccine and measures for safe and effective vaccination. The vaccination is 
underway with no adverse effect on animals re lated to LSD vaccination. Department has 
also asked the vaccine manufacturers to step up production capacity of vaccines from 50 
lakhs to 100 lakhs (in case of M/s. IIL) and 150 lakhs to 300 lakhs (in case of M/s. Hester) 
per month to ensure proper availab ility of the vaccine. There are no reports of shortage of 
vaccine from any state/UT. 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (DAHD) and Central Drugs Control Standard Organization are taking up  for early 
approval and prod uction of an indigenous vaccine ' Lumpi-ProVacind' against Lumpy Skin 
Virus.The vaccine technology has been transferred through Mls. Agrinnovate India Limited 
to two firms,  viz. Mls. Biovet Private Limited, Bengaluru and Mls. Indian Imm unologicals 
Limited, Hyderabad.” 
1.24 While replying about  the present status of development of the indigenous vaccine 
'Lumpi Provac ind' and the plans of the Department regarding production and availability of this 
vaccine for vaccination of Cattle in the Country, the Department stated: 
“As gathered from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), the commercial 
manufacturing of the indigenous homologous live  attenuated LSD vaccine (Lumpi -
ProvacInd) has not yet started. Three manufacturers viz; Biovet Pvt Ltd., Malur, Bengaluru, 
Indian Immunologicals, Hyderabad and Institute of Veterinary Biological Products, Pune 
have got the vaccine technology from ICAR - National Research Centre on Equines 
(NRCE), Hisar to manufacture the vaccine (Lumpi -ProvacInd). The commercial product has 
been tested by the competent authorities (as per the DCGI guidelines) and the final 
regulatory approvals are awaited.” 
G.   Bio-security Measures and Vector Control 
1.25 The Committee were informed that the Guidelines for preventio n of Lumpy Skin 
Disease issued by the Department and circulated to all States/UTs contained comprehensive 
bio-security measures to be taken to control and contain LSD. 
1.26 The G uidelines and advisories circulated to the states also include vector control 
disinfection and hygiene protocols. States have been asked to undertake vector control 
programmes in consultation and cooperation with local municipal and panchayat bodies and 
other stake holders which include regular fogging, disinfection of the area, lim ing and proper 
disposal of the carcass. States were advised that the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries 
should have proper supply of medicines, supplements, disinfectants, treatment accessories, 
foggers, awareness material, Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Kits and other related items 
at all times, door to door awareness and vaccination drive should be undertaken with the help of 
NGOs, village leaders, youths, cooperatives, school teachers and other stakeholders, the risk 
areas like high vector popula tion areas, grazing areas, cattle fares/markets, gaushalas , etc. and 
animal population shall be regularly monitored for any unusual sickness and mortality and if 

7 
noticed, immediately measures shall be taken as per the DAHD ad visory in respect to LSD.  The 
States were also advised to monitor the potential vector activity, presence of vector breeding 
sites such as lakes, rivers, grazing sites and accordingly necessary action shall be taken to 
check the vector populations. Departmental deputed Veterinarians an d Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research scientists to the affected states for taking first hand stock of the outbreak of 
Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) in coordination with State Animal Husbandry Department for 
investigations and suggestions in respect to cont rol and containment of LSD in definite time line 
as per the guidelines. Department regularly conducted physical  and virtual meetings with the 
States to sensitize the States and take the update of the situation. States are advised to establish 
the isolation centres for stray and other affected animals with proper bio -security measures and 
veterinary care. Disinfection and cleaning measures were circulated to the states to carry out the 
disinfection of premises and vehicles plying through the affected animal holdings with appropriate 
chemicals / disinfectants [Ether (20%), chloroform, formalin (1%), phenol (2% /15 minutes), 
sodium hypochlorite (2 -3%), iodine compounds (1:33 dilution) and quaternary ammonium 
compounds (0.5%)]. Further, the States were advised to undertake control of vector population in 
the area, premises and the animal body using the insecticide, repellents and other chemical 
agents.  
1.27 The Department informed the Committee that after October 2022, the number of 
affected animals decreased as  bio-security measures like sanitation , movement control of 
animals, Vector Control and V accination of susceptible and eligible cattle population were 
implemented strictly by the States/UTs. However, the number of deaths shows increasing trends 
as the animals were under the incubation period and comorbidity, malnutrition (especially in stray 
animals), presence of blood parasites and presence of vector population in the area decreased 
the immunity of LSD affected animals resulting in deaths.  
H.   Disposal of Carcasses 
1.28 As per the bio-security measures of the Guidelines for prevention of LSD , in case of 
mortality, carcass should be disposed of by deep burial method observing all hygienic measures. 
However, there have been various news reports about careless dumping of carcasses of animals 
dying due to infection from Lumpy Skin Virus. 
1.29 When the Committee asked about the reasons for careless dumping of carcasses of 
infected animals and actions being taken by the Department to correct such a situation, to ensure 
adherence to bio-security measures for disposing dead bodies of infected animals and to prevent 
further spread of the Lumpy Skin Virus owing to such carelessness, the Department stated:-  
“As gathered from the states, some cases of falling of carc asses were observed at initial 
stage of disease spread especially in the case of stray animals or the animals left by the 
owners. However, immediate proper actions were taken by the states as per the central 
guidelines. The guidelines and advisories circulated to the states include proper disposal of 
carcasses, disinfection and hygiene protocols. States were advised to undertake proper 
carcass disposal in consultation and cooperation with local municipal and panchayat bodies 
and other stake holders which in clude regular monitoring, disinfection of the area, liming 
etc. States were advised that the veterinary hospitals and dispensaries should have proper 
supply of disinfectants, awareness material, PPE kits and other related items at all times.  
The states were also advised to monitor the disposal sites and dead animals for proper and 
scientific disposals. Departmental deputed veterinarians and Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research scientists to the affected states for taking first hand stock of the outbreak  of 
Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) in coordination with State Animal Husbandry Department for 
investigations and suggestions in respect to control and containment of LSD in definite time 
line as per the guidelines. Department regularly conducted physical and vir tual meetings 

8 
with the states to sensitize the states and take the update of the situation. States are 
advised to establish the isolation centres for stray and other affected animals with proper 
bio-security measures and veterinary care. Disinfection and c leaning measures were 
circulated to the states to carry out the disinfection of premises and area with appropriate 
chemicals / disinfectants [Ether (20%), chloroform, formalin (1%), phenol (2% /15 minutes), 
sodium hypochlorite (2 -3%), iodine compounds (1:3 3 dilution) and quaternary ammonium 
compounds (0.5%)].” 
1.30 Responding to the constraints /difficulties faced by the Department in ensuring 
adherence to bio -security measures for disposing of carcasses of infected Cattle as per the 
Guideline for prevention of Lumpy Skin Disease, the Department stated: 
“There are no as such constraints/difficulties faced by the department as all necessary 
guidelines/advisories were regularly circulated to the states and and proper sensitization of 
the states/UTS was done thr ough meetings, control room, whatsapp group and physical 
visits of the central team. However, some incoordination between state Animal Husbandry 
department and local Municipal and Panchayat authorities were noticed. Further, local 
governance authorities we re properly sensitized by visiting central teams and by the state 
AHDs for proper and scientific disposal of infected carcasses. Awareness programmes 
conducted by the state also highlighted the need of proper disposal of carcasses.” 
I.   Raising awareness for prevention and precautions against Lumpy Skin Disease 
1.31 On this aspect the Department informed the Committee that  raising mass awareness 
about the disease among people particularly animal owners has been one of the strateg ies to 
control and contain LSD and it has been incorporated in the Guidelines and Advisory issued to 
States/UTs.  
1.32 The Committee asked to provide details of awareness drive undertaken by the 
Department for prevention and treatment of Lumpy Skin Disease in  Cattle, the Department, in its 
reply, submitted as under:- 
“The guidelines and SOPs for containment of the disease and isolation of infected animals, 
vaccination protocols and hygiene protocols including the treatment guidelines have been 
communicated to the States/UTs. Control Room at the centre was set up which coordinated 
efforts of the States in controlling LSD including the awareness to the state authorities. 
Department is collecting figures from affected States daily with updates. Whatsapp group 
also created to make the state authorities aware of various development in disease control 
programmes and to address the queries. Central teams were also deputed for investigation 
and monitoring. Advisories were also issued to unaffected States for appropriate  
awareness and preparedness. Funds have also been provided to the States for awareness 
programme as per their demand. Department advised the states to create awareness to 
animal owners and other stake holders to identify the suspected animals at an early s tage 
by observing initial signs like off feed, dullness, fever and inform to local veterinarian for 
immediate isolation and treatment of suspected animal and to control the infection at early 
stage before disease become severe. Department advised the states for formation of RRTs 
and trainers for immediate response and awareness and to explore the possibility to involve 
local animal owners, panchayat members, Pradhans, NGOs, local youth in awareness 
programmes. Department also circulating the awareness throu gh social media posts and 
through the 24x7 control room established in the department and at the level of the states. 
As a initiative for awareness, states/UTs were advised to constitute a District level 
monitoring and co -ordination committee headed by Dis trict Collector along with District 
officials and representatives of Dairy Unions for effective control and containment of Lumpy 
Skin Disease in the District. States/UTs are requested to conduct village wise household 

9 
survey for the disease. State periodic ally conducted TV talks, Radio Talks, Press 
Conference, Press release, Field visits, Rallies, School Students rallies, Pamphlets, 
leaflets. Ethno -veterinary formulations are also accessible on NDDB website 
(www.nddb.coop). On the e -GOPALA app, also LSD treatment using ethno -veterinary 
medicine is also available.” 
1.33 About utilization of the Mobile Veterinary Units (MVUs) for disbursing necessary 
information regarding awareness, prevention and treatment, the Department stated that it was 
also advised the States/UTs to use the  MVUs in disease control programme for Lumpy Skin 
Disease for awareness, sampling, treatment, vaccination. 
1.34 On being asked about the approach of the Department towards dispelling the myths 
related to consumption of dairy and meat in the minds of consumers during the ongoing spread 
of the Lumpy Skin Disease in Cattle, the Department stated: 
“Department issued the advisories to the states/UTs which include advisory that milk 
collection centers  should educate the farmers at the time of milk collection and ensure 
healthy milk collection without mixing of the milk of infected animals. The consumption and 
transport of raw milk of infected animal should be discouraged is also the part of advisory. 
The advisory also include that milk from affected animals may be used after boiling. 
Department also circulated the awareness through social media posts, virtual meetings with 
the states, through central team visits and through the 24x7 control room establi shed in the 
department and at the level of the states. The indicative treatment and management 
guidelines also indicate the judicial use of antibiotics and also to follow the withdrawal 
periods wherever antibiotics are used for treatment purpose. Funds hav e also been 
provided to the States as per their demand for awareness programmes.” 
J.   Ethno-Veterinary Medicine and Treatment 
1.35 During Briefing Meeting, on the Subject held on 20.12.2022,  the Hon'ble Members of 
the Committee stated that variou s traditional/Ethno-veterinary Methods of treatment were quite 
effective in treating LSD infected Cattle. 
1.36 When the Committee asked to provide details of  the steps being taken by the 
Department to popularize the traditional method / Ethno -veterinary meth od o f treatment for 
infected Cattle, the Department stated: 
“Department formulated the indicative management and treatment guidelines for the 
symptomatic treatment of cattle affected by Lumpy Skin disease which include 
Ethnoveterinary formulations. The for mulation includes oral and external application 
preparations including maggots management. The details are as under: 
Oral preparation (for one dose): Betel leaves -10 nos. + Black pepper -10 gm + Salt -10 gm. 
Blend this to form a paste and mix with jaggery. D ose: Day 1- One dose every three hours. 
Day 2 and onwards for 2 weeks- Three doses daily 
Oral preparation (for two doses): Garlic -2 pearls + Corlander -10 gm + Cumin -10 gm + Dry 
cinnamon leaves-10 gm + -10 nos. + Black pepper-10 gm + Betel leaves-5 nos + Shallots-2 
bulbs + Turmeric - 10gm + chirata leaf powder - 30 gm + Sweet basil 1 + Neem leaves - 1 
handful + Aegle marmalos 1 handful + Jaggery -100 gm. Blend this to form a paste and mix 
with jaggery. Dose: Day 1 - One dose every three hours. Day 2 and onwards till recovery- 
Two doses daily 
External application (if there are wound): Acalypha indica leaves-1 handful + Garlic-2 pearls 
+ Neem leaves -1handful + Coconut or Sesame oil -500 ml + Turmeric powder - 20 g m + 

10 
Mehndi leaves- 1 handful + Tulsi leaves- 1 handful. Blend all ingredients and mix with 500 
ml coconut or sesame oil and boil and bring to cool. Application: clean the wound and apply 
directly 
For Maggots: Apply Anona leaf paste or camphorated coconut oil for the first day only if 
maggots are present. 
Ethnoveterinary formulations are also accessible on NDDB website ( www.nddb.coop). On 
the e-GOPALA app, also LSD treatment using ethno-veterinary medicine is also available.” 
1.37 On being asked as to whether any study / ass essment abo ut effectiveness of 
traditional/Ethno-veterinary method of treatment in treating LSD in Cattle has been undertaken, 
the Department stated: 
“Lumpy Skin Disease is the viral disease with self -limiting nature and the affected animals 
normally recovered within 2 -3 weeks and the treatments are only symptomatic. While no 
permanent and 100% effective cure for LSD is known till date, vaccination is an effective 
option for prevention of LSD. Accordingly, vaccination with the available domestically 
manufactured Goat Pox vaccine is continuing. The use of preparations only supports the 
affected animals in recovery with no surety of recovery and therefore no sure treatment 
guidelines can be recommended. Therefore, no such study/assessment about 
effectiveness of traditional/Ethno-veterinary method of treatment in treating LSD in Cattle is 
necessary from Department side. Preventive vaccination and bio-security measures are the 
only measures to safeguard the animals from Lumpy Skin Disease. However, a MOU has  
been signed between DAHD and Ministry of AYUSH, on 7th April, 2021 to introduce the 
concept of Ayurveda and its allied disciplines into veterinary science with the objective of to 
develop a regulatory mechanism for the use of Ayurveda in the veterinary se ctor for the 
benefit of animal health.” 
1.38 On being asked to provide State and UT -wise details of the percentage of recovery 
rate and mortality rate in infected Cattle treated with Ethno-veterinary Medicine and those treated 
with modern Veterinary drugs, the Department stated: 
“... no such study of the percentage of recovery rate and mortality rate in infected Cattle 
treated with Ethno -veterinary Medicine and those treated with modern Veterinary  drugs is 
necessary and conducted from Department side. The use of Ethno-veterinary Medicine and 
modern Veterinary drugs only supports the affected animals in recovery with no surety of 
recovery and therefore no effective treatment guidelines are recommended. Preventive 
vaccination and bio -security measures are the only measures to safeguard the animals 
from Lumpy Skin Disease.” 
K.   Availability of Funds 
1.39 As regard the provision of Funds to the States, the Department submitted that the 
Funds had been provided to affected States for undertaking trainings, awareness campaigns and 
vaccination under Assistance to States for Control of Animal Disease (ASCAD) as per the 
demand. States are also advised the possibility to utilize the emergency funds of the state/district 
for control operations. Financial assistance provided to the States / UT for procurement of 
vaccines and accessories for control of LSD under Assistance to States for Control of Animal 
Diseases (ASCAD) during F inancial Year 2022-23. Department also communicated the animal 
certification and identification guidelines under items and norms in regard to eligibility for 
compensation on animal mortality to MHA in respect to assistance to states through SDRF and 
NDRF. 

11 
1.40 During the Briefing M eeting, the representative of the Department informed the 
Committee that, in 10 States in the country, vaccination of Cattle using Goat Pox vaccine has 
reached 100% and that the funding for this is met by a centrally sponsored  Scheme component 
called ASCAD (Assistance to States for Control of Animal Diseases). 
1.41 On being asked by the Committee to provide the funding pattern, total amount of fund 
allocated and the amount spent so far under the ASCAD component for vaccination against 
Lumpy Skin Disease in the country, the Department stated that: 
“The component ASCAD is focused towards assistance to States/UTs for vaccination 
against economically important diseases of animals duly prioritized by the States as per the 
disease(s) prevalent and losses to farmer s. Funding Pattern: ASCAD is having a Central -
State fund sharing pattern of 60 -40/90-10 for NER & Himalayan States/ 100%. The 
states/UTs are utilizing the fund and provide the utilization of fund as per the procedure of 
central schemes. The Details of Fund  provided/approved state wise for LSD control 
programme is as under: 
(Rs. in Lakh) 
Sl. No. State Funds released/permission accorded to States/UTs for 
procurement of vaccine doses and vaccination cost 
1. Uttar Pradesh 792.00 
2. Maharashtra 619.00 
3. J&K 1607.00 
4. Uttarakhand 80.33 
5. Punjab 1478.00 
6. Rajasthan 312.00 
7. Gujarat 2.25 
8. Chhattisgarh 93.70 
9. West Bengal 478.8 
10. Tripura 13.83 
11. Madhya Pradesh 67.20 
12. Haryana 272.48 
13. Karnataka 385.11 
14. Bihar 685.97 
15. Andhra Pradesh 153.90 
16. Mizoram 0.47 
17. Sikkim 6.9 
18. Himachal Pradesh 47.25 
19. Puducherry 4.01 
20. Assam 47.25 
21. Odisha 249.56 
22. Goa 2.19 
  Total 7399.20 

12 
1.42 When the Committee asked whether the Department and / or States also drew funds 
from the sources other than that allocated to the Department at the time of  Budget, the 
Department stated: 
“Department provides financial support to the States/UTs under the component ASCAD for 
vaccination against economically important diseases of a nimals duly prioritized by the 
States as per the disease(s) prevalent and losses to farmers including Lumpy Skin Disease 
with Central-State fund sharing pattern of 60 -40/90-10 for NER & Himalayan States/ 100%  
for UTs. However, as Animal Husbandry is the st ate subject, states are also utilizing their 
funds including emergency funds for various disease control and containment programmes 
including Lumpy Skin Disease.” 
1.43 On being queried whether  the Department faced any shortage of  funds  to  properly 
deal with the spread of Lumpy Skin Disease and other related  issues, the Department stated:- 
“No shortage of fund has been noticed by the Department in respect of dealing with Lumpy 
Skin Disease.” 
L.   Veterinary Infrastructure and Veterinary Manpower 
1.44 During Briefing meeting on the Subject held on 20.12.202 2, the Members of the 
Committee pointed out about unavailability or absence of Veterinary/Para -Veterinary staff in 
various affected regions of the Country. Members stated: 
“... You have made arrangements for vaccination, but due to the lack of veterinary doctors 
in many villages, it is difficult to vaccinate or give medicines to animals affected by lumpy 
skin disease in every village or in ev ery house. Due to lack of treatment of animals at the 
right time, such a large number of animals are dying. The areas where the animals have 
been treated properly and promptly, their condition has improved.” 
1.45 When the Committee asked about the measures being adopted by the Department 
to ensure availability of Veterinary / Para -Veterinary / trained staff in affected regions, 
particularly in remote and inaccessible areas of the country, the Department stated: 
“Animal Husbandry is the State S ubject. However, Department through the advisories 
circulated to the states  from time to time and during the meeting and through visits of 
Central teams regularly advised the states/UTs to ensure round the clock availability of 
Veterinary/Pra-veterinary trained staff in the affected area. States were advised to deploy 
Rapid Action Teams in the affected areas including formation of District level Committee 
under the Chairmanship of District Collector for better monitoring and implementation of 
control measures effectively at local level. States were advised that Veterinarians and Para-
Veterinarians working in the infected zone should not be deputed for other works so that 
their services are available round the clock and they can contribute effectively in diseas e 
control programme. States were also advised to establish Control room and activate 24x7 
toll free number to address the issues of farmers immediately and also to undertake door to 
door awareness and vaccination drive with the help of NGOs, village leader s, youths, 
cooperatives, school teachers and other stakeholders. States/UTs were also advised to 
increase the role of MVUs in awareness, treatment and vaccination drive in far-flung areas.” 
1.46 On being asked about the measures being adopted by the Depart ment to ensure that 
Veterinary and Para-veterinary Staff working round the clock in infected zones are suitably 
incentivized for their services at such times, the Department stated: 
“Animal Husbandry is the State subject and states/UTs deputed regular staff for LSD 
control programmes. However, department in the advisories advised the States/UTs that 

13 
the Veterinarians and Para-Veterinarians working in the infected zone should not be 
deputed for other works so that their services are available round the c lock and they can 
contribute effectively in disease control programme. Also, Proper TA/DA and incentives 
should be given and announced for veterinarians, para -veterinarians and other staff to 
motivate them in disease control operations. As per the guidelines under ASCAD state may 
also demand for the remunerations for the vaccinators involved in the vaccination 
programmes.” 
1.47 On being inquired by the Committee , whether the country has sufficient number o f 
Veterinary/Para- Veterinary/other trained staff to deal with the spread of disease like Lumpy Skin 
Disease in the country, the Department stated: 
“There are no reports from States/UTs regarding the shortage of trained staff to deal with 
the spread of diseases like Lumpy Skin Disease. Animal Husbandry, including Veterinary 
Science as well as veterinary practice, is a State subject. Hence, public employment of 
Veterinarians, as per their requirement, is the responsibility of the State Government.” 
1.48 The Committee have been apprised ab out decentralization of existing Diagnostic 
Facilities for rapid diagnosis and control. 33 laboratories with required bio-safety level have been 
allowed for screening the disease by PCR. States are allotted to a specific laboratory to avoid 
overcrowding. When the Committee asked whether 33 laboratories are sufficient to cater to the 
diagnostic needs of the entire country for screening and treating Lumpy Skin Disease, the 
Department stated: 
“The laboratories are presently sufficient to cater to the diagnosti c needs of the country as 
the laboratories are authorized based on their abilities and location and accordingly the 
states/UTs are allotted for fast and proper diagnosis of the disease.” 
1.49 On being asked whether Mobile Veterinary Units (MVUs) are capable of providing 
diagnostic facilities for detection of Lumpy Skin Virus in animals, the Department stated: 
“Laboratory diagnosis of the viral disease is the highly specialized subject requiring 
laboratories of Bio -security Level 3 and Bio -security Lev el 2 for virus isolation and PCR 
testing respectively including the trained staff in this area. Such facilities are not advisable 
in MVUs keeping in view the bio -safety and bio-security concerns. However, the states are 
advised to utilize the MVUs for sample collection and transportation of samples.” 
M.   Accuracy of data and methodology therein  
1.50 During Briefing Meeting , Members of the Committee expressed doubt on the data 
relating to death of the Cattle in the country due to Lumpy Skin Disease, provid ed by the 
Department. They stated:  
“... I am not aware about area where the first case of lumpy skin disease was reported in 
Rajasthan. There is the highest number of cow shelters there. The maximum number of 
cows have died in my constituency.  I'm sorry, but your figures are 100% wrong. I didn't 
speak like this till now, but this issue is related to cows, so wi th great sorrow I had to 
speak.” 
1.51 The Representative of the Department during the said Meeting submitted: 
“An Honourable MP has raised the quest ion that our data is not correct. Since we are 100 
per cent dependent on the state governments, we collect data from them and compile it. If 
there is some omission or under-counting, we can ask them to verify it again.” 

14 
1.52 When the Committee asked about the methods employed by the Department to 
ascertain ground realities of the spread of Lumpy Skin Disease and to collect data from the 
smallest of villages regarding infected, vaccinated, treated and dead Cattle in the country, the 
Department stated:- 
“Based on the central guidelines/advisories and as gathered from the states, LSD Nodal 
Officers are nominated at each district level that are responsible for collecting the data from 
their respective districts through Veterinarians and Para-Veterinarians at the  grass root 
level on a daily basis.  The state officers are also making surprise checks in the field in 
areas reporting unexpected low or high number of cases and deaths to verify the same.  
The State Nodal Officer/s also make field visit to various distri cts to verify and authenticate 
the data by the checking daily case reports entered in their registers/proformas. State 
officials correlated their cumulative data with field visits and meetings arranged in the 
affected districts, ensuring that there are no gaps in data being received. A State Level 
Control Room were also established in the State with toll free number to assist in data 
generation on daily basis.  Adequate checks and balances are in place and the data is also 
analyzed at the State Directorate level for data accuracy before reporting. The states also 
constituted a district committee under the chairmanship of the district magistrate and 
Collector of the respective district. The same committee is monitoring and reviewing the 
epidemic and its queries and carrying out meetings. Control Room at the centre was set up, 
which coordinates efforts of the States in controlling LSD. Central teams have been 
deputed for investigation and monitoring in high risk areas of the states.” 
1.53 On being asked how the Department ascertains the accuracy of the data collected 
from the field and whether reports showing mismatch between the cumulative data for spread of 
LSD infection, mortality and recovery rate in State and UTs and that of the actual situation on the 
ground are correct, the Department stated:-  
“Department regularly conducted physical and virtual meetings with the states to sensitize 
the states and take the update of the situation. The Department is collecting figures from 
affected States daily with updates and accordingly verify the data wherever there is any 
doubt. Department is also taking follow-up through whatsapp group and 24x7 control room. 
Department deputed Central teams comprising departmental veterinarians and ICAR -
NISHAD scientists to the affected states for taking first hand stock of the outbreak of Lumpy 
Skin Disease (LSD) in coordination with State Animal Husbandry Department for 
investigations and suggestions where the actual field conditions were examined and 
correlated with the reports. During the visits, no as such mismatch between the cumulative 
data for spread of LSD infection, mortality and recovery rate in State and UTs and that of 
the actual situation on the ground are noticed.” 
1.54 When the Committee asked about the steps being taken by the Department to ensure 
that the information provided about infection, death rate, recovery rate etc. of Cattle due to LSD 
infection are correct, the Department stated:- 
“Department regularly conducted physical and virtual meetings with the stat es to sensitize 
the states and take the update of the situation. The Department is collecting figures from 
affected States daily with updates and accordingly verify the data wherever there is any 
doubt. Department is also taking follow-up through whatsapp group and 24x7 control room. 
Department deputed Central teams comprising departmental veterinarians and ICAR -
NISHAD scientists to the affected states for taking first hand stock of the outbreak of Lumpy 
Skin Disease (LSD) in coordination with State Animal Husbandry Department for 
investigations and suggestions where the actual field conditions were examined and 
correlated with the reports.” 

15 
N.   Compensation to Livestock Owners 
1.55 During Briefing Meeting, Members stated: 
“As compensation was given by the Government to the families of people who died due to 
corona, similarly those who lost their livestock due to lumpy skin disease should also be 
given compensation. It is like a natural disaster for the farmers or the cattle owners. It is the 
duty of the gov ernment to give some compensation to the farmers and owners of the 
animals that die due to lumpy skin disease, so that the farmer could bear this loss.” 
1.56 When the Committee asked about the details of the provisions of the Department 
regarding compensation/insurance facilities to Livestock owners losing Cattle to unforeseen 
situations such as spread of Cattle diseases, faulty vaccination etc, the Department stated: 
“There are no reports of livestock owners losing cattle due to faulty vaccination. Department 
do not have any scheme to compensate cattle losses due to spread of disease. Further, as 
gathered from Ministry of Home Affairs, the primary responsibility for disaster management 
rests with the State Governments concerned. The concerned State  Government 
undertakes relief measures in the wake of natural disasters from the State Disaster 
Response Fund (SDRF) already placed at their disposal in accordance with Government of 
India’s approved items and norms. Additional financial assistance in the form of relief and 
not compensation is provided from the National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) as per 
the established procedure. Further, as communicated by MHA , assistance for the loss of 
milch animals, draught animals or animals used for haulage is prov ided from NDRF as one 
of the component of entire scheme. Department has communicated MHA the eligibility 
criteria for compensation on animal mortality.” 
1.57 On being asked whether the Department has any information related to compensation/ 
aid provided by any of the State Governments to Livestock owners who lost their livestock to the 
Lumpy Skin Disease, the Department stated:-  
“As gathered from the states, state of Maharashtra and Karnataka are providing 
compensation to livestock owners who lost their cattle to Lumpy Skin disease. Maharashtra 
government decided to provide death compensation from state plan scheme with 
retrospective effect as per the NDRF cost norms for animals deaths due to LSD i.e. Milch 
animals @ Rs.30,000/ - ,Draught animals @ Rs. 25,00 0/- and Calves @ Rs. 16,000. 
Further, Karnataka government also announced compensation towards death of cattle due 
to LSD @ Rs. 5000/- per calf, Rs. 20000/ per cow and Rs. 30000/ per bullock.” 
O.   Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)/Protocol for Lumpy Sk in Disease and similar 
other Outbreaks 
1.58 About the preparedness of the Department regarding tackling such unforeseen animal 
pandemic situations also being detected in other parts of world like Camel Flu, especially the 
ones with a potential threat of Zoonotic spread, the Department stated: 
“DAHD has constituted an ‘Empowered Committee for Animal Health (ECAH)’ for policy 
input into key aspects related to the animal husbandry sector in the country under the 
guidance of Principal Scientific Adviser to Govt. of India and Secretary (AHD).  The 
Committee act as a ’think tank’ for the Department to assess all evidences and data and 
provide analytics-based recommendations. This Committee brings together various animal 
health experts to collaborate on achieving the completion of its goals. The members 
represented on the committee include experts from Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO), Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Indian Council of Agricultural 

16 
Research (ICAR), Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute (IVRI), Veterinary Council of India (VCI), and prominent academics and 
researchers from notable veterinary institutes and industry. There are also subcommittees 
aiding ECAH in formulating guidelines and policies on clinical trials/field trials of anim al 
pharmaceuticals and biologicals. Further, One Health Support Unit (OHSU) at the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying (DAHD) is established for disease 
prevention, surveillance and response. One Health Support Unit (OHSU) was established 
by the de partment. With a vision of developing a “National One Health Platform”, the pilot 
was launched in Uttarakhand and Karnataka on 6th April, 2022 and 28th June, 2022 
respectively.  Monitoring, coordinating and implementing bodies for One Health pilot like 
High Level One Health Steering Committee (HLOHSC), State Level One Health Committee 
(SLOHC), and One Health Coordination Team (OHCT) in Uttarakhand and HLOHSC & 
OHCT in Karnataka have been formed for smooth implementation of the project.” 
  

17 
PART II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
Control and containment of Lumpy Skin Disease in the country 
1. The Committee noted that the country battled the devastating Lumpy Skin Disease 
(LSD) outbreak among cattle in 2021 -22, which killed and emaciated large number of 
cattle, hurting milk production and farm income. The Committee also note d that the first 
outbreak of LSD was reported in Odisha in September, 2019 whic h in subsequent years 
acquired P andemic Scale. The Committee w ere assured that presently the disease is 
showing less infection and death in affected States indicating the decrease in severity of 
infection. The Committee were informed that the Government through vaccination, 
awareness creation, isolation and treatment of infected ani mals and following the other 
measures are able to control and contain the spread of the disease to a large extent which 
is quite appreciable. However, the Committee feel that the disease should have been 
prevented and contained at initial stage of its firs t reporting in September, 2019 itself by 
taking prompt and effective measures as this would have avoided it taking pandemic form 
and would have saved large number of cattle from death and emaciation. The Committee, 
having taken note of all steps taken by t he Government, recommend the Department to 
develop a mechanism and Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) so that immediate and 
effective action is taken if spread of such disease is reported instead of waiting for a 
longer period. The Committee also recommend  the Department to make comprehensive 
efforts to ramp up disease surveillance, treatment and diagnostic infrastructure, improve 
veterinary services, build capacity of animal health professionals, etc to address animal 
pandemic in a holistic manner in future.  
Vaccination 
2. The Committee noted that vaccination of cattle is an important part of the strategy 
of the Government to tackle the spread of Lumpy Skin Disease among cattle in  the 
country. The Department had  issued the vaccination guidelines and advisories for 
carpet/preventive vaccination, controlled vaccination along with protocols related to 
animal eligibility, dose and route of vaccine and measures for safe and effective 
vaccination. The Vaccination of el igible and healthy susceptible cattle is underway by 
available Goat Pox vaccine (Uttarakashi strain) with no adverse effect on animal as stated 
by the Department. The Committee also note that three manufacturers viz. Biovet Pvt. Ltd, 
Malur, Bengaluru; Indian Immunological, Hyderabad and Institute of Veterinary Biological 
Products, Pune have got the vaccine technology from ICAR - National Research Centre on 
Equines (NRCE), Hisar to manufacture the indigenous homologous live attenuated LSD 
vaccine ( Lumpi-ProVacInd). The Commercial P roduct ha d been tested by the Competent 
Authorities (as per DCGI guidelines) and the final regulatory approvals are awaited. Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research, Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying and 
Central Drugs Cont rol Standard Organization are taking up for early approval and 
production of the indigenous vaccine 'Lumpi-ProVacInd' against Lumpy Skin Virus. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should take proactive steps for getting 
all regulatory appr ovals for commercial production/ manufacturing of 'Lumpi-ProVacInd' 
Vaccine, that has been developed specially for controlling and containing the spread of 
Lumpy Skin Disease among cattle. The Committee also desire that all eligible c attle be 
vaccinated as per the Vaccination P rotocols on priority basis in order to contain Lumpy 
Skin Disease among the cattle. 
Veterinary Infrastructure and Veterinary Manpower  
3. The Committee ha d been apprised about decentralization of existing Diagnostic 
facilities for rapid diagnosis and control of Lumpy Skin Disease. Thirty three laboratories 

18 
with required bio -safety level ha d been allowed for screening the disease by PCR and 
States were allotted to a specific laboratory to avoid overcrowding. According to the 
Department, these laboratories are presently sufficient to cater to the diagnostic needs of 
the country. The Committee ha d also been apprised by the Department that the 
States/UTs had been advised to ensure round the clock availability of Veterinary and Para-
Veterinary trained Staff in the affected areas so that they can contribute effectively in 
disease control programme. Further as per 'Guidelines for Prevention of Lumpy Skin 
Disease' cir culated to the States/UTs, farms with affected animals should be visited 
regularly by the field Veterinarians until all cases are recovered. The Veterinary Staff 
should take all precautionary hygiene measures to avoid further spread of the disease to 
other Farms/Households. However, the Committee observe d that Veterinary/Para -
Veterinary Staff were either unavailable or absent in various affected regions/areas of the 
country leading to large scale death of infected cattle  - in absence of proper treatment at 
right time. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to ensure availability 
and presence of Veterinary/Para-Veterinary and other trained Staff in the regions affected 
by the disease, particularly in remote and inaccessible areas of the country so  that timely 
treatment to infected cattle and vaccination can be provided and losses can be minimized. 
The Committee further recommend the Department to take steps for strengthening and 
upgrading of Veterinary Infrastructure such as Veterinary Hospitals, L aboratories, etc so 
that country can effectively contain diseases like Lumpy Skin Disease and minimise the 
economic loss to the country.  
Adherence to Bio-Security Measure for Disposal of Carcasses and Infected Material  
4. The Committee observed that as per the bio-security measures of the 'Guidelines 
for Prevention of Lumpy Skin Disease', carcass should be disposed of by deep burial 
method observing all hygienic measures. The Guidelines and Advisories circulated to the 
States/UTs include proper disposal o f carcasses, disinfection and hygiene protocol. 
States/UTs have been advised to undertake proper carcass disposal in consultation and 
cooperation with municipal and panchayat bodies and other stakeholders which include 
regular monitoring, disinfection of t he area, liming etc. The Committee, however, 
observed that there were large number of instances of careless dumping of carcasses of 
animals dying due to infection from Lumpy Skin Disease which poses serious health 
threats not only to other healthy animals but also to human beings. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to make sure in future complete adherence to bio -
security measures for disposing of carcasses of infected cattle and infected material as 
per the Guidelines for prevention of Lump y Skin Disease. The Committee further 
recommend the Department to formulate a policy at National /Central Level for ‘recovery 
and carriage process’ for the disposal of dead animals (Carcasses) and an ‘App’ or 
Helpline so that the ‘recovery and carriage’ ca n be ensured without any hiccups of 
jurisdiction and responsibility.   
Awareness Programme 
5. The Committee note d that raising mass awareness about the disease among 
people particularly Animal Owners and other Stakeholders ha d been one of the strategies 
to control and contain Lumpy Skin Disease and it has been incorporated in the Guidelines 
and Advisory issued to States/UTs. The Committee had  been apprised by the Department 
that it raised awareness through social media posts, v irtual meetings with the States, 
through Central team visits and through the 24X7 Control R oom, established in the 
Department and at the level of the States. Further, S tates periodically conducted TV talks, 
Radio Talks, Press Conference, Press Release, Fie ld Visits, Rallies, School Student 
Rallies, distribution of Pamphlets and Leaflets for awareness creation. However, the 
Committee feel that awareness among Animal Owners and other Stakeholders regarding 
treatment and management of infected animals and effe ctive control and containment of 

19 
Lumpy Skin Disease was lacking resulting in the wide spread of the disease and death of 
large number of infected cattle. The Committee, therefore, desire that awareness drive 
regarding treatment, control, containment and other related aspects of the disease should 
be undertaken on a large scale so that it reaches to every region and people of the 
country. Proper and wide spread awareness creation would not only help in controlling 
and containing the disease but would also help in dispelling the rumours/myths related to 
the disease and avoiding panic related therewith in the public. The Committee further 
desire that the Department may seriously consider to organize ‘Workshops/Seminars’ for 
the rural youth engaged in animal rea ring profession so as to enlighten them with basic 
knowledge/First Aid about how to deal with such diseases at ground level.    
Popularisation of traditional/Ethno-Veterinary Medicine and Treatment  
6. The Committee observe d that various traditional/ Ethno -Veterinary methods of 
treatment were quite effective in treating LSD infected cattle. The Committee noted that as 
per 'Indicative Management and Treatment of Lumpy Skin Diseases (LSD) in Animals', 
formulated and issued by the Department, use of Herbal Sol utions, Homeopathy 
Preparations, Ethno -Veterinary Formulations, etc also offered  a supportive role in 
management of Lumpy Skin Disease and might have been used. However, the Committee 
had been apprised by the Department that the use of preparations only support the 
affected animals in recovery with no surety of recovery and therefore, no sure treatment 
Guidelines could  be recommended. The Committee have also been apprised that a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed between the Department of 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (DAHD) and the Ministry of AYUSH, on 7 th April, 2021 to 
introduce the concept of Ayurveda and its allied disciplines into Veterinary Science with 
the objective to develop regulatory mechanism for the use of Ayurveda in the Veterinary 
Sector for the benefit of animal health. Welcoming the signing of Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between DAHD and the AYUSH, the Committee desire the 
Department to take steps to p romote the use of traditional/Ethno-Veterinary medicine and 
treatment in controlling and containing the spread of diseases among animals.  
Accuracy of Data 
7. The Committee note d that the country faced devastating outbreak of Lumpy Skin 
Disease among cattl e in 2021 -22 resulting in large scale death and emaciation of cattle. 
The Committee, however, express doubt on the data relating to death of the cattle in the 
country as a result of the Lumpy Skin Disease and also noted with anguish that there was 
a gap/mismatch in data relating to number of cattle affected and died as furnished by the 
Department and the actual grou nd realities. The Department had  apprised the Committee 
that it is totally dependent on State Governments/UTs for data regarding infected, 
vaccinated, treated and dead cattle in country and they (States/UTs) are following proper 
mechanism/system for ensuring compilation of accurate data. Further, during the visits of 
Central teams comprising Departmental Veterinarians and ICAR-NISHAD Scientists to the 
affected States, no such mismatch between the cumulative data for spread of LSD 
infection, mortality and recovery rate in State and UTs and that of the actual situation of 
the ground are noticed. The Committee are of considered view that the data rega rding 
infection, mortality, recovery of cattle from LSD should have been accurate as it would not 
have only helped in understanding the gravity of the situation but would also have helped 
in controlling and containing the disease and its further spread. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to ensure proper compilation of data relating to spread of 
infection and mortality of cattle from LSD so that cases of infection and mortality do no 
remain unreported and underreported.  
 
 

20 
Compensation to Livestock Owners 
8. The Committee noted that large number of Livestock/Cattle owners lost their cattle 
due to spread of Lumpy Skin Disease resulting in severe economic hardship to them. The 
Committee also note d that the Department did  not have any Scheme t o compensate for 
Cattle losses due to sprea d of disease. The Committee had  been apprised that the State 
Government o f Maharashtra and Karnataka had  provided/are providing compensation/  
financial help to Livestock Owners , who lost their cattle due to Lumpy Skin Disease. The 
Committee are of the view that providing compensati on/financial help to Livestock 
Owners, who lost their cattle to Lumpy Skin Disease would reduce their economic 
hardship to some extent. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Departmen t in 
coordination with State Government should make the necessary provisions for 
compensating Livestock owners who loses their cattle to Lumpy Skin Disease or any 
such outbreak of other animal diseases.  
 
      NEW DELHI; P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
13 December, 2023 Chairperson 
22 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry  
and Food Processing 

21 
ANNEXURE I 
GUIDELINES FOR PREVENTION OF LSD (LUMPY SKIN DISEASE) 
(Version 3.0, Date: 26.09.2022) 
1. Movement control of animals: In order to minimize the economic impact of the 
outbreaks and to control LSD, the movement of animals to and from the infected area should be 
completely banned. This will check  the transmission/spread of LSD. Affected states shall 
communicate with neighbor ing non -affected states and share control and risk strategies to 
ensure that infection do not enter the non-affected states. 
2. Restriction to be enforced with affected animals and the persons dealing with 
infected animals: Movement of people to and from the affected area should be restricted. The 
animal handlers and those attending to the affected animals should be advised to keep away 
from healthy animals. It is therefore, of utmost importance to ensure these safety measures. 
3. Vaccination 
The vaccinati on strategy for carpet/preventive vaccination and controlled epicentre 
vaccination is as under: 
A.   CARPET VACCINATION/PREVENTIVE VACCINATION IN NON-AFFECTED AREA 
1. Priority should be given to high risk areas like border area of affected district and 
states. 
2. Priority to cattle as presently most affected.  
3. Buffaloes need not to be vaccinated at this stage. Buffaloes shall be protected 
by adopting strict biosecurity measures like isolation from affected cattle, regular 
disinfection and vector control in the ar ea, provision of nutritional feed and 
fodder, regular veterinary supervision and care. 
4. Eligible and healthy susceptible cattle at the age of 4 months and above should 
be vaccinated through S/C route with available Goat pox vaccine - Uttarkashi 
Strain. The dose of 10 3.0 TCID50 (same dose of vaccine for goat against goat pox) can be used for 
carpet /preventive vaccination in cattle. 
5. Affected animals should not be vaccinated and (if found during vaccination) shall 
be isolated immediately with further laboratory  confirmation and epicentre 
vaccination strategy shall be followed as per para B below. 
6. All eligible non -affected apparently healthy animals shall be vaccinated after 
proper clinical examination. May also be covered under annual re -vaccination if 
remain healthy. 
7. Calves from vaccinated animals or naturally infected mothers should be 
vaccinated at the age of 4 to 6 months. Calves from unvaccinated mothers can 
be vaccinated at any age. 
8. Newly purchased animals should be vaccinated 28 days before the introductio n 
to the herd. 
9. Animals should be vaccinated 28 days before the transport or movement to 
another place (wherever permitted). 
10. Same dosage and protocol should be applied to domestic buffaloes as for cattle 
(whenever permitted). 
11. Pregnant, healthy cows/heifer can be safely vaccinated. 

22 
B.   CONTROL VACCINATION IN AFFECTED AREA/EPICENTER  
1. The infected village/area/premises/farm/house shall be identified with animal 
population profile and assessment of other requirement for control and 
containment of the disease. 
2. Affected animals shall be identified and isolated immediately away from healthy/ 
non-affected animals. 
3. Affected animals shall not be vaccinated. 
4. Priority to cattle as presently most affected.  
5. Buffaloes need not to be vaccinated at this stage. Buffaloes sh all be protected 
by adopting strict biosecurity measures like isolation from affected cattle, regular 
disinfection and vector control in the area, movement control from the infected 
area and providing nutritional feed and fodder and regular veterinary care. 
6. Vaccination Planning: 
(a) Control vaccination shall start first from the border of the epicentre (outside 
to inside strategy). 
(b) The affected premises/animal farm/house shall be strictly monitored with 
implementation of strict biosecurity measures as per the control guidelines. 
(c) The affected animal/s shall be isolated (quarantined) under veterinary care 
and supervision till recovered.  
(d) Affected animals shall not be vaccinated. 
(e) Eligible susceptible healthy cattle at the age of 4 months and above should 
be vaccinated through S/C route with available Goatpox vaccine- Uttarkashi 
Strain. The dose of 10 3.0 TCID50 (same dose of vaccine for goat against goat pox)  can be 
used. 
(f) Animals already vaccinated shall not be re -vaccinated. However, annual 
vaccination (after 1 year) may be given. 
(g) Animals recovered from LSD shall not be vaccinated. However, may be 
covered under annual vaccination if remain healthy. 
(h) All eligible non-affected apparently healthy animals shall be vaccinated after 
proper clinical examination. May also b e covered under annual re -
vaccination if remain healthy. 
(i) Calves from vaccinated animals or naturally infected mothers should be 
vaccinated at the age of 4 to 6 months. Calves from unvaccinated mothers 
can be vaccinated at any age. 
(j) Newly purchased animals s hould be vaccinated 28 days before the 
introduction to the herd. 
(k) Animals should be vaccinated 28 days before the transport or movement to 
another place (wherever permitted). 
(l) Same dosage and protocol should be applied to domestic buffaloes as for 
cattle (whenever permitted). 
(m) Pregnant, healthy cows/heifer can be safely vaccinated.  

23 
C.   OTHER MEASURES FOR SAFE AND EFFECTIVE VACCINATION 
1. Vaccinated animals shall be identified and monitored with tag numbers or 
without tag numbers with proper documentation. 
2. The staff and vaccinators should be trained for vaccination drive including 
storage and preparation of vaccine, dosing and injection and identification of 
animals. 
3. Use of fresh disposable needle and syringe every time for vaccination of new 
animal shall be ensured. 
4. Separate teams should undertake control vaccination in epicentre and the staff, 
vehicle, instrument etc. shall not be allowed to enter from affected area to 
clean/non-affected area. 
5. At the same time, fogging and disinfection of vaccinated area sha ll be ensured 
and documented along with other bio -security measures as per the control 
guidelines. 
4. Bio-security measures:  
 Isolation of sick animal from the healthy animals. 
 Clinical surveillance against LSD in affected districts and around surrounding villages 
should be intensified. 
 The buffaloes should be kept separately till complete recovery of the affected animals, 
if reared together. Ensue proper bio -security measures for buffaloes to prevent any 
possible disease threat from affected cattle. 
 Disinfection of premises at regular intervals. 
 Ecto-parasiticide should also be applied to healthy animals on the infected and on 
surrounding farms. 
 The persons dealing with the infected animal should wear gloves and face mask. 
 Care should be taken to report any  unusual sickness of other animals to nearest 
veterinary Hospital/Dispensary. 
 Hygiene practices should be followed at the animal farm and by the people in area 
where animals are infected. 
 Farms with affected animals should be visited regularly by the ﬁeld veterinarians until 
all the cases are recovered. The veterinary staff should take all precautionary hygiene 
measures to avoid further spread of disease to other farms/households. 
 In case of mortality, carcass should be disposed of by deep burial method obs erving 
all hygienic measures. 
 Cattle markets located within 10 km radius of the epicentre of infection should be 
closed. 
 Trade of live cattle, participation in fairs, shows should be banned immediately upon 
confirmation of the disease in the affected areas. 
5. Vector control: Control of vector population in the area, premises and the animal body 
should be carried out using the insecticide, repellents and other chemical agents.  

24 
6. Disinfection and cleaning measures:  Affected Premises, vehicles plying through the 
affected animal holdings should be carried out with appropriate chemicals / disinfectants [Ether 
(20%), chloroform, formalin (1%), phenol (2% /15 minutes), sodium hypochlorite (2 -3%), iodine 
compounds (1:33 dilution) and quaternary ammonium compounds (0.5%)]. 
7. Guidelines for Sample Collection and Dispatch for Diagnosis and surveillance of 
Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) for testing at ICAR-NIHSAD, Bhopal: Format, guidelines including 
general and transport guideline s may be seen at ICAR -NIHSAD, Bhopal website  
http://www.nihsad.nic.in/pdf/LSD_%20REVISED%20Guidelines%20for%20Sample%20Collectio
n%20and%20Dispatch%20for%20Diagnosis%20of%20Lumpy%20Skin%20Disease.pdf 
8. Awareness programme: Mass awareness campaign to be taken up to make the public 
awareof the disease and report to the veterinary authority immediately when suspected cases 
are detected. This will help in prevention and control of LSD. 
Awareness to animal owners and other stake holders to identify the suspected animals at 
an early stage by observing initial signs like off feed, dullness, fever and inform to local 
veterinarian for immediate isolation and treatment of suspected animals and to control the 
infection at early stage before disease become severe. 
Development of SOPs/DOs and DONTs and training material in local language as per 
guidelines for effective awareness to all stake holders and VOs and to conduct regular 
trainings.State may explore the possibility to involve local  animal owners, panchayat members, 
Pradhans, NGOs, local youth in awareness programmes. 
9. Establishing proper and effective communication with local veterinary colleges for 
support in control and containment operations. 
10. Formation of RRTs and trainers for immediate response for control and containment  
and awareness.  
11. Related suggestions: 
(a) Strict implementation of advisories. Rapid Action Teams should be deployed in the 
affected areas. 
(b) Strict implementation of bio -security measures including disinfect ion drives and 
carcass disposal in cooperation with local authorities including municipal authorities. 
The possibility of using state/district emergency funds may also be explored. 
(c) Movement restriction and isolation of affected animals. Establishment of is olation 
centers with veterinary care for affected animals. 
(d) Movement control of vehicle, animals from affected area to free area. 
(e) Disinfection measures to be followed strictly in liaison with Municipal bodies and 
administration including regular fogging and  lime spray in the infected and 
surrounding area. 
(f) Stray animals to be monitored regularly and the affected animals should be isolated 
under veterinary care with the help of municipal and administrative authorities. 
(g) Waste disposal including feed, fodder and  dead animal to be followed as per 
protocol and scientific method with marking and displayed safety guidelines. 
(h) Animal movement from affected area to be monitored to prevent spread of the 
infection. Buffaloes may be transported from non -infected areas with routine health 

25 
certificate, however, from the infected areas, the buffaloes should be inspected for 
clinical signs by a veterinarian (no animal with clinical sign should be allowed for 
movement, even if mild symptoms are noticed), accompanied with a recen t health 
certificate and preferably be tested negative by PCR before transportation. 
(i) Animal trade and fare should not be allowed in the affected area. 
(j) Vehicle passing through the infected area should be monitored and disinfected. 
Check post should be made active at border roads and bridges to control the entry 
of affected animals from affected states and districts. 
(k) Insecticides spray and fogging to be undertaken in the animal sheds, common 
grazing area, veterinary hospital and dispensaries, animal gathering  spots and 
animal movement tracks to control vectors like mosquito, flies, ticks, fleas etc. 
(l) Surveillance of vector should also be undertaken by sending the samples to ICAR -
NIHSAD to understand disease epidemiology and accordingly making control 
strategies. 
(m) Monitoring of pastures, grazing area, water bodies, feed and fodder to prevent 
contamination by infected animal. 
(n) Infected feed, fodder and bedding material should not be used and disposed 
scientifically. 
(o) Infected animals should be kept separately in isolation with close monitoring till 
recovered and should not be kept in same animal shed. The milk of infected animals 
should not be used and mixed in the milk of healthy animals. 
(p) Unnecessary post-mortem and sampling of infected animals should be avoided so 
that disease may not spread during such operations. The staff should wear all 
preventive gears during PM and sampling. 
(q) The sampling should be done as per the prescribed SOP and protocol with due care 
at all times and proper and safe transport shall be e nsured. Sampling should only 
be done by expert personnel by the veterinarian or under veterinary supervision. 
(r) Except in unavoidable circumstances, the treatment of infected animal should be 
done through oral medication and topical application to avoid spre ading of disease 
through treatment procedures and contamination of treatment accessories and 
personnel during treatment. 
(s) The veterinary hospitals and dispensaries should have proper supply of medicines, 
supplements, disinfectants, treatment accessories, fo ggers, awareness material 
PPE kits and other related items at all times. 
(t) Control room and 24x7 toll free number to be activated to address the issues of 
farmers immediately and also awareness. 
(u) Role of MVUs should be increased in awareness, treatment and va ccination drive 
and the MVU operating in infected area should not enter the free area and if 
required proper disinfection protocol should be followed. 
(v) Door to door awareness and vaccination drive should be undertaken with the help of 
NGOs, village leaders,  youths, cooperatives, school teachers and other 
stakeholders. 

26 
(w) Milk collection centers should educate the farmers at the time of milk collection and 
ensure healthy milk collection without mixing of the milk of infected animals. The 
consumption and transpor t of raw milk of infected animal should be discouraged. 
The milk from affected animals may be used after boiling. 
(x) Group grazing area and animal groups should be monitored and vaccinated and the 
infected animals should be immediately separated and kept unde r isolation under 
veterinary care. Special care should be taken to monitor the movement of animals 
from affected districts and states and round the clock check post with disinfection 
system should be activated and documented. 
(y) Veterinarians and para -veterinarians working in the infected zone should not be 
deputed for other works so that their services are available round the clock and they 
can contribute effectively in disease control programme.Proper TA/DA and 
incentives should be given and announced for ve terinarians, para-veterinarians and 
other staff to motivate them in disease control operations. 
(z) Proper communication with media/social media for update on actual situation to 
avoid rumours and unnecessary panic in the public. 
  

27 
ANNEXURE II 
INDICATIVE MANAGEMENT AND TREATMENT OF LUMPY SKIN DISEASES (LSD) IN 
ANIMALS 
A. The treatment guidelines for Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) are as under: 
1. LSD affected animals should be separated from healthy animals and shall be kept in 
strict isolation and monitoring under veterinary supervision. 
2. Symptomatic treatment including the treatment of secondary infection (if any) shall 
be carried out during isolation of animal. 
3. Based on the symptoms and clinical signs following is recommended: 
a. Use of anti -inflammatory drugs (prefer ably non -steroids) to treat the 
inflammatory condition. 
b. Use of anti-histamine preparations/drugs to treat allergic conditions. 
c. Use of Paracetamol in case high fever is observed. 
d. In case of secondary bacterial infections like respiratory infections, skin 
infections antibiotics may also be used judiciously. The dose and duration of the 
antibiotics should be strictly adhered including advice to the owner to follow the 
withdrawal period for milk. 
e. Parental/oral multivitamins may also be given. 
4. Treatment by methylene blue (MB) 
 Oral treatment with 0.1% Methylene Blue (MB) solution (1 gram of MB powder in 
1 liter of water) may be considered by the Veterinarian. 
 Following dosage may be attempted: 
 Adult cows (of approximately 350 Kg body weight): 300 ml at 8 hour ly 
interval (thrice in a day) for 4 days.  
 Calf: give approx. half dose. 
 MB solution/preparations may also be used topically every  (eg. by spray). 
 A milk withholding interval of 96 hours and a meat withdrawal interval of 14 days 
(if used in meat producing animals) is advised.  
5. Feeding of liquid feed/food, soft feed and fodder and succulent pasture is 
recommended. 
Advise: Except in unavoidable circumstances, the treatment of infected animal should be done through 
oral medication and topical application to avoid spreading of disease through treatment procedures 
and contamination of treatment accessories and personnel during treatment. 
B. USE OF HERBAL SOLUTIONS 
The under mentioned Herbal Animal Health Solutions also offers a supportive role in 
management of Lumpy Skin: 
1. Wound Healing and Fly Repellents 
Available herbal spray, cream and gel promotes rapid wound repair in the skin 
nodules due to rapid collagenisation,  have strong fly repellent action that prevent 
flies from sitting on the wounds and prevents maggot in wounds. 

28 
Preparations: 
Like Topicure Advance Spray Natural Remedies Skin Healer and Fly Repellent, 
Scavon skin spray, charmil skin spray, Himax cream,Skin heal and Tee burb Indian 
Herbs Oral skin healer may be used. 
2. Appetite and Digestive Tonics 
Appetite stimulants restore the appetite, rumen functions and also prevent loss of 
body condition among animals. 
Preparations: 
Like Himalayan Battista 100gm Indian Herbs, Appetonic 50gm HDC and Ruchamax 
15gm/300g may be used. 
3. Immunomodulators and antioxidants 
Improve immunity and potent and improve overall health. 
Preparations: 
Like Restobal 500ml/1Lit Ayurvet Immunity enhancer and Geri forte 500ml/1Lit HDC 
may be used. 
4. Instant Energy Booster 
Sustain energy level and keeps animal active. 
Preparation:  
Like Gluca-Boost Liquid Natural Remedies Energy Booster may be used. 
C. Homoeopathy Preparations 
The under mentioned Hom oeopathy preparations may also offers a supportive role in 
management of Lumpy Skin Disease and may be used: 
Scruphularianodosa 30 
Antim tart 30 
Ars alb 30 
CalendulaMT 
D. Ethnoveterinary formulations (also refer www.nddb.coop) 
The under mentioned formulations are also recommended: 
1. Oral preparation  (for one dose): Betel leaves -10 nos. + Black pepper -10 
gm+Salt-10 gm 
Blend this to form a paste and mix with jaggery  
Dose: Day 1- One dose every three hours 
Day 2 and onwards for 2 weeks- Three doses daily 
2. Oral preparation (for two doses): Garlic -2 pearls + Corlander -10 gm + Cumin -
10 gm + Dry cinnamon leaves -10 gm + -10 nos. + Black pepper -10 gm+ Betel 
leaves-5 nos + Shallots-2 bulbs + Turmeric- 10gm + chirata leaf powder- 30 gm 
+ Sweet basil 1 + Neem leaves - 1 handful + Aegle marmalos 1 handful + 
Jaggery-100 gm 
Blend this to form a paste and mix with jaggery  
Dose: Day 1- One dose every three hours 
Day 2 and onwards till recovery- Two doses daily 

29 
3. External application (if there are wound): Acalypha indica leaves -1 handful + 
Garlic-2 pearls + Neem leaves -1handful + Coconut or Sesame oil -500 ml + 
Turmeric powder- 20 gm + Mehndi leaves- 1 handful + Tulsi leaves- 1 handful. 
Blend all ingredients and mix with 500 ml coconut or sesame oil and boil and 
bring to cool. 
Application: clean the wound and apply directly. 
For Maggots: Apply Anona leaf paste or camphorated coconut oil for the first 
day only if maggots are present.  

30 
APPENDIX I 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
(2022-23) 
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20th December, 2022, from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 3, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar  –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
3. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
4. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
5. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
6. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
7. Shri Mohan Mandavi  
8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Shri Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
15. Shri Virendra Singh 
16. Shri V.K. Sreekandan  
Rajya Sabha 
17. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
18. Shri S.Kalyansundaram  
19. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
20. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   — Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Naval K. Verma  — Director 
3. Shri Uttam Chand Bhardwaj — Additional Director 
4. Shri Prem Ranjan    — Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri N. Amarathiagan  — Under Secretary 

31 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
[Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying (DAHD)] 
1. Shri Rakesh Kumar Singh — Secretary  
2. Miss Varsha Joshi  — Additional Secretary  
3. Dr. Abhijit Mitra  — Animal Husbandry Commissioner  
4. Dr. O.P.Chaudhary  — Joint Secretary 
5. Dr. Sujit Nayak  — Joint Commissioner 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Standing 
Committee and informed them that, as directed by the Hon’ble Speaker, Computer (HW & SW) 
Management Branch (Software Unit) would make a Presentation before the Committee so as to 
apprise the Members of the Digital Sansad Mobile Application and Website and to seek their 
valuable suggestions and feedback for further improvements in the Software. Thereafter, Officers 
of Computer (HW & SW) Management Branch (Software Unit)  made their Power Point 
Presentation in this regard. 
3. Thereafter, the Representatives of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying)  were called in for a Briefing on the 
Subject 'Spread of Lumpy Skin Disease in Cattle in the Country and issues related therewith'. 
4. The Chairperson welcomed the Representatives of the Department to the Sitting of the 
Committee, apprised them about the Confidentiality of th e Proceedings and asked them to be 
free and frank while expressing their views on the Subject. 
5. After the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion, which was followed by a 
Power-point Presentation by the Representatives of the Department . T he discussion inter alia 
covered issues such as causes of spread of Lumpy Viru s/Skin Disease (LSD), severity and 
recovery rate in Cattle in the country, status of vaccination, treatment and control guidelines as 
well as measures adopted for tackling its sp read, etc . The Chairperson and Members of the 
Committee inter alia raised se veral important issues/ points, as briefly mentioned below and 
sought clarifications/information: 
i. The causes of the rampant spread of the Lumpy Skin Disease in Cattle in Rajasthan 
and its subsequent spread in other States of the country; 
ii. Methods employed by the Department to ascertain ground realities of the spread of 
Lumpy Skin Disease and to collect data, from the smallest of villages, regarding 
infected, vaccinated, treated and dead Cattle; 
iii. The accuracy of the data collected and to correlate this data with that being presented 
by the Department before the Committee; 
iv. The need for a select team of Officials / experts from the Centre to visit the disease 
affected States to ascertain State-specific patterns of spread of Lumpy Skin Disease, 
higher death rate of Cattle and low recovery rate of Cattle from the Lumpy Virus 
infection; 
v. The reasons behind the low rate of recovery of Cattle infected with Lumpy Skin Disease 
in the State of Kerala; 

32 
vi. Timely treatment of Cattle suffering from Lumpy Skin Disease and guidelines with 
respect to isolation facilities for infected cattle in States; 
vii. Steps taken for vector control so as to contain spread of the virus; 
viii. The causes behind the rate of infection as well as the death rate being extremely low in 
Stray Cattle as compared to that of Domestic Cattle and causes of higher infection in 
male Cattle compared to others; 
ix. The vaccination plan and schedule of Livestock in each of the States and Union 
Territories and the reasons behind negligible rate of vaccination of Cattle against Lumpy 
Skin Disease in the State of Bihar; 
x. The steps being taken by the Department to produce the indigenous /specific vaccine 
against Lumpy Skin Disease in the country; 
xi. Steps taken b y the Department to successfully reduce severity of infection and avert 
deaths through timely administration of Goat Pox vaccine in Cattle and through 
treatment of infected cattle using Ethno-veterinary medicine; 
xii. To raise awareness among livestock owners r egarding treatment of Lumpy Skin 
Disease with Ethno-veterinary medication with minimum side effects; 
xiii. Problems arising in vaccination drive and treatment of affected Cattle in rural and 
remote areas due to shortage of Veterinary and Para-veterinary Staff; 
xiv. Measures being adopted by the Department to increase human capital in the Veterinary 
Services, such as, temporary or contractual deployment of Veterinary and Para -
veterinary Staff in geographically inaccessible terrains in order to ensure timely 
intervention in the event of spread of Lumpy Skin Disease and also incentivizing 
Veterinary undergraduate students to temporarily serve in remote and inaccessible 
areas with limited or insufficient Veterinary manpower; 
xv. Proper training of Para -veterinary Staff so as t o enable efficient doorstep delivery of 
Veterinary services; 
xvi. The need to ensure insurance facilities/compensation for Cattle owners losing Livestock 
due to Lumpy Skin Disease; and 
xvii. Efforts being made or research being done in the direction of eradication of Lumpy Skin 
Disease etc. 
6. The Representatives of the Department tried to  respond to some of the queries/ points 
raised by the Members. The Chairperson directed them to send, in writing, the re quisite 
information on points/ items, which were not readily ava ilable with them, to the Committee 
Secretariat by 30th December, 2022 and thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable information 
with the Committee on the Subject. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept separately.)  

33 
APPENDIX II 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2023-24) 
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13th December, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
in Office of Chairperson, Room No. 103, Block -B, Extension to Parliament House Annexe,  
 New Delhi.   
PRESENT 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar  —  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi  
3. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
4. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
5. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
6. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
7. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
8. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
9. Shri Virendra Singh 
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku  
Rajya Sabha 
11. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
12. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
13. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
14. Shri Kailash Soni 
15. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
16. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
17. Shri Vaiko 
18. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan  — Additional Secretary     
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  — Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan            —   Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of Draft Report on the Subject 
'Spread of Lumpy Skin Disease in Cattle in the Country and issues related therewith' pertaining 

34 
to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying). 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report with slight additions in 
Recommendation No. 4 (Adherence to Bio -Security Measure for Disposal of Carcasses and 
Infected Material) and Recommendation No. 5 (Awareness Programme). The Committee also 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the Report to Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 