 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
MINISTRY OF 
SCHEME FOR CREATION/EXPANSION OF FOOD PROCESSING AND PRESERVATION 
CAPACITIES (CEFPPC)
SIXTY
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEBRUARY
67 
i 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEME FOR CREATION/EXPANSION OF FOOD PROCESSING AND PRESERVATION 
CAPACITIES (CEFPPC) – AN EVALUATION 
 
 
 
SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2024 /MAGHA 1945 (SAKA) 
 
 
, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
SCHEME FOR CREATION/EXPANSION OF FOOD PROCESSING AND PRESERVATION 
  

ii 
 
 
SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING  
                 (2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
  
 
 
SCHEME FOR CREATION/EXPANSION OF FOOD PROCESSING AND PRESERVATION 
CAPACITIES (CEFPPC) – AN EVALUATION 
 
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on                    07.02.2024 
 
      Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on      07.02.2024 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2024 /MAGHA 1945 (SAKA) 
  


iii 
 
 
COA No. 495 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
 CONTENTS Page 
No. 
Composition of the Committee (2021-22) v 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24) vi 
Introduction viii 
PART - I 
CHAPTER-I Introduction to Food Processing Sector India and Pradhan Mantri  
Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 
 Harvest and Post-Harvest Losses of Agri-Produces 1 
 Food Processing Sector of India 5 
 Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 8 
CHAPTER-II Scheme for Creation / Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation 
Capacities (CEFPPC)  
 Salient Features of the Scheme for CEFPPC 15 
 Eligibility Conditions and Submission Proposals under CEFPPC 16 
 Selection of Proposals under the Scheme of CEFPPC 21 
 Pattern of Assistance and Implementation of Projects under 
CEFPPC 
24 
 Revision of CEFPPC Operational Guidelines 30 
 Issues in the Implementation of Scheme for CEFPPC 34 
CHAPTER-III Progress in the Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC  
 Budgetary Support for PMKSY & CEFPPC 42 
 Implementation of CEFPPC in 14th Finance Commission Cycle 
Period 
44 
 Implementation of CEFPPC in 15th Finance Commission Cycle 
Period 
48 
 Allocation & Utilization of Funds for SCSP, TSP & NER  59 
PART – II 
Recommendations and Observations of the Committee 63 
ANNEXURES 
I. Instructions for Application Filing  79 
II. List of Ineligible Items for Calculation of Grants-in-Aid  Under the Scheme for 
CEFPPC 
81 
III. List of 105 Cancelled / Withdrawn Projects alongwith reasons under CEFPPC 
Scheme 
82 
IV. PMKSY Outlay & Expenditure of Ministry of Food Processing Industries from 2017-18  
to 2023-24 (as on 05-06-2023) 
89 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the 23rd Sitting of the Committee (2021-22) held on 08.08.2022 90 
II. Minutes of the 2nd Sitting of the Committee (2023-24) held on 11.10.2023 93 
III Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Committee (2023-24) held on 06.02.2024 96 
 
 
  

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING* 
 (2021-22) 
 
 
    SHRI P.C. GADDIGOUDAR         -         CHAIRPERSON  
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri Afzal Ansari  
3.   Shri Horen Sing Bey  
4.   Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole'  
5.   Shri A. Ganeshamurthi  
6.   Shri Kanakmal Katara  
7.   Shri Abu Taher Khan  
8.   Shri Mohan Mandavi 
9.   Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
10. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
11. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel  
12. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil  
13. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
14. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
15. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Mohammad Sadique 
18. Shri Virendra Singh  
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav  
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa  
23. Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Kailash Soni 
27. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
28. Shri Vaiko 
29. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
 
* Standing Committee on Agriculture renamed as Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing vide Para No. 3293, Bulletin Part-II dated 23.11.2021 
 
  
 

vi 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Mohammad Sadique 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
21. VACANT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beedha Yadav  
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Kailash Soni 
27.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar* 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
* Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar, MP, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Committee vide 
Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 7523 dated 29.09.2023 vice Shri Surendra Singh Nagar w.e.f. 
26.09.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

vii 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Director 
 
3. Shri N. Amarathiagan  - Under Secretary 
 
 4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan  - Executive Officer 
 
 
  

viii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2023-24), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Sixty-Seventh Report on the Subject 'Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food 
Processing and Preservation Capacities - An Evaluation' pertaining to the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing had 
selected the Subject for examination during 2020-21. The Committee again selected the Subject for 
examination during 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24. The Committee took briefing from the 
representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries on 08.08.2022. Evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was taken by the Committee in their 
Sitting held on 11th October, 2023. The Report on the Subject was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their Sitting held on 6th February, 2024. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations / Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries for appearing before the Committee and furnishing requisite information in 
connection with the examination of the subject.  
 
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation for the 
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the Officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
           
 
 
NEW DELHI;                           P.C. GADDIGOUDAR  
06 February, 2024                          Chairperson, 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
                Animal Husbandry and Food Processing   
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
   
Introduction to Food Processing Sector of India and  
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 
 
 Agricultural Production in India has consistently recorded higher output over the 
years.  India ranks first in pulses & milk, second in vegetable primary, fruit primary, wheat 
and rice and third in cereals, eggs primary in World Agriculture in 2019.  During the five 
years ending 2020-21, Food Processing Sector has been growing at an average annual 
growth rate of around 8,38 Percent as compared to around 4,87 per cent in Agriculture & 
Allied Sectors (at 2011-12 prices).  Food Processing Sector has also emerged as an 
important segment of the Indian economy-in terms of its contribution to GDP, employment 
and investment.  The Sector constituted as much as 10.54 Per cent and 11.57 Per cent of 
GVA in Manufacturing and Agriculture sectors respectively in 2020-21 (at 2011-12 prices). 
 
 
Harvest and Post-Harvest Losses of Agri-Produces 
 
1.2 Food processing could strengthen the link between agriculture and industry and help 
in generating farm income and employment as also in reducing wastage of agricultural 
products.  According to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, a study on the extent of 
harvest and post-harvest losses of major Agricultural Produces in 2015 covering 45 
agricultural crops of 107 districts in 14 Agro Climatic Zones (ACZs) was conducted by ICAR-
CIPHET, Ludhiana.  In 2022 also a nation wide study on the Post-harvest Losses for 54 
agricultural produces in 292 districts of 15 Agro Climatic Zones (ACZs) was carried out by 
NABARD Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd. (NABCONS) and the study report was submitted in 
August, 2022.  The salient features of findings of the present study report by NABCONS are 
summarized below:- 
"In the cereals category, the Post-Harvest losses for paddy, wheat, maize, Bajra and 
sorghum were estimated. The Post-Harvest losses ranged from 3.89 percent in 
maize to 5.92 percent in sorghum. Use of manual methods for operations such as 
sickle and sticks for harvesting and threshing majorly contributed to the Post-Harvest 
losses. 
The estimated Post-Harvest losses in pulses (pigeon pea, chickpea, black gram and 
green gram) ranged from 5.65 percent in pigeon pea to 6.74 percent in chickpea. 
Shattering of grains during harvesting, spillage during various operations, and 
mishandling resulted in losses. 
In case of oilseeds, Post-Harvest losses of crops such as mustard, cottonseed, 
soybean, safflower, sunflower and groundnut were estimated. The losses were 

2 
 
ranging from 2.87 percent in cottonseed to 7.51 percent in soybean. Harvesting and 
threshing at farm operations and improper storage conditions at market channels 
resulted in losses. 
Among 11 fruits (apple, banana, citrus, grapes, guava, mango, papaya, sapota, 
pineapple, pomegranate and muskmelon) selected for study, losses were in the 
range of 6.02 percent in pineapple to 15.05 percent in guava. Harvesting and sorting/ 
grading in farm operations and improper handling and storage conditions majorly 
contributed towards losses. This indicated that better harvesting tools, proper 
handling and effective cold chain infrastructure was essential for further reduction in 
Post-Harvest losses. 
Among 14 vegetables (cabbage, cauliflower, green peas, mushroom, onion, potato, 
tomato, tapioca, bottle gourd, brinjal, beans, radish, capsicum and okra) the 
estimated losses ranged from 4.82 percent in tapioca to 11.61 percent in tomato. 
Farm operations such as harvesting and sorting/grading resulted in Post-Harvest 
losses. Lack of proper storage and improper handling practices by various 
stakeholders in market channels were the major contributing factors towards losses. 
The cold chain infrastructure for vegetables in the country was still at a very nascent 
stage and needed special focus for reduction in Post-Harvest losses as well as for 
retention of good quality as desirable by the consumers. 
The losses of plantation crops (areca nut, cashew nut, coconut and sugarcane) 
ranged from 3.72 percent in cashew nut to 7.33 percent in sugarcane. Operations 
such as harvesting and threshing contributed towards losses. 
In the case of spices (black pepper, coriander, chilli and turmeric), the estimated 
Post-Harvest losses were in the range of 1.29 percent in black pepper to 6.11 
percent in chilli. Shattering during harvesting and spillage at various stages 
contributed towards Post-Harvest losses. 
The Post-Harvest loss of eggs was 6.03 percent attributed to mishandling of eggs at 
farm level and lack of cold storage facilities. Increase in the number of eggs 
processing units and significant shift to organized poultry farms resulted in a 
significant decline in the Post-Harvest losses in eggs. 
The Post-Harvest loss of inland fish was 4.86 percent, whereas Post-Harvest loss of 
marine fish was 8.76 percent. Post-Harvest loss in marine fish was majorly attributed 
by throwing the uneconomical fish after harvesting along with Post-Harvest losses at 
wholesaler and retailer levels, which can be overcome by strengthening of cold chain 
infrastructure including cold storages, ice plants, freezing plants.  
The Post-Harvest loss of meat was 2.34 percent, whereas Post-Harvest loss of 
poultry meat was 5.63 percent. The overall improvement in farm level operations and 
significant shift of standalone slaughter houses to integrated facilities led to reduced 
Post-Harvest losses. 

3 
 
The Post-Harvest loss of milk was observed to be 0.87 percent. Improvement in 
handling of milk at farm level and in processing units may help in further reduction of 
Post-Harvest losses. 
 
In comparison to Post-Harvest losses during 2014-15, the Post-Harvest losses during 
2020-22 reduced significantly for 25 crops and non-significant reduction was 
observed in 17 crops. However, in 3 crops viz. black paper, turmeric and tapioca, 
estimated Post-Harvest losses were slightly higher than previous assessment in 
2015.  As can be seen from the Table appended below, the average range of losses 
for all crops and commodities was found to be 15.05 percent in guava to 0.87 percent 
in milk. 
Categories  Overall national average Post-Harvest losses (%) 
Fruits  6.02 (pineapple) - 15.05 (guava) 
Vegetables  4.87 (tapioca) - 11.61 (tomato) 
Cereals  3.89 (maize) - 5.92 (sorghum) 
Pulses  5.65 (pigeon pea) - 6.74 (chickpea) 
Oilseeds  2.87 (cottonseed) - 7.51 (soybean) 
Plantation crops & sugarcane 3.72 (cashew nut) – 4.41 (areca nut)7.33 (sugarcane) 
Spices  1.29 (black pepper) - 6.11 (chilli) 
Milk  0.87 
Egg  6.03 
Meat  2.34 (meat) – 5.63 (poultry meat) 
Inland fish  4.86 
Marine fish  8.76 
 
Good farm level practices and existing modern machinery available for Post-Harvest 
practices may be promoted and made accessible to farmers. Processing of 
agricultural produce to suitable value added products and appropriate storage of 
excess production during glut can help to reduce the Post-Harvest losses and also 
may give relief from price fluctuation. Cold chain for perishable products and cold 
storage for cereal, pulses, oilseed, plantation crops and spices need to be promoted 
in a big way. Training and demonstration of modern technologies and good handling 
practices may be carried out through extension activities to reduce Post-Harvest 
losses. Interventions of favourable policies and development in infrastructure for 
processing and storage is needed for further reduction of postharvest losses." 
 
 
Targets and Achievements in Reduction of Harvest and Post-Harvest Losses 
 
1.3 The Committee sought to know about the State/UT-wise details of Food production 
including food-grains/agricultural produces, Achievements against targets in reducing the 
Harvest/ Post-harvest Losses and Present rate of wastage due to non-availability of 
adequate level of Post Harvest/ Food-Processing capacity in the country.  In this regard, the 
Ministry has inter-alia submitted:- 
 
“Ministry of Food Processing Industries deals with Post-Harvest losses and not food 
wastage. The Ministry, through its schemes, creates Post-Harvest and processing 

4 
 
infrastructure so as to augment value addition, reduce losses, generate employment 
and boost exports of value added products. As per study results of CIPHET 2015 and 
NABCONS 2022, Post-Harvest losses are as given in the table below: 
Crops/ 
Commodities 
Loss (%) 
As per ICAR-CIPHET Study 
(2015)* 
As per NABCONS Study 
(2022)** 
Cereals 4.65 - 5.99  3.89-5.92 
Pulses 6.39 - 8.41  5.65-6.74 
Oil Seeds 3.08 - 9.96  2.87-7.51 
Fruits  6.70-15.88  6.02-15.05 
Vegetables 4.58-12.44  4.87-11.61 
Plantation Crops & Spices 1.18-7.89 1.29-7.33 
Milk 0.92  0.87 
Fisheries (Inland) 5.23  4.86 
Fisheries (Marine) 10.52  8.76 
Meat 2.71  2.34 
Poultry 6.74  5.63 
Egg 7.19  6.03 
           Source: *ICAR-CIPHET Study 2015, **NABCONS Study 2022. 
 
 From the above comparison, it is apparent that the post-harvest losses has declined 
 for all major agricultural produces in India." 
 
 
1.4 On being asked by what time the country could establish adequate level of Post 
Harvest Food Processing capacity so as to ensure that there is no wastage / loss of food 
material produced in the country the Ministry stated that:-   
“In order to minimize Post-Harvest losses, Ministry through its schemes, is providing 
grants-in-aid for establishing food processing infrastructure with efficient supply chain 
across the country and thereby reducing gap between production, processing 
capacity & Post-Harvest losses respectively. The approved projects under 
component schemes of PMKSY would create processing and preservation capacity 
of 368.40 LMT per year and completed projects have already resulted in creation of 
processing and preservation capacity of 217.29 LMT per year. Ministry is making 
continuous efforts to reduce the loss of food by supporting creation of robust 
infrastructure facilities in food processing sector. However, as infrastructure 
strengthening is a continuous process and since losses are dependent on various 
factors, definite timeline is not feasible”. 
  

5 
 
1.5 Role of Ministry of Food Processing Industries - The Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries is responsible for formulation and implementation of the policies for the 
processing industries within the overall national priorities and objectives.   The Ministry acts 
as a catalyst for bringing in greater investment into this sector, guiding and helping the 
industry and creating a conducive environment for healthy growth of the food processing 
industry. The Ministry of Food Processing Industries does not deal with a few food items 
such as coffee, tea, oilseeds, sugar, spices and alcohol made from molasses, as these 
items fall within the purview of other Ministries as per the Allocation of Business Rules for 
Central Ministries.    
 
Food Processing Sector of India 
 
1.6 Food Products Industry has the largest number of factories and engages largest 
number of persons as compared to other Industries.  Also Food Products Industry figures 
among the top five sectors with respect to Output and Gross Value Added (GVA).  
According to the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) for 2019-20, the total number of persons 
engaged in registered food processing sector was 20.32 lakh.  Unregistered food 
processing sector supported employment to 51.11 Lakh Workers as per the NSSO 73rd 
Round, 2015-16 and constituted 14.18% of employment in the unregistered manufacturing 
sector.  The overall scenario of employment in food processing sector is as given below: 
 
Sector Food Processing* 
Industry 
Overall 
Industry 
(%) Share of 
FP Sector 
Registered# (2019-20) 20.32 lakh 166.24 lakh 12.22 
Un-incorporated (2015-16)** 51.11 lakh 360.41 lakh 14.18 
 
* Includes food products and beverages segments; 
# Source: Annual Survey of Industries 2019-20; 
** Source: NSSO Report No. 582 (73/2.34/2) on Economic Characteristics of 
Unincorporated Non-Agricultural Enter-prises (Excluding Construction) in India; NSS 
73rd Round (July 2015-June 2016). 
 
 
1.7 The Committee desired to know about the Schemes & Programmes under which 
prospective Entrepreneurs in Food Processing Sector could get hassle-free / concessional 
credits required for investment in the Food Processing Sector of the country.  In this regard, 
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries stated as under :-  
“The Government of India has taken several measures to ensure credit availability 
to food processing sector. The major initiatives, inter-alia, include: 
 

6 
 
(i) Food Processing Sector has been included under Priority Sector Lending (PSL) 
norms under the ‘agriculture’ category by Reserve Bank of India (RBI). As per 
extant PSL guidelines, loans for food and agro-processing up to an aggregate 
sanctioned limit of Rs.100 Crore per borrower are eligible for classification under 
the priority sector lending. 
 
(ii) A Special Fund for food processing sector was set up in 2014-15 at NABARD with 
a corpus of Rs. 2000 Crore for providing direct term loans at affordable rates of 
interest to the designated food parks and food processing units in such parks. 
 
(iii) Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises is implementing Credit 
Guarantee Scheme for Micro & Small Enterprises through Credit Guarantee Fund 
Trust for Micro & Small Enterprises (CGTMSE). Under this scheme, credit 
guarantee coverage ranges from 75% (others) to 85% (for micro units) for making 
available collateral free loans. Both term loans and/ or working capital loan is 
covered for micro & small enterprises." 
 
1.8 On being asked about new fiscal measures being considered by the Government 
towards promotion of the Food Processing Sector in the country, the Ministry stated: 
"No new fiscal measure is under consideration by the Government of India as of now. 
However, the following fiscal incentives have been made available for the Food 
Processing sector: 
a) 100% deduction from profits and gains derived from setting up of new food 
processing units for 5 years and thereafter, 25% (30% in case of company) 
deduction for the next 5 years. [Section 80-IB, 11(A) of the Income Tax 
Act,1961] 
 
b) 100% deduction for expenditure incurred or investment made for setting up of 
cold chain or warehousing facilities for storage of agriculture produce [Section 
35-AD of the Income Tax Act 1961] 
  
c) Lower GST for raw and processed product; more than 70% food products are 
covered in lower tax slab of 0% & 5%." 
 
 
1.9 Foreign Direct Investment - 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is permitted 
under the automatic route in food processing industries. 100% FDI is allowed through 
Government approval route for trading, including through e-commerce in respect of food 
products manufactured and / or produced in India.  FDI equity inflows in Food Processing 
sector in India since 2014-15 is as under : 
 

7 
 
S. No. Year (April-March) FDI (in Rs. Crore) FDI (in US$ Million) 
1.  2014-15 3,164.72 515.86 
2.  2015-16 3,312.00 505.88 
3.  2016-17 4,865.85 727.22 
4.  2017-18 5,835.62 904.90 
5.  2018-19 4,430.44 628.24 
6.  2019-20 6,414.67 904.70 
7.  2020-21 1,670.37 393.41 
8.  2021-22 5,290.27 709.72 
9.  2022-23 (Apr-Sept) 3,367.28 430.69 
 
 
1.10 As regards growth rate in the Food Processing Sector of the country during the last 
10 years, the Ministry stated that the compound annual growth rate in the Food Processing 
Sector of the country from 2012-13 to 2021-22 was 5.34%.  On being asked about the 
general level of profitability in different types of food processing sectors, the Ministry 
furnished the following details :- 
"As per the latest report of ASI for the year 2019-20, the net profit in food processing 
sectors is as follows: 
Figures are in Rs Crore 
Food Processing 
Sectors 
Net Profit 
 
Output Profit 
Food Products 30937.25 1243570.19 2.49 % 
Beverages 9932.06 92446.16 10.74 % 
 
 
1.11 Major Challenges in Food Processing Sector - The Major Challenges being faced 
by the Food Processing Sector in India as per the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, 
are as under :- 
(i) Lack of product development and innovation 
(ii) Supply Chain Infra Gaps (Lack of Primary processing, Storage facilities) 
(iii) Inadequate link between production and processing (lack of processable 
varieties) 
(iv) Seasonality of operations and low capacity utilization 
(v) Supply Chain Institutional Gaps (procurement on APMC markets) 
(vi) Inadequate focus on quality and safety standard 
 
  

8 
 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY)  
 
1.12 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries had been implementing a number of 
Schemes for creation of infrastructure, expansion of processing capacity, and other supporting 
measures for healthy growth of food processing industry with a view to augment private 
investment to food processing sector. These Schemes were reviewed, critical gaps identified, 
and some new schemes were formulated to address these gaps in promoting the sector. The 
Government of India approved the umbrella Central sector scheme, SAMPADA-Scheme for 
Agro-marine processing and Development of Agro-processing Clusters with a total allocation 
of Rs.6000 Croreon 03.05.2017 for implementation period 2016-2020 coterminous with the 
14th Finance Commission Cycle. The scheme was subsequently renamed as ‘Pradhan Mantri 
Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY)’. PM Kisan SAMPADA Yojana was envisaged as a 
comprehensive package which will result in creation of modern infrastructure with efficient 
supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet. 
 
1.13 The PMKSY with Eight Scheme Components was launched on 03rd May 2017 to give 
necessary thrust for accelerated growth of the sector :- 
(i) Mega Food Parks 
(ii) Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure 
(iii) Creation/Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities(Unit Scheme) 
(iv) Infrastructure for Agro-Processing Clusters 
(v) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages 
(vi) Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure  
(vii) Human Resources and Institutions 
(viii) Operation Greens 
 
1.14 The PMKSY was sanctioned for implementation during the coterminous period of the 
14th Finance Commission Cycle, which was subsequently extended to FY 2020-21. 
Government has further decided to restructure the component schemes for implementation 
during the 15th Finance Commission with total outlay of Rs. 4600 Crore, wherein provision 
for only committed liabilities of component Schemes-Mega Food Parks, Creation of 
Backward & Forward Linkages, Human Resource & Institution - Skill Development has been 
made and no new projects are to be sanctioned under these components during the period. 
Promotion Activities & HACCP-a component of Food Safety and Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure have been discontinued. The component schemes continued during the 15th 
FC Cycle for new projects are : - 
 
(i) Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure (ICC) 

9 
 
(ii) Creation/Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities (Unit 
Scheme) 
(iii) Infrastructure for Agro-Processing Clusters (APC) 
(iv) Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure (FTL) 
(v) Human Resources and Institutions - R&D 
(vi) Operation Greens  
 
1.15 When asked to give reasons for discontinuation of the two of the eight Scheme 
Components of PMKSY of 15th Finance Commission Cycle and to state whether the earlier 
mandate of the Scheme has been modified / revised, the Ministry stated :- 
 
"Two Schemes i.e. ‘Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages’ (CBFL) scheme 
and ‘Mega Food Park’ (MFP) scheme have been discontinued in the 15th FCC. 
Since scope of Operation Greens scheme has been extended to 22 perishable fruits 
& vegetables, Ministry has proposed to sanction future linkages projects under 
Operation Greens Scheme and, therefore, CBFL scheme has been discontinued 
in15th FCC. 
After taking into account recommendations of many State Governments & Working 
Group constituted under 12th FC, a new scheme of APC was launched under PMKSY 
to develop common infrastructure in relatively smaller geographical area of 10 acres. 
Since APC scheme is going to supplant the intent behind MFP scheme, it has been 
discontinued in 15th FCC. 
By widening the scope of Operation Greens Scheme and continuation of Agro-
Processing Clusters scheme, the objectives met by Creation of Backward and 
Forward Linkages Scheme and Mega Food Park Scheme respectively could be 
achieved." 
 
1.16 According to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, it has comprehensively 
reviewed the activities supported under various component schemes of PMKSY and has 
also restructured it for implementation during the 15th FC Cycle. As a result, there is no 
overlap in activities supported under different component schemes. The brief details of 
objectives of all the scheme components of the PMKSY are provided as under : 
S. No. Schemes Objectives 
1. Integrated Cold Chain and 
Value Addition Infrastructure 
(CC) 
 To provide integrated cold chain, preservation and 
value addition infrastructure facilities without any 
break, from the farm gate to the consumer in order 
to reduce Post-Harvest losses of non-horticulture 
produce, dairy, meat, poultry, and marine/ fish 
(except shrimp). 
 

10 
 
2. Infrastructure for Agro-
processing Clusters (APC) 
 To create modern infrastructure for food processing 
closer to production areas and to provide integrated 
and complete preservation infrastructure facilities 
from the farm gate to the consumer through 
effective backward and forward linkages. 
 
3. Creation / Expansion of 
Food Processing & 
Preservation Capacities 
(CEFPPC) 
 Creation of processing and preservation capacities 
and modernization/ expansion of existing food 
processing units which will help in increasing the 
level of processing, value addition and thereby lead 
to reduction in food loss and result in enhancement 
of farmers' income. 
4. Food Safety and Quality 
Assurance Infrastructure 
(FTL) – HACCP component 
closed 
 To strengthen the food quality control infrastructure 
and to make it available to the food processing 
sector and other stakeholders in order to ensure 
compliance to domestic and international food 
safety standards and also to reduce Turn-around 
Time (TAT) for analysis of food samples. The food 
testing facilities so created under the Scheme will 
be accessible to public at large and will be made 
available to the food processing units for testing 
their products. 
5. Human Resources and 
Institutions (HRI) – Skill 
Component closed 
 End product/outcome/findings of R&D work should 
benefit food processing industry in terms of product 
and process development, efficient technologies, 
improved packaging, value addition etc. with 
commercial value along with standardization of 
various factors viz. additives, colouring agents, 
preservatives, pesticide residues, chemical 
contaminants, microbiological contaminants and 
naturally occurring toxic substances within 
permissible limits.   
6. Operation 
Greens (OG) 
Short-Term 
Interventions 
 To protect the growers of Eligible Crops from 
making distress sale and to reduce Post-Harvest 
losses. 
Long-Term 
Interventions 
 Enhancing value realisation of farmers by targeted 
interventions to strengthen production clusters and 
FPOs, and linking/ connecting the farmers with the 
market. 
 Reduction in Post-Harvest losses by creation of 
farm gate infrastructure, development of suitable 
agri-logistics, creation of appropriate storage 
capacity linking consumption centres.  
 Increase in food processing capacities and value 
addition in value chain by creating firm linkages with 
identified production clusters. 
 
 
1.17 On being asked about the promotional incentives/supportive measures provided to 
prospective promoters for starting a new company/entity under the PMKSY, the Ministry 
stated as under :- 

11 
 
"The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing the 
umbrella scheme, Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), since 2017-18 
across the country. PMKSY is a comprehensive package of sub-schemes viz. (i)  
Mega Food Parks, (ii) Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure, (iii) 
Food Safety & Quality Assurance Infrastructure, (iv) Creation/ Expansion of Food 
Processing and Preservation Capacities, (v) Creation of Infrastructure Development 
for Agro Processing Cluster, (vi) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkage  and (vii) 
Human Resource and Institutions,  which results in creation of modern infrastructure 
with efficient supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet. 
MoFPI invites online proposals/applications from prospective entrepreneurs by 
issuing Expression of Interest (EoI) from time to time under various sub-schemes of 
PMKSY based on availability of vacant slots and funds. Under the sub-schemes of 
PMKSY, financial support is being provided in the form of grants-in-aid against the 
eligible components as per their extant scheme guidelines. The extent of Grants 
available as percentage of eligible project cost is as follows: 
 
Name of Scheme Grant as % of Eligible Project Cost 
(General Area/Special Areas & SC-ST 
projects) 
Scheme for Mega Food Parks 50%/75% - up to Rs. 50 Cr 
Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain 
and Value Addition Infrastructure 
35%/50% - up to Rs. 10 Cr 
Scheme for Infrastructure for Agro-
processing Clusters 
35%/50% - up to Rs. 10 Cr 
Scheme for Creation/ Expansion of 
Food Processing and Preservation 
Capacities  
35%/50% - up to Rs. 5 Cr 
Scheme for Creation of Backward 
and Forward Linkages 
35%/50% - up to Rs. 5 Cr 
Operation Greens 35%/ 50% - up to Rs. 10 Cr for standalone 
projects &Rs 15 Cr for Integrated projects 
Scheme for Food Safety and Quality 
Assurance Infrastructure 
(a) Government organizations are eligible for 
grants-in-aid of (i) entire (100%) cost of the 
eligible cost of the approved equipment and 
(ii) 2% of the eligible cost of the approved 
equipment or Rs.15.00 lakh, whichever is 
lower, towards Technical Civil Work (TCW) 
and Furniture & on lump-sum basis. 
(b) Private organizations/ entities are 
eligible for grants-in-aid of (i) 50% (in 
General Areas)/ 70% (in Difficult Areas as 
well as for SC/ST applicants) of the eligible 
cost of the equipment and (ii) 2% of the 
eligible cost of approved equipment or Rs. 
15.00 lakh, whichever is lower, towards 
Technical Civil Work (TCW) and Furniture & 

12 
 
Fixtures on lump-sum basis. 
HRI-R&D 
 
For Government Organizations - Grants @ 
100% of equipment cost, consumables, 
salary for JRF/SRF/RA, TA/DA (up to 1.00 
lakh) and Institutional Charges (10%   of 
project cost subject to maximum of Rs. 3 
lakh for non-academic   institutions and Rs. 5 
Lakh for academic institutions). For 
private   organizations /universities/ 
Institutions, grant @50% / 70% of 
equipment   cost. 
HRI-Skill Maximum 50%. 
 
 
Impact of PMKSY on Food Processing Sector  
 
1.18 The Committee asked the Ministry to justify that the implementation of PMKSY has 
accelerated growth rate of Food Processing Industry in India in terms of growth rate of food 
processing industry before and after the implementation of PMKSY.  In this regard, the 
Ministry stated as under :- 
"Third party evaluation of Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure 
Scheme by M/s NABCONS; Food Testing Laboratory Scheme by M/s Yes Bank; 
Research & Development (HRI) Scheme by M/s Global Agrisystem Pvt. Limited; and 
Mega Food Park Scheme by M/s KPMG have all concluded that schemes have made 
substantial positive impact in terms of private Investment Leverage, Preservation & 
Processing Capacity created, reduction in wastages, creation of off farm jobs and 
higher farm-gate prices. 
Gross Value Added (GVA) for Food Processing Industries was estimated to be Rs 
1.79 Lakh Crore in the Year 2016-17, which has increased to Rs 2.08 Lakh Crore in 
the Year 2021-22."  
 
 
1.19 When asked to furnish a brief note on the Industries of the Food Processing sector of 
country with particular reference to impact of implementation of PMKSY on the growth of 
Food Processing Industries, the Ministry stated :- 
 
"Food processing sector plays a key role in increasing farm income and creation of 
off-farm jobs, reducing Post-Harvest losses through on-farm and off-farm investments 
in preservation and processing infrastructure. India ranks first in the production of 
milk, second in cereals like rice and wheat, fruits and vegetables, fish, third in 
production of eggs and fifth in the production of meat. 
Food processing industries is a sunrise sector in India. It accounts for around 1.62% 
of the total Gross Value Added (GVA). The sector constitutes as much as 9 per cent 
and 11 percent of GVA in Manufacturing and Agriculture sector respectively in 2018-

13 
 
19 at 2011-12 prices. GVA in Food processing sector has grown from Rs. 1.34 lakh 
Crore in 2014-15 to Rs. 2.08 lakh Crore as compared to growth of 3.11% in 
agriculture and of 8.21% in manufacturing. 
Food processing sector accounts for a significant proportion of workforce in the 
manufacturing sector. About 70 lakh persons are directly engaged both in formal and 
informal segment of food processing which is almost 14% of the total employment in 
the manufacturing sector. In the registered manufacturing sector, food processing 
sector is the highest creator of job/employment opportunities accounting for 12.3% of 
the total employment in the registered manufacturing sector. 
Agri-food export accounts for nearly 10.4% of the total exports of the country. 
However, the value added or processed food export is about 19.1% of the total agri-
food exports indicating enough scope to increase the export of more value added 
and processed food to generate employment in the sector.  However, Food 
Processing industry faces many challenges, which include (1) supply chain 
infrastructural gaps (lack of primary processing, storage and distribution facilities), (ii) 
seasonality of operations and low capacity utilization leading to increased cost of 
production, (iii) limited growth in storage and warehousing capacity for different types 
of agro-produce, (iv) inadequate access to institutional credit by the food processors 
compared to other sectors etc. 
The schemes under PMKSY have resulted in significant addition to infrastructure and 
manufacturing/storage capacity in the sector. Third party evaluation of Integrated 
Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Scheme by M/s NABCONS; Food 
Testing Laboratory Scheme by M/s Yes Bank; Research & Development (HRI) 
Scheme by M/s Global Agrisystem Pvt. Limited; and Mega Food Park Scheme by 
M/s KPMG have all concluded that schemes have made substantial positive impact 
in terms of private Investment Leverage, Preservation & Processing Capacity 
created, reduction in wastages, creation of off farm jobs and higher farm-gate prices. 
These third party evaluations and external review of the other schemes have 
recommended continuation of the scheme components with some modifications, 
except MFP." 
 
 
1.20 When asked about the total number of categories  of registered production units in 
the Food Processing Sector of the country as on 03 May 2017 (Private, Public, Multipurpose 
Cooperative Societies, FPOs, SHGs, etc)and as on date, the Ministry stated as under:- 
"The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) collects data on 
various registered manufacturing sectors including food processing industries 
through Annual Survey of Industries (ASI). Annual Survey of Industries Report of 
2016-17 had estimated 39740 registered Food Processing Units in the country, 
whereas the Report of 2019-20 has estimated it to be 41484.However, the sector-
wise data for total number of registered production units for private, public, 
Cooperative Societies, FPOs, SHGs etc. under Food Processing sector is not 
available." 

14 
 
 
1.21 On being asked by the Committee about the allied Schemes and Programmes apart 
from PMKSY that are being implemented by the Ministry towards promotion of Food 
Processing Industries,  the Ministry furnished the following details :  
"Apart from the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) is also implementing PMFME scheme – a 
Centrally Sponsored scheme for providing ﬁnancial, technical and business support 
for upgradation of existing micro food processing enterprises towards promotion of 
Food Processing Industries. The Scheme adopts One District One Product (ODOP) 
approach to reap the beneﬁt of scale in terms of procurement of inputs, availing 
common services and marketing of products. 
"The Ministry has launched a new Central Sector Scheme, namely, “Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme for the Food Processing Industries (PLISFPI) on 
02.05.2021. It is to be implemented for a period of six years from 2021-22 to 2026-27 
with an outlay of Rs. 10,900 crore. The objective of the scheme is to support the 
creation of global food manufacturing champions; promote Indian brands of food 
products; increase employment opportunities for on-farm jobs; ensure remunerative 
prices of farm produce; and higher income to farmers."  
 
 
***  

15 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
Scheme for Creation / Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities 
(CEFPPC) 
 
 
A. Salient Features of the Scheme for CEFPPC 
 
 The Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities 
(CEFPPC) is one of Scheme Component of the umbrella Scheme of Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
Sampada Yojana (PMKSY)”.  The Scheme of CEFPPC is being implemented from the year 
2017-18 onwards.  
 
Objectives of CEFPPC 
 
2.2 The main objective of the Scheme is creation of processing and preservation 
capacities and modernisation / expansion of existing food processing units with a view to 
increasing the level of processing, value addition leading to reduction of wastage. The 
processing activities undertaken by the individual units covers a wide range of post-harvest 
processes resulting in value addition and/or enhancing shelf life with specialized facilities 
required for preservation of perishables. While expansion of processing capacity is 
necessary to increase the level of processing and reduce wastage, the induction of modern 
technology is intended to make a clear difference in terms of process efficiencies as well as 
improving the quality of the end product. The setting up of new units and modernization/ 
expansion of existing units are covered under the scheme. 
 
Implementing Agencies 
 
2.3 The Scheme of CEFPPC is implemented through organizations such as Central & 
State PSUs/ Joint Ventures/ Farmer Producers Organization (FPOs)/ NGOs/ Cooperatives/ 
SHG’s / Pvt. Ltd companies / individuals proprietorship firms engaged in establishment/ 
upgradation/ modernization of food processing units.  The applicant/ promoter of the entity 
on approval of the proposal/project by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries for grants-
in-aid under the scheme are referred as implementing agencies (IAs) and they are involved 
in the successful implementation/ completion of the units. 
 
2.4 The Committee sought to know as to whether any role has been assigned for the 
State/UTs in the implementation of the Scheme.   In this regard, the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries stated :-  

16 
 
"State/UT Government representatives, are a part of Technical Committee (TC) of 
the Scheme, who evaluate the eligibility of proposals received. In case of certain 
discrepancies noticed in respect of the approved unit, receipt of certain statutory 
clearances etc. State/UT Government facilitate in effective implementation of the 
scheme".   
 
CEFPPC Operational Guidelines 
  
2.5 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has issued detailed guidelines for the 
implementation of the 'Scheme for CEFPPC'.   According to the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries, the operational guidelines of CEFPPC scheme were initially issued on 
11.07.2017. Subsequently, it was modified/ revised on nine occasions (13.12.2017, 
08.03.2018, 19.09.2018, 29.10.2018, 15.07.2019, 29.08.2019, 22.10.2019, 08.01.2020, 
02.03.2020 and 08.06.2022) to take into account the emerging needs of the sector. 
 
 
B. Eligibility Conditions and Submission Proposals under CEFPPC 
 
2.6 The CEFPPC Operational Guidelines containing instructions regarding procedural 
matters relating to various aspects involved in the implementation of the Scheme like -  
Eligible Sectors,  Eligible Processing Activities,  Ineligible Items for Calculation of Grants-in-
aid, Eligible Entities, Eligible Location of the Project, Eligibility Criteria, Fee and 
Performance Security, Application filling and Documents required,  Selection of Proposals 
for Financial Assistance Pattern of Assistance, Implementation Schedule and Extension in 
Timelines, Release of Grants-in-aid etc. are available at https://mofpi.gov.in. 
 
2.7 Eligible Sectors  - The following Sectors are eligible under the Scheme of CEFPPC : 
(a) Fruits & vegetables processing, 
(b) Milk Processing, 
(c) Meat/ poultry/ fish processing, 
(d) Ready to Eat/ Ready to Cook Food Products/ Breakfast cereals/ Snacks/ 
bakery and other food products including nutritional health foods, 
(e) Grains/ pulses, oil seed milling and processing based on modern technology, 
(f) Modern Rice milling, 
(g) Other agri-horti products including spices, coconut, soybean, mushroom 
processing, honey processing, 
(h) Fruits/ honey-based wines, 

17 
 
(i) Natural Food flavours, food additives/ food extracts & colours, oleoresins, guar 
gum, cocoa products, 
(j) Manufacturing jaggery from sugarcane and value-added products from jaggery 
(as raw material) except sugar mills, 
(k) Any other sector that makes food products fit for human consumption. 
(l) Animal feed manufacturing unit(s), already set up or being set up, in Mega 
Food Parks or Agro Processing Clusters approved by the Ministry from time to 
time.   
(m) Carbonated drinks/ beverages containing fruit juice/ pulp (more than 5% in 
case of lime/ lemon and more than 10% in case of other fruits) will be 
considered for financial assistance under the Scheme. A maximum of two (2) 
units in a Mega Food Park (MFP) and one (1) unit in Agro Processing Cluster 
(APC) can be sanctioned under this category. 
 
Note:  (i) Activities related to manufacturing of aerated water (other than that 
covered under serial no. (m) above and packaged drinking water will not be 
considered for financial assistance under the Scheme.  
      (ii) Farming activities such as dairy farming, poultry farming, mushroom 
farming, hatcheries etc. are not eligible for financial assistance under the Scheme. 
 
2.8 Eligible Organizations/Entities  - The eligibility criteria is stated as under:- 
(a) Any organisation or an individual engaged in or that plans to engage in 
creation/ expansion/ modernization of food processing and preservation 
capacities would be eligible for financial assistance under the Scheme. 
(b) Proposals received from Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Tribe (ST) holding 
at least 51% stake in the entity, will be treated as SC/ST proposals. 
 
2.9 Eligible Location of the Project - The proposals under the Scheme will be 
considered both inside Mega Food Parks (MFPs)/ Agro-processing Clusters (APCs) and 
anywhere outside MFPs/ APCs. As far as practicable, out of total fund allocation, 60% will 
be for units inside MFPs/APCs and 40% to units outside MFPs/APCs.  
 
2.10 Other Eligibility Criteria - A Brief Summary of other eligibility criteria laid down in 
the CEFPPC Operational Guidelines was provided by the Ministry as under:- 
(a) The combined net worth of the applicant shall not be less than 1.5 times of 
grants-in-aid sought under the scheme.  Provided that in case of proposal from 

18 
 
Difficult Areas, applicant(s) of SC/ST category, FPOs and SHGs, combined net 
worth shall not be less than grants-in-aid sought under the Scheme.   Provided 
further that in case of proposal from SC/ST category, the sum of net worth of 
SC/ST member(s) shall not be less than 10% of the combined net worth of the 
entity.  Provided also that in case of proposal from Central Government 
(including entities/ organizations under the Central Government) or State 
Government (including entities/ organizations under the State Government), no 
net worth criteria will be applicable. Note: The net worth of applicant will be 
calculated as per Appendix-I of Operative Guidelines. 
(b&c) Final/in-principle term loan sanction letter from the Bank  (inter alia, indicating 
whether proposal is for expansion/ upgradation or a fresh proposal) for an 
amount not less than 20% of the total project cost in respect of proposals from 
General Areas. In case of proposals from Difficult Areas or proposals from 
SC/ST or Farmer Producer Organisations or Self-Help Groups, term loan 
amount shall not be less than 10% of the total project cost. Note: Difficult Area 
for proposals under this Scheme means North-Eastern States (including 
Sikkim), State of Uttarakhand, State of Himachal Pradesh, Union Territories of 
Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh, State Notified ITDP (Integrated Tribal 
Development Projects) areas and Islands (Union Territories of Andaman & 
Nicobar and Lakshadweep). 
(d) A detailed Appraisal Note from a Scheduled Commercial Bank specific to the 
proposal.  Note: Detailed Project Report/ Techno-Economic Viability Report 
merely stamped or endorsed by the Scheduled Commercial Bank without 
detailed Appraisal Note shall not be considered as valid for the purpose of 
these Guidelines. 
(e) Infusion of equity of at least 20% of the total project cost for proposals from 
General Areas (10% for proposals from Difficult Areas or proposals from SC/ST 
or Farmer Producer Organisations or Self-Help Groups). Note: The value of 
land in registered sale/ lease deed shall not be considered as part of the total 
project cost. Unsecured loan will not be treated as a part of equity. 
(f) Minimum eligible project cost will be Rs.3 (three) Crore for proposals in 
General Areas and Rs.1 (one) Crore in case of proposal from Difficult Areas 
and for SC/ST proposals. 
(g) Only one application will be accepted from an entity against Expression of 
Interest of the scheme:  Provided that promoter(s) of Mega Food Parks (MFP) 
and Agro-Processing Clusters (APC) approved by the Ministry who are 
desirous to set up units in Mega Food Parks or Agro-Processing Clusters, as 
the case may be, will be eligible for availing financial assistance for more than 
one unit(s).  However, no second proposal from an entity or promoter of an 
entity, who have availed grants-in-aid earlier under the Scheme, will be 
considered. 

19 
 
(h) Entities or promoter(s) of entities who have availed financial assistance under 
another scheme (any scheme other than the CEFPPC Scheme) of the Ministry 
will be eligible for grants-in-aid only after two years from the date of commercial 
operation of the previous project: Provided that an entity or promoter(s) of an 
entity shall not be eligible for financial assistance for more than two projects 
during a period of 10 years. 
(i) No second proposal from an entity or promoter(s) of an entity, who have 
availed grants-in-aid earlier under the Scheme will be considered.  
(j) Entities or promoter(s)of entities who have availed financial assistance under 
another scheme (any scheme other than the CEFPPC Scheme) of the Ministry 
will be eligible for grants-in-aid only after two years from the date of commercial 
operation of the previous project: 
 Provided that an entity or promoter(s) of an entity shall not be eligible for 
financial assistance for more than two projects during a period of 10 years. 
 
Submission of Applications / Proposals 
  
2.11 The applications under the Scheme are invited by the Ministry through Expression of 
Interest (EoI) that is issued from time to time. The applications received against EoI are 
scrutinized by a committee chaired by concerned Additional Secretary/ Joint Secretary while 
they are approved by a committee chaired by the Hon’ble Minister, Food Processing 
Industries. 
 
2.12 Instructions on Application Filing – Detailed instructions on application filing and 
documents required are given in the Para-9 of CEFPPC Guidelines.  The same are 
reproduced at Annexure-I of this Report.  All applications shall be submitted online on the 
Sampada Portal of the Ministry.  No physical applications will be accepted and such 
application shall be summarily ignored.  Applicants are required to submit the following 
documents:-   
Detailed Project Report (DPR), CA/Statutory Certificates in support of Net-worth of 
applicant & Project Proposals etc.  Details approved notes and Final In-Principle  
term loan sanction from a Bank. No physical application will be accepted and such 
application shall be summarily ignored. Applicants are required to submit following 
documents: 
 
Certificate of incorporation/registration, Memorandum and Article of Association, bye 
laws of the society/partnership deed, PAN, TAN, SC/ST caste certificate (whichever 
applicable); 
 

20 
 
IEM registration/Entrepreneur’s Memorandum/Udyog Aadhaar registration. Annual 
reports and Audited Financial Statement of Accounts for last two years (if applicable), 
Bio-data/ Background experience of the entity;  
 
An undertaking to be furnished by the applicant as prescribed in the Guidelines;  
 
Correspondences (emails/ letters) for possible forward or backward linkages etc; 
 
Details of Land, Bio-data/ Background experience of the entity, Quotations from 
Original Equipment Manufacturer / Supplier, etc. 
 
Note: Self-attested English/ Hindi version needs to be submitted in case such 
document is in regional language. 
 
2.13 Fee & Performance Security - The CEFPPC Operational Guidelines stipulate that : 
(a) The entities applying for financial assistance are required to submit a non-
refundable fee of Rs.20,000/- (Rupees twenty thousand only) through Demand 
Draft  in favour of “Pay and Accounts Officer, Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries, New Delhi”. Provided that the non-refundable fee shall be 
Rs.15,000/- (Rupees fifteen thousand only) for applications from SC/ST. 
 
(b) On being selected for financial assistance by the Ministry, the successful 
applicant shall submit a refundable bank guarantee (initially valid till 60 days 
beyond scheduled completion of the project which would be required to be 
extended till 60 days beyond revised completion of the project in case the 
project is delayed) for 5% of eligible grants-in-aid within 30 days of issue of 
approval letter by the Ministry.  Provided that in case instalment(s) of grants-
in-aid is released by the Ministry and the project is not completed by PIA, the 
Ministry may encash such Bank Guarantee. 
 
2.14 On being specifically asked by the Committee about the reasons for seeking (i) Non-
refundable fee for application and (ii) Refundable bank guarantee for selected applicants 
under the Scheme of CEFPPC and how much is the refundable bank guarantee in respect 
of different types of project proposals, the Ministry stated as under :- 
"Non-refundable application fee is sought from the applicant(s) in order to ascertain 
the genuineness and interest of the applicant for availing grants-in-aid (GIA) under 
the scheme and also to meet out the expense involved in processing the 
applications/ proposals.  Irrespective of the category of the applicant, 5% of approved 
GIA is sought for showing keen interest and timely implementation of the project 
within the prescribed timeline of 18 months. No alternative method for submitting 5% 
of approved GIA other than in the form of Bank Guarantee exists as per scheme 
guidelines."  

21 
 
 
2.15 The Committee sought to know as to whether the non-refundable application fee in 
respect of rejected / ineligible proposals is returned to the applicants and also to give 
reasons for in case of non-refund to rejected /ineligible proposals along with comments as 
to whether it will not be discouraging factor for the probable participants in the Scheme. In 
response, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries stated:- 
"Non-refundable application fee is sought from the applicant(s) in order to ascertain 
the genuineness and interest of the applicant for availing grants-in-aid (GIA) under 
the scheme and also to meet out the expense involved in processing the 
applications/ proposals. The non-refundable application fee in respect of rejected/ 
ineligible proposals is not returned to the applicants." 
 
C. Selection of Proposals under the Scheme of CEFPPC 
2.16 The selection process was stated to be as under:- 
"(a) Proposals will be invited by the Ministry through Expression of Interest (EOI) 
that will be valid for a period of 45 days and may be extended by the Ministry 
only in case sufficient proposals are not received. Applications can be filled only 
online on the Ministry’s Sampada Portal (https://www.sampada-mofpi.gov.in).  
 (b) The Ministry will constitute a Technical Committee (TC) and a Project Approval 
Committee (PAC) for scrutiny/ consideration/ approval of proposals received 
against EOI. Technical Committee and Project Approval Committee may be 
assisted by Project Management Agency(ies) (PMA) to be appointed by the 
Ministry. 
 (c) The Technical Committee so constituted shall also function as Technical 
Committee (or by whatever name it was called) for the purpose of previous 
guidelines. The Project Approval Committee so constituted shall also function as 
Inter-Ministerial Approval Committee (or by whatever name it was called) for the 
purpose of previous guidelines. 
 (d) The Technical Committee will scrutinize applications with respect to prima facie 
eligibility based on the eligibility criteria for the scheme. The proposals found 
prima facie eligible will be evaluated inter-alia on the basis of technical 
parameters as well as assessment criteria of the scheme as given in Annexure-I 
of the Guidelines.  

22 
 
 (e)  A proposal will have to obtain a minimum of 60 marks in order to become 
eligible for consideration of grants-in-aid. Provided that the minimum marks will 
be 45 for an applicant belonging to SC/ ST.  
 (f) The Ministry shall inform the applicants whose proposals are rejected (either 
based on eligibility criteria or technical parameters or assessment criteria), the 
reasons for such rejection by the Technical Committee. Provided that before 
conveying rejection of a proposal, the approval of the Secretary of the Ministry 
shall be sought. 
 (g) An applicant aggrieved with rejection of the proposal may prefer an appeal 
before the Project Approval Committee detailing the grounds of such appeal. 
 (h) In respect of proposals that are found eligible for consideration of grants-in-aid, 
recommendation(s) of the Technical Committee will be placed before Project 
Approval Committee for consideration and approval or otherwise. 
 (i) Presence of applicant or its authorized representative (in-person or virtually) is 
expected (to explain its proposal) during meetings of the Technical Committee 
and Project Approval Committee. The applicant/ authorized representative may 
on its own or when asked by TC/ PAC, shall make a presentation regarding its 
proposal. 
 (j) In case of eligible proposals having equal marks, preference will be given to the 
proposal envisaging higher eligible project cost. 
 (k) The decision of the Ministry shall be final regarding eligibility or otherwise of the 
proposals, selection of proposals for grants-in-aid and quantum of grants-in-aid 
approved.  
 (l) The Ministry will issue approval letter to the successful applicants giving, inter 
alia, details of project, total project cost, eligible project cost, approved grants-in-
aid, completion schedule of the approved project and other relevant details. 
 (m) The Ministry shall inform the applicants whose proposals are not approved by 
PAC along with the reasons. 
 (n) Once approval letter is issued by the Ministry, the applicant has to provide 
Acceptance Letter as per prescribed format (Annexure-II of the Guidelines) and 
notarised Affidavit on Rs. 100 Non-Judicial Stamp Paper as per prescribed 
format (Annexure-III of the Guidelines) along with counter-signed copy of 
Approval letter. 

23 
 
 (o) Once Acceptance Letter and undertaking is given, the applicant will be called as 
Project Implementing Agency (PIA). 
Assessment criteria for evaluation of proposals 
Sl. 
No. 
Criteria for Evaluation of the proposal Marks Max 
marks 
Modifications 
approved by IMAC 
1 Priority Sector 
a. For Perishable Products (Fruits & Veg, Meat & Poultry, 
Milk & Aqua Products ) 
25 
25 DPR/ Bank appraisal 
and IEM b. For Consumer products (Bakery/Snacks/Breakfast 
cereals/ RTE products ) 
20 
c. For Non- Perishable Products (Grain/Pulse/Oil milling ) 15 
2 Possession of Appropriate Land  
a. Complete land title - sale deed/registered lease deed/ 
possession letter/allotment letter from State Govt. 
Agencies/ MFP/APC in the name of PIA along with CLU 
15 
15 
CLU and  Land Own
ership Documents 
b. Complete land title - sale deed/registered lease deed/ 
possession letter/allotment letter from State Govt. 
Agencies/ MFP/APC in the name of PIA along without 
CLU 
10 
Land     Ownership D
ocuments 
c. Agreement to Sale/Purchase of Land in the name of PIA 5 Copy of Agreement 
3 Investment on Eligible Project cost  
a. More than Rs.15 crore 15 
15 DPR/ CE Certificate. b. More than Rs 8 Crore to 15 crore 10 
c. Less than 8 crore 08 
4 Net worth of the applicant       
  a. More than 2 times of proposed equity 15 
15 
Balance Sheet / CA 
Certificate/ 
Supporting 
Documents 
b. More than 1.5 and upto 2 times of proposed equity 10 
C More than 1 and upto 2 times of proposed equity in case 
of SC/ST applicant 
10 
5 Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) based on Bank appraisal  
  a. 3.0 and above  15 
15 Bank Appraisal 
Report b. Between 2.5 but less than 3.0 12 
c.. Between 1.5 but less than 2.5 10 
6 Project Strength - The promoter(s) having professional / special  training in food 
processing/ technology 
  a.  B. Tech/ B.Sc. in Agri/Horti/Food Processing/Food 
Technology/ Dairy Science/Technology/B. Voc. in Agri 
and above 
05 
05 Copy of Degree/ 
Diploma/ Certificate  b. Diploma in Agri/Horti/Food Processing/ Food Technology/ 
Dairy Science/Technology 
 
03 
7 Turnover of applicant firm / promoter(s) having atleast 10% shareholding in Food 
Processing:   
  
a. Food processing business having annual turnover of ₹10 
Crore and above during previous year 10 
10 Balance sheet, 
FSSAI license etc. b. Food processing business having annual turnover of ₹5 
Crore but less than ₹10 Crore above during previous year 7 
    Total   100   
 
 
 

24 
 
2.17 On being asked about the composition of Project Approval Committee for the 
selection of projects under the Scheme for CEFPPC, the Ministry furnished the following 
details : 
"The composition of the Project Approval Committee is as under: 
Hon’ble Minister, FPI – Chairperson 
Hon’ble Minister of State, FPI – Vice-chairperson 
Secretary, MoFPI – Member 
Financial Advisor, MoFPI – Member 
Additional Secretary / Joint Secretary, PMKSY, MoFPI – Member Secretary" 
 
2.18 When asked to give reasons for providing higher marks for proposals carrying higher 
project cost, the Ministry stated as under :- 
"In order to attract more private investment under the scheme, the proposals carrying 
higher project cost are given with higher marks."        
 
 
D. Pattern of Assistance and Implementation of Projects under CEFPPC 
 
2.19 Pattern of Assistance - The pattern of assistance under CEFPPC was stated to be 
as follows : 
"(a) Grants-in-aid will be @35% of eligible project cost for projects in General Areas 
and @50% of eligible project cost for projects in Difficult Areas as well as for 
projects of SC/ST, FPOs and SHGs subject to a maximum of Rs. 5 crore. 
(b) No upward revision, for any reason whatsoever, in approved grants-in-aid will 
be considered. 
(c) In case of proposals requesting for dropping of any of the approved 
components, the proportionate grants-in-aid (35% or 50%, as the case may be) 
approved for that particular component(s) shall be deducted from the approved 
grants-in-aid. 
(d) No grants-in-aid shall be payable on any expenditure, of any nature 
whatsoever, made before the date of issuance of approval letter by the Ministry 
towards eligible components of the project. The same shall be verifiable from 
bank statement/ invoices to be submitted at the time of request for release of 
various instalments of grants-in-aid. 
(e) Grants-in-aid will be considered in respect of eligible project components only. 
(f) Cost Norms (excluding taxes) issued by the Ministry or the Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) under Department of 

25 
 
Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers Welfare will be followed, wherever 
available.  
(g) Proposals received from entities where Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled 
Tribe (ST) hold at least 51% stake, will be treated as SC/ST proposals. 
(h) If there is any reduction in stake of SC/ST below 51% during implementation of 
the project, such projects shall be cancelled and grants-in-aid released, if any, 
shall be ordered to be recovered with 10% annual interest. 
(i) Grants-in-aid will be released subject to availability of funds. 
(j) Dovetailing of Assistance- Considering the complexities and challenges 
associated with agricultural infrastructure projects of this nature, PIA may 
dovetail assistance available under various other schemes of other Central/ 
State Governments, which would improve the viability of the project. While 
dovetailing such assistance, it will be ensured that there is no duplication of 
assistance for the same component/ activity of the project. 
(k) The list of ineligible items for calculation of Grants-in-Aid as given in Para-4 of 
Operational Guidelines is reproduced at Annexure-II for ready reference." 
 
 
2.20 To a query of the Committee whether the cost norms laid down for the Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) is applied in respect of all cases of 
sanctioned projects for calculation of Grants-in-aid, the Ministry stated:- 
"The eligible GIA for the approved project is calculated by taking into account the 
eligible technical civil work component and plant & machinery component of the 
project. MIDH cost norms are being followed for the projects in which the 
components relating to cold storage, refer vans, etc. are being considered. In other 
cases, the MoFPI cost norms are being followed."      
  
 
2.21 On being asked about the details of declared Difficult Areas for the implementation of 
the Scheme for CEFPPC and whether it is common for all the Scheme components of 
PMKSY (Pradhan Mantry Kisan Sampada Yojana), the Ministry furnished the following 
reply: 
"As per the guidelines of various components of PMKSY, Difficult Areas has been 
defined as North-Eastern States (including Sikkim), State of Uttarakhand, State of 
Himachal Pradesh, Union Territories of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh, State Notified 
ITDP (Integrated Tribal Development Projects) areas and Islands (Union Territories 
of Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep)." 

26 
 
 
Implementation Schedule and Extension in Timelines 
2.22 (a) Time for completion and operationalisation of projects will be 18 months from 
the date of issue of approval letter.  
 
 (b) Schedule for submission of claims for release of instalments (from the date of 
issue of approval letter) will be as under: 
Sl. No. Particulars Timeline 
1. 1 st instalment 9 months 
2. 2 nd instalment 18 months 
 
 (c) Time schedule may be extended by Secretary of the Ministry beyond the period 
as indicated at clause (a) on account of events of force majeure. There shall be 
commensurate relief towards timelines without deduction in grants-in-aid if such 
an extension is granted. 
   
  Note:  force majeure for the purpose of this Guidelines means act of god 
including drought, fire and explosion, earthquake, landslide, flood, cyclone and 
such other events; any unlawful, unreasonable or discriminatory action on the 
part of an Indian Governmental Instrumentality which is directed against the 
project provided that a competent court of law declares the action to be 
unlawful, unreasonable and discriminatory and strikes the same down; war, 
invasion, armed conflict or act of foreign enemy, blockade, embargo, revolution, 
riot, insurrection, terrorist or military action; industry wide strikes and labour 
disturbances, having a nationwide impact in India; a pandemic; or an event 
declared as an event of force majeure by Government of India for whole of India 
or a State Government for whole of State where project is located. 
 
 (d) Extension upto six months on account of delay (except for reasons of force 
majeure) in completion of the projects may be granted by concerned Additional 
Secretary/ Joint Secretary of the Ministry, while extension beyond six months 
may be granted by the Project Approval Committee. Irrespective of any such 
extension in timelines for completion of the projects, deduction in grants-in-aid 
will be on basis of implementation schedule as per sub-clause (a) above. 
 

27 
 
 (e) Extension in timeline may be granted for maximum period of six months at a 
time. Any extension under clauses (c) and (d) shall be in consultation with 
Financial Advisor of the Ministry. 
 
2.23 Change in Components and Cost of Project - The following can be approved by 
the concerned Additional Secretary/ J. Secretary: 
(i) Reduction (without change in equipment, civil work) in eligible project cost 
(ii) Reduction in project components  
(iii) Change in Bank 
(iv) Change in shareholding pattern/ Board of Directors 
(v) Change in location of the facilities other than main facility/ centre 
(vi) Change in means of finance 
 
 Change in components or cost of the project, other than the above mentioned 
cases, shall require approval of the Project Approval Committee. 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation  
2.24  As per the CEFPPC Operational Guidelines the Ministry may take assistance of 
Programme Management Agency (PMA) in scrutiny, examination, monitoring and evaluation 
of proposals received against EOI and for conduct of site inspections of approved projects. 
The Ministry may also constitute a panel of consultants/ experts for undertaking inspection 
of projects sanctioned under the component schemes. 
 
2.25 Non-Implementation or Delay in Implementation of Project 
(a) Project Implementing Agencies (PIA) shall make all possible efforts to complete 
the Project as per the stipulated timelines of 18 months.  
 
(b) In case of non-adherence to the stipulated timelines, the approved grants-in-aid 
shall be deduced as below (irrespective of any extension in timelines except for 
reasons of force majeure): 
Delay Deduction in grants-in-aid 
Up to three months Nil 
More than 3 months and up to 4 months 0.5% 
More than 4 months and up to 5 months 1.0% 
More than 5 months and up to 6 months 1.5% 
More than 6 months and up to 7 months 2.0% 
More than 7 months and up to 8 months 2.5% 
More than 8 months and up to 9 months 3.0% 
More than 9 months and up to 10 months 3.5% 
More than 10 months and up to 11 months 4.0% 
More than 11 months and up to 12 months 4.5% 
More than 12 months 5.0% 

28 
 
 
(c) The decision of the Ministry shall be final and binding on PIA on period, 
quantum and deduction in grants-in-aid. 
(d) The Ministry shall have the right to close a project at any stage, after recording 
reasons thereof, with or without directions as to refund of grants-in-aid released. 
(e) If at any point of time, it comes to the notice of the Ministry that grants-in-aid has 
been availed by manipulation/ concealment of information/ facts, such grants-in-
aid released by the Ministry shall be refunded along with interest @10% per 
annum. Manipulation/ concealment of information/ facts may also attract other 
civil/ criminal liabilities in terms of prevailing laws. 
(f) In the event of PIA withdrawing from executing the project, the grants-in-aid 
amount released to it (along with interest @10% per annum) by the Ministry will 
be returned by PIA to the Ministry within 30 days of communication for refund of 
such grants-in-aid. 
(g) In case of the failure on part of PIA to refund the grants-in-aid amount (or 
interest thereon) as directed by the Ministry, the due amount will be recovered 
as an arrear of land revenue as per the relevant laws in force. 
 
Release of Grants-in-Aid  
 
2.26 Approved grant will be released in two installments each of 50% in the following 
manner subjects to fulfillment of conditions including furnishing of documents as laid down 
vide paras 15 &16 of Operational Guidelines  in the following manner :- 
 
"The first installment of grant would be released after incurring expenditure of 50% of 
the eligible project cost on the eligible project components of the project and on 
submission of required documents as per guidelines. 
The second installment of grant would be released after incurring expenditure of 
100% of the eligible project cost on eligible project components of the project, 
commencement of commercial production verified through joint physical verification 
and submission of documents specified in the guidelines." 
 
2.27 To a query regarding the details of the Documents, required to re-submitted by the 
applicants before getting the Grants-in-aid released, the Ministry stated as under :- 
 
"The documents which have been submitted online at the time of application are not 
sought at the time of considering the release of installments. However, a set of 
requisite documents as mentioned in the guidelines for considering release of 1st& 
2nd installment of GIA are being obtained from PIA." 

29 
 
  
2.28 When asked whether fund release for any of the approved project proposal has been 
delayed / affected due to non-furnishing of documents, the Ministry stated :-  
"Funds can be released only after the claims have been verified in terms of the 
scheme guidelines. However, in cases where there is delay in submission of 
documents for considering release of grants-in-aid (GIA), penalty is imposed at the 
time of release of grants-in-aid as per scheme guidelines." 
 
2.29 The Committee sought to know as to whether the Grants-in-aid to the approved/ 
ongoing projects are paid in time.  In this regard, the Ministry stated :- 
"Under CEFPPC Scheme, as per scheme guidelines, GIA is released in two equal 
installment(s) to the project implementing agency (PIA) after due diligence. 
Sometimes, due to delay in submission of requisite documents by the PIA, the 
release of GIA gets delayed." 
 
 
2.30 To a specific query whether the Grants-in-Aid to the already Completed projects 
under the Scheme for CEFPPC has been made in time, the Ministry replied :- 
"The Ministry takes all efforts to release the grants-in-aid to the completed project in 
time (subject to submission of complete documents/ information and verification of 
project). However, in some cases it was delayed due to budgetary constraints." 
 
2.31 When asked about the provisions in the CEFPPC Operational Guidelines in respect 
of approved projects, the implementation of which got delayed / disrupted due to non-
availability of funds and whether such project can be implemented at subsequent stages 
when funds are available, the Ministry stated :- 
"In case it is not possible for the Ministry to release grants-in-aid due to paucity of 
funds under relevant budget heads of the scheme at the fag end of the financial year, 
grants-in-aid is released to such projects as soon as funds are received during the 
next financial year." 
 
Grants-in-Aid to Completed / Cancelled / Withdrawn Projects 
 
2.32 The Committee have been intimated that a total of 105 (as on 12.09.2023) approved/ 
sanctioned projects under the Scheme for CEFPPC were subsequently been cancelled/ 
withdrawn.  The Committee, therefore, asked the Ministry to briefly state the reasons for 
cancellation/ withdrawal of 105 projects along with details regarding the impact of the 

30 
 
cancelled / withdrawn projects on the implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC and the 
steps being taken to arrest the trend of cancellation / withdrawal from the Scheme.  In 
response, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries furnished a statement giving reasons 
for cancellation/ withdrawal of the list of 105 projects as in the Annexure-III. 
 
2.33 To a query seeking details regarding release of Grants-in-aid to the cancelled/ 
withdrawn projects and how the amounts will be settled, the Ministry furnished reply as 
under : 
"The details regarding release of Grants-in-aid to the cancelled / withdrawn projects 
are as under: 
 
Name of the applicant District Date of 
Approval 
Project 
Cost (Rs. 
in Cr.) 
Approved 
Grant (Rs. 
in Cr.) 
Released 
Amount 
(Rs. in Cr.)  
M/s Great Destiny foods 
and Drinks (P) Ltd 
Tiruvallur,  
Tamil Nadu 
19.02.2018 11.46 3.59 1.80 
M/s Pampar Ovenfresh 
Foods Pvt. Ltd 
Darjeeling,  
West Bengal 
23.01.2019 4.22 1.40 0.70 
M/s Anutham Enterprises Vijaypur,  
Karnataka 
02.12.2019 10.68 5 2.50 
M/s D Raju Enterprise Papum Pare,  
Arunachal Pradesh 
03.03.2021 7.82 3.10 1.55 
M/s GG Enterprises Papum Pare,  
Arunachal Pradesh 
03.03.2021 5.86 2.19 1.10 
M/s Madhur Organic Cold 
Press Oil 
Dhule, 
Maharashtra 
14.01.2021 8.02 3.02 1.51 
 
Effort are being made for recovering the GIA from the cancelled/ withdrawn projects as per 
the provision contained in the scheme guidelines and other legal options available in this 
regard."   
 
E.  Revision of CEFPPC Operational Guidelines 
 
2.34 According to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the operational guidelines of 
CEFPPC scheme were initially issued on 11.07.2017. Subsequently, it was modified/ 
revised on nine occasions to take into account the emerging needs of the sector.  The 
extent revised operational guidelines were issued on 08.06.2022 to make the provisions 
consistent and taking into account the concerns raised by various stakeholders during 
implementation of the Scheme during the previous years. 
 
2.35 Changes in Guidelines - Regarding details of changes made to the previous 
CEFPPC Operative Guidelines and the new provisions incorporated in the Revised 
Guidelines issued on 08.06.2022, the Ministry furnished a reply as follows:- 
"The brief of changes made and new provisions incorporated in the Revised 
Guidelines issued on 08.06.2022 are as under:- 

31 
 
Existing provisions under the CEFPPC 
guidelines dated 02.03.2020 
Modification as per CEFPPC scheme guidelines 
dated 08.06.2022 
Eligible location of the project:  
The proposals for creation/ expansion/ 
modernization of food processing & 
preservation units will be considered in 
Mega Food Parks (MFPs), Agro-
processing Clusters assisted by the 
Ministry. However, in State/UTs having no 
Mega Food Park, Agro Processing cluster, 
units may be considered anywhere.  
The proposals under the Scheme will be considered 
both inside Mega Food Parks (MFPs)/ Agro-processing 
Clusters (APCs) and anywhere outside MFPs/ APCs. As 
far as practicable, out of total fund allocation, 60% will 
be for units inside MFPs/APCs and 40% to units 
anywhere outside MFPs/APCs.  
Provision for SC/ST applicant:  
Special provision for SC /ST entrepreneurs 
having 100% stake in the applicant firm  
Proposals received from entities where Scheduled 
Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Tribe (ST) holding atleast 51% 
stake in the entity, will be treated as SC/ST proposals. 
Provision for considering taxes attached 
with P&M as eligible item  
Taxes attached with plant & machinery are considered 
as   ineligible item  
Non-refundable application fee:  
No fee is charged against submission 
of application/ proposal under the scheme  
The entities applying under a scheme for financial 
assistance are required to submit a non-refundable fee 
of Rs. 20,000/- (Rupees twenty thousand) in favour of 
“Pay and Accounts Officer, Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries, New Delhi”. Provided that the non-refundable 
fee shall be Rs. 15,000/- for applications from SC/ST. 
Eligibility Criteria  
Only those proposals shall be eligible in 
which final sanction of term loan has been 
accorded by the Banks/Financial 
Institutions after the date of advertisement 
of EoI of this Scheme 
Final/In-principle term loan sanction letter from a 
Scheduled commercial Bank or a Government-
controlled Financial Institution or a non-banking 
financing company approved by the Reserve Bank of 
India 
Eligibility Criteria  
Availing term loan from the bank/ 
Financial Institution minimum 20% of the 
total project cost (except for proposals 
submitted by Central/State Government) 
Term loan from the Bank for an amount not less than 
20% of the total project cost in respect of proposals from 
General Areas. In case of proposals from Difficult Areas 
or proposals from SC/ST or Farmer Producer 
Organisations or Self-Help Groups, term loan amount 
shall not be less than 10% of the total project cost. 
Proposal will have to obtain a minimum of 
60 marks in order to become eligible for 
consideration of grants-in-aid 
A proposal will have to obtain a minimum of 60 marks in 
order to become eligible for consideration of grants-in-
aid. 
 
Provided that the minimum marks will be 45 for an 
applicant belonging to SC/ ST. 
 
Submission of bank guarantee by the 
successful applicant:  
No bank guarantee is required to be 
submitted by the successful applicant  
The successful applicant shall submit a bank guarantee 
(initially valid for duration of scheduled completion of the 
project which would be required to be extended till 
completion of the project in case the project is delayed) 
for 5% of eligible grants-in-aid within 30 days of issue of 
approval letter by the Ministry.  

32 
 
Detailed appraisal note on the 
proposal:  
Bank appraisal indicating techno-
economic viability parameters of the 
project  
 
A detailed Appraisal Note, specific to the scheme, from 
a Scheduled Commercial Bank.  
Pattern of assistance:  
(i) 35% of the eligible project cost subject 
to a maximum of Rs. 5.00 Crore in 
General Areas;  
(ii) 50% of the eligible project cost subject 
to a maximum of Rs. 5.00 Crore in North 
Eastern States (including Sikkim) and 
Difficult areas i.e. Himalayan States/UTs 
(Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Ladakh, 
Jammu and Kashmir), State Notified ITDP 
areas and Islands (Union Territories of 
Andaman& Nicobar and Lakshadweep).  
Proposals received from Scheduled Caste 
(SC)/ Scheduled Tribe (ST) promoters 
holding 100% stake in the implementation 
Agency/ applicant organization, will be 
treated as SC/ST proposals. Such 
implementation agency/ applicant 
organization will be treated at par with the 
difficult areas for the purpose of extending 
benefits under the scheme. 
 
Grants-in-aid will be considered @35% for projects in 
General Areas and @50% for projects in Difficult Areas 
as well as for projects of SC/ST, FPOs and SHGs 
subject to a maximum of Rs. 5 crore.  
Timeline for release of instalments:  
No specific timeline is given for seeking 
release of first instalment GIA and 18 
months from the date of issue of approval 
letter.  
Schedule for submission of claims for release of 
instalments (from the date of issue of approval letter) will 
be as under: 
 
 Timeline is proposed as under:  
Sl. No.  Particulars  Timeline  
1.  1 st instalment  9 months  
2.  2 nd instalment 18 months 
 
 
Penalty imposed for delay in 
implementation of the project: 
 
In case of non-adherence of time lines, a 
penalty of 1% of the approved grants-in-
aid, will be imposed for each month’s delay 
beyond the stipulated timeline of 18 
months. The maximum amount of penalty, 
however, shall not exceed 10% of the 
approved grants-in-aid to be released to 
the project. The penalty will be calculated   
    In case of non-adherence to the stipulated timelines, 
the approved grants-in-aid shall be reduced as below 
(irrespective of any extension in timelines except for 
reasons of force majeure):  
 
Delay  Reduction in 
grants-in-aid  
Up to three months  Nil  
More than 3 months and up to 
4 months  
0.5%  
More than 4 months and up to 1.0%  

33 
 
and imposed on the applicant firm at the 
time of release of 2nd & final instalment of 
grants-in-aid.  
   
5 months  
More than 5 months and up to 
6 months  
1.5%  
More than 6 months and up to 
7 months  
2.0%  
More than 7 months and up to 
8 months  
2.5%  
More than 8 months and up to 
9 months  
3.0%  
More than 9 months and up to 
10 months  
3.5%  
More than 10 months and up to 
11 months  
4.0%  
More than 11 months and up to 
12 months  
4.5%  
More than 12 months  5.0%  
 
 
 
The revised guidelines takes into account concerns raised by various stakeholders during 
implementation of the Scheme in the previous years. Also, the Ministry, with a view to 
promoting “Ease of Doing Business”, has taken several pro-active steps to simplify the 
guidelines and align it with other schemes of PMKSY. Some provisions related to Ease of 
Doing Business that have been incorporated in the revised guidelines issued on 08.06.2022 
are (a) reducing compliance burden (lesser number of documents while submitting 
application and for claiming grants-in-aid), (b) rationalizing documents for eligibility criteria, 
(c) defining Difficult Areas, SC/ST applications and force majeure, (d) doing away with 
submission of documents at frequent intervals, (e) evaluation and approval of all schemes of 
PMKSY by a single committee etc." 
 
2.36 On being asked about the reasons for frequent modifications/revisions of Guidelines, 
the Ministry stated :-  
"The revision of CEFPPC Scheme guidelines has been done due to the following 
reasons:- 
to attract prospective entrepreneurs to make investment in the food processing 
sector;  
to implement ease of doing business under the scheme; 
to invite more proposals from the applicants belonging to categories of SC/ST, NER, 
Self Helf Groups, FPOs and ITDP areas; and 
receipt of less or no response from certain States/UTs." 
 
2.37 When asked about the reasons as to why the Ministry could not finalize an all 
inclusive CEFPPC Guidelines at the Initial Stage of implementation of the Scheme for 
CEFPPC in 2017 causing frequent changes subsequently, the Ministry stated as under :- 
"The revision of CEFPPC Scheme guidelines has been done due to the following 
reasons:- 

34 
 
to attract prospective entrepreneurs to make investment in the food processing 
sector;  
to implement ease of doing business under the scheme;  
to invite more proposals from the applicants belonging to categories of SC/ST, NER, 
Self Helf Groups, FPOs and ITDP areas; and  
receipt of less or no response from certain States/UTs." 
 
2.38 When asked whether there has been any improvement in the number of eligible 
applications/proposals received from all categories of entrepreneurs after revision of 
guidelines in 2022, the Ministry stated as under :- 
"The latest CEFPPC scheme guidelines has been approved by the Ministry on 
08.06.2022. Accordingly, EOI dated 21.06.2022 has been issued to invite 
applications/ proposals under the scheme keeping last date of submission of 
application as 20.08.2022. In response, 806 proposals had been received wherein 
307 proposals were found eligible on merit basis." 
 
2.39 When asked whether it is feasible to issue a single consolidated set of operative 
guidelines for all the Scheme Components of the PMKSY, the Ministry stated that :- 
"Under various component schemes of PMKSY, financial assistance is provided to 
different components as per their respective Scheme Guidelines.  Each component 
Scheme has a specific aim and purpose under which assistance is being provided to 
the projects received under them in various areas of food processing as per the 
mandate given in the component scheme guidelines. Hence, it is not possible to 
issue a single consolidated set of operative guidelines for all the Scheme 
Components of the PMKSY. However, in the latest guidelines issued on 08.06.2022, 
the provisions of guidelines of different component schemes have been aligned as 
far as possible." 
 
F. Issues in the Implementation of Scheme for CEFPPC 
  
Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC in Locations Outside MFPs / APCs 
 
2.40 The Committee noted that proposals under the Scheme will be considered both 
inside Mega Food Parks (MFPs)/ Agro-processing Clusters (APCs) and anywhere outside 
MFPs/ APCs.  As far as practicable, out of total fund allocation, 60% will be for units inside 
MFPs/APCs and 40% to units outside MFPs/APCs.    In this regard, the Committee desired  
to know about the basis for stipulating the criteria of 60% will be for units inside MFPs/APCs 
and 40% to units outside MFPs/APCs.  The Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
furnished the information for the same as under:- 

35 
 
"As per earlier guidelines, 100% units were required to be set up within MFPs/ APCs/ 
Designated Food Parks. Prospective entrepreneurs represented to allow setting up 
processing units outside MFPs/ APCs/ Designated Food Parks too. Keeping in view 
the representations and demand for such units, total fund allocation has been 
bifurcated as 60% for the units to be set up inside Mega Food Parks (MFPs)/ Agro-
processing Clusters (APCs)and 40% for the units to be set up anywhere outside 
MFPs/ APCs." 
 
2.41 Regarding the mechanism followed by the Ministry to ensure that sufficient number of 
eligible proposals are received from Location Specific Categories like MFPs/APCs, the 
Ministry stated :- 
"In order to ensure receipt of adequate number of proposals from location specific 
categories like MFPs/APCs, a provision of a ratio of 60:40 has been included in the 
scheme guidelines such that 60% of allocated fund under the scheme will be utilized 
for approving proposals received for setting up of units inside MFPs/APCs and 40% 
of proposals in anywhere outside the country." 
 
2.42 On being asked about the State/UT-wise distribution of MFPs/APCs in the country,  
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries furnished the following details  :- 
"41 Mega Food Parks (MFPs) and 76 Agro Processing Clusters (APCs) have been 
approved under ‘Mega Food Park scheme’ and ‘Creation of Infrastructure for Agro-
Processing Clusters scheme’ respectively of PMKSY. Out of 41 MFPs, 24 are 
functional while18 APCs are functional as on date.  The State/UT-wise distribution of 
these MFPs/APCs across the country is as under: 
Sr. 
No 
State Mega Food Parks 
(in nos.) 
Agro-Processing 
Clusters (in nos.) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 3 3 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1 0 
3 Assam 1 7 
4 Bihar 2 1 
5 Chhattisgarh 1 1 
6 Goa 0 0 
7 Gujarat 2 4 
8 Haryana 2 3 
9 Himachal Pradesh 1 2 
10 Jharkhand 0 0 
11 Karnataka 2 5 
12 Kerala 2 2 

36 
 
13 Madhya Pradesh 2 5 
14 Maharashtra 3 14 
15 Manipur 1 0 
16 Meghalaya 1 0 
17 Mizoram 1 0 
18 Nagaland 1 0 
19 Odisha 2 1 
20 Punjab 3 3 
21 Rajasthan 2 5 
22 Sikkim 0 0 
23 Tamil Nadu 1 11 
24 Telangana 2 4 
25 Tripura 1 0 
26 Uttar Pradesh 0 3 
27 Uttarakhand 2 1 
28 West Bengal 1 0 
31 D & N Haveli and Daman & Diu 0 0 
33 Jammu & Kashmir 1 1 
34 Ladakh 0 0 
35 Lakshadweep 0 0 
36 Pondicherry 0 0 
 Total 41 76 
 
2.43 To a query of the Committee as to what type of priority is given to applications from 
needy areas / States / UTs which do not possess sufficient level of food processing capacity 
and have either few or nil MFPs /APCs, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
submitted :- 
"The scheme is demand driven and not State/ UT specific. However, as per scheme 
guidelines, the proposals under the Scheme will be considered both inside Mega 
Food Parks (MFPs)/ Agro-processing Clusters (APCs) and anywhere outside MFPs/ 
APCs. As far as practicable, out of total fund allocation, 60% will be for units inside 
MFPs/APCs and 40% to units outside MFPs/APCs. 
Special provisions have been made in respect of difficult areas which consist of NER, 
J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, and State Notified ITDP (Integrated Tribal 
Development Projects) areas, Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep and several 
relaxations to applicants from these regions is provided in the scheme guidelines." 
2.44 When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure receipt of sufficient 
number of proposals from potentially needy areas, which lack in entrepreneurship and food 
processing capacity, the Ministry stated :- 
"An expression of Interest (EoI) for inviting applications under the scheme is demand 
driven and subject to availability of funds. Though no specific State-wise allocation of 
funds is made under the scheme, 10% of total BE is reserved for North Easter 
Region. A number of benefits in terms of higher rate of Grants, lower net worth & 
promotors capital requirement is allowed for projects located in North Eastern Region 

37 
 
and other difficult area, including ITDP (Integrated Tribal Development Project) areas, 
which generally have small entrepreneurial base." 
 
2.45 On being asked about the percentage of CEFPPC projects so far sanctioned by the 
Ministry that  are located in the MFPs/APCs and whether the Ministry has any proposal to 
change the ratio in States / UTs, which have fewer  MFPs/APCs, the Ministry stated :-  
"257 food processing units have been approved to be set up in MFPs/APCs under 
CEFPPC scheme, which constitute about 54.33%of total food processing units 
approved across the country. At present, Ministry has no proposal for changing the 
ratio of existing 60:40 for Food Processing Units inside MFPs/APCs and anywhere 
outside the country." 
 
2.46 The Committee desired to know whether any priority is given for applications from the 
States/UTs which do not have any functional Mega Food Parks / Agro Processing Centres, 
while considering applications for the 40% projects earmarked for entities to be located 
outside the MFPs / APCs along with reasons in case of not according any priority : 
"There is no such priority in the scheme guidelines. The Scheme is demand driven 
and in respect of States/UTs where there are no Mega Food Parks or APCs, the 
proposals can be sanctioned outside MFP/APCs if applications are received and are 
found eligible as per scheme guidelines." 
 
Participation of Different Categories in the Implementation of Scheme for CEFPPC 
 
2.47 The Committee sought to know as to whether any preference was given to proposals 
submitted from State / UT Governments / FPOs / SHGs especially / farmers in case of many 
applications having equal merit after technical evaluation.  In this regard, the Ministry of 
Food Processing furnished the following information :- 
"When many applications have same score in assessment criteria, preference is 
given to projects with higher project cost. However, under the scheme guidelines 
dated 08.06.2022, there is a provision that in case of proposals from Central 
Government (including entities/ organizations under the Central Government) or 
State Government (including entities/ organizations under the State Government), no 
net worth criteria is applicable. As regards proposals from FPOs and SHGs, 
combined net worth needs to be more than grants-in-aid sought (as against 1.5 times 
of the grants-in-aid for the General category applicants) under the scheme." 
 
 
 

38 
 
2.48 The Committee desired to know about the number of sanctioned proposals / 
applications received from State / UT Governments /FPOs/ SHGs, under the Scheme of 
CEFPPC.  In this regard, the Committee were informed:- 
"No eligible application has been received from FPOs/ SHGs till date under the 
CEFPPC scheme. However, one proposal received from the State Government of 
Goa had been found eligible and approved for grants-in-aid under the scheme. The 
same has been completed and started commercial operations/ production with the 
financial assistance under the scheme." 
 
2.49 On being subsequently asked to furnish details of different categories of successful 
applicants (Public Sector, Private Sector, MNCs, FPOs, SHGs, Multipurpose Societies, 
SC/ST category, etc whose proposals have been sanctioned out of the total number of 
projects sanctioned under the Scheme of CEFPPC till date, the Ministry submitted:- 
 " 
Public 
Sector 
Private 
Sector 
MNCs FPOs SHGs Multipurpose 
Societies 
SC 
Category 
ST 
Category 
1 399 10 13 0 2 27 21 
" 
 
2.50 The Committee asked about the reasons for non-participation or negligible 
participation of FPOs, SHGs, Multi-purpose Societies, State/Central Public Sector units 
under the Scheme for CEFPPC and also details as to whether any steps are being taken to 
encourage these entities for their active participation in the implementation of Scheme.  In 
this regard, the  reply of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries is reproduced below : 
"No specific study/ survey has been conducted on reasons for non-participation or 
negligible participation of FPOs, SHGs, Multi-purpose Societies, State/Central Public 
Sector units under the Scheme. However, it is possible that the non-compliance of 
criteria such as net worth, equity contribution and term loan from Bank may be a 
hindrance in participation of these organizations.  
To attract participation of these originations, scheme guidelines have been modified. 
These prescribe that in case of proposals from Central Government (including 
entities/ organizations under the Central Government) or State Government 
(including entities/ organizations under the State Government), no net worth criteria is 
applicable. As regard proposals from FPOs and SHGs, combined net worth 
requirement is equal to (or more than) grants-in-aid sought as against 1.5 times (or 
more) of the grants-in-aid for the General category applicants. Equity & term loan 
contribution has been reduced from 20% (for General category) to 10% for them." 
 
 

39 
 
Need for Review and Simplification of Procedure  
 
2.51 The Committee noted that the Ministry invites proposals through Expression of 
Interest (EOI) that will be valid for a period of 45 days which extended by the Ministry only in 
case of non-receipt of sufficient number of applications.  As per the CEFPPC Operative 
Guidelines, an applicant needs to submit many documents including Detailed Project 
Report, Term-loan sanction from bank, etc within the stipulated time frame.  The Committee, 
therefore, sought to know about facilities being made available to prospective applicants 
who may like to enquire/cross-check the eligibility status of their project proposal being 
prepared by them for submission under the CEFPPC Scheme.  In this regard, the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries furnished the following reply :- 
 
"Under operational scheme guidelines of the component schemes of PMKSY, there 
is a provision for “criteria for evaluation of proposals”, which helps in ascertaining the 
eligibility of project proposal by the applicant before submission of the application on 
the Ministry’s application portal." 
 
2.52 To a query seeking reasons for stipulating 'Term-loan from a bank' as one of the 
eligibility condition,  the Ministry of Food Processing Industries stated as under :: 
"Availing term loan for the project by the applicant under the scheme has been 
emphasized in order to ascertain that the project is appraised by a scheduled 
commercial bank for its financial viability and economic feasibility. Further, if term 
loan is a part of means of finance, it will also help the Ministry to ascertain the 
financial position of the implementing agency of the unit." 
  
2.53 The Committee noted from the eligibility criteria that only established projects entities 
could apply for financial assistance under the CEFPPC and asked the Ministry to explain 
how the Scheme would promote setting up of new projects. In this regard, the Ministry 
stated that -  
"The CEFPPC scheme promotes setting up of new units as well as expansion/ 
modernization / upgradation of existing units.  Selection criteria are framed as per the 
objectives of the scheme and promotes setting up of new units as well as expansion 
of existing units." 
 
2.54 On being asked about the eligibility criteria in the CEFPPC Operational Guidelines 
requiring the applicants to have a certain ratio of the Grants-in-aid as combined net worth of 

40 
 
the applicant as well as equity infusion of certain percentage of the project proposal, the 
Ministry stated that :- 
"In order to ascertain the capacity of the applicant(s) to implement and smoothly run 
the project for a long time, the combined net worth of the applicant as well as the 
equity infusion by the promoter on the project are being sought." 
 
 
2.55 When asked how the eligibility criteria relating to Net-worth of applicant and Equity 
infusion of entities will be applied in respect of Multipurpose societies, FPOs SHGs etc., the 
Ministry stated that :- 
"Infusion of equity of at least 10% of the total project cost for proposals of FPOs and 
SHGs is required. As regards combined net worth, it should not be less than grant-in-
aid sought under the scheme for FPOs and SHGs." 
 
2.56 On being asked about the category of applicants required to furnish copies of Annual 
reports and Audited Financial Statement of Accounts for the last two years, the Ministry 
stated as under :- 
"Net worth of companies is ascertained based on paid up share capital of the 
company and reserves created of profits. Hence, companies (Private/Public Limited) 
registered under Companies Act, 1956/Companies Act, 2013 and ongoing 
partnership/proprietorship firm, are required to submit Audited financial statements 
for assessment of net worth.    
To claim score under ‘turnover of applicant firm’ criterion, applicant needs to submit 
audited balance sheet to show turnover in food processing business in previous 
year." 
 
2.57 When asked about the types of correspondences (emails / letters) that are required 
to be submitted by the applicants while applying for assistance under CEFPPC along with 
state reasons for seeking such documents, the Ministry stated as under :- 
"The applicants are required to submit their application and all required documents 
only on the online SAMPADA portal. Further, no correspondence in the form of 
emails/ letter is entertained at the time of application. However, the Ministry may seek 
explanatory/ supporting documents subsequently." 
 
2.58 The Committee noted that many documents relating to Bank-loan, Audit Reports, 
Detailed Project Report, etc were required for submission of application under the Scheme 

41 
 
for CEFPPC.  In this context, the Committee sought to know whether any advertisement or 
awareness campaign is conducted by the Ministry before it actually notifies the Expression 
of Interest for inviting applications/proposals under the Scheme alongwith reasons for the 
same.  In this regard the reply of Ministry of Food Processing Industries is as under:- 
"The following steps are taken for creating awareness amongst the investors/ 
prospective entrepreneurs under the scheme:  
 
(i) Scheme Guidelines are notified in Hindi and English on the Ministry’s website.  
(ii) EOI is issued in Hindi, English and other various regional languages through 
newspapers advertisement on pan India basis.  
(iii) Pre-bid meetings (with option to join virtually also) are conducted for clarifying 
the issues/ doubts of investors and public at large." 
 
*** 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
 
Progress in the Implementation of the Scheme for Creation / Expansion of Food 
Processing and Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC) 
 
A. Budgetary Support for PMKSY & CEFPPC 
 
 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing the Scheme for 
Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC) 
since 2017 under the umbrella scheme of “Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana 
(PMKSY)”.  According to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the Scheme for 
CEFPPC plays a major role in establishment/expansion of food processing units and 
would thus reduce loss of perishable and other food products and would also 
increase income of farmers. Hence, this scheme needs to be continued till sufficient 
number of units are established throughout the country for catering the farmers 
needs in processing/preservation of farm produce and also create employment to 
rural youth. 
 
   
3.2 Budgetary Support for PMKSY - The year-wise budgetary outlays made for the 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) since 2017-18 as furnished by the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (FPI) are as under :- 
S. 
No. 
Scheme 14th Finance Commission 
Cycle–Total Revised Outlay 
(Rs. in crore) 
15th Finance Commission 
Cycle–Total Revised Outlay 
(Rs. in crore) 
1 Integrated Cold Chain and Value 
Addition Infrastructure 
2021.50 1116 
2 Scheme for creation of infrastructure 
for Agro Processing Industries 
562.50 530 
3 Scheme for Creation/ Expansion 
of Food Processing & 
Preservation Capacities 
1068.50 1492 
4 Scheme for Creation of Backward & 
Forward linkages 
187.50 70 
5 Food Safety and Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure 
187.50 145 
6 Operation Greens 500  721 
7.1 Human Resource and Institutions–
Skill Development 
30 4.50 
7.2 Human Resource and Institutions–
Research and Development 
50 31.50 
8 Mega Food Park 1500  490 
 Total 6107.50 4600 
 
 

43 
 
3.3 The year-wise break-up of BE, RE & AE in respect of each Scheme Component of 
PMKSY since 2017-18, as furnished by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries are at 
Annexure-IV. (Reply to LOP No.5 - 01-06-2023).  To a query of the Committee regarding the 
proposed and sanctioned budgetary outlays for PMKSY and its sub-components including 
CEFPPC during 14th & 15th Financial Commissions periods along with comments on 
adequacy of funds,  the Ministry responded as under:- 
“For the 14th FCC period, an allocation of Rs. 6000 Crore has been made against 
the proposed outlay of Rs. 6000 Crore under PMKSY. 
 
For the 15th FCC period, an allocation of Rs. 9824 Crore was sought under 
PMKSY. However, an allocation of Rs. 4600 Crore was made after deducting Rs. 
5224 crore.” 
 
3.4 On being asked by the Committee about norms and guidelines followed for allocation 
of funds for different Scheme Components of PMKSY, the Ministry stated :- 
"Taking into account level of interest shown by promotors/ stakeholders to the 
component schemes in the past and impact evaluation of these schemes, outlay 
under various component schemes of PMKSY was proposed in the EFC Note for 
continuation of PMKSY during 15th FC Cycle. After consideration of EFC proposal 
and other relevant considerations, allocation of outlay has been approved by the 
Government for implementing the component schemes under PMKSY." 
 
 
 
3.5 On being asked about the progress/achievements that have been made against set 
targets including capacity addition achieved in the Food Processing sector after the 
implementation of PMKSY, the Ministry stated :- 
 
"Cumulative Budgetary allocation of Rs. 5530.84 Crore has been made during period 
2017-18 to 2023-24 under PMKSY Scheme. Out of this, Rs. 3864.17 Crore has been 
utilized till 31.05.2023. 
 
During the aforesaid period, total 1360 projects have been approved till 31.05.2023, 
which is expected to create 364.9 LMT/annum of processing capacity.  Out of these, 
776 projects have been made operational leading to creation of 208.09 LMT/annum 
of processing capacity." 
 
 
3.6 On being asked about the priority accorded to CEFPPC under the Umbrella Scheme 
of PMKSY during the 15th Finance Commission Cycle Period as compare to the Budgetary 
Support for the CEFPPC Scheme with that of other Scheme Components of PMKSY and 
justify priority given to CEFPPC, the Ministry submitted :- 

44 
 
 
"Umbrella scheme of PMKSY accords importance to all the component schemes 
as per their respective objectives and anticipated sectoral contribution. The Budget 
allocation to CEFPPC against other scheme component of PMKSY during the year 
2021-22 to 2023-24 of 15th FCC is as under:-  
 
 Name of the Scheme 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Budget 
Allocation 
Actual 
Expenditure 
Budget 
Allocation 
Actual 
Expenditure 
Budget 
Allocation 
(BE) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(as on 
05.06.2023) 
Scheme for Mega Food 
Parks 
54.37 52.59 24.80 22.14 54.80 0.02 
Scheme for 
Infrastructure for Agro-
processing Clusters 
53.90 49.08 56.55 46.82 81.30 5.95 
Scheme for Integrated 
Cold Chain and Value 
Addition Infrastructure  
263.00 225.31 222.34 203.06 196.50 14.33 
Scheme for 
Creation/Expansion of 
Food Processing and 
Preservation 
Capacities  
242.50 238.08 219.68 170.11 320.00 5.74 
Scheme for Creation of 
Backward and Forward 
Linkages 
40.79 32.98 18.78 9.35 5.39 0.00 
Scheme for Food 
Safety and Quality 
Assurance 
Infrastructure 
46.70 34.25 33.80 18.73 46.50 1.49 
Scheme for Human 
Resource and 
Institutions 
15.14 13.03 22.36 20.49 4.96 0.04 
Scheme for Operation 
Greens 
74.50 68.15 74.49 71.05 213.59 7.03 
TOTAL – SCHEME 790.9 713.47 672.8 561.75 923.04 33.47 
 
 
B. Implementation of CEFPPC in 14th Finance Commission Cycle Period 
 
3.7 Proposals Invited /Received  - The Ministry of Food Processing Industries furnished 
the following details with regard to EOI (Expression of Interest) Notifications inviting 
applications / proposals under CEFPPC since launch of the Scheme along with other details 
including number of applications, Ineligible applications,  number of proposals sanctioned, 
etc.:- 
 
  

45 
 
"Date of 
Issue of EOI 
Total No. of 
Applications 
Ineligible 
applications 
Eligible 
applications 
Sanctioned 
Proposals 
Projects 
Cancelled/ 
Withdrawn 
31.07.2017 452  378 74 74 29 
29.12.2017 337  181 156 156 25 
16.07.2019 360  272 88 88 26 
01.06.2020 200  121 79 79 16 
21.06.2022 806  499 307 175 3 
 
3.8 The Committee sought to know reasons for inviting applications from time to time for 
the implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC.  In this regard, the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries, furnished the following reply:- 
"Based on the approval of CCEA and the Budget allocation for the scheme, number 
of proposals to be approved under the scheme for a particular period of time is 
decided. Further, the number of projects cancelled/ withdrawn due to certain 
difficulties faced by the promoters of the approved units are taken into account to 
decide the number of vacant slots. Based on the availability of vacant slots, 
applications/ proposals are invited online under the scheme by issuing Expression of 
Interest (EoI)."  
 
 
3.9 The Committee sought clarification as to why the Ministry could not follow any annual 
time schedule in the implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC including invitation of 
proposals for the same.  In this regard, the Ministry stated :- 
"The reasons for not following annual time schedule in the implementation of the 
scheme are as under:  
(a) Covid-19 pandemic for about 2 years. 
(b) Non-receipt of eligible applications/ proposals as per Scheme Guidelines 
at initial stage of scheme implementation. Based on the experience 
gained over the period, the scheme guidelines were revised to make it 
investor friendly.  
(c) The proposals were approved till the end of 14th FC Cycle." 
 
Progress in implementation  
3.10 Ministry of Food Processing Industries informed that under the CEFPPC Scheme, 
400 food processing units (revised target 305 units) were to be sanctioned up to 2020-21 
with an allocation of Rs. 1290 Crore (revised allocation of Rs. 1068.50 crore).  As per the 
information furnished by the Ministry in 2022, out of target of 305 units under the Scheme, 
277 units were approved (161 units have been completed and 116 units were under various 
stages of implementation)  

46 
 
 
3.11 Regarding progress / achievements made in the implementation of projects under  
CEFPPC Scheme during the 14th Finance Commission Cycle period, the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries furnished the following details :- 
" 
Expression of 
Interest (EoI) 
date 
Last date of 
submission of 
application 
Extended date 
of submission 
of application 
Total Project 
approved 
Cancelled/ 
Withdrawal 
Completed/ 
Operational 
Ongoing 
31.07.2017 15.09.2017 13.10.2017 74 29 39 6 
29.12.2017 31.03.2018 30.06.2018 
30.09.2018 
31.12.2018 
31.03.2019 
&  
30.06.2019 
156 25 93 38 
16.07.2019 30.09.2019 31.12.2019 
31.03.2020 & 
31.05.2020 
88 19 26 43 
01.06.2020 31.08.2020 30.11.2020 79 04 3 72 
21.06.2022 10.08.2022 Under progress 
      397 77 161 159 
 
 
3.12 The Committee sought to know the reasons for approval of lesser number of projects 
against the targeted number of 305 projects for the period ending 2020-21 and whether the 
backlogs of 28 units would be added to the next phase (15th Finance Commission Cycle).  
In this regard, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries furnished reply as under : 
"During 14th Finance Commission Cycle period (2015-20) extended up to 
31.03.2021, a total revised allocation of Rs. 1068.50 Crore was made for 
approving 305 projects with an average GIA of Rs. 3.5 Crore per unit. However, 
the allocated fund of Rs. 1068.50 Crore got exhausted in approving 297 units up to 
31.03.2021. Due to paucity of funds, the target of approving 305 units was not 
achieved. Out of 297 sanctioned units, 30 units were further cancelled or 
withdrawn." 
 
 
3.13 On being asked about the reasons for shortfalls in the implementation of the Scheme 
of CEFPPC at the end of the 14th Finance Commission Cycle Period, the Ministry stated as 
under :- 
"During 14th Finance Commission Cycle period (2015-20) extended up to 31.03.2021, 
revised allocation of Rs. 1068.50 Crore was made for approving 305 projects with an 
average GIA of Rs. 3.5 Crore per unit. However, the allocated fund of Rs. 1068.50 
Crore got exhausted in approving 297 units up to 31.03.2021. Due to paucity of 
funds, the target of approving 305 units was not achieved." 

47 
 
 
3.14 Utilization of Funds - 14th Finance Commission Cycle Period - The Ministry 
furnished the following details with regard to when asked about the budgetary support & 
utilization of funds during the 14th Finance Commission Cycle Period:- 
 " (Rs. in crore) 
Financial 
Year (FY) 
Proposed 
Budget Estimate 
Budget 
Estimate (BE) 
Revised 
Estimate (RE) 
Actual 
Expenditure (AE) 
2017-18 428.00 95.00 20.74 10.68 
2018-19 350.00 395.00 90.00 74.81 
2019-20 200.00 160.00 200.02 168.37 
2020-21 190.00 190.00 219.30 202.84 
Total 456.70 
 
" 
While giving details of the Actual Expenditure for 2020-21 the Ministry had stated that 
out of an allocation of Rs. 219.30 Crore Rs. 202.84 Crore was the Actual Expenditure 
and the reason for under-utilization of funds was due to inadequate eligible proposals 
under SCSP and TSP." 
 
3.15 The Committee learnt that the Ministry of Food Processing Industries had approved 
less than the targeted 305 Projects as it exhausted funds in approving 297 Units only till 
31.03.2021.  However, the Ministry spent only Rs.456.70 Crore during the 14th Finance 
Commission Period against the Budgetary Support of Rs.1068.50 Crore provided against 
the outlay of Rs.1290 Crore.  In this context, the Ministry was asked to clarify the reasons 
for under-utilization of funds and shortfalls in achievements.  The Ministry respected as 
follows :- 
"During 14th Finance Commission Cycle period (2015-20) extended up to 
31.03.2021, a total revised allocation of Rs. 1068.50 Crore was made for approving 
305 projects with an average GIA of Rs. 3.5 Crore per unit. However, the allocated 
fund of Rs. 1068.50 Crore got exhausted in approving 297 units up to 31.03.2021. 
Due to paucity of funds, the target of approving 305 units was not achieved.  
 
The reasons for under-utilization of funds and shortfalls in achievements are (i) 
receipt of inadequate eligible proposals, (ii) large number of proposal were approved 
towards end of 14th FCC and have execution period of 18/24 months, (iii) delayed 
submission of requisite documents by the project implementing agency for 
considering release of GIA." 
 
  

48 
 
C. Implementation of CEFPPC in 15th Finance Commission Cycle Period 
 
3.16 According to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, 162 food processing units 
have been targeted to be sanctioned with an allocation of Rs.650 Crore and Rs. 642 Crore 
allocated towards liability for ongoing projects during the 15th Finance Commission Cycle 
period i.e. from 2021-22 to 2025-26.  Keeping in view, the receipt of large number of eligible 
proposals against Expression of Interest (EoI) dated 21.06.2022, Ministry re-appropriated 
Rs. 200 Crore from Operation Greens Scheme to CEFPPC Scheme. Using funds of Rs. 850 
crores, Ministry has sanctioned total 218 proposals (including 43 proposals from the earlier 
EoI) under CEFPPC Scheme. However, Ministry has not been able to approve 132 eligible 
proposals since funds have got exhausted. 
 
3.17 The Committee sought to know the reasons as to why only 162 projects were 
proposed with the outlay of Rs. 1292 Crore whereas the outlay for 305 projects of 14th 
Finance Commission Cycle was only Rs. 1068.50 Crore  In this regard, the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries, furnished the following information:- 
"An outlay of Rs. 1292 Crore was allocated for the 15th Finance Commission Cycle 
period i.e. from 2021-22 to 2025-26, for approving 162 units. Further, it is to mention 
that out of Rs. 1292 Crore, only Rs. 650 Crore is for setting up of new projects while 
Rs. 642 Crore is towards meeting liability for ongoing projects." 
 
3.18 The Committee sought to know the details of Notifications inviting proposals under 
the Scheme for CEFPPC for the targeted 162 Projects, number applications received, 
number of ineligible applications and the percentage of applications selected for sanction.  
In this regard, the Ministry stated :- 
"43 proposals have been approved in 2022-23 which were received against the EoI 
dated 01.06.2020. In 2022-23, only one EoI dated 21.06.2022 was issued for inviting 
proposals/ applications under the scheme, wherein 806 applications were received till 
last date of submission of application i.e. 20.08.2022.Out of 806 proposals, 307 
proposals were found eligible as per provisions of the guidelines of the scheme. In 
view of large number of eligible proposals and unavailability of funds under the 
CEFPPC Scheme for approving all the proposals, Rs. 200 Crore was re-appropriated 
from the Operational Guidelines (OG) Scheme.  The Ministry has approval 175 
proposals out of 307 eligible proposals. The remaining 132 eligible proposals (after 

49 
 
approving 175 proposals) involving grants-in-aid of Rs. 441.14 Crore (approx.) could 
not be approved for want of funds." 
 
 
Utilization of Funds - 15th Finance Commission Cycle Period 
 
3.19 The Ministry furnished the following details with regard to budgetary support and  
utilization of funds during the 15th Finance Commission Cycle Period  :- 
 (Rs. in crore) 
Financial 
Year (FY) 
Proposed 
Budget Estimate 
Budget 
Estimate (BE) 
Revised 
Estimate (RE) 
Actual 
Expenditure (AE) 
2021-22 284.00  162.00 242.50 238.08 
2022-23 301.79  282.80 219.68 171.30 
2023-24 320.00  320.00 -  5.74 
(till 01.06.2023) 
 
3.20 On being asked about funds requirement and the actual budgetary support received 
by it for the Scheme for 2023-24, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries stated that:-  
"Rs. 949.90 Crore is required for implementation and completion of 263 ongoing 
projects under the scheme as on 06.06.2023. During FY 2023-24, BE of Rs. 320 
Crore has been allocated under the scheme." 
 
3.21 When asked to furnish the details of break-up of the budgetary provisions for 2023-
24 for the on-going and the new projects, the Ministry stated:- 
"During FY 2023-24, BE of Rs. 320 Crore has been allocated under the scheme. No 
bifurcation of funds for ongoing projects and for new projects is made in the 
allocation." 
 
Cumulative Achievements in the Implementation of CEFPPC 
 
3.22 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries further stated that as on 04.09.2023, 491 
Projects/Units have been approved (excluding those which have been withdrawn/ 
cancelled) under the CEFPPC Scheme with total project cost of Rs. 8094.48 Crore including 
grants-in-aid of Rs. 1911.29 Crore. 
  

50 
 
A. The expected outcomes of 491 approved projects are as under:   
 
1 Total projects approved by CCEA 400 (revised target 305) [14th FC 
period target) + 
162 [15th FC period target]  
2 Total approved projects as on 04.09.2023 491  
3 Total Project cost of approved projects  Rs. 8094.48crore  
4 Total Grant Approved by MoFPI     Rs. 1911.29crore  
5 Grant Released by MoFPIupto04.09.2023 Rs. 876.51crore  
6 Expected Private investment Rs. 6183.19 crore  
7 Expected Employment generation (Direct) 41369  
8 Food Processing Capacities to be created 100.55 lakh MT per annum 
  
B. Sector-wise details of the projects under CEFPPC Scheme (as on 04.09.2023) 
Sr. No. Sector Number of Units 
Completed Ongoing Total 
1 Consumer Industry 86 100 186 
2 Fruits & Vegetables 
Processing 69 77 146 
3 Dairy/ Milk Processing 9 28 37 
4 Fish & Marine Processing 4 3 7 
5 Grain Milling 40 42 82 
6 Meat & Poultry Processing 5 3 8 
7 Oil Milling 5 20 25 
  Total 218 273 491 
  
C. Year-wise details of the projects under CEFPPC Scheme (as on 04.09.2023) 
Sr. No. Financial Year Number of Units   
Completed Ongoing Total 
1 2017-18 28 4 32 
2 2018-19 80 5 85 
3 2019-20 81 21 102 
4 2020-21 23 13 36 
5 2021-22 0 2 2 
6 2022-23 6 206 212 
7 2023-24 0 22 22 
  Total 218 273 491 
  
D. Category-wise details of the projects under CEFPPC Scheme (as on 04.09.2023) 
Sr. No. Category Number of Units Approved Grant –in-aid 
(Rs. in Cr) Completed  Ongoing Total 
1 General 184 209 393 1531.75 
2 SC 13 18 31 112.43 
3 ST 1 18 19 71.46 
4 NER 20 28 48 195.66 
  Total 218 273 491 1911.30 
 

51 
 
3.23 The Committee sought to know the reasons for sanction of lesser number of projects 
in Dairying/Milk Processing, Fish & Marine Processing & Oil Milling sectors and SC/ST 
category projects. In response the Ministry of Food Processing Industry stated that sufficient 
number of eligible applications/proposals were not received from these categories/ sectors. 
 
3.24 When asked whether the Ministry would like to consider necessary amendments to 
the CEFPPC Operative Guidelines so as to provide for sectoral reservation for different 
sectors of food processing industry in the implementation of the CEFPPC Scheme, the 
Ministry stated as under :- 
"In the latest CEFPPC scheme guidelines dated 08.06.2022, provision has been 
made for awarding score to the project based on perishability of the raw materials 
used in the project." 
 
 
3.25 The Committee noted that the number of units / projects that have been approved / 
sanctioned under the Scheme for CEFPPC is slightly above 1% (473 / 41484) total number 
of Registered Units in the Food Processing Sector.  In this context, the Committee sought 
comments of the Ministry as to whether the implementation of the Scheme at such low level 
would have the required impact to increase the installed capacity of food processing & 
preservation in the country.   The reply of the Ministry in this regard is reproduced below:- 
 
"Ministry provides financial assistance to eligible proposals/ applications 
received against the Expression of Interest issued time to time and as per 
availability of funds." 
 
 
3.26 On being asked with Committee about the number of CEFPPC Projects, which were 
approved during the 14th Finance Commission period but not yet completed along with date 
of likely completion of these projects, the Ministry replied as under :- 
"Out of approved units during 14th Finance Commission period under CEFPPC 
Scheme, 45 units are under various stages of implementation. Most of these are 
likely to be completed by the end of current FY 2023-24." 
 
3.27 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries in a Note provided to the Committee on 
17.09.2023 furnished the following data relating to progress in the implementation of 
Projects under the Scheme for CEFPPC :-  
  

52 
 
 
  " 
Expression of 
Interest (EoI) 
date 
Last date of 
submission of 
application 
Extended date of 
submission of 
application 
Total 
Project 
approved 
Cancelled/ 
Withdrawal 
Completed/ 
Operational 
Ongoing 
31.07.2017 15.09.2017 13.10.2017 74 29 41 4 
29.12.2017 31.03.2018 30.06.2018, 
30.09.2018, 
31.12.2018, 
31.03.2019 & 
30.06.2019 
156 25 113 18 
16.07.2019 30.09.2019 31.12.2019 
31.03.2020 & 
31.05.2020 
88 26 47 15 
01.06.2020 31.08.2020 30.11.2020 78 19 13 46 
21.06.2022 10.08.2022 20.08.2022 200 6 4 190 
      596 105 218 273 
 
3.28 The Committee, while taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries on the subject of this Report on 11.10.2023, sought to know the 
reasons for lower achievements against targets.  In response, Secretary, Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries submitted inter-alia as under :- 
"……..Our approval came on 19.01.2022 and due to this we were not able to make 
any sanctions in the years 2019-20 and 2021-22.  When our approval came in the 
year 2022, we had asked for an amount of Rs. 9,820 crore.  When our cabinet note 
was issued and we had Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and so on with 
finance, but the allocation we got was only Rs. 4,600 crore.  Sir, our commitment 
liability was quite and high in that also.  Sir, under this we got Rs. 1292 Crore for the 
unit scheme.  …..." 
3.29 As regards, progress in the implementation of CEFPPC projects during 14th and 15th 
Finance Commission periods, the Ministry furnished the following details (Oct, 2023) : 
 " 
Year/Period Projects 
approved 
Date Completed/ 
operational 
Cancelled/ 
withdrawn 
Ongoing 
14th Finance 
Commission Period 
353 01.04.2015 to 
31.03.2021 
212 96 45 
15th Finance 
Commission Period 
243 01.04.2022 to 
31.03.2026 
7 26 210 
" 
3.30 On being asked about the number of the Approved Projects which at present remain 
pending/ongoing would be completed during the current financial year (2023-24), the 
Ministry stated that during the current FY 2023-24, 80 food processing units at various 
stages of implementation could be completed and made functional. 
 
  

53 
 
Funds Requirement during 15th Finance Commission Cycle Period 
 
3.31 The Committee sought to know whether the budgetary support available for the 
period from 2024-26 out of the total outlay of Rs.4600 Crore for the 15th Finance 
Commission Cycle period is adequate for effective implementation of the CEFPPC Scheme.  
The reply of the Ministry is as reproduced below :- 
"An amount of Rs. 1292 Crore has been allocated for implementing CEFPPC 
Scheme for 15th FCC period (01.04.2021 to 31.03.2026). An Expression of Interest 
(EOI) was issued on 21.06.2022 for inviting online proposals/ applications from 
prospective entrepreneurs under CEFPPC Scheme. Against EOI, 806 applications 
were received out of which 307 applications were found eligible. In view of large 
number of eligible proposals and unavailability of sufficient funds under the CEFPPC 
Scheme for approving all the eligible proposals, Rs.200 Crore was re-appropriated 
from the Operation Greens Scheme. Despite that, out of 307 eligible proposals, the 
Ministry has been able to approve only 175 proposals. The remaining 132 eligible 
proposals involving grants-in-aid of Rs. 441.14 Crore (approx.) could not be approved 
for want of funds." 
 
3.32 On being asked whether the budgetary support available for the period from 2024-26 
out of the total outlay of Rs.4600 Crore for 15th Finance Commission Cycle period is 
adequate for effective implementation of the CEFPPC Scheme,  the Ministry stated as 
under :- 
"For 15th FCC period (01.04.2021 to 31.03.2026), an amount of Rs. 1292 Crore has 
been allocated for implementing CEFPPC Scheme. An Expression of Interest (EOI) 
was issued on 21.06.2022 for inviting online proposals / applications from prospective 
entrepreneurs under CEFPPC Scheme. A total 806 applications were received out of 
which, 307 applications were found eligible. In view of large number of eligible 
proposals and unavailability of sufficient funds under the CEFPPC Scheme for 
approving all the eligible proposals, Rs. 200 Crore was re-appropriated from the OG 
(Operation Greens) Scheme. Despite that, out of 307 eligible proposals, the Ministry 
has been able to approve only 175 proposals. The remaining 132 eligible proposals 
involving grants-in-aid of Rs. 441.14 Crore (53 approx.) could not be approved for 
want of funds."  
 
 
3.33 The Committee asked about the balance amount presently available out of the 
budgetary outlay of Rs.1292 Crore for the CEFPPC Scheme for the 15th Finance 

54 
 
Commission Cycle period of 2022-26. and about the actual funds requirement for 
completion of all approved and sanctioned projects.  In response , the Ministry replied:- 
"No balance is available out of the allocated outlay (Rs. 1292 crore); since proposals 
have been approved keeping in mind the fund position." 
 
3.34 When asked about the proposed annual allocations for CEFPPC for the period from 
01.04.2024 to 31.03.2026, the Ministry submitted :- 
"During the 15th FCC period (01.4.2021 to 31.03.2026), an allocation of Rs. 1292 
Crore (including allocation made for meeting committed liabilities of Rs. 642 crore) 
has been made under CEFPPC. Against the total outlay of Rs. 1292 Crore, for FY 
2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, annual budget allocation of Rs. 162.00 Crore, 
Rs.282.80 Crore and Rs. 320 Crores have been made respectively."    
 
 
3.35 As regards the proposed annual allocations for CEFPPC for the period from 
01.04.2024 to 31.03.2026, the Ministry stated:- 
"During the 15th FCC period (01.4.2021 to 31.03.2026), an allocation of Rs. 1292 
Crore (including allocation made for meeting out committed liabilities of Rs. 642 
Crore) has been made. Against the total outlay of Rs. 1292 Crore, for FY 2021-22, 
2022-23 and 2023-24, annual budget allocation of Rs. 162.00 Crore, Rs.282.80 
Crore and Rs. 320 Crore have been made respectively." 
 
 
3.36 On being asked by the Committee as to whether the Ministry has sought additional 
allocation for the Scheme the same, the Ministry submitted :- 
"Ministry had sought additional allocation (initially Rs. 7200 Crore which was revised 
to Rs. 1000 Crore subsequently) under PMKSY. However, Department of 
Expenditure vide O.M. dated 28.8.2023 has suggested that the Ministry may utilize 
additional Rs.920 Crores only (20% of allocated Rs. 4600 Crore) after obtaining 
requisite approvals of Secretary and Financial Advisor. " 
 
3.37 The Committee sought to know about the likely funds requirement for the presently 
on-going 273 projects (as on 12.09.2023) for their implementation & completion as also for 
sanction / implementation of the remaining 107 already approved projects.  In response, the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries submitted :- 
"Rs. 1034.78 Crore is required for on-going 273 projects (as on 12.09.2023) for their 
implementation & completion. No new approvals will be given to applications 
received against previous EoIs and that any new proposals will be approved when 

55 
 
they are received against new EoI. An Expression of Interest (EOI) has been issued 
for inviting online proposals/ applications from prospective entrepreneurs under 
CEFPPC Scheme with last date as 22.11.2023." 
 
3.38 The Committee sought to know as to when the Ministry would again call for proposals 
under the Scheme for CEFPPC.  In this regard, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
replied that "An Expression of Interest (EOI) had already been issued for inviting online 
proposals/ applications from prospective entrepreneurs with last date as 22.11.2023." 
 
 
Challenges & Problems in the Implementation of Scheme of CEFPPC  
3.39 According to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the following challenges / 
problems that have been noticed in the implementation of the Scheme :  
 (i) Delay in obtaining the statutory clearances/ certificates from the State Govt. 
regarding Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to Operate (CTO), building plan 
approval, electricity connection for the unit etc. 
(ii) Inadequate support from lending banks in disbursement of term loan to the 
units. 
(iii) Upsurge of Covid-19 affected the mobilization of labour and running of the units 
continuously. However, for the proposals approved recently, this is no longer a 
problem. 
 
 
3.40 When asked to give details regarding Section/Cell set up by the Ministry for helping 
Entrepreneurs in obtaining status clearance/certificate from the concerned State 
Governments regarding Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to Operate (CTO), Building 
Plan Approval, electricity connection for the units, the Ministry stated:- 
"MoFPI has a dedicated section/ cell which administer all the issues pertaining to 
CEFPPC scheme. The cell, inter alia, handholds the promotors in completion of the 
projects including taking up the matter with concerned State Governments to help 
them obtain statutory clearance/certificate from concerned State Governments, 
based upon request of project developers." 
 
 
3.41 When asked about the feasibility for opening of Single Window to apply and get 
logistic support, the Ministry submitted:- 
"The Ministry has a unified SAMPADA Portal for administration of component 
schemes of PMKSY. The Portal captures entire work flow starting from the stage 
of submission of proposals to project conception and there after facilitating grant 
release involving all the stakeholders namely Promoter / Project Execution 

56 
 
Agencies, Project Management Agencies (PMAs) and automates all the processes 
related to grants release. The module facilitates online submission of applications, 
document uploading and its status tracking on real time basis. At any stage when 
the status of proposal gets changed, the system generates automated email alerts 
and forwards it to concerned stakeholder’s email account. The system also 
provides facilities for queries and reports for monitoring and decision making." 
 
 
 
3.42 On being asked by the Committee to state whether any expert opinion has been 
taken to tackle the challenges/problems faced in the implementation of the Scheme, the 
Ministry stated as under :- 
"The component schemes of PMKSY were formulated after stakeholder consultation. 
In order to have review and mid-term course correction, a desk study under 
chairpersonship of Economic Advisor in the Ministry has been conducted and its 
recommendations taken into account while framing the proposal for continuation of 
the scheme in 15th FC Cycle. As the base of completed projects was quite small in 
the scheme till recently, third party evaluation of the scheme has not yet been 
conducted." 
 
Installed Capacity of Food Processing and Preservation Capacity in the country 
 
3.43 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries was asked about the pattern of availability 
of Food Processing and Preservation Capacity in the country in different regions particularly 
about the deficient States / regions. In this regard, the Ministry stated :- 
"Initially, this scheme was implemented in all the States/UTs during 2017 by 
allocating number of units based on the 5 years (2010-15) data on agro-produce 
share of the States/UTs. Accordingly, Expression of Interest (EoI) was issued. 
However, as less number of/ no eligible proposals were received from certain States/ 
UTs, no equilibrium in distribution of units in various States/ UTs could be achieved. 
 
In the subsequent years, the EoI were issued to invite proposals from all States/UTs 
under the scheme irrespective of their share in agro-produce in the country. 
Accordingly, proposals were received, evaluated and approvals were granted for the 
eligible proposals on merit basis. As on date, no specific study has been conducted 
to identify the States/ regions that are deficient in the units approved under the 
scheme. This scheme is demand driven and is sanctioned on the basis of 
applications received from applicants." 
 
 
3.44 When asked by the Committee about the number of Food Processing Units in each 
State and Union territory as well as in the Scheduled Castes set up and Tribal Dominated 
Areas in the Country, the Ministry stated :- 

57 
 
  
"A total of 484 food processing units have been approved in the States/UTs. In this 
connection, a list of State/UT-wise food processing units (including the SC and Tribal 
dominated areas) approved/ completed/ ongoing is given below (as on 23.03.2023): 
 
Sr. No. State Number of Units 
Approved/ 
Sanctioned 
Number of Units 
completed 
Number of 
Ongoing 
Units 
1 Andhra Pradesh 11 2 9 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 10 1 9 
3 Assam 38 9 29 
4 Bihar 5 1 4 
5 Chhattisgarh 4 1 3 
6 Goa 1 1 0 
7 Gujarat 40 19 21 
8 Haryana 19 13 6 
9 Himachal Pradesh 19 14 5 
10 Jharkhand 0 0 0 
11 Karnataka 21 9 12 
12 Kerala 19 10 9 
13 Madhya Pradesh 22 5 17 
14 Maharashtra 88 24 64 
15 Manipur 2 1 1 
16 Meghalaya 2 2 0 
17 Mizoram 1 0 1 
18 Nagaland 4 0 4 
19 Odisha 4 2 2 
20 Punjab 17 5 12 
21 Rajasthan 24 7 17 
22 Sikkim 1 0 1 
23 Tamil Nadu 32 16 16 
24 Telangana 9 1 8 
25 Tripura 5 4 1 
26 Uttar Pradesh 34 21 13 
27 Uttarakhand 18 6 12 
28 West Bengal 15 5 10 
29 A&N Islands 0 0 0 
30 Chandigarh 0 0 0 
31 Delhi 0 0 0 
32 Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Daman & Diu 
1 1 0 
33 Jammu & Kashmir 18 12 6 
34 Ladakh 0 0 0 
35 Lakshadweep 0 0 0 
36 Pondicherry 0 0 0 
 Total 484 192 292 
 
3.45 The Committee sought reasons for disparity in the implementation of the Scheme for 
CEFPPC as the number of projects implemented is nil or very less in some States/UTs 

58 
 
while it is comparatively high in some other States/UTs. The reply of the Ministry in this 
regards is as under: 
"The main reasons for no/Zero(0) projects approved and approval of only one or two 
Units/Projects in the aforesaid States is that the scheme is demand-driven and 
interested applicants have to apply for setting up/ expansion of food processing units. 
Sufficient number of eligible proposals have not been received from such States/UTs 
under the scheme" 
 
3.46 On being categorically asked by the Committee about how the Objective of achieving 
Doubling of Farmers Income be achieved with uneven approval of units in each State and 
Union Territory of the country and how the Ministry would bring equilibrium among them, the 
Ministry stated :- 
 
"The scheme will be publicized amongst the prospective entrepreneurs/FPOs/ 
farmers and awareness will be spread about the benefits available under the 
scheme. Expression of Interest (EoI) will be floated from time to time inviting 
applications and encouraging prospective investors to apply under the scheme." 
 
 
 
3.47 When asked to give details of options available to the Ministry to improve the food 
processing and preservation capacity of States/UTs through CEFPPC, which lag behind the 
all India average capacity, the Ministry submitted :- 
"Expression of Interests (EoIs) is being issued under the scheme for inviting project 
proposals for setting up / expansion of food processing units across the country from 
time to time based on demand and availability of funds under CEFPPC Scheme. 
Further, there are provisions of concessions for applicant from SC/ST category, 
North-Eastern Region and difficult areas so as to encourage the prospective 
investors in those categories and Ministry undertakes promotional measures to 
encourage promoters/entrepreneurs of the region to apply under the scheme." 
 
 
3.48 To a query as  to how the objectives of the Scheme for CEFPPC would be achieved, 
with less number of units in some of the States and no new proposal forthcoming from such 
States/UTs, the Ministry stated as under :- 
"The objective of this scheme will be achieved across the country by floating 
Expression of Interest (EoI) from time to time for inviting application / proposals from 
the prospective promoters /investors and according approvals to the eligible 
proposals on merit basis." 
 

59 
 
 
3.49 On being asked about the efforts made by the Ministry under CEFPPC Scheme to fill 
up the gap between the available capacities and the required capacities available in the 
country, the Ministry stated as under :-  
"Under CEFPPC scheme, 473 projects has been approved since inception of the 
scheme to till date. Out of these, 210 projects have been completed with creation of 
processing/preservation capacity of 38.32 LMT/annum. Further, 263 ongoing projects 
will result in creating processing/preservation capacity of 55.58 LMT/annum."  
 
 
3.50 When asked about the percentage of the Food Processing Entities/units in the 
country that benefitted from the PMKSY Scheme and its Scheme Component of CEFPPC 
as on date, the Ministry stated :- 
"473 food processing units have been supported under CEFPPC Scheme, which 
constitute 34.78%of total1360 projects supported under all the component schemes 
of PMKSY. Annual Survey of Industries Report of 2019-20 has estimated number of 
registered Food Processing Units in the country as 41484." 
 
 
3.51 When asked whether any completed project under CEFPPC has been found to be 
closed subsequently, the Ministry submitted :-  
"One completed project viz. M/s Pavanputra Wafers Private Limited for which grants-
in-aid of Rs. 500.00 lakhs had been approved on 14.09.2018 and released for setting 
up of a new unit for manufacturing of Potato Chips, Namkeen Bhujia & other 
Namkeen, Snacks, Fryums at Plot No. F-35 to F-37, (Designated Food Park), Agro 
Food Park, Boranda, District Jodhpur, Rajasthan. However, a major fire incident on 
14.03.2021 has burned and completely destroyed half portion of main plant building 
and P&M related to Packing, Packing material and laminates." 
 
 
D. Allocation & Utilization of Funds for SCSP, TSP & NER 
 
3.52 When asked to furnish the details of different categories of successful applicants 
including SC/ST categories whose proposals have been sanctioned out of the total number 
of projects sanctioned under the Scheme of CEFPPC till date, the Ministry stated:- 
"Under CEFPPC Scheme, 473 food processing units have been financially supported 
since inception to till date. Out of these, 52 units have been approved under SC/ST 
category promoters." 
 
 
3.53 To a Specific Query of the Committee seeking details regarding number of projects 
belonging to SC/ST categories out of the 596 sanctioned projects the Ministry stated "76 
projects belong to the SC/ST category." 
 

60 
 
 
3.54 The Ministry furnished the following details with regard to (Funds allocation & 
Utilization for SCSP, TSP & NER during 14th Finance Commission Cycle periods 2020-21 & 
2022-23 :-  
 
 "The details of funds allocation and utilization of SCSP, TSP and NER category of 
PMKSY are as under-  (Rs in Crore) 
Year SCSP TSP NER 
BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE 
2018-19 55.00 37.42 6.45 55.00 37.42 5.75 131.30 87.03 38.75 
2019-20 91.38 73.82 21.28 47.34 38.25 0.35 110.10 88.94 19.39 
2020-21 89.75 62.25 27.73 46.50 32.25 10.50 108.14 75.00 48.99 
2021-22 58.10 65.57 31.74 30.10 33.97 17.36 70.00 79.00 54.30 
2022-23 74.70 55.86 20.30 38.70 28.94 01.36 90.00 67.30 37.85 
 BE- Budget Estimate, RE- Revised Estimate, AE- Actual Expenditure 
 
Under-utilization of these components is mainly on account of receipt of lesser 
number of applications for assistance under component schemes of PMKSY from 
SC/ST entrepreneurs & NER. In order to encourage wider participation of these 
groups/ regions, Ministry has reviewed structure of the component schemes of 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) in consultation with stakeholders 
and recommendations of third party evaluation reports and has revised the scheme 
guidelines of various sub schemes of PMKSY on 8th June 2022.  Further, Ministry is 
regularly conducting virtual/physical meetings with promoters/investors of 
SC/ST/NER to assess the implementation of sanctioned projects and to find out 
issues/problems being faced by them." 
 
 
3.55 On being asked about the reasons for lower utilization of funds for the Scheme 
during 2022-23, the Ministry stated:-  
"The reasons for under-utilization of funds are(i) receipt of inadequate eligible 
proposals under SCSP, TSP and NER, (ii) no proposal could be approved during FY 
2021-22 since the approval for continuation of PMKSY was received during February, 
2022, (iii) delayed submission of requisite documents by PIA (project implementing 
authority) for considering release of GIA due to the post effect of Covid-19 problem 
faced by them, (iv) delay in obtaining statutory clearances/ certificates from the State 
Govt. regarding Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to Operate (CTO), building plan 
approval, electricity connection for the unit etc. and (v) delay in disbursement of term 
loan." 
 

61 
 
3.56 On being asked about the mechanism followed by the Ministry to ensure that 
sufficient number of eligible proposals are received from SC/ST categories, the Ministry 
stated :- 
 
"The following special provisions have been incorporated in the guidelines to promote 
receipt of more applications/ proposals from SC/ST category: 
 
a) Proposals received from SC/ST holding at least 51% stake in the entity, are 
treated as SC/ST proposals. 
b) Quantum of Term Loan from Banks should not be less than 20% of the total 
project cost in respect of proposals from General Areas. In case of proposals 
from Difficult Areas or proposals from SC/ST or Farmer Producer Organizations 
or Self-Help Groups, term loan amount should not be less than 10% of the total 
project cost. 
c) Applicant(s) of SC/ST category are given the benefit of combined net worth 
requirement wherein relaxation is given that their net-worth eligibility needs to 
be only equal to grants-in-aid sought (for General category applicants, net-worth 
requirement is 1.5 times of grants-in-aid sought). 
d) Grants-in-aid benefit @ 50% of eligible project cost for the projects received 
from SC/ST applicants is provided against 35% of grants-in-aid in case of 
general category applicants. 
e) As per evaluation criteria, a minimum score of 45 marks is considered eligible 
for the proposals received from SC/ST applicants against 60 marks for general 
category applicants." 
 
 
3.57 On being asked by the Committee about the corrective measures taken to address 
the problem of lesser number of applications received under SC/ST category, the Ministry 
furnished written reply under :- 
 
"The following special provisions have been incorporated in the guidelines to promote 
receipt of more applications / proposals from SC/ST category: 
 
(a) Relaxation in respect of stake of Scheduled Caste (SC) / Scheduled Tribe 
(ST) in SC/ST projects. Proposals received from SC/ST holding at least 51% 
stake in the entity, will be treated as SC/ST proposals. 
 

62 
 
(b) Quantum of Term Loan from Banks reduced to an amount not less than 20% 
of the total project cost in respect of proposals from General Areas. In case of 
proposals from Difficult Areas or proposals from SC/ST or Farmer Producer 
Organizations or Self-Help Groups, term loan amount shall not be less than 
10% of the total project cost. 
 
(c) Applicant(s) of SC/ST category are given the benefit of combine net worth 
requirement wherein relaxation is given that their net-worth eligibility would be 
only equal to grants-in-aid sought, however, for General Category applicants 
net-worth requirement if 1.5 times of grants-in-aid sought. 
 
(d) Grants-in-aid benefit @ 50% of eligible project cost for the projects received 
from SC/ST applicants is provided against 35% of grants-in-aid in case of 
general category applicants. 
 
(e) As per evaluation criteria, a minimum score of 45 marks is considered eligible 
for the proposals received from SC/ST applicants against 60 marks for 
general category applicants." 
 
 
3.58 During the course of evidence on 11.10.2023 the secretary, Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries, with regard to steps being taken to ensure effective implementation 
of the Sub-plans in respect of North-East Region, SCSP/TSP, stated inter-alia as under :- 
 
"……. In this we had invited EoI under the new guidelines.  Our savings were when 
we came to know that general response is less in North-East and SC/ST.  Regarding 
them, we have again issued a new EoI on 27.07.2023, the applications for which 
have arrived.  A committee is working on them for their approval process. ……" 
 
***  

63 
 
PART- II 
 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
Progress in Reduction of Harvest & Post Harvest Losses 
 
1. The Committee note that Agricultural Production in India has consistently 
recorded higher output over the years.  In 2019, India ranked first in pulses & milk, 
second in vegetable, fruit, wheat and rice and third in cereals, eggs in the World 
Agriculture.  However, the demand for food in India is likely to increase in the coming 
years - in direct proportion to likely increase in population of the country.  The 
Harvest and Post-harvest Losses in Agricultural Produces is however a drain on the 
food security and economic development of the country.  An effective Harvest and 
Post-harvest Management is therefore, very important for planning and utilization of 
the Agricultural Produces both scientifically and economically.  Studies have been 
conducted on Harvest and Post-harvest losses by the Central Institute of Post-
Harvest Engineering and Technology (CIPHET) in 2015 and by the NABARD  
Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd. (NABCONS) in 2022.  The Post-harvest losses in 
respect of cereals, pulses, Fruits, vegetables, Egg, etc. are stated to be in the range 
of 3.89% to above 5%.  The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has informed the 
Committee that as per findings of these Study Reports Post-harvest losses have 
marginally come down during the period from 2015 to 2022.   
 Food Processing could strengthen the link between Agriculture and Industry 
and help in generating farm income and employment as also in reducing wastage of 
agricultural products.  The Ministry of Food Processing Industries with the view to 
achieving the broad objective of bringing down Post-harvest Losses, is implementing 
various Schemes and Programmes including the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada 
Yojana (PMKSY), for the promotion of Food Processing Industries. 

64 
 
 The Committee, while taking note of the fact that the Post-harvest Losses,  
which is more than 3% in the cases of cereals, pulses, Fruits, vegetables, Egg, etc., 
recommend that realistic targets be set for the reduction of Post-Harvest losses in 
respect of Agricultural Produces through target oriented implementation of various 
Schemes of the Ministry including the Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food 
Processing and Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC).  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Schemes and Programmes for the Promotion of Food Processing Sector of India 
 
2. The Committee note that Food Products Industry of the country figures among 
the top five Sectors with respect to Output and Gross Value Added (GVA).   About 70 
lakh persons are directly engaged both in formal and informal segments of Food 
Processing Sector and this volume is almost 14% of the total employment in the 
Manufacturing Sector.   The average annual growth rate in Food Processing Sector 
was around 8.38% during the five years ending in 2020-21.  However, this Sector 
faces many challenges including Supply-Chain infrastructural gaps in primary 
processing/storage/distribution & marketing facilities, Seasonality of operations 
leading to low capacity utilization & increased cost of production,  Lack of product 
development and innovation, Inadequate institutional credit,  etc.   
 The Committee appreciate that the Government of India have taken several 
measures for the growth and development of the Food Processing Sector.  The Food 
Processing Sector has been included under Priority Sector Lending (PSL) Norms 
under the ‘Agriculture’ category by Reserve Bank of India (RBI).  The Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises is implementing Credit Guarantee Scheme for 
Micro & Small Enterprises through Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro & Small 
Enterprises (CGTMSE).  The Ministry of Food Processing Industry is implementing 

65 
 
two Central Sector Schemes - Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) and 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme for the Food Processing Industries (PLISFPI) 
and one Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 'Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of Micro Food 
Processing Industries (PMFME)' towards promotion of the Food Processing Sector.  
Implementation of the umbrella Scheme of PMKSY, which at present comprises six 
separate Scheme-Components including the Scheme for Creation / Expansion of 
Food Processing and Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC), have resulted in significant 
addition to infrastructure and manufacturing/storage capacity in the Sector. 
While acknowledging the progress so far, achieved, the Committee even then 
hold the view that the full scope and growth potential of Food Processing Sector of 
the country has not been fully realized.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to take necessary action to address the challenges faced by the Sector, 
especially the issues relating to credit needs of Entrepreneurs, through its Schemes 
and Programmes.  The Committee also recommend the Government to give wide 
publicity to the Schemes & Programmes available under the Food Processing Sector 
and periodically bring out a Compendium of Updated Information on Schemes and 
Programmes implemented by the Union Government for the information of the 
farmers and Agro-Processing Industries. 
 
Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 
 
3. The Government launched the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana 
(PMKSY),  an Umbrella Scheme comprising eight Scheme-Components including the 
Scheme for Creation / Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities 
(CEFPPC) on 03.05.2017 - with a view to give necessary boost to growth of Food 
Processing Sector of the country.  PMKSY was envisaged as a comprehensive 
package towards creation of Modern infrastructure with efficient supply Chain 

66 
 
Management from Farm Gate to Retail Outlet.  However, the Committee find that 
funds utilization for PMKSY has been found to be less than optimal level since its 
launch in 2017-18.   During the period of 2017-18 to 2020-21, the Revised Estimates 
and the Actual Expenditure was Rs.3143.60 Crore and Rs.2555.28 Crore, respectively 
against the Outlay of Rs. 6107.50 Crore.  The Committee further note that the PMKSY 
has since been restructured and provided with a marginally reduced outlay of 
Rs.4600 Crore for the 15th FCC Period of 2021-22 to 2025-26 against the proposed 
outlay of Rs.9824 Crore.  The Cumulative Funds Utilization under the PMKSY till 
31.05.2023 was Rs.3864.17 Crore against a Cumulative Budgetary Allocation of 
Revised Estimates of Rs.5530.94 Crore for 2017-18 to 2023-24.   
 Notwithstanding the issue of under-utilization of funds, the Committee note 
that a total of 1360 Projects with potential to create 364.9 LMT/amount of processing 
capacity were approved till 31.05.2023 and 776 Projects of these Projects were made 
operative leading to creation of 208.09 LMT of processing capacity.  Against this 
backdrop, the Committee while appreciating the positive impacts of PMKSY towards 
creation / expansion of Food Processing and preservation capacities in the country,  
hold the firm view that the issue of under-utilization funds under PMKSY needs to be 
addressed on the top most priority.   
 In view of the foregoing the Committee recommend that appropriate remedial 
measures be taken to improve the process of implementation and its regular 
monitoring so as to ensure optimal utilization funds and target oriented 
implementation of PMKSY.  The Committee also emphasize that the Ministry needs to 
look into the all issues affecting smooth implementation of PMKSY, particularly, the 
aspect of receipt of ineligible proposals, which has been stated to be a major 
constraint in the implementation of PMKSY.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the action taken in the matter. 

67 
 
 
Need for Engagement of Resource Persons/Experts in the Implementation of Scheme 
for Creation / Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC) 
 
4. The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing the Scheme for 
Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC) since 
2017-18 under the Central Sector Umbrella Scheme of “Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
Sampada Yojana”.  The Main Objective of the Scheme is to increase the level of food 
processing and value addition to facilitate reduction of wastage and enhancement of 
farmers income through creation of incremental processing and preservation 
capacities and modernization/ expansion of existing food processing units.  The 
CEFPPC Scheme, which covers a wide range of processing activities, is implemented 
in accordance with the Operative Guidelines issued by the Ministry.  These Operative 
Guidelines lay down the detailed procedure for the implementation of the Scheme 
including eligibility conditions.   
The Committee note that the CEFPPC Scheme is demand driven and  the 
Projects selected under the Scheme are eligible for Grants-in-aid @35% of eligible 
project cost for projects in General Areas and @50% in Difficult Areas as well as for 
projects of SC/ST, FPOs and SHGs subject to a maximum of Rs. 5 crore.  As provided 
in the Guidelines, the Ministry invites proposals from the public through Notification 
of Expression of Interest from time to time.  Submission of proposals under the 
Scheme involves voluminous work requiring preparation of Detailed Project Report 
and fulfillment of other eligibility conditions as laid down in the Operative Guidelines 
including obtaining of Term-loan from bank, etc., within a short time period of 45 
days or so, as specified in the Notification.  An Applicant also needs to furnish Non-
Refundable Fee of Rs. 20,000/- along with his project proposal, and this fee is not 
returned to the Applicants, even if the application is found ineligible or rejected 

68 
 
subsequently.  Since the inception of the Scheme, the Ministry has invited proposals 
six times including the last Notification of 27.07.2023.    
The Committee further note that more than 50% of the Applications received by 
the Ministry during each of the previous five times were rejected as those were found 
to be ineligible. The Committee, feel that the main reason for receipt of Ineligible 
Proposals is lack of information and knowledge about the Scheme among the 
applicants and the accompanying Formalities /Technicalities associated with it.   
 The Committee, recommend that suitable Experts/Resource Persons be 
engaged by the Ministry for providing necessary guidance and assistance to 
probable applicants / entrepreneurs for the preparation and submission of project 
proposals to the Ministry under all the Schemes of PMKSY including the Scheme for 
CEFPPC.  The Committee would like be apprised of the action taken on the issue. 
 
Utilization of Funds and Progress in Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC 
  
5. The Scheme for CEFPPC, which was launched in 2017-18, was allocated a 
Budgetary Outlay of Rs.1290 Crore for the 14th Finance Commission Cycle (FCC) 
Period ending on 31.03.2021.  The Budgetary Support was subsequently revised to 
Rs.1068.50 Crore for approving 305 Projects, with an average Grants-in-Aid of Rs.3.5 
Crore Per Unit.  The Ministry, however, exhausted the amount in approving 297 Units 
up to 31.03.2021 and accordingly the target of approving 305 Units could not be 
achieved.   The Committee note with concern that the Ministry could eventually utilize 
only Rs.456.70 Crore against Rs.1068.50 Crore.  With regard to lower achievements, 
the Ministry attributed the factors responsible for the same like Inadequate number of 
eligible proposals at initial stages of implementation,  Approval of large number of 
Projects at the end of 14th FCC period, Time period of 18/24 months required for 

69 
 
completion of Projects and the delay in submission of Documents for claiming 
Grants-in-Aid. 
 During the 15 th FCC Period of 2021-22 to 2025-26, the outlay for CEFPPC was 
Rs.1292 Crore, out of which Rs.642 Crore has been earmarked only towards meeting 
the liabilities of Previously Sanctioned Ongoing Projects. Hence, an amount of Rs.650 
Crore, was only available for implementation of New Proposals against which, the 
Ministry envisaged to implement 162 New Proposals including a backlog of 43 
Eligible Proposals.  The Ministry also received 307 More Eligible Proposals as against 
its Notification of 21.06.2022 and thus there were a total of 350 (43+307) Eligible 
Proposals for implementation.   In regard to additional funds allocation for the 
Scheme, the Department of Expenditure has suggested to the Ministry that it may 
utilize additional Rs.950 Crore only (20% of outlay of Rs.4600 Crore for PMKSY) after 
obtaining requisite approvals. 
 Under these circumstances, the Ministry has now informed that 107 pending 
eligible proposals will not be approved for implementation due to non-availability of 
funds.  Surprisingly, even in this crisis situation of non-availability of funds for approving 
already received 107 Eligible Proposals and inadequacy of funds for completion of 273 
Ongoing  Projects, the Ministry has again issued Notification inviting proposals under 
the Scheme.  
  Keeping in view the above factors, the Committee feel that the Ministry has failed 
to visualize, plan and ensure proper implementation of  the Scheme and the Ministry has 
under-utilized the funds during the 14th FCC period and faces financial constraints during 
15th FCC period in the implementation of the Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry needs to improve its planning process and execution 
mechanism in implementation of the CEFPPC Scheme.  The Committee further 
recommend to the Ministry that necessary approvals as suggested by the Department of 

70 
 
Expenditure be obtained well in time for getting additional funds allocation for the 
Scheme for CEFPPC in order to ensure smooth implementation of this most important 
Scheme-Component of PMKSY.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise 
action taken in the matter. 
 
Requirement of Additional Budgetary Allocation for the Scheme for CEFPPC  
 
6. The Committee note that since the launch of the Scheme for CEFPPC in 2017-
18, the cumulative achievements as on 17.09.2023 are that a total of 596 Projects have 
been approved, out of which 218-Projects were completed, 105-Projects cancelled/ 
withdrawn and 273-Projects are ongoing.  According to the Ministry an amount of 
Rs.1034.74 Crore is required for these 273 ongoing Projects.  In addition the Ministry 
may need additional funds for the implementation of New Eligible Proposals that will 
be received in response to its notification of 27.07.2023.  The Committee also note 
that an outlay for the Scheme for CEFPPC for the duration of 15th FCC period of 2021-
22 to 2025-26 was Rs.1292 Crore. As on 01.06.2023, the Ministry has already incurred 
an expenditure of Rs. 415.12 Crore.  The Ministry has taken up the matter of 
additional funds allocation for the Scheme for CEFPPC with the Ministry of Finance.  
According to the Ministry 107 Eligible Proposals already pending with it could not be 
approved for implementation due to Non-availability of funds. The Non-availability of 
sufficient funds during the current year, as also for the remaining duration of 15th 
FCC period has also been one of the major reasons for the same. The Funds 
requirements for completion of Ongoing Projects and Additional funds needed by the 
Ministry for the implementation of New Projects under the Scheme, have not been 
clearly indicated by the Ministry. 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that funds requirements for the 
Scheme be worked out afresh taking into account the balance funds available out of 

71 
 
the outlay for 15th FCC period, Number of projects likely to be completed during 2023-
24, 2024-25 & 2025-26 and the likely Number of new eligible proposals to be 
implemented out of the eligible application to be received against notification issued 
on 27.07.2023.   
 The Committee, further emphasize that the Ministry shall work out a realistic 
estimate of its funds requirements and convince the Government for providing the 
required additional funds for the Scheme at the earliest so that all the eligible 
proposals received by it are implemented towards attaining the objective of reducing  
Post-harvest Losses of Agricultural Produces in the country. The Committee also 
desire that the Government should provide more funds for efficient and smooth  
implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC during the current financial year and for 
the period of 2024-26 for effective implementation of the important Scheme-
Components of the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY).  The Committee, 
would like to be apprised of the achievements made by the Ministry in this regard.  
 
 
Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC for SCSP, TSP & NE Region 
7. The Committee note that the Ministry could not properly utilise the funds 
allocated under the Scheme for CEFPPC for Schedule Caste Sub Plan (SCSP), Tribal 
Sub Plan (TSP) and for the North Eastern Region since the launch of the Scheme.  As 
regards the implementation of SCSP during 2018-19 to 2022-23, the Budget Estimates 
(BE), Revised Estimates (RE), Actual Expenditure (AE) are Rs. 368.93 Crore; Rs. 
292.92 Crore; and Rs. 107.50 Crore respectively. In the implementation of TSP, the 
achievements in terms of BE, RE and AE are Rs. 217.64 Crore, Rs. 170.83 Crore and 
Rs. 35.32 Crore.  Similarly, the BE, RE and AE in respect of North Eastern Region are 
Rs.  509.54 Crore, Rs. 397.27 Crore and Rs. 199.28 Crore respectively. 

72 
 
 The Committee note that utilisation of funds for SCSP and TSP has been less 
than 1/3rd of the amount allocated and utilisation of funds for North Eastern Region 
(NER) is less than 50% which is not an encouraging trend. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should try to find out the reasons for Non-utilization of 
allocated funds for SCSP, TSP and also for NER so as to make sure that the funds are 
utilised to the optimum level by the Ministry in the implementation of the Scheme. 
 
Non-Refundable Fee in respect of Non-Implemented Eligible Proposals 
 
8. The Committee note that the probable beneficiaries under the Scheme for 
CEFPPC need to submit their Application / Project Proposal complete in all respects  
in accordance with the instructions laid down in the Operative Guidelines and as per 
the Notification of the Ministry.  All the Applicants are also required to submit a Non-
refundable fee of Rs.20,000/- (Rs.15,000/- for SC/ST Applicants) along with the Project 
Proposal. Moreover, the successful applicants, on being selected for financial 
assistance by the Ministry, are also required to submit a Refundable Bank Guarantee 
of 5% of eligible Grants-in Aid within 30 days of approval of the Project for the period, 
till 60 days beyond the date of completion of the Project. According to the Ministry, 
the Non-refundable Application fee is sought in order to ascertain the genuineness 
and interest of the Applicant for availing Grants-in-Aid and also to meet out the 
expense involved in processing the Applications / Proposals.   This fee in respect of 
the Rejected/ Ineligible proposals is not returned to the Applicants. 
Keeping in view the above factors, the Committee hold the view that 
prescription of Non-refundable fee for the submission of application for the Scheme 
is a discouraging factor for prospective applicants particularly, SC/ST applicants and 
weaker categories like farmers, SHGs, etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 

73 
 
that the condition of Non-refundable Application Fee for submission of proposals 
needs a serious reconsideration.  However the Ministry may consider other alternate 
measures to discourage Non-serious candidates instead of prescribing Non-
refundable Application Fee. 
The Committee also specifically desire that the Ministry shall look into the 
matter of 107 Eligible Proposals, which still remain pending with it out of the 307 
Eligible proposals received by it against its previous Notification dated 21.06.2022.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Criterion of Eligibility of Location for Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC and 
the Issue(s) Associated with Eligible Proposals 
 
9. As per the Operative Guidelines of the CEFPPC Scheme, the proposals under 
the Scheme will be considered both inside Mega Food Parks (MFPs)/Agro-processing 
Clusters (APCs) and anywhere outside MFPs/ APCs. As far as practicable, 60% of 
funds will be for units inside MFPs/APCs and 40% to units outside MFPs/APCs.  The 
Committee note that 41 MFPs and 76 APCs have been sanctioned under the PMKSY 
and out of this sanctioned numbers, as on 11-06-2023, there are 24 Functional MFPs 
and 18 Functional APCs, only. 
Further, the Committee note that many States/UTs like, Jharkhand, Goa, 
Pondicherry, Ladakh, etc., have had neither any MFPs nor any APCs.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the existing criteria regarding Eligible Location for 
implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC including the ratio of 60 : 40 for Projects 
Inside and Outside the MFPs/APCs be reviewed suitably.  Further, New Provisions be 
incorporated in the Operative Guidelines so as to ensure that implementation of the 
CEFPPC Scheme is encouraged in the States/UTs and in the Regions, which do not 
have any MFPs or APCs.  The Committee also recommend that until such time the 

74 
 
New Provisions are made in this regard,  due preference be accorded to those 
States/UTs which do not have any MFPs or APCs, while selecting / approving new 
Projects against the present 40% Project-quota meant for the places located outside 
the MFPs/APCs.  The Committee would however, like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this matter. 
 
Participation of Different Categories in the Scheme for CEFPPC 
10. As per the CEFPPC Operative Guidelines any organization/individual engaged 
in creation/ expansion/ modernization of Food Processing and Preservation 
Capacities would be eligible for Grants-in Aid (GIA) under the Scheme.   The scheme 
is Demand Driven and subject to availability of funds.  Although no specific State-
wise allocation of funds is made under the Scheme, however, 10% of total BE is 
reserved for North- Eastern Region.  Many concessions including the enhanced rate 
of Grants-in-Aid are permitted in respect of Project Proposals submitted by Persons 
belonging to SC/ST and Difficult Areas,  Farmers Producers Organizations (FPOs), 
Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and Central / State Entities in order to encourage these 
sections to participate in the Scheme for CEFPPC.   
 
 As regards Selection Criteria, the Ministry clarified to the Committee that when 
many applications have the same score in assessment, the Project with higher 
project cost will gain preference in order to attract more private investment.  This 
provision has the effect of nullifying the concessions extended to proposals from 
SC/ST, Difficult Areas, FPOs, SHGs and Central / State Entities.  The Committee also 
note that out of the 473 approved Projects, the break-up of different categories is 
Private sector-399; SC category-27; ST categories-21; FPO's-13; MNC's-10; 
Multipurpose-Societies-1; Public Sector-1 and SHGs-Nil.  Against this backdrop, the 

75 
 
Committee recommend that the Selection Criteria be reviewed to ensure that FPOs, 
SHGs, Entities from Difficult Areas and Public Entities-having participation of farmers 
and women also get benefits under the Scheme for CEFPPC.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
 
Time Schedule for Invitation of Proposals Under the Scheme for CEFPPC 
 
11. The Committee note that the Ministry of Food Processing Industries invites 
Online Proposals/Applications from the prospective Entrepreneurs by issuing 
Expression of Interest (EoI) from time to time under various Sub-schemes of PMKSY 
including the Scheme for CEFPPC based on availability of funds, number of 
Cancelled/ Withdrawn Projects and the number of vacant slots.   During the past six 
years of implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC since its inception, the Ministry 
has invited proposals six times on 31.07.2017, 29.12.2017, 16.07.2019, 01.06.2020, 
21.06.2022 & 27.07.2023. The last date for submission of proposals as per the current 
Notification of 27.07.2023 was 22.11.2023.    
 
 The Committee further note that the Ministry has not followed any Annual time 
Schedule in inviting proposals reportedly due to Covid-19 Pandemic  and non-receipt 
of adequate number of eligible applications/proposals at initial stages of 
implementation of the Scheme.  However, during the 15th Finance Commission Cycle 
period starting from 01.04.2021, the Ministry is receiving good response for the 
Scheme and is getting sufficient number of eligible proposals for the Scheme.  
Against the backdrop the Committee recommend that the Ministry must chalk out an 
Annual Time Schedule for Invitation, Selection and Approval / Sanction of Projects 
under the Scheme for CEFPPC and the Notification for inviting proposals be issued 

76 
 
atleast once in a year after budgetary allocation for the year.   Action taken in this 
regard be intimated to the Committee. 
 
Promotion of Region Specific Products Under the Schemes of the Ministry 
12. The main objective of the scheme for CEFPPC is to increase the level of Food 
Processing and Value Addition through creation of processing and preservation 
capacities and modernization / expansion of existing Food Processing Units.  The 
Committee, note that the Scheme for CEFPPC plays a major role in establishment / 
expansion of Food Processing Units. The Committee further note that the Scheme is 
Demand Driven and as such no State/UT-wise Project implementation and funds 
allocation is done.  Out of the already Approved 473 Food Processing Units till June, 
2023, 210 Projects have been completed with creation of processing/ preservation 
capacity of 38.32 LMT/Annum.  Further, 263 Ongoing Projects will result in creating 
processing / preservation capacity of 55.58 LMT/Annum. However, the State/UT-wise 
data of 484 Projects furnished by the Ministry indicates that there is a vast disparity 
among States/UTs and in different Regions.   
 The Committee are also of the view that the problem of periodic glut in 
production of some Agricultural Produces like Onion, Potato, Tomato, etc. in different 
Regions of the country has not been properly addressed to under the Scheme.  
Moreover, the Post-harvest losses - in respect of fruits and vegetables in the country, 
are in the range of 4.58% to above 11%, which remains a big cause of concern.  
Processing of Agricultural Produces into suitable value added products and 
facilitation of appropriate storage for excess production can help to reduce the Post-
Harvest losses and also give protection against price fluctuation during the glut 
periods.  The Committee therefore, recommend that Region Specific and Product 
Specific Programmes be promoted under the Scheme for CEFPPC to address the 

77 
 
issue through suitable interventions by the way of necessary modifications in the 
Operative Guidelines of the Scheme.  The Committee also recommend that more 
number of Common Facility Centers with Gamma Radiation Centres, etc. be 
promoted under the Scheme to increase preservation capacities - in respect of 
perishable items of agricultural produces.  The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the action taken in the matter. 
 
Delay and Challenges in the Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC 
13. The Committee note that the time period specified for completion and 
operationalisation of Approved Projects under the Scheme for CEFPPC, is 18 months 
from the date of issue of Approval Letter.  However, the Sanctioned Projects have 
been observed to incur delay / time-overruns in their implementation and completion.  
The Ministry have stated before the Committee that it could not approve the targeted 
305 projects during 14th Finance Commission Cycle (FCC) period due to paucity of 
funds for the Scheme.  However, the Ministry subsequently intimated that during the 
14th FCC Period of 01.04.2017 to 31.03.2021 a total of 353 Projects were approved, out 
of which 212 Projects were completed, 96 were cancelled/withdrawn and 45 Projects 
are still ongoing.  During the 15th FCC period starting from 01.04.2021 onwards, out of 
the total 243 Approved Projects, 7-Projects were completed 26-Projects were 
cancelled/ withdrawn and 210-Projects were ongoing.  As on 12.09.2023, the 
cumulative achievements since the launch of the Scheme for CEFPPC in 2017-18, are 
stated to be Total Number of Approved Projects - 596, Projects Completed - 218, 
Projects cancelled/ withdrawn - 105 and Ongoing Projects - 273.  
 
 The Committee note that delay in obtaining Statutory Clearances / Certificates 
from States/UTs and inadequate support from lending banks in disbursement of 

78 
 
Term-loans are stated to be main factors causing delay in the in the implementation 
of the Approved Projects.  As regards cancellation or withdrawal of approved 
Projects is concerned, the Committee note that the reason for the same is that the 
applicants could not fulfill the eligibility conditions or show required 
progress/documents in the implementation of the project for getting benefits under 
the Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take 
necessary action to address the problems/ challenges faced by the Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs) in States/UTs through creation of Monitoring 
Cells/Units in concerned State/UTs and through effective coordination with the 
Institutions/Resources that have been established in States/UTs for the 
implementation of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 'Pradhan Mantri Formalisation 
of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME)'.  The Committee also recommend 
that the Technical Evaluation and Monitoring Process for the implementation of the 
Scheme for CEFPPC be suitably strengthened by way of improving its mechanism so 
as to avoid subsequent Cancellation/ Withdrawal in respect of large number of 
Approved Projects. The Committee would like to be apprised of action taken in the 
matter. 
 
 
 
New Delhi          P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
06 February, 2024      Chairperson 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
   Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 

79 
 
Annexure-I 
Instructions for Application Filing 
(a) All applications shall be submitted online on the Sampada Portal of the 
Ministry. No physical application will be accepted and such application shall be 
summarily ignored. Applicants are required to submit following documents: 
Note: 
(i)  All pages of all documents submitted online must be self-attested by the 
applicant or its authorised signatory (supporting documents for such authorization 
to be furnished). 
 
(ii)  The Ministry will not be responsible for delay in submission of any 
proposal within the prescribed time limit indicated in EOI, and such proposals (not 
received in time) shall not be considered. Incomplete information or deficient 
documents submitted/ uploaded by the applicant may lead to rejection of 
proposals. 
 
(iii) Mere submission of application (with required documents) against EOI 
does not confer any right on the applicant for claim of grants-in-aid under the 
Scheme. Grants-in-aid will be sanctioned based on merit, preference criteria and 
evaluation of the proposal as per the assessment criteria.  
 
(iv) When original documents are in regional language, they should be 
accompanied by self-certified English/ Hindi translation. 
 
(b) Detailed Project Report (DPR)indicating financial and technical profile of the 
entity, domain expertise available with the entity, raw material availability in the area 
where project is proposed to be set up, arrangements for procurement of raw material, 
marketing strategy of proposed products, process flow diagram of proposed 
products with production capacity per day, technology proposed for various activities in 
process line, financial estimates with key financial parameters, profit and loss 
statement, estimated employment generation from the project (direct as well as 
indirect), number of farmers estimated to be benefited etc. 
 
(c) CA/Statutory Auditor certificate (prepared in accordance with statutory 
provisions read with conditions indicated in Appendix-I) in support of networth along 
with documentary proof.  
 
(d) Final/ in-principle term loan sanction from a Bank. 
 
(e) A detailed Appraisal Note, specific to the scheme, from a Scheduled 
Commercial Bank. 
 
(f) Certificate of incorporation/ registration, Memorandum and Article of 
Association, bye laws of the society/partnership deed, PAN, TAN, SC/ST caste 
certificate (whichever applicable). 
 
(g) IEM registration/Entrepreneur’s Memorandum/ Udyog Aadhaar registration. 

80 
 
 
(h) Bio-data/ background/ experience of the entity and its promoters relevant to 
the scheme. 
 
(i) Annual reports and Audited Financial Statement of Accounts for last two years 
(if applicable). 
 
(j) Details of land (on ownership basis or leasehold) along with relevant 
documents. In case of lease, the registered lease deed shall be for a period of at least 
15 years in the name of the applicant firm. In case land for the project has been taken 
on lease from State Government/ its entities, the policy of State Government in this 
regard will be followed. 
Note: Self-attested English/ Hindi version needs to be submitted in case such 
document is in regional language. 
 
(k) Proof of submission of requisite fee. 
 
(l) Quotations from Original Equipment Manufacturer (or its authorised dealer/ 
supplier) in respect of Plant & Machinery and equipment for the proposed project. 
 
(m) CA/ Statutory Auditor certificate as per Appendix-II. 
 
(n) Item-wise and cost-wise details of technical civil works envisaged duly certified 
by Chartered Engineer (Civil). 
 
(o) Item-wise and cost-wise details of Plant & Machinery envisaged duly certified 
by Chartered Engineer (Mechanical). 
 
(p) An undertaking to be furnished by the applicant as per  
Appendix-III. The expenditure made/ incurred on the project before the date of 
submission of online application shall be furnished as per Appendix-IV. 
 
(q) Correspondences (emails/ letters) for possible forward or backward linkages. 
 
Note: All pages of the proposal are to be properly numbered and the proposal should 
contain an Index as first page of the proposal indicating the various documents 
submitted along with page number, failing which the proposal is likely to be rejected. 
 
 
  

81 
 
Annexure-II 
 
List of Ineligible Items for Calculation of Grants-in-Aid under Scheme for CEFPPC 
Compound wall  
Approach road/ internal roads  
Cost of land and site development 
Administrative office building 
Canteen  
Labour rest room and quarters for workers 
Security/ guard room or enclosure 
Non-technical civil works not related to the components of the scheme 
Margin money, working capital and contingencies  
Fuel, consumables, spares and stores  
Transport vehicles except Controlled temperature vehicles like coolers and 
refrigerated/ insulated/ ventilated transport 
Pre-operative expenses 
Service charges, carriage and freight charges or other such charges/ fees 
Expenditure on painting of machinery  
AC ducting, furniture, computers and allied office items.  
Closed Circuit TV Camera and security system related equipment. 
Consultancy fee, taxes, etc. on plant and machinery. 
Stationery items 
Plant & machinery not directly related to components of the scheme 
Fly catchers, hand washer, laundry 
Reconditioned/ refurbished/ second hand/ old plant & machinery 
Note: The list is only indicative and the Project Approval Committee constituted by 
the Ministry will be the final authority to decide on ineligibility or otherwise of items for 
purpose of grants-in-aid. 
 
  

82 
 
Annexure-III 
 
List of 105 cancelled / withdrawal projects alongwith reasons under CEFPPC Scheme 
 
Sr. 
No.  
Name of the 
applicant District State Reasons  
1 M/s Omniactive 
health technologies 
Ltd.  
Krishnagiri Tamil Nadu Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh  
2 M/s Genus 
International 
Commidities Limited  
Ajmer Rajasthan The project has been cancelled by Ministry as 
applicant could not able to show sufficient 
progress at project site 
3 M/s Hexagon 
Nutrition 
(International) Pvt. 
Ltd.  
Tuticorin Tamil Nadu The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 17.9.2018 as the applicant had 
incurred more than 50% of expenditure before 
EoI. 
4 M/s karma Milk Surat Gujarat Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh 
after redesigning the project 
5 M/s Al rasheed 
agro-impex 
Srinagar Jammu & 
Kashmir 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 18.01.2019 as the applicant could 
not meeting the basic eligibility criteria of scheme 
guidelines. 
6 M/s Dolphin 
Corporation 
Surat Gujarat Withdrawn by applicant due to change in the 
Partnership agreement and some components of 
Plant and Machinery 
7 M/s Pal Agro Bareilly Uttar 
Pardesh 
Withdrawn by applicant as it is not going to 
implement the project 
8 M/s Sunrise 
Buildhome Pvt Ltd 
Ajmer Rajasthan Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh 
after redesigning the project 
9 M/s Shree Ganesh 
Frozen foods 
Pvt.Ltd 
West Tripura  Tripura Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh on 
new location 
10 M/s J R Beverages Surat Gujarat Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh 
under APC scheme 
11 M/s Miloni Foods Surat Gujarat Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh 
under APC scheme 
12 M/s Euro Enterprise Surat Gujarat Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh 
under APC scheme 
13 M/s Krishna 
Synthetics Limited 
GautamBuddh 
Nagar 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Withdrawn by applicant due to dispute with 
Sanctioning bank 
14 M/s Ekstaze India 
Pvt Ltd 
GautamBuddh 
Nagar 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Withdrawn by applicant  
15 M/s Warana 
Industries 
Osmanabad Maharashtra Withdrawn by applicant. 
16 M/s JMJ Seafoods 
Pvt Ltd 
Kanyakumari Tamil Nadu The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 07.08.2019 as the applicant has 
not complied with the conditions of scheme 
guidelines 
17 M/s JH Agro 
Products 
Pilibhit Uttar 
Pradesh 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 11 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
18 M/s Mohani Tea 
Leaves Pvt. Ltd 
Kanpur Dehat Uttar 
Pradesh 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 

83 
 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant has 
not complied with the conditions of approval letter 
dated 13.04.2018 and also extant scheme 
guidelines even after lapse of more than 16 
months from the date of issue of approval letter . 
19 M/s Haryana Food 
& General Mills 
Sonepat Haryana The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 12 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
20 M/s Atarson 
Overseas Pvt. Ltd 
(earlier known as 
Shri 
BalajiRohilkhand 
Rice Mills) 
Shahjhanpur Uttar 
Pradesh 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 11 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
21 M/s Yaps N Belly 
Food Products Pvt 
Ltd 
Udham Singh 
Nagar 
Uttarakhand The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 18 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
22 M/s Delect Spices 
and Herbs Pvt Ltd 
Tumkur Karnataka The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 18 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter 
23 M/s Banashankari 
Chemicals Pvt Ltd 
Mandya Karnataka The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 18 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
24 M/s Bodhivriksha 
Agro Products Pvt 
Ltd 
Ajmer Rajasthan The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 16 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
25 M/s Mangalam 
Resources Pvt Ltd 
Dewas Madhya 
Pradesh 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 18 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
26 M/s Allfun Foods 
India Pvt Ltd 
Satara Maharashtra The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 18 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
27 M/s Aarya Agro-bio 
and Herbals Pvt Ltd 
Satara Maharashtra The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 18 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
 

84 
 
28 M/s Pashudhan 
Feeds 
Satara Maharashtra The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 18 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
29 M/s Purnita Flour 
Mills 
Satara Maharashtra The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 18 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
30 M/s 
SwaharEntrepries 
Satara Maharashtra The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 16 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
31 M/s Baghelkhand 
Industries Pvt Ltd 
(BIPL) 
Dewas Madhya 
Pradesh 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 18 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
32 M/s Rabi Rice 
Milling & Processing 
Centre 
Imphal East Manipur The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 21.08.2019 as the applicant has 
not complied with the conditions of approval letter 
dated 19.02.2018 and also extant scheme 
guidelines even after lapse of more than 18 
months from the date of issue of approval letter. 
33 M/s Himalaya Agro 
Industry 
Kullu Himacha 
Pradesh  
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 25.09.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project 
site. 
34 M/s Sindhu Farms 
Pvt Ltd 
Raipur Chhattisgarh The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 19.12.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 15 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
35 M/s Lemooria 
Foods Private 
Limited 
Chennai Tamil Nadu The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 19.12.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 22 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
36 M/s Natures Fresh 
Enterprises Pvt Ltd 
Varanasi Uttar 
Pradesh 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 19.12.2019 as the applicant has 
not complied with the conditions of approval letter 
dated 13.04.2018 and also extant scheme 
guidelines even after lapse of more than 20 
months from the date of issue of approval letter 
37 M/s Pampar 
Ovenfresh Foods 
Pvt. Ltd 
Darjeeling West Bengal The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 19.12.2019 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project 
site. 

85 
 
38 M/s Kamuna Food 
Processing Ltd 
Mirzapur Uttar 
Pradesh 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 26.02.2020 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 17 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
39 M/s HRB Food 
Products Pvt. Ltd 
Howrah West Bengal The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 26.02.2020 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 16 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
40 M/s Supreme 
Specialty Foods 
Private Limited 
Sonepat Haryana  The project has been cancelled based on PMA 
site visit report.  
41 M/s Achint&Aparna 
Agro Products Pvt    
Ltd 
Udham Singh 
Nagar 
Uttarakhand The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 28.05.2020 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 26 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
42 M/s Manish Kumar 
Mohit Kumar 
Sonepat Haryana The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 28.05.2020 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 15 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
43 M/s Sunrise Food 
Industry 
Kolasib Mizoram The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 02.09.2020 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
after lapse of more than 21 months from the date 
of issue of approval letter. 
44 M/s Shelke 
Beverages Pvt Ltd 
Pune Maharashtra Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh 
under revised scheme guidelines 
45 M/s Greatvalley 
Agro Pvt. Ltd 
Surat Gujarat The project has been cancelled vide letter dated 
04.01.2021 as the applicant could not able to 
show sufficient progress at project site even after 
lapse of more than 16 months from the date of 
issue of approval letter. 
46 M/s Metrolike Tasty 
Food Products 
Surat Gujarat Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh  
47 M/s Ranvik Foods Udham Singh 
Nagar 
Uttarakhand Withdrawn by applicant  
48 M/s Bharat RTE 
Foods 
Surat Gujarat Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh  
49 M/s Grand Marine 
Exim 
Alappuzha Kerala Withdrawn by applicant due to financial issues  
50 M/s Shagun Dairy  Mandi Himacha 
Pradesh  
Withdrawn by applicant due to some unavoidable 
circumstances  
51 M/s Mata Hanogi 
Agro Industry 
Mandi Himachal 
Pradesh  
Withdrawn by applicant so as to apply afresh  
52 M/s Tomar Foods 
Pvt Ltd 
Udham Singh 
Nagar 
Uttarakhand The project has been cancelled vide letter dated 
30.03.2021 as the applicant could not able to 
show sufficient progress at project site. 
53 M/s Sunrise  Food 
Products 
Mandya Karnataka Withdrawn by applicant due to feasibility issue at 
project location 
54 M/s Telangana 
State Horticulture 
Development 
Medchal Telangana Withdrawn by applicant due to administrative 
reasons  

86 
 
Corporatin Ltd 
55 M/s ATC Bilaspur Himachal 
Pradesh  
The project has been cancelled vide letter dated 
28.05.2021 as the applicant could not able to 
show sufficient progress at project site even after 
lapse of more than 21 months from the date of 
issue of approval letter. 
56 M/s 
SarvasiddhiAgrotec
hPvt. Ltd. 
South Tripura Tripura Withdrawn by applicant  
57 M/s Chander Milk 
Product 
Bilaspur Himachal 
Pradesh  
The project has been cancelled vide letter dated 
27.05.2021 as the applicant could not able to 
show sufficient progress at project site even after 
lapse of more than 21 months from the date of 
issue of approval letter. 
58 M/s KisanSmapada 
Food Park (UNIT-II) 
Nagpur Maharashtra Withdrawn by applicant due to no viability of 
project 
59 M/s King Spices Kolasib Mizoram Withdrawn by applicant as it is not able to 
implement the project 
60 M/s Sula Vineyards 
Private Limited 
Nashik Maharashtra Withdrawn by applicant  
61 M/s Lateef Agro 
Industries  
Pulwama Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Withdrawn by applicant due to financial issues in 
Covid-19 
62 M/s Vinayaka Agro  
Foods 
Mandya Karnataka Withdrawn by applicant due to financial issues in 
Covid-19 
63 M/s Narendra Agro 
Industries  
Kangra Himachal 
Pradesh  
Withdrawn by applicant due to some unavoidable 
circumstances  
64 M/s Ahuja Sweets 
&Namkeen 
Kangra Himachal 
Pradesh  
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 17.08.2021 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
even after lapse of more than 21 months from the 
date of issue of approval letter. 
65 M/s Naga Spice & 
Herbs 
Senapati Manipur Withdrawn by applicant to avail subsidy from 
MOVCDNER 
66 M/s IXI Serve LLP Ajmer Rajasthan Withdrawn by applicant due to paucity of funds 
67 M/s Agrosafe 
Industries Pvt Ltd 
AJmer Rajasthan The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 07.03.2022 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
even after lapse of more than 19 months from the 
date of issue of approval letter. 
68 M/s KDS 
Enterprises 
West Kemeng Arunachal 
Pradesh 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 07.03.2022 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
even after lapse of more than 12 months from the 
date of issue of approval letter. 
69 M/s Kasa Infra Ltd Jodhpur Rajasthan The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 07.03.2022 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
even after lapse of more than 25 months from the 
date of issue of approval letter. 
70 M/s. Al Halal Foods Pulwama Jammu & 
Kashmir 
The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 07.03.2022 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
even after lapse of more than 19 months from the 
date of issue of approval letter. 
 

87 
 
71 M/s Beri Agro 
Foods 
Mandya Karnataka The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 07.03.2022 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
even after lapse of more than 23 months from the 
date of issue of approval letter. 
72 M/s Coco Lait Kanchipuram Tamil Nadu The project has been cancelled by Inter-
Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) in its 
meeting dated 07.03.2022 as the applicant could 
not able to show sufficient progress at project site 
even after lapse of more than 27 months from the 
date of issue of approval letter. 
73 M/s Natures Cane 
Foods LLP  
Krishna Andhra 
Pradesh 
Withdrawn by applicant  
74 M/s Great Destiny 
foods and Drinks 
(P) Ltd 
Tiruvallur Tamil Nadu The project has been cancelled vide letter dated 
02.06.2022 as the applicant could not able to 
show sufficient progress at project site even after 
lapse of more than 51 months from the date of 
issue of approval letter 
75 M/s Aegean 
Chennai Foods Pvt 
Ltd 
Tiruvallur Tamil Nadu The project has been cancelled vide letter dated 
08.06.2022 as the applicant could not able to 
show sufficient progress at project site even after 
lapse of more than 34 months from the date of 
issue of approval letter 
76 M/s Unimax Frozen 
Treat Private 
Limited  
Sonepat Haryana Withdrawn by applicant due to no viability of 
project 
77 M/s Homtek India 
Agro Foods  
Kamrup Assam Non-submission of docuemnts for 1st installment 
78 M/s Shelke Foods 
Private limited 
Pune Maharashtra Non-submission of docuemnts for 1st installment 
79 M/s Hitayu Dairy 
Private Limited 
Mandya Karnataka Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 22 months 
80 M/s Anutham 
Enterprises 
Vijaypur Karnataka Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister due 
to submission of fraud documents by IA 
81 M/s LT Boinu 
Pineapple 
Processing Industry 
Bishnupur Manipur Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 24 months 
82 M/s PL Fruit and 
Veg Processing 
Industry 
Churachandpur Manipur Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 34 months 
83 M/s Thangsing 
Food Industry 
Churachandpur Manipur Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 23 months 
84 M/s Him Pickle Bilaspur Himachal 
Pradesh  
Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 31 months 
85 M/s Jeph (Ind) 
Foods 
Una Himachal 
Pradesh  
Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 23 months 
86 M/s Striker and 
Brothers 
Bilaspur Himachal 
Pradesh  
Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 21 months 
 
87 M/s Agriva Naturals Una Himachal 
Pradesh  
Withdrawan by applicant vide letter dated 
14.03.2023 
88 M/s D Raju 
Enterprise 
Papum Pare Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister due 
to submission of fraud documents by IA 
 

88 
 
89 M/s Samarth Agro 
Industries 
Jalna Maharashtra Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 28 months 
90 M/s M&D Poultry 
Production cum 
Meat Processing 
Churachandpur Manipur Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 28 months 
91 M/s Keshav Agro 
Foods Industries 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Udham Singh 
Nagar 
Uttarakhand Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment even after lapse of 26 months 
92 M/s GG Enterprises Papum Pare Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister due 
to submission of fraud documents by IA 
93 M/s Agro Cluster 
(Unit-II) 
Vijaypur Karnataka Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister due 
to submission of fraud documents by IA 
94 M/s. Agro Cluster 
(Unit-I) 
Vijaypur Karnataka Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister due 
to submission of fraud documents by IA 
95 M/s Baba Ramdev 
Agro Industries 
Bikaner Rajasthan Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister, due 
to violation of scheme guidelines regarding cross 
shareholding 
96 M/s Soozwin 
International Foods 
Sonitpur Assam Withdrawan by applicant vide letter dated 
12.05.2023 
97 M/s Subh Karan 
Food Park  
Kamrup Assam Withdrawan by applicant vide letter dated 
27.05.2023 
98 M/s SCA Foods 
Products Pvt Ltd 
Palakkad Kerala Withdrawan by applicant vide letter dated 
31.05.2023 
99 M/s Shivay Foods Aurangabad Maharashtra Withdrawan by applicant vide letter dated 
16.06.2023 
100 M/s N R Enterprise Papum Pare Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister due 
to submission of fraud documents by IA 
101 M/s Anug Foods Ariyalur Tamil Nadu Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
failed to submit the documents for release of 1st 
installment 
102 M/s Madhur 
Organic Cold Press 
Oil 
Dhule Maharashtra Cancelled with approval of Hon'ble Minister as IA 
not able to complete the project as per approval 
letter even after lapse of 3.5 years 
103 M/s Paramount 
Nutritions India Pvt. 
Ltd.  
Ramanagara Karnataka Withdrawan by applicant vide letter dated 
31.07.2023 
104 M/s Corman Foods 
Pvt. Ltd.  
Chhindwara Madhya 
Pradesh 
Withdrawan by applicant vide letter dated 
18.08.2023 
105 M/s Emami 
Agrotech Limited 
Jaipur Rajasthan Withdrawan by applicant vide letter dated 
19.08.2023 
 
 
 
  

89 
 
Annexure-IV 
PMKSY OUTLAY & EXPENDITURE OF MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES FROM  2017-18 to 2023-24 (as on 05-06-2023) 
 
Rs. in Crore 
Name of the Scheme 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE 
Scheme for Mega Food 
Parks 
300.00 298.56 296.72 390.00 182.86 181.47 200.00 140.00 106.73 100.00 61.85 61.87 47.60 54.37 52.59 55.80 24.80 22.14 54.80 0.02 
Scheme for 
Infrastructure for Agro-
processing Clusters 
35.00 0.00 0.00 20.00 30.00 22.65 48.75 50.14 43.83 65.00 56.69 48.47 37.50 53.90 49.08 48.45 56.55 46.82 81.30 5.95 
Scheme for Modern 
Abattoirs/Committed 
Liabilities for 
Infrastructure related 
Schemes 
45.00 23.82 21.69 30.00 22.00 9.69 28.11 17.81 6.83 21.00 4.80 4.38 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Scheme for Integrated 
Cold Chain and Value 
Addition Infrastructure 
180.00 198.68 196.15 400.00 271.59 244.74 290.00 326.16 271.12 349.71 252.58 207.41 227.60 263.00 225.31 230.50 222.34 203.06 196.50 14.33 
Scheme for 
Creation/Expansion of 
Food Processing and 
Preservation Capacities 
95.00 21.18 11.31 395.00 90.00 74.85 160.00 202.52 171.78 190.00 219.30 202.84 162.00 242.50 238.08 282.80 219.68 170.11 320.00 4.61 
Scheme for Creation of 
Backward and Forward 
Linkages 
20.00 0.00 0.00 20.00 18.80 11.50 40.00 50.46 42.92 100.00 56.60 54.42 51.70 40.79 32.98 22.20 18.78 9.35 5.39 0.00 
Scheme for Food Safety 
and Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure 
20.00 20.00 20.00 25.00 25.00 16.80 40.00 40.00 26.99 44.00 36.83 29.00 45.20 46.70 34.25 51.80 33.80 18.73 46.50 1.49 
Scheme for Human 
Resource and 
Institutions 
30.00 71.53 55.98 33.00 29.94 24.06 94.00 32.07 21.76 84.00 23.05 20.36 44.80 15.14 13.03 23.69 22.36 20.49 4.96 0.04 
Scheme for Operation 
Greens 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 200.00 5.50 200.00 30.03 2.85 127.50 38.20 38.21 73.40 74.50 68.15 184.56 74.49 71.05 213.59 7.03 
Swacchta Action 
Plan(SAP) 
0.00 0.07 0.06 0.08 0.14 0.12 0.14 0.24 0.13 0.20 0.10 0.09 0.20 0.10 0.02 0.20 0.20 0.18 0.20 0.00 
TOTAL - SCHEME 
 
725.00 633.84 601.91 1313.08 870.33 591.38 1101.00 889.43 694.94 1081.41 750.00 667.05 690.00 791.00 713.49 900.00 673.00 561.93 923.24 33.47 

90 
 
Appendix-I 
 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2021-22) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty Third Sitting of the Committee 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 08th August, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
           
Present 
 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Afzal Ansari  
 3. Shri Horen Singh Bey 
 4. Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole'  
 5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 6. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel 
 9. Shri Virendra Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 10. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 11. Shri Kailash Soni 
 12. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   – Additional Secretary     
2. Shri Sundar Prasad Das  – Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar            –   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Prem Ranjan            –   Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

91 
 
Witnesses 
 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
 
S. No. Name Designation 
 
1.  Smt. Anita Praveen  Secretary 
2.  Shri Shashi Ranjan Kumar  AS&FA 
3.  Shri Minhaj Alam  Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri Santosh Kumar Jha  Joint Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and witness 
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries in connection with the examination of the 
Subject, 'Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities - 
An Evaluation'. 
3. The Hon'ble Chairperson, thereafter, apprised the Agenda of the Sitting of the 
Committee. The representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, then, gave a 
Power Point Presentation to the Committee covering inter-alia the following points:- 
(i) Salient features of the Pradan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 
(ii) Background on launch of the scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC).  
(iii) Status of implementation of the CEFPPC Scheme.  
(iv) Highlights of new guidelines of the CEFPPC Scheme dated 08.06.2022.  
(v) Pattern of Assistance under the CEFPPC.  
(vi) Achievements/ progress made in the implementation of the CEFPPC.  
4. Thereafter, the Committee raised several issues/points and sought 
clarification/information from the representatives of the Ministry as briefly mentioned below:- 
(i) Need for educating the farmers about the Schemes being implemented by the 
Ministry so that farmers get the benefits.  
(ii) Need to give emphasis for promoting Ease of doing Business by looking into the 
problems of Promoters and Entrepreneurs and finding solutions to it.  
(iii) There are eight different schemes of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana 
(PMKSY) being implemented in different States and Union territories, the 

92 
 
difficulties being faced in implementing these eight different Schemes need to be 
removed.  
(iv) Need for allowing farmers/persons having the requisite land to set up processing 
units.  
(v) Urgent need for looking into the marketing of Food Products manufactured by 
Entrepreneurs. 
(vi) Need for marketing of Farmers produce.  
(vii) Need for having a meeting with the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
regarding enhancement in Farm Produce.  
(viii) Need to identify processing of food products as per Region Specific produces.  
(ix) Need for promoting Organic Farm Products in the Food Processing Sector.  
(x) Need for Setting up of Marketing Units in each State and in each District.  
(xi) Early Implementation of One District One Product Scheme more realistically, 
strictly on the basis of Region wise Specific products.  
(xii) Creation of Transportation and Storage facilities. 
 
4. The representatives of Ministry of Food Processing responded to the queries. The 
Chairperson, then, thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable information to the Committee 
and directed them to furnish the information on the points/items, which were not readily 
available, to the Committee Secretariat by 18th August, 2022, positively.  
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
[A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept.] 
 
|----------------------| 
  

93 
 
Appendix-II 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND  
FOOD PROCESSING  
 
(2023-24) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
   
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11th October, 2023 from 1100 hours to 1240 
hours in Committee Room '3', Block-A, Extn. to PHA Building, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
3. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu  
4. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
5. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
6. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
7. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku 
 
 
      RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
8. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
9. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
10. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
11. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
12. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

94 
 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the new Member Shri Vijay Pal Singh 
Tomar, MP (Rajya Sabha) to the Committee. Thereafter the Chairperson welcomed the 
Members of the Committee and Witnesses of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries to 
the sitting of the Committee convened for taking Oral evidence on the subject 'Scheme for 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities - An Evaluation' and 
apprised them of the confidentiality of the proceedings. 
 
3. After introduction by the witnesses, a power-point presentation was made by the 
Secretary Ministry of Food Processing Industries. The presentation inter-alia covered the 
following points:- 
 
I. Background of launch of the scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and 
Preservation capacities (CEFPPC); 
 
II. Practical aspects noticed in implementation of this Scheme; 
III. Implementation of the Scheme with Revised Guidelines; 
IV. Highlights of New Scheme guidelines of CEFPPC Scheme dated 08.06.2022; 
V. Eligible organizations and Pattern of Assistance under CEFPPC; and 
VI. Achievements and Current status of the scheme CEFPPC including Sector-wise 
details of the units under CEFPPC. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee raised several issues/points and sought clarification / 
Information from the representatives of the Ministry, as briefly mentioned below:- 
 
 
I. Need for improving food storage/preservation and food processing capacities in the 
country; 
 
II. Low participation of farmers in the implementation of CEFPPC and need for 
educating farmers about the benefits of the Schemes of the Ministry; 
 
III. Time bound reduction in Harvest and Post Harvest losses through preservation / 
storage and value addition in food products in the country; 
 
IV. Need to give preference to State and Union Territories which do not have Mega Food 
Parks and Agro Processing Centres, while allocating units under 40 percent quota of 
the Scheme for CEFPPC; 
 
1.  Ms. Anita Praveen Secretary 
2.  Ms. Sukriti Likhi  AS & FA 
3.  Shri Minhaj Alam Additional Secretary 
4.  Shri Sanoj Kumar Jha Additional Secretary 

95 
 
V. Marketing facilitation of Food products manufactured by Entrepreneurs under the 
Scheme for CEFPPC; 
 
VI. Need to identify region specific produces for creation / increasing of Food Processing 
and preservation capacities; 
 
VII. Reasons for non-establishment of processing units in many States/UTs; 
VIII. Timeline for approval, sanction, completion and disbursement of Grants and the 
implementation of project proposals under the Scheme for CEFPPC; 
 
IX. Under-utilization and non-availability of funds for the Scheme for CEFPPC;  
X. Setting up of the Gamma Radiation Centre under the Scheme for CEFPPC;  
XI. Need for the engagement of Response-persons/ Experts/Chartered Accountants to 
prepare Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for the Farmers Producers Organizations, 
Self Help Groups, Cooperatives & Individuals, which come forward with the 
Expression of Interest (EOI) to set up Unit(s) under CEFPPC Scheme after having 
interactions with the concerned Agencies for getting them the Bank-Loans, Subsidies 
and Marketing related assistance;  
 
XII. Steps taken for promoting CEFPPC Scheme at Grass Root Village level; 
XIII. Helpline for promoting effective implementation of CEFPPC Scheme; and 
XIV. Setting up of units of CEFPPC in small scale for the benefit of the farmers. 
 
5. The Representatives of the Ministry responded to most of the queries raised by the 
Members. The Chairperson, then, thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable information 
with the Committee on the subject and directed them to send, in writing, the requisite 
information (which was not readily available to them) to the Secretariat by 18.10.2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept separately) 
 
  

96 
 
Appendix-III 
 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2023-24) 
 
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06th February, 2024 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
in the Office of Chairperson, Room No. 103, Block-B, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi.   
 
Present 
 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 4. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 5. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11. Shri Masthan Rao Beedha Yadav 
12. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
13. Shri Kailash Soni 
14. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
15. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
16. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan – Additional Secretary     
2. Shri Khakhai Zou   – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan            –   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria  – Deputy Secretary  
 
  

97 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of Draft 
Reports on the following Subjects: 
 
  (i)   Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation 
Capacities (CEFPPC) - An Evaluation (Ministry of Food Processing Industries) 
 * (ii)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 *(iii)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 * (iv) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx    xxxx  
 
  
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any 
modification.  The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Report to Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report 
 