 
 
   
       STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
 ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2024-25) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING) 
              
 
 
SPREAD OF LUMPY SKIN DISEASE IN CATTLE IN THE COUNTRY  
AND ISSUES RELATED THEREWITH 
         
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Sixty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24)] 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025 / Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
15 

 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2024-25) 
 
          
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING) 
              
 
 
SPREAD OF LUMPY SKIN DISEASE IN CATTLE IN THE COUNTRY  
AND ISSUES RELATED THEREWITH 
         
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Sixty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24)] 
 
 
            
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                  20.08.2025 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                20.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
 August, 2025 / Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


 
 
COA No. 514 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24) …………………………………….. iii 
 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) …………………………………….. iv 
Introduction ……………………………………………………………………….. vi 
Chapter I Report…………………………… 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
9 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
24 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
25 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
27 
 
   
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 35th sitting of the Committee held on 18.08.2025 
 
 
 
28 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty Sixth Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24) 
 
 
 
30 
 

iii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar  -   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 4. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 5. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 6. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 7. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
 8. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
9. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
10. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
11. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
12. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT^ 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beedha Yadav 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Kailash Soni 
27.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar* 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
#Shri A. Ganeshamurthi, MP, Lok Sabha expired on 28.03.2024.  
^Vacant since Constitution of the Committee.  
*Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated vice Shri Surendra Singh Nagar w.e.f. 26.09.2023 vide 
Bulletin Part-II, dated 29.09.2023 (para No. 7523).  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025. 
  

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee to submit this 
Report on their behalf, present this 15th Report on action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty Sixth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2023-24) on the Subject ‘Spread of Lumpy Skin Disease in cattle in the 
country and issues related therewith’ pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying).  
 
2. The Sixty Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24) on the Subject ‘Spread 
of Lumpy Skin Disease in cattle in the country and issues related therewith’ pertaining 
to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 19 December, 2023. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received 
on 26 February, 2024. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 18 August, 2024 
 
4.  An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty Sixth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
  
            
       
 
NEW DELHI;                          CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
18 August , 2025                                                             Chairperson, 
27Shravana, 1947 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Agriculture
       Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty Sixth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2023-24) on the subject “Spread of Lumpy Skin Disease in Cattle in the 
Country and issues related therewith” pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 
2023. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all 
the 08 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have 
been scrutinised and categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Total - 07 
Chapter II 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
Total - NIL 
Chapter III 
 Recommendation Para No. NIL 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Total- 01 
Chapter IV 
 Recommendation Para No.  3 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Total - NIL 
Chapter V 
 Recommendation Para No. NIL 
   
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance would be given by the Ministry 
of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying) to implement the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Ministry/Department to 

2 
 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter be 
intimated in writing to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The 
Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at an 
early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Control and Containment of Lumpy Skin Disease in the Country 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO.1) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
The Committee noted that the country battled the devastating Lumpy Skin 
Disease (LSD) outbreak among cattle in 2021-22, which killed and emaciated 
large number of cattle, hurting milk production and farm Income. The 
Committee also noted that the first outbreak of LSD was reported in Odisha in 
September, 2019 which in subsequent years acquired Pandemic Scale. The 
Committee were assured that presently the disease is showing less infection 
and death in affected States indicating the decrease in severity of infection. The 
Committee were Informed that the Government through vaccination, 
awareness creation, isolation and treatment of infected animals and following 
the other measures are able to control and contain the spread of the disease to 
a large extent which is quite appreciable. However, the Committee feel that the 
disease should have been prevented and contained at initial stage of its first 
reporting in September 2019 itself by taking prompt and effective measures as 
this would have avoided it taking pandemic form and would have saved large 
number of cattle from death and emaciation. The Committee, having taken note 
of all steps taken by the Government, recommend the Department to develop 
a mechanism and Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) so that immediate and 
effective action is taken if spread of such disease is reported instead of waiting 
for a longer period. The Committee also recommends the Department to make 
comprehensive efforts to ramp up disease surveillance, treatment and 
diagnostic infrastructure, improve veterinary services, build capacity of animal 

3 
 
health professionals, etc to address animal pandemic in a holistic manner in 
future. 
 
1.6 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted:- 
 
“Lumpy Skin Disease was initially suspected from Odisha based on the test report of IVRI, Bareilly. Department constituted the team of scientists from ICAR-NIVEDI (Bengaluru), ICAR-NIHSAD (Bhopal) and ICAR-IVRI (Bareilly) for further investigation of suspected Lumpy Skin Disease and Capripox disease in Odisha. The investigations confirmed the disease in the state of Odisha by PCR and nucleotide sequencing using the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) prescribed methods for LSD agent identification.  Department took immediate and proactive steps to control the Lumpy Skin Disease and Capripox disease in Odisha and other states which include epidemiological investigation in the states and ring vaccination strategy with available Goat pox vaccine. Department in consultation with the experts formulated the   guidelines and SOPs for control and containment of the disease in definite timeline which include isolation and treatment of affected animals, vaccination protocols, disinfection protocols etc. States/UTs are regularly advised to adopt carpet and controlled vaccination strategy with available Goat pox vaccine (Uttarakashi strain) in cattle on annual basis as per the timeline communicated state/UT wise. Department also deputed Central expert teams to the affected states for taking first hand stock of the outbreak of Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) and to guide on corrective measures and technical ground support. Advisories issued to non-affected states also for awareness and advance preparedness. Department has established the control room and also advised the states to establish the control room for technical support to the states/UTs and to address the issues of animal owners including awareness at all times. Funds have been provided to affected States for undertaking trainings, surveillance, awareness campaigns and vaccination under Assistance to states for Control of Animal Disease (ASCAD) as per the demand. States are also advised the possibility to utilize the emergency funds of the state/district for control operations. Department also communicated the animal certification and 

4 
 
identification guidelines under items and norms in regard to eligibility for compensation on animal mortality to MHA in respect to assistance to states through SDRF and NDRF. Further, Department is supporting and augmenting livestock health care through the implementation of Livestock Health & Disease Control Programme (LHDCP) which is a Central sector scheme, in all states/UTs, with the aim of reducing risk to animal health by prophylactic vaccination against diseases of animals, capacity building of Veterinary services, disease surveillance and strengthening Veterinary infrastructure. The major activities supported are vaccination against Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), Brucellosis, Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR) and Classical Swine Fever (CSF), Assistance to States for Control of Animal Disease (ASCAD) for control of state prioritized economically important exotic, emergent and zoonotic animal diseases and Establishment and Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries-Mobile Veterinary Units (ESVHD-MVU). Further, under ESVHD-MVU, the Central Government has provided 100% financial assistance to the States/UTs towards procurement and customization of MVUs to strengthen veterinary health services. Additionally, the Animal Pandemic Preparedness Initiative (APPI) is a comprehensive plan of the Department to be implemented nationwide to address the preparedness for emerging pandemic diseases in animals. The key strategies to address the outbreaks of pandemic diseases include enhanced disease surveillance in collaboration with other line departments for developing integrated disease surveillance system and establishment of investigation and outbreak response teams at the national and state level.  The honorable Supreme court of India vide WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 872 OF 2022 also expressed satisfaction with measures taken by centre and States to prevent LSD in cattle. The disease is presently under control with 2907 active cases (as on 5.1.2024) in 05 states namely Mizoram, Odisha, Kerala, Maharashtra and Sikkim. More than 18.26 crore (more than 90%) cattle have been vaccinated/re-vaccinated in the country including 8.14 and 10.20 crore in 2022 and 2023 respectively. The vaccination including surveillance and biosecurity measures as per the EXIT plan are 

5 
 
underway. States/UTs are advised to conduct the random LSD surveillance (for detection of affected animals) in the state after 30 days of the last laboratory confirmed (PCR positive) case detected in the entire state through the DAHD designated LSD testing laboratories for the concerned State/UT. In case the disease is confirmed in the animal (s), then the DAHD control and treatment advisory shall be implemented immediately.” 
 
1.7 In order to save large number of cattle from death and emaciation from 
the outbreak of diseases like Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD), the Committee had 
recommended the Department to develop a mechanism and Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) so that immediate and effective action was taken if spread of 
such disease was reported instead of waiting for a longer period. The Committee 
had also recommended the Department to make comprehensive efforts to ramp 
up disease surveillance, treatment and diagnostic infrastructure, improve 
veterinary services, build capacity of animal health professionals, etc. to 
address animal pandemic in a holistic manner in future.  The Department in its  
Action Taken Reply has submitted that after confirmation of spread of Lumpy 
Skin Disease, the Department took immediate and proactive steps such as 
epidemiological investigation, formulation of guidelines and SOPs in 
consultation with the experts, issuing of advisories to States/UTs, deputing of 
Central expert teams to the affected States, establishment of Control Room, 
provision of funds under Assistance to States for Control of Animal Disease 
(ASCAD), etc. to control the Lumpy Skin Disease. The Department has also 
submitted that it is supporting and augmenting livestock healthcare through the 
implementation of a Central Sector Scheme ‘Livestock Health and Disease 
Control Programme (LHDCP)’.  Additionally, the Department has planned a 
comprehensive plan - the Animal Pandemic Preparedness Initiative (APPI) to be 
implemented nationwide to address the preparedness for emerging pandemic 
diseases in animals. The Committee express their satisfaction that due to 
measures and steps taken by the Department, State Governments and other 
stakeholders, spread of Lumpy Skin Disease among cattle was contained and 
controlled in the country. The Committee also appreciate the Department for the 
Animal Pandemic Preparedness Initiative (APPI) which will address the 
outbreaks of pandemic diseases by developing integrated disease surveillance 

6 
 
system and establishment of investigation and outbreak response teams at the 
National and State level. 
 
B. Veterinary Infrastructure and Veterinary Manpower 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 3) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee had been apprised about decentralization of existing 
Diagnostic facilities for rapid diagnosis and control of Lumpy Skin Disease. 
Thirty-three laboratories with required bio-safety level had been allowed for 
screening the disease by PCR and States were allotted to a specific laboratory 
to avoid overcrowding. According to the Department, these laboratories are 
presently sufficient to cater to the diagnostic needs of the country. The 
Committee had also been apprised by the Department that the States/UTs had 
been advised to ensure round the clock availability of Veterinary and Para-
Veterinary trained Staff in the affected areas so that they can contribute 
effectively in disease control programme. Further as per 'Guidelines for 
Prevention of Lumpy Skin Disease’ circulated to the States/UTs, farms with 
affected animals should be visited regularly by the field Veterinarians until all 
cases are recovered. The Veterinary Staff should take all precautionary hygiene 
measures to avoid further spread of the disease to other Farms/Households. 
However, the Committee observed that Veterinary/Para-Veterinary Staff were 
either unavailable or absent in various affected regions/areas of the country 
leading to large scale death of infected cattle in absence of proper treatment at 
right time. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to ensure 
availability and presence of Veterinary/Para-Veterinary and other trained Staff 
in the regions affected by the disease, particularly in remote and inaccessible 
areas of the country so that timely treatment to infected cattle and vaccination 
can be provided and losses can be minimized. The Committee further 
recommend the Department to take steps for strengthening and upgrading of 
Veterinary Infrastructure such as Veterinary Hospitals, Laboratories, etc so that 
country can effectively contain diseases like Lumpy Skin Disease and minimize 
the economic loss to the country.” 
 

7 
 
1.9 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“There are no reports from States/UTs regarding the shortage of trained staff to 
deal with the spread of diseases like Lumpy Skin Disease. Animal Husbandry 
is a State subject. Hence, public employment of veterinarians, as per their 
requirement is the responsibility of the State Government. However, 
Department in the advisories and during meetings and field visits regularly 
advised the States/UTs that the Veterinarians and para-veterinarians working 
in the infected zone should not be deputed for other works so that their services 
are available round the clock and they can contribute effectively in disease 
control programme. Also, Proper TA/DA and incentives should be given and 
announced for veterinarians, para-veterinarians and other staff to motivate 
them in disease control operations. States were advised to deploy Rapid Action 
Teams in the affected areas including formation of District Level Committee 
under the Chairmanship of District Collector for better monitoring and 
implementation of control measures effectively at local level. Advisory also 
issued to establish Control room and activate 24x7 toll free number to address 
the issues of farmers immediately and also to undertake door to door 
awareness and vaccination drive with the help of NGOs, village leaders, youths, 
cooperatives, school teachers and other stakeholders. States/UTs were also 
advised to increase the role of MVUs in awareness, treatment and vaccination 
drive in far-flung areas at farmer’s door step. Further, under Assistance to 
States for Control of Animal Disease (ASCAD) states/UTs are supported as per 
the demand for control of state prioritized economically important exotic, 
emergent and zoonotic animal diseases, capacity building and Establishment 
and Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries-Mobile Veterinary 
Units (ESVHD-MVU). Under ESVHD-MVU, the Central Government has 
provided 100% financial assistance to the States/UTs towards procurement and 
customization of MVUs to strengthen veterinary health services.” 
 
 
1.10 Taking note of the fact that Veterinary/Para-Veterinary Staff were either 
unavailable or absent in various Lumpy Skin Disease affected regions/areas of 
the country leading to large scale death of infected cattle - in absence of proper 
treatment at right time, the Committee had recommended the Department to 
ensure availability and presence of Veterinary/Para- Veterinary and other trained 

8 
 
Staff in the regions affected by the disease, particularly in remote and 
inaccessible areas of the country so that timely treatment to infected cattle and 
vaccination can be provided and losses can be minimized. The Committee had 
further recommended the Department to take steps for strengthening and 
upgrading of Veterinary Infrastructure such as Veterinary Hospitals, 
Laboratories, etc. so that country can effectively contain diseases like Lumpy 
Skin Disease and minimise the economic loss to the country.  The Department 
in its Action Taken Reply has submitted that the Animal Husbandry being a State 
subject, the public employment of Veterinarians is the responsibility of the State 
Government, however, the Department through advisories, field visits, meetings 
etc. has advised the States/UTs for making available the services of the 
Veterinarians/Para-Veterinarians round the clock in disease control programme.  
At the same time, the Department has denied any report of shortage of trained 
staff to deal with the spread of Lumpy Skin Disease, which the Committee 
consider far from the actual ground realities.  The Committee also note that the 
Department has not stated anything about the steps taken/to be taken for 
strengthening and upgrading of Veterinary Infrastructure such as Veterinary 
Hospitals, Laboratories etc. except mentioning the programmes – Assistance to 
States for Control of Animal Disease (ASCAD), and Establishment and 
Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries – Mobile Veterinary 
Units (ESVHD-MVU).  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire the Department to take steps for strengthening and 
upgrading of Veterinary Infrastructure, such as Veterinary Hospitals, 
Laboratories etc. so that country can effectively contain diseases like Lumpy 
Skin Disease and minimize the economic loss to the Country.  

9 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Control and containment of Lumpy Skin Disease in the country  
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee noted that the country battled the devastating Lumpy Skin 
Disease (LSD) outbreak among cattle in 2021-22, which killed and emaciated large 
number of cattle, hurting milk production and farm Income. The Committee also noted 
that the first outbreak of LSD was reported in Odisha in September, 2019 which in 
subsequent years acquired Pandemic Scale. The Committee were assured that 
presently the disease is showing less infection and death in affected States indicating 
the decrease in severity of infection. The Committee were Informed that the 
Government through vaccination, awareness creation, isolation and treatment of 
infected animals and following the other measures are able to control and contain the 
spread of the disease to a large extent which is quite appreciable. However, the 
Committee feel that the disease should have been prevented and contained at initial 
stage of its first reporting in September, 2019 itself by taking prompt and effective 
measures as this would have avoided it taking pandemic form and would have saved 
large number of cattle from death and emaciation. The Committee, having taken note 
of all steps taken by the Government, recommends the Department to develop a 
mechanism and Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) so that immediate and effective 
action is taken if spread of such disease is reported instead of waiting for a longer 
period. The Committee also recommends the Department to make comprehensive 
efforts to ramp up disease surveillance, treatment and diagnostic infrastructure, 
Improve veterinary services, build capacity of animal health professionals, etc to 
address animal pandemic in a holistic manner in future. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Lumpy Skin Disease was initially suspected from Odisha based on the test 
report of IVRI, Bareilly. Department constituted the team of scientists from ICAR-
NIVEDI (Bengaluru), ICAR-NIHSAD (Bhopal) and ICAR-IVRI (Bareilly) for further 
investigation of suspected Lumpy Skin Disease and Capripox disease in Odisha. The 

10 
 
investigations confirmed the disease in the state of Odisha by PCR and nucleotide 
sequencing using the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) prescribed 
methods for LSD agent identification.  Department took immediate and proactive steps 
to control the Lumpy Skin Disease and Capripox disease in Odisha and other states 
which include epidemiological investigation in the states and ring vaccination strategy 
with available Goat pox vaccine. Department in consultation with the experts 
formulated the   guidelines and SOPs for control and containment of the disease in 
definite time line which include isolation and treatment of affected animals, vaccination 
protocols, disinfection protocols etc. States/UTs are regularly advised to adopt carpet 
and controlled vaccination strategy with available Goat pox vaccine (Uttarakashi 
strain) in cattle on annual basis as per the time line communicated state/UT wise. 
Department also deputed Central expert teams to the affected states for taking first 
hand stock of the outbreak of Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) and to guide on corrective 
measures and technical ground support. Advisories issued to non-affected states also 
for awareness and advance preparedness. Department has established the control 
room and also advised the states to established the control room for technical support 
to the states/UTs and to address the issues of animal owners including awareness at 
all times. Funds have been provided to affected States for undertaking trainings, 
surveillance, awareness campaigns and vaccination under Assistance to states for 
Control of Animal Disease (ASCAD) as per the demand. States are also advised the 
possibility to utilize the emergency funds of the state/district for control operations. 
Department also communicated the animal certification and identification guidelines 
under items and norms in regard to eligibility for compensation on animal mortality to 
MHA in respect to assistance to states through SDRF and NDRF. 
Further, Department is supporting and augmenting livestock health care 
through the implementation of Livestock Health & Disease Control Programme 
(LHDCP) which is a Central sector scheme, in all states/UTs, with the aim of reducing 
risk to animal health by prophylactic vaccination against diseases of animals, capacity 
building of Veterinary services, disease surveillance and strengthening Veterinary 
infrastructure. The major activities supported are vaccination against Foot and Mouth 
Disease (FMD), Brucellosis, Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR) and Classical Swine 
Fever (CSF), Assistance to States for Control of Animal Disease (ASCAD) for control 
of state prioritized economically important exotic, emergent and zoonotic animal 
diseases and Establishment and Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and 

11 
 
Dispensaries-Mobile Veterinary Units (ESVHD-MVU). Further, under ESVHD-MVU, 
the Central Government has provided 100% financial assistance to the States/UTs 
towards procurement and customization of MVUs to strengthen veterinary health 
services. Additionally, the Animal Pandemic Preparedness Initiative (APPI) is a 
comprehensive plan of the Department to be implemented nationwide to address the 
preparedness for emerging pandemic diseases in animals. The key strategies to 
address the outbreaks of pandemic diseases include enhanced disease surveillance 
in collaboration with other line departments for developing integrated disease 
surveillance system and establishment of investigation and outbreak response teams 
at the national and state level.  
The honorable Supreme court of India vide WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 
872 OF 2022 also expressed satisfaction with measures taken by centre and States 
to prevent LSD in cattle. The disease is presently under control with 2907 active cases 
(as on 5.1.2024) in 05 states namely Mizoram, Odisha, Kerala, Maharashtra and 
Sikkim. More than 18.26 crore (more than 90%) cattle have been vaccinated/re-
vaccinated in the country including 8.14 and 10.20 crore in 2022 and 2023 
respectively. The vaccination including surveillance and biosecurity measures as per 
the EXIT plan are underway. States/UTs are advised to conducted the random LSD 
surveillance (for detection of affected animals) in the state after 30 days of the last 
laboratory confirmed (PCR positive) case detected in the entire state through the 
DAHD designated LSD testing laboratories for the concerned State/UT. In case the 
disease is confirmed in the animal (s), then the DAHD control and treatment advisory 
shall be implemented immediately.  
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
Letter No. K-11/86/2022-LH dated 26.2.2024] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
Vaccination 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 

12 
 
  
The Committee noted that vaccination of cattle is an important part of the 
strategy of the Government to tackle the spread of Lumpy Skin Disease among cattle 
in the country. The Department had issued the vaccination guidelines and advisories 
for carpet/preventive vaccination, controlled vaccination along with protocols related 
to animal eligibility, dose and route of vaccine and measures for safe and effective 
vaccination. The Vaccination of eligible and healthy susceptible cattle is underway by 
available Goat Pox vaccine (Uttarakashi strain) with no adverse effect on animal as 
stated by the Department. The Committee also note that three manufacturers viz. 
Biovet Pvt. Ltd, Malur, Bengaluru; Indian Immunological, Hyderabad and Institute of 
Veterinary Biological Products, Pune have got the vaccine technology from ICAR 
National Research Centre on Equines (NRCE), Hisar to manufacture the indigenous 
homologous live attenuated LSD vaccine (Lumpi-ProVacnd). The Commercial Product 
had been tested by the Competent Authorities (as per DCGI guidelines) and the final 
regulatory approvals are awaited. Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Department 
of Animal Husbandry and Dairying and Central Drugs Control Standard Organization 
are taking up for early approval and production of the Indigenous vaccine 'Lumpi-
ProVac against Lumpy Skin Virus. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Department should take proactive steps for getting all regulatory approvals for 
commercial production/ manufacturing of 'Lumpi- ProVac Vaccine that has been 
developed specially for controlling and containing the spread of Lumpy Skin Disease 
among cattle. The Committee also desire that all eligible cattle be vaccinated as per 
the Vaccination Protocols on priority basis in order to contain Lumpy Skin Disease 
among the cattle. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
The Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) serves as the 
nodal agency for approving drugs, conducting clinical trials, and establishing 
standards for drugs and vaccines. The ECAH Subcommittee of DAHD assesses the 
veterinary drugs & vaccines, at the behest of CDSCO. The application of Lumpy Skin 
Disease Vaccine, Live attenuated is presently progressing through different stages of 
regulatory approval and their status is as follows: 
•    M/s Biovet Pvt Ltd: The Department has issued a No Objection Certificate (NOC) 
to Biovet to manufacture the new drug and its formulation for market authorization for 

13 
 
“Lumpy Skin Disease Vaccine, Live attenuated, Freeze-dried (BV117)” and Sterile 
Diluents on 25.01.2024. 
•  M/s Indian Immunologicals: The Department has recommended the grant of 
permission for Field Trial on 25.01.2024. 
•  M/s Hester Biosciences Limited: The Department has recommended the 
manufacturing of a new vaccine formulation, “Lumpy Skin Disease Vaccine, Live 
Attenuated (Ranchi Strain),” for the purpose of examination, test, and analysis on 
13.12.2023. 
•    IVBP, Pune: The Department has recommended manufacturing a new vaccine 
formulation, “Lumpy Skin Disease Vaccine, Live Attenuated (Ranchi Strain),” for 
examination, test, and analysis on 5.4.2023. 
As of the current date, there are no pending matters at the DAHD regarding the 
approval of the Lumpy Skin Disease Live attenuated vaccine. Further, Department has 
communicated the vaccination strategy along with indicative time-line for annual 
vaccination and re-vaccination to all states/UTs so that all eligible and susceptible 
healthy cattle are vaccinated from April to June with available Goatpox vaccine- 
Uttarkashi Strain. The states/UTs are financially supported as per the demand through 
ASCAD. States namely Sikkim, Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 
Assam, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and 
Tripura are advised to undertake carpet vaccination in the bordering districts including 
creation of 5 Km wide vaccination barrier all along the borders of Nepal and 
Bangladesh covering grazing route, migration channels and other sensitive areas.  
Indicative annual vaccination schedule for LSD (in cattle) as per DAHD Control 
and Vaccination Guidelines is as under: 
  
S.No. State Name Time of vaccination 
1.   Madhya Pradesh May 16 to May 31 
2.   Maharashtra May 16 to May 31 
3.   Bihar April 16 to April 30 
4.   Chhattisgarh April 16 to April 30 
5.   Jharkhand April 16 to April 30 
6.   Odisha April 16 to April 30 
7.   West Bengal April 16 to April 30 
8.   Arunachal Pradesh May 1 to May 15 

14 
 
9.   Assam May 1 to May 15 
10.   Manipur May 1 to May 15 
11.   Meghalaya May 1 to May 15 
12.   Mizoram May 1 to May 15 
13.   Nagaland May 1 to May 15 
14.   Sikkim May 1 to May 15 
15.   Tripura May 1 to May 15 
16.   Delhi May 16 to May 31 
17.   Haryana May 16 to May 31 
18.   Himachal Pradesh May 16 to May 31 
19.   Jammu & Kashmir May 16 to May 31 
20.   Punjab May 16 to May 31 
21.   Uttar Pradesh May 16 to May 31 
22.   Uttarakhand May 16 to May 31 
23.   Chandigarh May 16 to May 31 
24.   Andaman & Nicobar Island April 1 to April 15 
25.   Lakshadweep April 1 to April 15 
26.   Puducherry April 1 to April 15 
27.   Andhra Pradesh April 1 to April 15 
28.   Karnataka April 1 to April 15 
29.   Kerala April 1 to April 15 
30.   Tamil Nadu April 1 to April 15 
31.   Telangana April 1 to April 15 
32.   Dadra & Nagar Haveli June 1 to June 15 
33.   Daman & Diu June 1 to June 15 
34.   Goa June 1 to June 15 
35.   Gujarat June 1 to June 15 
36.   Rajasthan June 1 to June 15 
  
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
Letter No. K-11053/81/2017-LH dated 26.2.2024] 
 
 
Adherence to Bio-Security Measure for Disposal of Carcasses and Infected 
Material 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
  
The Committee observed that as per the bio-security measures of the 
'Guidelines for Prevention of Lumpy Skin Disease, carcass should be disposed of by 
deep burial method observing all hygienic measures. The Guidelines and Advisories 
circulated to the States/UTs Include proper disposal of carcasses, disinfection and 
hygiene protocol. States/UTs have been advised to undertake proper carcass disposal 
in consultation and cooperation with municipal and panchayat bodies and other 
stakeholders which include regular monitoring, disinfection of the area, liming etc. The 
Committee, however, observed that there were large number of instances of careless 

15 
 
dumping of carcasses of animals dying due to infection from Lumpy Skin Disease 
which poses serious health threats not only to other healthy animals but also to human 
beings. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to make sure in future 
complete adherence to bio-security measures for disposing of carcasses of infected 
cattle and infected material as per the Guidelines for prevention of Lumpy Skin 
Disease. The Committee further recommend the Department to formulate a policy at 
National Central Level for 'recovery and carriage process' Nation for the disposal of 
dead animals (Carcasses) and an 'App' or Helpline so that the 'recovery and carriage' 
can be ensured without any hiccups of jurisdiction and responsibility.  
  
Reply of the Government 
  
DAHD has developed the National Carcass Disposal and Disinfection 
guidelines to help the states/UTs and other stake holders for safe and secure disposal 
of animal carcass, animal waste including the disinfection procedures and hygienic 
measures. Department has also issued the advisory to all states/UTs to stay vigilant 
and proactively implement stringent measures, ensure effective collaboration between 
State/UT Animal Husbandry Department (AHD), Wildlife Authorities, Administration 
and Municipal/Panchayat bodies and to dispose of animal waste and carcasses under 
official veterinary supervision, following national guidelines on carcass disposal and 
disinfection to prevent further Incidences of LSD. Arrangement for safe disposal of 
carcass and related materials by following zoo sanitary measures are to be made by 
respective State/UT AHDs are advised to constitute Animal Carcass Retrieval Teams 
and provide requisite training to team members with awareness to all stakeholders. 
  
Further, the requirements for disposal of carcasses and other potentially 
contaminated fomites in case of infectious and contagious diseases are also provided 
in the Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Act, 
2009’ and Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals 
(Form of Vaccination Certificate, Manner of Post Mortem Examination and Disposal of 
Carcass) Rules, 2010. Proper disposal of the carcass is mandatory as per Act and the 
destruction and disposal of the animals and material shall be documented by the 
Animal Husbandry Department officials. States should also follow the provisions of 
India Code Disposal of Dead animals and may involve NGOs and cooperatives. 
State/UT AHDs are advised for advance cooperation between the Veterinary 

16 
 
Service and other relevant government bodies for proper disposal of dead animals and 
to identify the disposal sites in advance and develop them scientifically with buffer 
zones. States/UTs AH Department are advised to organize and ensure proper 
awareness and sensitization to all stakeholders, other authorities, farmers/animal 
owners in respect to effective biosecurity measures, scientific disposal and 
management, disinfection, vector management and safety measures taken to prevent 
spread of the disease by disposal method.  
  
Additionally, Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying vide Order no. 2023-
24 dated 12.12.2023, issued direction under Section 39 of the Prevention and Control 
of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Act, 2009. As per the order all the 
birth and death details shall be registered mandatorily on Bharat Pashudhan app/web 
portal. State government shall also designate the village level Nodal person to ensure 
recording of animal birth and animal death within his/her jurisdiction and within the 
specified time period (the animal owner shall report the death of animal within 24 hours 
of the death of animal to the designated village level nodal person, nearest veterinary 
health centre, call centre etc. indicating unique Tag ID of the dead animal along-with 
date and time of death) on the NDLM portal. 
  
               [Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
Letter No. K-11053/81/2017-LH dated 26.2.2024] 
 
 
Awareness Programme 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee noted that raising mass awareness about the disease among 
people particularly Animal Owners and other Stakeholders had been one of the 
strategies to control and contain Lumpy Skin Disease and it has been incorporated in 
the Guidelines and Advisory issued to States/UTs. The Committee had been apprised 
by the Department that it raised awareness through social media posts, virtual 
meetings with the States, through Central team visits and through the 24X7 Control 
Room, established in the Department and at the level of the States. Further, States 
periodically conducted TV talks, Radio Talks, Press Conference, Press Release, Field 
Visits, Rallies, School Student Rallies, distribution of Pamphlets and Leaflets for 
awareness creation. However, the Committee feel that awareness among Animal 

17 
 
Owners and other Stakeholders regarding treatment and management of infected 
animals and effective control and containment of Lumpy Skin Disease was lacking 
resulting in the wide spread of the disease and death of large number of infected cattle. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that awareness drive regarding treatment, control, 
containment and other related aspects of the disease should be undertaken on a large 
scale so that it reaches to every region and people of the country. Proper and wide 
spread awareness creation would not only help in controlling and containing the 
disease but would also help in dispelling the rumours/myths related to the disease and 
avoiding panic related therewith in the public. The Committee further desire that the 
Department may seriously consider to organize 'Workshops/Seminars' for the rural 
youth engaged in animal rearing profession so as to enlighten them with basic 
knowledge/First Aid about how to deal with such diseases at ground level. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
Animal Husbandry is a state subject. However, Department is regularly advising 
the states/UTs for strict implementation of guidelines and SOPs for containment of the 
disease, isolation of infected animals, vaccination, hygiene/disinfection, treatment 
including awareness to stakeholders. Control Room at the centre was set up which 
coordinated efforts of the States in controlling LSD including the awareness to the 
state authorities. Whatsapp group also created to make the state authorities aware of 
various development in disease control programmes and to address the queries. 
Central teams deputed for investigation and monitoring also undertake awareness and 
sensitization meetings in the field and at local headquarters. Advisories were also 
issued to unaffected States for appropriate awareness and preparedness. Funds have 
also been provided to the States for awareness programme as per their demand. 
Department advised the states to create awareness to animal owners and other stake 
holders to identify the suspected animals at an early stage by observing initial signs 
like off feed, dullness, fever and inform to local veterinarian for immediate isolation and 
treatment of suspected animal and to control the infection at early stage before disease 
become severe. Department advised the states for formation of RRTs and trainers for 
immediate response and awareness and to explore the possibility to involve local 
animal owners, panchayat members, Pradhans, NGOs, local youth and other 
stakeholders in awareness programmes including door to door awareness and 
vaccination drive. Department also circulating the awareness through social media 

18 
 
posts and through the 24x7 control room established in the department and at the level 
of the states. As a initiative for awareness, states/UTs were advised to constitute a 
District level monitoring and co-ordination committee headed by District Collector 
along with District officials and representatives of Dairy Unions for effective control and 
containment of Lumpy Skin Disease in the District. States/UTs are requested to 
conduct village wise household survey for the disease. State periodically conducted 
TV talks, Radio Talks, Press Conference, Press release, Field visits, Rallies, School 
Students rallies, Pamphlets, leaflets. States/UTs were also advised to increase the 
role of MVUs in awareness, treatment and vaccination drive in far-flung areas. Funds 
have been provided to affected States for undertaking trainings, awareness 
campaigns and vaccination under Assistance to states for Control of Animal Disease 
(ASCAD) as per the demand. 
Further, the action plan for awareness creation will also include: 
  
i. Tailored workshop and seminars for rural youth engaged in animal rearing. 
ii. Develop more brochures, pamphlets, community radio programmes and 
posters for Lumpy Skin Disease. 
iii. Host webinars and seminars accessible to farmers and livestock owners, 
emphasizing the significance of timely treatment. 
iv. Collaborate with schools and colleges to include educational modules like E-
learning 
v. Tailored workshop and capacity building programme for Panchayat 
president/Sarpanch and Members, in collaboration with Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj. 
  
 [Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
Letter No. K-11053/81/2017-LH dated 26.2.2024] 
 
 
 
Popularisation of traditional Ethno-Veterinary Medicine and Treatment 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 
The Committee observed that various traditional/ Ethno-Veterinary methods of 
treatment were quite effective in treating LSD Infected cattle. The Committee noted 
that as per Indicative Management and Treatment of Lumpy Skin Diseases (LSD) in 
Animals", formulated and issued by the Department, use of Herbal Solutions, 

19 
 
Homeopathy Preparations, Ethno-Veterinary Formulations, etc also offered a 
supportive role in management of Lumpy Skin Disease and might have been used. 
However, the Committee had been apprised by the Department that the use of 
preparations only support the affected animals in recovery with no surety of recovery 
and therefore, no sure treatment Guidelines could be recommended. The Committes 
have also been apprised that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been 
signed between the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying (DAHD) and the 
Ministry of AYUSH, on 7 April, 2021 to Introduce the concept of Ayurveda and its allied 
disciplines into Veterinary Science with the objective to develop regulatory mechanism 
for the use of Ayurveda in the Veterinary Sector for the benefit of animal health. 
Welcoming the signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between DAHD and 
the AYUSH, the Committee desire the Department to take steps to promote the use 
of traditional/Ethno-Veterinary medicine and treatment in controlling and containing 
the spread of diseases among animals. 
  
Reply of the Government  
  
Department signed the MOU with Ministry of Ayush during 2021 with the aim to 
support Ministry of Ayush in areas like awareness with support of NDDB in respect to 
herbal, veterinary medicine and scientific and technological collaboration to research 
institutes. The department has created the "e-GOAPLA" android and web application. 
In September 2020, for direct usage by farmers. There are 12 languages supported 
by this application, including Hindi, Gujarati, Marathi, Odiya, Kannada, Malayalam, 
Punjabi, Telugu, Bengali,Tamil, Assamese and English helping farmers in 
management of nearly 29 common ailments of dairy animals e.g. mastitis, indigestion, 
diarrhoea etc. using Ethno-Veterinary Medicine (EVM). This section also contains 
videos in various languages on disease management protocols through Ethno- 
Veterinary Medicine including Lumpy Skin Disease. Department also formulated the 
indicative management and treatment guidelines for the symptomatic treatment of 
cattle affected by Lumpy Skin disease which include Ethno-veterinary formulations. 
The formulations include oral and external application preparations including maggots 
management. Ethnoveterinary formulations are also accessible on NDDB website 
(www.nddb.coop). On the e-GOPALA app, also LSD treatment using ethno-veterinary 
medicine is also available. 
  
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 

20 
 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
Letter No. K-11053/81/2017-LH dated 26.2.2024] 
 
 
Accuracy of Data 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
 
  
The Committee noted that the country faced devastating outbreak of Lumpy 
Skin Disease among cattle in 2021-22 resulting in large scale death and emaciation 
of cattle. The Committee, however, express doubt on the data relating to death of the 
cattle in the country as a result of the Lumpy Skin Disease and also noted with anguish 
that there was a gap/mismatch in data relating to number of cattle affected and died 
as furnished by the Department and the actual ground realities. The Department had 
apprised the Committee that it is totally dependent on State Governments/UTs for data 
regarding infected, vaccinated, treated and dead cattle in country and they 
(States/UTs) are following proper mechanism/system for ensuring compilation of 
accurate data. Further, during the visits of Central teams comprising Departmental 
Veterinarians and ICAR-NISHAD Scientists to the affected States, no such mismatch 
between the cumulative data for spread of LSD infection, mortality and recovery rate 
in State and UTs and that of the actual situation of the ground are noticed. The 
Committee are of considered view that the data regarding Infection, mortality, recovery 
of cattle from LSD should have been accurate as it would not have only helped in 
understanding the gravity of the situation but would also have helped in controlling and 
containing the disease and its further spread. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Department to ensure proper compilation of data relating to spread of infection and 
mortality of cattle from LSD so that cases of Infection and mortality do no remain 
unreported and underreported.  
  
Reply of the Government  
  
Department has issued regular advisories to all states/UTs to stay vigilant and 
proactively implement stringent measures and ensure effective collaboration between 
State/UT Animal Husbandry Department (AHD), Wildlife Authorities, Administration 
and Municipal/Panchayat bodies. States/UTs are also advised to compile and report 
data related to LSD cases, vaccination and mortality regularly as per the format 
developed by the Department. The data is regularly analyzed and monitored at 

21 
 
headquarter and also through meetings, whatsapp messages, telephonic calls and 
central team on ground visit.   
Further, as per the advisory, LSD Nodal Officers are nominated at each district 
level who are responsible for collecting the data from their respective districts through 
Veterinarians and parveterinarians at the grass root level on a daily basis.  The State 
Nodal Officer/s also make field visit to various districts to verify and authenticate the 
data by the checking daily case reports entered in their registers/proformas. State 
officials correlated their cumulative data with field visits and meetings arranged in the 
affected districts, ensuring that there are no gaps in data being received. A State Level 
Control Room are also established in the State with toll free number to assist in data 
generation on daily basis.  Adequate checks and balances are in place and the data 
is also analyzed at the State Directorate level for data accuracy before reporting. The 
states also constituted a district committee under the chairmanship of the DM and 
Collector of the respective district for reviewing and monitoring of the control 
operations. Control Room at the centre was set up, which coordinates efforts of the 
States in controlling. The Department is collecting figures from affected States daily 
with updates and accordingly verify the data wherever there is any doubt. Department 
is also taking follow-up through WhatsApp group and 24x7 control room. Department 
deputed Central teams comprising departmental veterinarians and ICAR-NISHAD 
scientists to the affected states for taking first hand stock of the outbreak of Lumpy 
Skin Disease (LSD) in coordination with State Animal Husbandry Department for 
investigations and suggestions where the actual field conditions were examined and 
correlated with the reports. During the visits, no as such mismatch between the 
cumulative data for  
 
spread of LSD infection, mortality and recovery rate in State and UTs and that of the 
actual situation on the ground are noticed. 
 [Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
Letter No. K-11053/81/2017-LH dated 26.2.2024] 
 
 
Compensation to Livestock Owners 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8)  
  

22 
 
The Committee noted that large number of Livestock/Cattle owners lost their 
cattle due to spread of Lumpy Skin Disease resulting in severe economic hardship to 
them. The Committee also noted that the Department did not have any Scheme to 
compensate for Cattle losses due to spread of disease. The Committee had been 
apprised that the State Government of Maharashtra and Karnataka had provided/are 
providing compensation/financial help to Livestock Owners, who lost their cattle due 
to Lumpy Skin Disease. The Committee are of the view that providing 
compensation/financial help to Livestock Owners, who lost their cattle to Lumpy Skin 
Disease would reduce their economic hardship to some extent. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department in coordination with State Government should 
make the necessary provisions for compensating Livestock owners who loses their 
cattle to Lumpy Skin Disease or any such outbreak of other animal diseases. 
  
Reply of the Government  
  
Animal Husbandry is a state subject. Department do not have any scheme to 
compensate cattle losses due to spread of disease. Further, as gathered from Ministry 
of Home Affairs, the primary responsibility for disaster management rests with the 
State Governments concerned. The concerned State Government undertakes relief 
measures in the wake of natural disasters from the State Disaster Response Fund 
(SDRF) already placed at their disposal in accordance with Government of India’s 
approved items and norms. Additional financial assistance in the form of relief and not 
compensation is provided from the National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) as per 
the established procedure. Further, as communicated by MHA, assistance for the loss 
of milch animals, draught animals or animals used for haulage is provided from NDRF 
as one of the component of entire scheme. Department also communicated the animal 
certification and identification guidelines under items and norms in regard to eligibility 
for compensation on animal mortality to MHA in respect to assistance to states through 
SDRF and NDRF. Further, Department under the component Assistance to States for 
Control of Animal Diseases (ASCAD) provides financial support to the states/UTs as 
per the demand on 50:50 (Centre: State) sharing basis to compensate the animal 
owners for animals culled to control the epidemics namely ASF and HPAI. (no culling 
is followed for LSD) 
  
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
Letter No. K-11053/81/2017-LH dated 26.2.2024] 

23 
 
 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL -  
  

25 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Veterinary Infrastructure and Veterinary Manpower 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee had been apprised about decentralization of existing Diagnostic 
facilities for rapid diagnosis and control of Lumpy Skin Disease. Thirty-three 
laboratories with required bio-safety level had been allowed for screening the disease 
by PCR and States were allotted to a specific laboratory to avoid overcrowding. 
According to the Department, these laboratories are presently sufficient to cater to the 
diagnostic needs of the country. The Committee had also been apprised by the 
Department that the States/UTs had been advised to ensure round the clock 
availability of Veterinary and Para-Veterinary trained Staff in the affected areas so that 
they can contribute effectively in disease control programme. Further as per 
'Guidelines for Prevention of Lumpy Skin Disease’ circulated to the States/UTs, farms 
with affected animals should be visited regularly by the field Veterinarians until all 
cases are recovered. The Veterinary Staff should take all precautionary hygiene 
measures to avoid further spread of the disease to other Farms/Households. However, 
the Committee observed that Veterinary/Para-Veterinary Staff were either unavailable 
or absent in various affected regions/areas of the country leading to large scale death 
of infected cattle in absence of proper treatment at right time. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to ensure availability and presence of 
Veterinary/Para-Veterinary and other trained Staff in the regions affected by the 
disease, particularly in remote and inaccessible areas of the country so that timely 
treatment to infected cattle and vaccination can be provided and losses can be 
minimized. The Committee further recommend the Department to take steps for 
strengthening and upgrading of Veterinary Infrastructure such as Veterinary Hospitals, 
Laboratories, etc so that country can effectively contain diseases like Lumpy Skin 
Disease and minimize the economic toss to the country. 
  
 
Reply of the Government  

26 
 
There are no reports from States/UTs regarding the shortage of trained staff to 
deal with the spread of diseases like Lumpy Skin Disease. Animal Husbandry is a 
State subject. Hence, public employment of veterinarians, as per their requirement is 
the responsibility of the State Government. However, Department in the advisories 
and during meetings and field visits regularly advised the States/UTs that the 
Veterinarians and para-veterinarians working in the infected zone should not be 
deputed for other works so that their services are available round the clock and they 
can contribute effectively in disease control programme. Also, Proper TA/DA and 
incentives should be given and announced for veterinarians, para-veterinarians and 
other staff to motivate them in disease control operations. States were advised to 
deploy Rapid Action Teams in the affected areas including formation of District Level 
Committee under the Chairmanship of District Collector for better monitoring and 
implementation of control measures effectively at local level. Advisory also issued to 
establish Control room and activate 24x7 toll free number to address the issues of 
farmers immediately and also to undertake door to door awareness and vaccination 
drive with the help of NGOs, village leaders, youths, cooperatives, school teachers 
and other stakeholders. States/UTs were also advised to increase the role of MVUs in 
awareness, treatment and vaccination drive in far-flung areas at farmer’s door step. 
Further, under Assistance to States for Control of Animal Disease (ASCAD) 
states/UTs are supported as per the demand for control of state prioritized 
economically important exotic, emergent and zoonotic animal diseases, capacity 
building and Establishment and Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and 
Dispensaries-Mobile Veterinary Units (ESVHD-MVU). Under ESVHD-MVU, the 
Central Government has provided 100% financial assistance to the States/UTs 
towards procurement and customization of MVUs to strengthen veterinary health 
services.  
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
Letter No. K-11053/81/2017-LH dated 26.2.2024]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of this 
Report  

27 
 
CHAPTER – V  
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
- NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI 
18 August, 2025  Chairperson 
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
  

28 
 
Annexure 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA),  New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
   2. Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
   3. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
   5. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
   6. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
7. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
8. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
9. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
10. Shri Murasoli S. 
11. Shri Dharambir Singh 
   12. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
   13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
   14. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
   15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
    
Rajya Sabha 
 
   16. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
   17. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
   18. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
   19. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
   20. Shri Madan Rathore 
   21. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
   22. Shri P.P. Suneer 
    
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director  
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
   

29 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee *xxxxxx. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption 
the following Reports: 
 
(i) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx;  
(ii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx;  
(iii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx;  
(iv) Draft Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 66th Report of the 
Committee on the subject, “Spread of Lumpy Skin Disease in Cattle in 
the Country and issues related therewith” pertaining to Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying) presented during 17th Lok Sabha; 
(v) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx;  
(vi) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx;  
(vii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  
(viii) *xxxxx. xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx.  
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any 
modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present 
the Report to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
* Matter not related to this Report 

30 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY SIXTH REPORT 
(17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations  08 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the Government  
Para Nos. 1,2,4,5,6,7 and 8 Total    07 
 Percentage     87.50% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government’s replies  
Para No. NIL Total 00 
 Percentage    0.00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No. 3 Total 01 
 Percentage 12.50% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
are still awaited 
Para No. NIL Total 00 
 Percentage  0.00%  
 