 
 
  
  STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL         
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
 
  
 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26)’ 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
27 MARCH, 2026/ CHITRA 6, 1948 (SAKA) 
  
35 

 
 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL  
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
 
  
 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26)’ 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on     27.03.2026 
  Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on      27.03.2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
27 MARCH, 2026/ CHITRA 6, 1948 (SAKA) 
 
  


i 
 
 
COA No. 534 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Price:  Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
 Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha 
Secretariat, New Delhi. 
  

ii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
CONTENTS 
 
Page No.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)………………………… iii 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)………………………… iv 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………… vi 
CHAPTER – I REPORT……………………………………………….. 1 
CHAPTER - II Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government……………………… 
15 
 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies………………………………… 
31 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee…………………………. 
42 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………. 
50 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 12th Sitting of the Committee held on 23.03.2026 52 
APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report                              
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
54 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2024-25) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P . P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f. on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, 
Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025.  
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde  
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
27.  Shri Madan Rathore 
28.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P . P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
  

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
      1.         Shri Dhiraj Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
      2.         Shri Maheshwar  - Director 
                 3.         Shri Sanjeev Kumar  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Fifth Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing (2024-25) on 'Demands for Grants (2025-26)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare).  
 
2. The Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.03.2025.   The Action Taken Notes on the 
Report were received on 12.06.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 23.03.2026. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2025-26) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
24th MARCH, 2026                                             Chairperson, 
03 CHAITRA, 1948 (Saka)             S tanding Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing         
(2024-25) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) which was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 12.03.2025 and Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.03.2025, 
respectively. 
1.2 The Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing on Demands for Grands (2025-26)- Demand No.1 
pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare) contained 14 Observations/ Recommendations on the following aspects. 
 
 Demands for Grants (2025-26) - (Demand No. 1) 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) 
Recommendation 
No. 
Recommendation 
1. Analysis Of Demands for Grants-Demand No.1  
2. Need For Enhancement of Budgetary Allocation to Department 
3. Scheduled Castes Sub – Plan (SCSP) 
4. Need To Strengthen Krishi Vigyan Kendras(KVKS) To Enable 
Them to Act as Force Multiplier 
5. Change of Nomenclature of The Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare to Department of Agriculture, Farmers & Farm 
Labourers Welfare 
6. Use Of Advertisement & Publicity Campaign to Boost 
Awareness About Ongoing Agricultural Schemes   
7-10  Need For Improvement in Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) 
11. Declaration of Minimum Support Price for Organic Produce 
12. Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) 

2 
 
13. Implementation of Universal Crop Insurance for Small Holder 
Farmers 
14. Need to Tackle Issues Related to Crop Residue  
 
1.3  The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare) has furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 14 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 3, 6,7, 8,10, and 12 
              Total 07 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies:  
Recommendation Para No. 4, 5 and 14 
                      Total 03 
                   Chapter-III  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para Nos. 2, 9 and 11 
              Total 03 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 
Recommendation Para No. 13 
Total 01 
             Chapter-V 
  
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation 
of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the Government.  In cases where 
it is not possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons 

3 
 
for non-implementation.  The Committee desire that further Action-taken Notes on the 
Observation/ Recommendations contained in Chapter - I and Final Action-taken 
Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished 
to them at an early date. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action -Taken by the Government on some of 
Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A- Need for Enhancement of Budgetary Allocation to Department 
Recommendation No.2 
 
1.6 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
“The Committee observe that the proportion of budgetary allocations made in favour 
of the Department in terms of the percentage of the total   central outlay for the years  
2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26 stood at 3.53%, 3.14%, 2.57%, 
2.54% and 2.51% respectively. This shows continuous decline in allocations to the 
Department as proportion of Central Plan outlay.  The Committee, in view of the fact 
that as more than 50 % people depend on agriculture for their livelihood, desire the 
Ministry to arrest this declining trend.” 
1.7 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
“Agriculture is a critical sector for the economy, contributing significantly to food 
security, employment, and rural livelihoods. The Department acknowledge and 
appreciate the Committee's insightful observations regarding the allocation to the 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) and its relation to the growth 
rate of the agriculture sector. However, the Department would like to highlight that 
the overall national priorities and budgetary allocations are determined based on a 
comprehensive assessment of various sectors and their respective needs.  

4 
 
It may be noted that the Government of India has significantly increased budget 
allocations, rising from ₹29,772.83 crore in 2013-14 to ₹1,27,290.16 crore at BE level 
in 2025-260, demonstrating its commitment to the sector. Toward this end, the 
Department is actively implementing various initiatives aimed at enhancing 
agricultural production and productivity through schemes like RKVY, KY scheme etc. 
with a focus on improving crop and livestock productivity, diversifying into high-value 
crops, and utilizing digital platforms to facilitate better price discovery for farmers' 
produce; all in line with the goal of doubling farmers' income. The Department is also 
strengthening farmer support systems through initiatives like PM-KISAN, crop 
insurance schemes, and improved access to credit and markets.   
It may also be noted that Government of India had increased Budget Provision to 
Rs.1,31,195.20 crore at RE level in 2024-25 which is highest so far for the 
Department out of which Rs. 1,24,261.06 crore has been utilized and accordingly it 
is expected to increase the budget provision at RE level in the current year (2025-26) 
as well.” 
1.8 The Committee had recommended that the proportion of budgetary allocations 
made in favour of the Department in terms of the percentage of the total central outlay 
for the years 2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26 stood at 3.53%, 3.14%, 
2.57%, 2.54% and 2.51% respectively which showed continuous decline in allocations 
to the Department as proportion of Central Plan outlay and accordingly, the 
Committee desired the Ministry to arrest this declining trend in view of the fact that 
more than 50% of the country’s population depend on agriculture. The Department in 
its Action Taken Reply have submitted that the Government of India has significantly 
increased budget allocations, rising from Rs. 29,772.83 crore in 2013-14 to Rs. 
1,27,290.16 crore at BE level in 2025-26, demonstrating its commitment to the sector.  
Toward this end, the Department is actively implementing various initiatives aimed at 
enhancing agricultural production and productivity through schemes like Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana(RKVY), Krishonnati Yojana(KY) schemes etc. with a focus on 
improving crop and livestock productivity, diversifying into high-value crops and 

5 
 
utilizing digital platforms to facilitate better price discovery for farmers’ produce; all 
in line with the goal of doubling farmer’s income. The Department is also 
strengthening farmer support systems through initiatives like PM-KISAN, crop 
insurance schemes, and improved access to credit and markets. The Committee are 
of the considered view that though the amount of budgetary allocation to agriculture 
has increased over a period of time, the percentage share of the Department w.r.t. the 
total Central Plan outlay needs to be enhanced to support food security, rural 
employment and sustainable economic growth alongwith fortifying agriculture 
against emerging challenges like Climate Change, desertification, declining water 
table etc. 
B.  Need for Improvement in Market Intervention scheme (MIS) 
  Recommendation No. 9 
1.9 The Committee had observed/ recommended: - 
“Certain disparities in prices offered to farmers under the MIS for the same produce, 
in two separate locations in a particular region of a state, were brought to the notice 
of the Committee. The Committee after discussion, felt that there should not be any 
intra state disparity in the implementation of the Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) 
by States/Implementing agencies.  The Committee also suggest that implementing 
robust data collection systems to monitor market prices and production levels can 
help in making informed decisions about appropriate time for activating MIS.  The 
Committee also suggest the Ministry to provide training for farmers on market 
trends, pricing mechanisms, and ways to leverage the MIS can empower them to 
make better decisions regarding their produce. Regular assessments of the MIS 
impact on farmers' incomes and market stability can identify areas for improvement 
and ensure that the scheme adapts to changing agricultural landscapes.” 
1.10 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
“Under MIS, Market Intervention Price (MIP) is determined by the Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (A&FW) consisting of the officers of the State 

6 
 
Government, the representatives of NAFED and NCCF, State intervening agencies, 
representative of the Costing Cell, DA&FW, Directorate of Economics & Statistics, 
Integrated Finance Division, DA&FW, TMOP Division and Horticulture Division, 
DA&FW. The Committee finalizes the terms and conditions with express approval of 
the competent authority in the Department that are applicable for procurement of 
corps throughout the States. The price is regularly monitored by MIS Committee 
during the implementing period of MIS through AgMarknet Portal.  
The Study of impact Evaluation of Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) was done by 
NABARD consultancy Service in 2019.  The study had suggested that the farmers 
has highest level of satisfaction on majority of states about the implementation of 
these schemes & had a positive impact on their income.” 
1.11 The Committee had recommended that there should not be any intra state 
disparity in the implementation of the Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) by 
States/Implementing agencies. The Committee had also recommended that 
implementing robust data collection systems to monitor market prices and 
production levels can help in making informed decisions about appropriate 
time for activating MIS and to train the farmers on market trends, pricing 
mechanisms, and ways to leverage the MIS to empower them to make better 
decisions regarding their produce.  The Committee had further recommended 
that regular assessments of the MIS impact of farmers’ incomes and market 
stability can identify areas for improvement and ensure that the scheme adapts 
to changing agricultural landscapes.  The Department in its Action Taken reply 
have submitted that Under MIS, Market Intervention Price (MIP) is determined 
by the Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (A&FW) 
consisting of the officers of the State Government, the representatives of 
NAFED and NCCF, State intervening agencies, representatives of the Costing 
Cell, DA&FW, Directorate of Economics & Statistics, Integrated Finance 
Division, DA&FW, TMOP Division and Horticulture Division, DA&FW and the 
said Committee finalizes the terms and conditions with express approval of the 

7 
 
competent authority in the Department that are applicable for procurement of 
crops throughout the States.  The price is regularly monitored by MIS 
Committee during the implementing period of MIS through AgMarknet Portal.  
The Committee are of the considered view that MIS is a scheme of immense 
importance to provide relief to farmers and hence, the Department should 
finalize the terms and conditions of the scheme for procurement of crops from 
all the states in larger interests of the farmers and effectively monitor its 
progress. 
 
 
 
 
C. Declaration of Minimum Support Price for Organic Produce 
Recommendation No. 11. 
 
1.12  The Committee had observed/ recommended: - 
 “The Committee, after thorough consideration, strongly advocates for the promotion 
of organic farming across the country. An initiative with focus on national health 
concerns, addressing concerns over soil and water contamination, and protecting 
against other environmental risks. There is an urgent need for a national effort to 
transition towards healthier food systems and more sustainable agricultural practices. 
Organic farming transition will help farmers move from chemical-intensive farming to 
natural farming on a large-scale. 
The Committee acknowledges the Government’s positive initiatives to encourage 
chemical-free farming, such as the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and 
the Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
(MOVCDNER). These schemes support farmers from production to marketing, 
including certification and post-harvest management (processing, packaging). They 
provide financial assistance to cover costs for seeds, bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides, 

8 
 
organic manure, and more. Additionally, these initiatives offer support for the 
formation of Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs), training programs, and value 
addition. Furthermore, the Bhartiya Prakritik Krishi Padhati (BPKP) promotes natural 
farming by utilising traditional indigenous practices, excluding synthetic chemicals, 
focusing on on-farm biomass recycling, and using cow dung-urine formulations and 
plant-based preparations. 
The Committee believes that while these initiatives are valuable, more schemes and 
incentives are needed to facilitate the nationwide shift towards organic farming. The 
farmer will only shift towards organic farming and diversified agriculture if farmers are 
convinced that the shift will allow for better economic prospects and benefits than the 
present form of agriculture. 
There is need for the establishment of rapid testing mechanisms for organic produce. 
Organic farming not only enhances biodiversity but also strengthens the natural 
resilience of farmlands, making them more adaptable to climate change. Hence, it 
should be encouraged through increased financial and non-financial incentives. 
In this context, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should declare 
a Minimum Support Price (MSP) for all Organic Crops in addition to the MSP declared 
on traditional crop. 
However, the demand for MSP on organic produce should not undermine the broader 
MSP demand based on the Swaminathan formula. Instead, the legal MSP framework 
should be expanded to include organic produce. This would incentivise farmers to 
transition to organic farming, despite the challenges of lower yields in the initial years 
of conversion. The Committee believes that the MSP for organic produce should be 
set higher than that for conventional crops to compensate for the drop in yield and 
the costs associated with the shift to organic farming.  
To determine an appropriate MSP for organic produce, extensive large-scale 
research studies should be conducted. These studies would examine the costs 

9 
 
associated with transitioning to organic farming and ensure that the MSP adequately 
reflects the financial support required for this shift, particularly in terms of decreased 
yields per hectare and increased quality of the produce. The current MSP 
mechanism, which primarily considers production costs, may not fully account for 
these factors. Thus, the Government has to determine MSP on organic crops 
considering it to be economical for the farmer to shift away from traditional crops 
providing better income from the same size of land and input costs. Therefore, the 
MSP for organic produce should take into consideration not just production costs, but 
also the support necessary to enable farmers to successfully make the transition from 
chemical-intensive farming to organic farming. MSP Incentive for Organic crops will 
also help solve the problem of storage of food-grain as production of organic crops 
per hectare is less than traditional crop. Most importantly, the nationwide health 
issues arises from chemical-based crop production can be solved as well as 
increasing demand for India’s healthier food exports globally. 
In an effort to give fillip to the Organic Farming, the Committee strongly recommend 
that a separate budget head may be created and sufficient funding may be made 
available every year to subsidize Organic Farming for its effective promotion.” 
1.13 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
“The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) is mandated to 
recommend Minimum Support Price (MSP) for 22 agricultural commodities and Fair 
and Remunerative Price (FRP) for Sugarcane at all India level. 
While making MSP recommendations, the Commission, as per its mandate, 
considers cost of production, supply and demand situation of various crops in 
domestic and global markets, domestic and world prices along with trade 
opportunities, terms of trade between agriculture and non-agriculture sector, optimal 
utilization of land, water and other production resources, likely effect of price policy 
on rest of the economy, and a minimum of 50 percent as the margin over the cost of 
production. 

10 
 
Government fixes Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for 22 mandated agricultural 
crops on the basis of the recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural 
Costs & Prices (CACP), after considering the views of State Governments and 
Central Ministries/Departments concerned. The 22 mandated crops include 14 
Kharif crops viz. paddy, jowar, bajra, maize, ragi, tur (arhar), moong, urad, 
groundnut, soyabean, sunflower, sesamum, nigerseed, cotton and 6 Rabi crops 
viz. wheat, barley, gram, masur (lentil), rapeseed & mustard, safflower and two 
commercial crops viz. jute and copra. 
While recommending MSPs, CACP considers important factors like cost of 
production, overall demand-supply conditions, domestic and international prices, 
inter-crop price parity, terms of trade between agricultural and non-agricultural 
sectors, the likely effect on the rest of the economy, besides ensuring rational 
utilization of land, water and other production resources and a minimum of 50 
percent as the margin over cost of production. 
The inclusion of crops under MSP framework is dependent on several factors 
which include relatively large shelf life, widely grown, item of mass 
consumption, essential for food security, among others. 
The Union Budget for 2018-19 had announced the pre-determined principle to 
keep MSPs at levels of one and half times of the cost of production. 
Accordingly, Government had increased MSPs for all mandated Kharif, Rabi and 
other Commercial crops with a minimum return of 50 percent over all India 
weighted average cost of production from year 2018-19 onwards. 
To make Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) more effective and transparent, a 
committee has been constituted on 12th July 2022. The subject matter of the 
committee also include (i) Suggestions on practicality to give more autonomy to 
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) and measures to make it more 
scientific, and (ii) To strengthen the Agricultural Marketing System as per the changing 

11 
 
requirements of the country to ensure higher value to the farmers through 
remunerative prices of their produce by taking advantage of the domestic and 
export opportunities. 
  
Support given to farmers under PKVY and MOVCDNER schemes: 
Government is committed to promote Organic Farming, with emphasis on sustainable 
productivity, food security and soil health. It supports the organic farming initiative in 
various ways. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic Value 
Chain Development for Northeastern Region (MOVCDNER) schemes were launched 
in 2015-16 for promotion of Organic farming.  
 
PKVY Scheme is being implemented in a cluster mode with min. 20 ha size and states 
have been asked to implement in cluster size of 1000 ha in plain area and 500 ha in 
hilly area to facilitate marketing of organic produce. All farmers are eligible but within a 
group a farmer can avail benefit to a maximum of 2 ha and the limit of assistance is 
Rs.31, 500 per hac. out of which 47.62% i.e., Rs. 15,000 is given as incentives to a 
farmer for organic conversion, organic inputs, on farm inputs, production infrastructure, 
etc., shall be provided directly through DBT during the conversion period of 3 years. 
Total 14.99 lakh ha area has been covered involving 25.30 lakhs farmers. 
 
MOVCDNER scheme is implementing with an aim to develop end to end organic value 
chains across all eight states of NER. The scheme provides financial support for 
institutional development (FPOs), organic certification, on-farm and off-farm inputs, 
quality planting material, custom hiring centres, post-harvest and processing 
infrastructure as well as for marketing and branding of organic produce.  
Till date, total 2.35 lakh ha area covered involving 2.70 lakh farmers, 24 organic outlets 
have been developed which are being operated by FPOs and state governments. 324-
Collection & Aggregation Units, 354-Custom Hiring Centres, 176 – small Processing 
units, 6- Integrated Processing Units and 23- pack house entities created under 

12 
 
FPO/FPCs and private ownership, 254-Transportation vehicles provided to FPO/FPCs 
and 8 states developed their own brands. 
The scheme enables market linkages with industry players as well as with consumers 
though a whole host of marketing initiatives such as participation in buyer-seller meets, 
developing organic retail outlets within the state as well in major cities. 51 organic FPOs 
have been supported to sell their products online on Open Network for Digital 
Commerce (ONDC).  The organic products command better price than conventionally 
grown produce. 
  Selected Mandis have started offering separate kiosk for organic produce. 
 In response to the recommendation that a separate budget head be created and 
sufficient funding be made available every year to subsidize organic farming for its 
effective promotion, the following reply is submitted: 
Since 2015-16, the government has been prioritizing the promotion of organic farming 
across the country through two key schemes: the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(PKVY), implemented in all States and Union Territories (except the North Eastern 
States), and the Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
(MOVCDNER). Initially, both schemes operated with separate budget lines. However, 
following the rationalization of the schemes, PKVY has been integrated as a component 
under the PM-RKVY umbrella scheme, with a common budget line and adequate fund 
allocation. Similarly, MOVCDNER has been included as a component under the 
Krishonnati Yojana (KY) umbrella scheme, also with a common budget line and 
sufficient budget allocation.” 
 
1.14  The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should declare a Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) for all Organic Crops in addition to the MSP declared on 
traditional crop.  This would incentivize farmers in transition to organic 
farming, despite the challenges of lower yields in the initial years of 
conversion. The Committee believes that the MSP for organic produce should 
be set higher than that for conventional crops to compensate for the drop in 

13 
 
yield and the costs associated with the shift to organic farming. To determine 
an appropriate MSP for organic produce, extensive large-scale research 
studies should be conducted.  These studies would examine the costs 
associated with transitioning to organic farming and ensure that the MSP 
adequately reflects the financial support required for this shift, particularly in 
terms of decreased yields per hectare and increased quality of the produce.  
The Department in its Action Taken Reply have submitted that the Commission 
for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) is mandated to recommend Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) for 22 agricultural commodities and Fair and 
Remunerative Price (FRP) for Sugarcane at all India level.  While making MSP 
recommendations, the Commission, as per its mandate, considers cost of 
production, supply and demand situation of various crops  in domestic and 
global markets, domestic and world prices along with trade opportunities, 
terms of trade between agriculture and non-agriculture sector, optimal 
utilization of land, water and other production resources, likely effect of price 
policy on rest of the economy, and a minimum of 50 per cent as the margin over 
the cost of production. Government fixes Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for 
22 mandated agricultural crops on the basis of the recommendations of the 
Commission for Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP), after considering the view 
of the State Governments and Central Ministries/Departments concerned.  The 
22 mandated crops include 14 Kharif crops viz. paddy, jowar, bajra, maize, ragi, 
tur (arhar), moong, urad, groundnut, soyabean, sunflower, sesamum, 
nigerseed, cotton and 6 Rabi crops viz. wheat, barley, gram, masur (lentil), 
rapeseed & mustard, safflower and two commercial crops viz. jute and copra. 
The inclusion of crops under MSP framework is dependent on several factors 
which include relatively large shelf life, widely grown, item of mass 
consumption, essential for food security, among others.  The Union Budget for 
2018-19 had announced the pre-determined principle to keep MSPs at levels of 
one and half times of the cost of production. Accordingly, Government had 
increased MSPs for all mandated Kharif, Rabi and other Commercial crops with 

14 
 
a minimum return of 50 percent over all India weighted average cost of 
production from year 2018-19 onwards.  To make Minimum Support Prices 
(MSPs) more effective and transparent, a Committee has been constituted on 
12th July 2022. The subject matter of the committee also include (i) Suggestions 
on practicality to give more autonomy to Commission for Agricultural Costs 
and Prices (CACP) and measures to make it more scientific, and (ii) To 
strengthen the Agricultural Marketing System as per the changing 
requirements of the country to ensure higher value to the farmers through 
remunerative prices of their produce by taking advantage of the domestic and 
export opportunities.  The Committee are of the considered view that Organic 
farming requires extra labour for composting, weeding, and on-farm input 
preparation, as well as expenditure on certification and segregation, which are 
not adequately covered by conventional MSP calculations. MSP for organic 
crops will send a clear, upfront signal that the state will support farmers 
through the transition years, encouraging more producers to shift area under 
organic management and making programs like natural farming and 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana more effective on the ground.  MSP for 
Organic produce is necessary to protect organic farmers from price risk, 
compensate them for higher costs and lower initial yields, and to mainstream 
organic and natural farming as a viable, scalable production system. 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Analysis of Demands for Grants-Demand No. 1 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has been 
allocated Rs.127290.16 Crore for 2025-26 at BE Stage, which is 4.56% less than RE of 
Rs.131195.21 Crore for 2024-25.  The actual utilization of funds for 2024-25 is Rs.78510.76 
Crore as on 02.02.2025 w.r.t. RE stands at 59.84%, which suggests that the Department 
needs to strive hard to fully utilize the funds in the remaining period - two months (approx.) 
of the financial year 2024-25.  The Committee observe that in the previous years also the 
Ministry have got allocations much lower than the amounts sought from the Ministry of 
Finance.  The Committee are of the view that: 
(i) incase the Ministry is not able to spend the funds in the remaining two months 
of the Financial year, there is increased risk of not getting the allocations as 
sought by the Ministry in future as the later might take a position that since 
surrendering was done in the past   continuously the ministry may not allocate 
the entire amounts asked for.  
(ii) the bulk spending, almost 40% of the total allocation in this case, in the last 
quarter of the financial year also violates the prescribed limits of quarter wise 
spending issued by the Department of Expenditure.   
(iii) Surrendering of the funds may have adverse bearing on the outcome and output 
targets given in various programmes, schemes, projects and Missions, 
particularly if rollover mechanisms for unused funds are not in place. 
 
In view of the above, the Committee earnestly request the Ministry to put in place 
required processes and mechanisms to monitor the fund usage at regular intervals and to 
address the issues that may hamper the entire spending of the allocated amounts.  

16 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare acknowledges the observations 
made by the Standing Committee regarding the budgetary allocations and fund utilization 
for the financial years 2024-25 and 2025-26. The Department remains committed to 
ensuring the optimum utilization of allocated funds to achieve the intended objectives of 
various schemes, programs, and missions aimed at supporting farmers and enhancing 
agricultural productivity.  To address the Committee’s observations, the Department has 
taken the following steps: 
 
1. Efficient Fund Utilization: The Department is taking proactive steps to ensure the 
full utilization of funds within the remaining period of the financial year. Mechanisms 
for expedited implementation of projects and direct benefit transfers to eligible 
beneficiaries are being strengthened. 
2. Allocation Considerations: The Department acknowledges the importance of 
demonstrating effective fund utilization to justify future budgetary allocations. To this 
end, internal monitoring mechanisms are being reinforced to track expenditure 
patterns and minimize risks associated with fund surrender. 
3. Quarterly Spending Compliance: The Department is aware of the guidelines issued 
by the Department of Expenditure regarding quarterly spending limits. Efforts are 
underway to streamline expenditure patterns and avoid bulk spending towards the 
end of the financial year, ensuring compliance with prescribed financial regulations. 
4. Impact on Programs and Rollover Mechanisms: The Department recognizes the 
potential impact of fund surrender on outcome and output targets.  Accordingly, 
measures are being explored to establish robust rollover mechanisms for unutilized 
funds, thereby ensuring continuity in program implementation without disruptions. 
 

17 
 
In view of the Committee’s recommendation, the Department is committed to further 
strengthening its financial monitoring processes, improving fund absorption  
 
 
capacity, and enhancing coordination with implementing agencies to ensure seamless 
execution of schemes and projects. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan (SCSP) 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee are of the view that the Department should more proactively pursue 
the release of funds under SCSP with State Governments and implementing agencies. 
Concerted efforts should be made in coordination with state Governments to chalk out 
strategies to deal with problems which hitherto exist, after taking into account, the existing 
ground realities which may relate to Terms & Conditions, eligibility criteria, etc.  The efforts 
made by the Department to impress upon the States for full utilization of the funds, 
sensitizing them to complete the documentation and completion of the audit in time, meeting 
the stakeholders at regular intervals, etc. have not had desired impact on utilization of the 
funds.  The Committee accordingly recommend that: 
(i) Terms and Conditions (T&C) of the scheme, if required, may be revisited after 
consulting stakeholders and suitable amendments be made after taking into 
account ground realities to improve utilization of funds under the Scheme.  
(ii) a rating system may be devised where in states/UTs performance is rated on 
the utilization of funds disbursed under the scheme. In addition, other relevant 
factors may also be taken into consideration in devising the rating system.  The 
Committee are of the strong view that such a rating system will spur competition 

18 
 
amongst the states to improve considerably the spending of the funds allocated 
for the scheme. 
(iii) annual audits of SCSP by Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) be introduced 
imparting transparency and accountability in fund utilization. 
(iv)  wide publicity of the scheme in vernacular languages may be given in different 
media such as radio, TV, social media platforms, mobile (through SMS & 
WhatsApp) detailing benefits of the Scheme be given.  
(v) an exclusive and dedicated web portal with use of Artificial Intelligence tools to 
track the implementation progress, expenditure, and outcomes of the Scheme 
with an inbuilt grievance redressal mechanism can improve transparency and 
public trust in these programmes. 
(vi) issue guidelines to ensure that funds allocated under SCSP remain non-
divertible and are used exclusively for SCSP specific initiatives. 
The Committee further recommend that the State Governments which fail to spend 
SCSP Funds, their shall be strict restrictions imposed on those states for allotment of certain 
funds even not falling under SCSP.  
Reply of the Government 
The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare acknowledges the concerns 
raised by the Standing Committee regarding the utilization of funds under the Scheduled 
Caste Sub Plan (SCSP). We remain committed to ensuring the effective deployment of 
resources for the benefit of Scheduled Caste beneficiaries while improving coordination with 
State Governments and implementing agencies.  
To address the Committee’s recommendations, the Department has taken the following 
steps;  
1. Revisiting guidelines: The Department recognizes the need to address 
operational challenges that may hinder fund utilization. In consultation with 
relevant stakeholders, we will undertake a review of the scheme’s guidelines, 

19 
 
making necessary amendments to align with ground realities and improve 
accessibility. 
2. Performance-Based Rating System: To incentivize proactive utilization of 
SCSP funds, the Department will explore the feasibility of introducing a rating 
mechanism to assess State/UT performance based on fund disbursement, 
utilization efficiency, and impact. This system will encourage competitiveness 
among states, thereby improving overall fund absorption. 
3. Annual Audits by Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG): To enhance 
accountability and transparency, the Department will actively consider 
institutionalizing annual audits of SCSP funds by the CAG, ensuring strict 
financial oversight and compliance with regulations. 
4. Public Awareness & Outreach: The Department acknowledges the importance 
of comprehensive outreach efforts. We will expand the dissemination of 
information regarding SCSP benefits through multiple media channels, 
including radio, TV, social media, and mobile-based messaging services in 
vernacular languages to enhance awareness among target beneficiaries. 
5. Dedicated Web Portal & AI Integration: As part of our efforts to enhance 
transparency and monitoring, the Department will explore the development of 
a dedicated web portal equipped with Artificial Intelligence tools to track 
implementation progress, expenditure, and outcomes. The portal will include a 
robust grievance redressal mechanism to facilitate stakeholder engagement 
and responsiveness. 
6. Ensuring Non-Diversion of Funds: Clear guidelines will be issued to ensure that 
SCSP funds remain exclusively allocated to SCSP-specific initiatives, 
preventing any diversion or misallocation. 
7. Enforcement of Accountability Measures: The Department takes cognizance of 
the recommendation to impose restrictions on States failing to utilize SCSP 
funds effectively. Measures will be devised to ensure responsible fund usage 
while aligning future allocations with performance metrics. 

20 
 
The Department remains steadfast in its commitment to improving fund utilization, 
ensuring transparency, and optimizing the impact of SCSP initiatives for the betterment of 
Scheduled Caste beneficiaries. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
  

21 
 
Use of Advertisement & Publicity Campaign to Boost Awareness About Ongoing 
Agricultural Schemes   
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee are of the view that effective advertisement and publicity campaigns 
are crucial for promotion of agricultural schemes, as they help raise awareness, encourage 
participation, and ensure the success of government initiatives.  Many farmers, especially 
in rural areas, are unaware of agricultural schemes due to limited access to information. 
Publicity campaigns bridge this gap by disseminating information through accessible 
channels. Highlighting the benefits of schemes (e.g., subsidies, training, or improved 
technologies) through publicity campaigns motivate farmers to participate and adopt latest 
technologies and Climate smart farming practices. Transparent communication about 
schemes builds trust among farmers, ensuring they perceive these initiatives as beneficial 
and reliable.  Publicity campaigns can connect farmers with markets, buyers, and 
government programmes, improving their income and productivity. In view of the foregoing 
the Committee suggest to:  
(i) Customize campaigns to address specific challenges faced by different farmer 
groups (e.g., women farmers or small-scale producers); 
(ii) encourage State Governments & Implementation agencies to use social media 
to share success stories, scheme updates, and educational content tailored to 
farmers' needs; 
(iii) enable farmers groups and Farmers Producer Organisations (FPOs) to engage 
proactively in advertisement campaigns for wider and faster outreach;  
(iv) Organize and promote ‘Kisan melas’ may also be organized in urban and semi 
urban areas to create and spread awareness about the farmers produce in 
these areas especially on weekends to have more footfalls;  
(v) Provide SMS based services for giving real time updates regarding ongoing 
schemes in vernacular languages can also be adopted; 

22 
 
(vi) assess the impact of advertisement campaigns, be it offline or online, through 
surveys or feedback mechanisms to refine strategies over time by the 
Department; and,   
(vii) adopt community driven approach to enhance the reach of the awareness 
campaigns.  
Reply of the Government  
(i)  The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is implementing a Central Sector 
Scheme “Mass Media Support to Agriculture Extension” through DD Regional Kendra, DD 
Kisan and All India Radio to create awareness and about the schemes & programmes for 
the benefit of farmers, across the country. The network of 18 DD Regional Kendras, 97 FM 
stations of AIR and DD Kisan are being utilized for wider publicity of Department’s schemes 
& programmes, on-going initiatives & policy interventions of the Government for farmer’s 
welfare, even at remote locations.  
(ii)  The, "Audio-Visual spots are being used to broadcast and telecast information 
through Doordarshan, All India Radio and private TV and radio channels as a part of 
‘Focused Publicity Campaign’ for the benefit of farmers. 
(iii)  The customized approach has been adopted through outdoor publicity, print media 
advertisement in leading newspapers and mass media campaigns to create awareness 
among the rural masses. 
(iv)  The Department has proactively leveraged the extensive use of social media 
platforms viz Facebook, X (formerly Twitter), Instagram, Threads, YouTube, LinkedIn & 
WhatsApp, and farmers friendly Apps to disseminate information related to agricultural 
schemes, technological interventions & success stories for wider outreach among the 
farmers.  
(v)  The extension activities such as exposure visits, demonstrations, Farmer-Scientist-
Interactions, kisan melas and farm schools are organized under the ATMA scheme, which 
provides a direct interaction platform to the farmers to learn about innovations, advanced 
technologies and good agriculture practices. 

23 
 
The MIDH scheme is being implemented by State Governments and National Level 
Agencies.  In the scheme guidelines there is a separate provision available for awareness 
and promotional programmes on horticulture, as per prescribed norms.   State Governments 
and National Level Agencies under MIDH are promoting the scheme through Seminars, 
conferences, workshops, exhibitions, Kisan Mela, publicity, printed literature etc and local 
advertisements. 
In order to harness the potential of ICT in Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture has 
launched the scheme "Kisan Call Centres (KCCs)". Main aim of the KCC is to answer 
farmers' queries on a telephone call in their own dialect. These call Centres are working in 
14 different locations covering all the States and UTs.   A countrywide common eleven digit 
Toll Free number 1800-180-1551 has been allotted for Kisan Call Centre. This number is 
accessible through mobile phones and landlines of all telecom networks including private 
service providers. Replies to the farmers' queries are given in 22 local languages. 
Further, the Scheme ‘Support to State Extension Programme for Extension Reforms’ 
popularly known as ATMA scheme, aimed at promoting decentralized, farmer friendly 
extension system in the country with an objective to support State Government’s efforts to 
revamp the agricultural extension system focusing on Natural Farming, Climate Resilient 
Agriculture, Crop Diversification, National Pest Surveillance System, Soil Health Card, 
Digital Agriculture Mission and making available the latest agricultural technologies and 
good agricultural practices to the farmers. Under the scheme, emphases of extension 
services on post-production management, surplus management and marketing is being 
provided to the farmers.  
Under the sub-component ‘Seed Village Programme’ of Seed components of NFSNM 
training is provided to the farmers on seed production and seed technology. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
Need for Improvement in Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) 
Recommendation No. 7 

24 
 
The Committee note that Market Intervention Scheme (MIS), a sub component of 
Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay Sankrashan Abhiyaan (PM-AASHA), is implemented on the 
request of State/UT Government for the procurement of various perishable 
agricultural/horticultural commodities such as Tomato, Onion, Potato etc. for which Minimum 
Support Price(MSP) is not applicable and there is a reduction of prices in the market by at 
least 10% over the rates of previous normal season in the States/UTs so that farmers are 
not constrained to make distress sale of their produce.  While recent revisions have 
improved certain aspects of the scheme, there are several areas where further 
enhancements can be made to ensure its effectiveness and reach. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that:  
(i)  Awareness campaigns be conducted as many farmers remain unaware of the MIS 
and its benefits. Increasing outreach through local agricultural offices, community 
meetings, and farmer cooperatives can help disseminate information effectively.  
(ii) direct applications from Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) or Cooperatives 
through a dedicated e-portal, could speed up response time during critical market 
downturns as the current requirement for State Governments to announce, notify and 
implement the scheme may lead to delays.  
(iii) The Govt. may consider favourably to increase the current Procurement limit of 25% 
of the total estimated production in the country to 50% to cover more farmers and 
produce under the scheme. Further, the Committee feel that it could provide greater 
security for farmers, especially during bumper crop years when prices tend to drop 
sharply.  
Reply of the Government 
(i) Wide publicity is given by the State and State designated agencies through Print 
and Electric Media during the procurement period.  
(ii) Market Intervention Scheme (MIS), a sub component of Pradhan Mantri Annadata 
Aay Sankrashan Abhiyaan (PM-AASHA) is implemented by the State Designated 
Agencies such as Cooperatives, Farmers Producer Organizations (FPOs) etc. 

25 
 
Recently, it has been implemented in some of the States such as Telangana, 
Karnataka, and Rajasthan etc. Farmers register themselves on the e-portal before 
selling their produce to the State agencies during the implementation of the 
scheme prompting response of interventions to get remunerative price of their 
produce by the farmers. 
(iii) MIS is an intervention scheme and it is implemented with the expectations that 
timely market interventions helps in establishing the market price in favour of 
farmers by pushing it above the cost of production/economic level. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
Need for Improvement in Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) 
Recommendation No. 8 
The option for States to pay the difference between the Market Intervention Price (MIP) 
and Selling Price directly into farmers' accounts is a positive step. However, ensuring that 
this system is efficient and timely is crucial for maintaining farmer trust and participation. 
Reply of the Government 
Consequent upon the approval of the Cabinet, the Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) 
has been revised in the recent past with an option to pay the farmers price difference 
between Market Intervention Price (MIP) and Sale Price directly into the farmers’ accounts 
instead of physical procurement.  
Recently, consequent upon on the request of the Government of Andhra Pradesh, maximum 
coverage of quantity for Price Deficiency Payment under MIS of Red Chilly has been 
approved as 258238 MT with the MIP of Rs.11781.25/per quintal. The maximum quantum 
of differential payment between the MIP and Sale Price will be upto 25% of MIP. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 

26 
 
Need for Improvement in Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee also suggest the Ministry to explore the possibility of expanding the 
range of crops covered under the MIS as it can provide broader protection for various crops 
vulnerable to price fluctuations.  Further, feedback on MIS may also be obtained which can 
help policymakers understand its effectiveness and areas needing adjustment. 
The Committee also strongly suggest that the Govt may explore the possibility of 
extending MIS to cover Millets also by amending the extant mandate  
 
Reply of the Government 
MIS is implemented for perishable Agricultural/Horticultural Commodities for which 
Minimum Support Price (MSP) is not announced.   This scheme is implemented at the 
request of the State /UT Government which is ready to bear 50% (25% in case of North-
Eastern States) of loss incurred if any, in the operation.  The basic criteria for implementation 
of MIS is when there is a reduction of market price of crop by at least 10% over the market 
rates of previous normal season in the States/ UTs.   The procurement is undertaken by the 
State designated agency upto 25% of the State’s production of the crop of the prescribed 
Fair Average Quality (FAQ) at fixed Market Intervention Price (MIP) determined by MIS 
Committee plus permitted overheads expenses, which is generally of 25% of MIP.  However, 
States/ UTs have also an option to implement Price Deficiency Payment (PDP) under MIS 
by making the differential payment between the MIP and Sale Price directly to the farmers 
instead of physical procurement. 
  
As far procurement of Millet is concerned, there is already a mechanism in place for 
the procurement of millet under the domain of Department of Food and Public Distribution.      
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) 

27 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee note that PMFBY aims to provide financial support to farmers in the 
event of crop losses due to natural calamities, pest attacks, and other adverse conditions. 
Delays in fund release from state governments resulting in postponed insurance payouts to 
farmers, inadequate compensation vis-à-vis the losses, lengthy claim processing, disputes 
over yield assessments & transmitting the yield data leading to delays in receiving 
compensation.  payments transmitting yield data. The Committee suggest that these issues 
be addressed at the earliest to improve the scheme's effectiveness and ensuring that it 
meets its goal of providing reliable support to farmers facing crop losses. 
 
The Committee suggest that the damages caused to the crops by stray animals may 
be considered for covering under PMFBY so that the farmers whose crops are destroyed by 
stray animals are entitled for compensation under PMFBY .  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is regularly monitoring 
the  implementation of the scheme including delays in fund release from state Governments 
resulting in delay in payment of claims  to farmers, inadequate compensation vis-à-vis the 
losses, lengthy claim processing, disputes over yield assessments & transmitting the yield 
data leading to delays in receiving compensation, delay in transmitting yield of yield data 
through weekly video conferences of all stakeholders, one to one meeting as well as 
National level Review Conferences. 
Based on the experience gained and view of the stakeholders, Government has 
taken various steps to strengthen infrastructure for implementation of this scheme, bring 
transparency and ensure timely settlement of claims:  
 Government has undertaken development of National Crop Insurance Portal 
(NCIP) as a single source of data ensuring subsidy payment, co-ordination, 
transparency, dissemination of information and delivery of services including direct 
online enrollment of farmers, uploading/obtaining individual insured famer’s details 

28 
 
for better monitoring and to ensure transfer of claim amount electronically to the 
individual farmer’s Bank Account.  
 To sort out the issue regarding delay in receipt of State Government share in premium 
subsidy resulting in delay in settlement of claims, Central Government has separated 
the release of its premium subsidy share from the State Government release.  Now 
Central Government is releasing its share without waiting for the State Government 
share and asked the insurance companies to proportionately release claims to the 
farmers.   
 Further, with effect from Kharif 2025, States are required to deposit their share in 
premium in escrow account in advance and enrolment in the State would be opened 
at National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) only after deposit of share of State 
Government in the Escrow Account.   
 In order to rigorously monitor claim disbursal process, a dedicated module namely 
‘Digiclaim Module’ has been operationalized for payment of claims from Kharif 2022 
onwards.  It involves integration of National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) with Public 
Finance Management System (PFMS) and accounting system of Insurance 
Companies to provide timely & transparent processing of all claims.  W.e.f. Kharif 
2024, in case payment is not made timely by Insurance Company, penalty of 12% is 
auto-calculated and levied through NCIP.  This is expected to help in further 
expediting claims settlement. 
 To tackle the issue of inadequate compensation viz-a-viz the losses, formula for 
calculation of yield has been revised/rationalized from time to time.  To benefit the 
farmers, losses due to localized risks of hailstorm, landslide, inundation, cloud burst 
& natural fire and post-harvest losses due to cyclone, cyclonic/unseasonal rains & 
hailstorms are calculated on individual insured farm basis.  
 Since the scheme is implemented by the State Government, therefore, in order to 
resolve the grievances/complaints including those related to claims of insured 
farmers, provision of Stratified Grievance Redressal Mechanism viz. District Level 
Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRC), State Level Grievance Redressal 

29 
 
Committee (SGRC) has been made in the Revised Operational Guidelines of the 
Scheme.    These committees have been given the detailed mandate as outlined in 
the Operational Guidelines for hearing the complaints/ grievances   and to dispose 
them as per the stipulated procedure.   
 To further improve the grievance redressal mechanism, Krishi Rakshak Portal and 
Helpline (KRPH) has been developed.  A single Pan-India toll free number 14447 has 
been deployed and linked to the insurance companies database, where farmers can 
raise their grievances/issues.  Timelines to resolve these grievances/issues has also 
been fixed.  
 Also, towards leveraging technology in implementation of the scheme, various steps 
like capturing of yield data/Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) data through CCE-Agri 
App & uploading it on the NCIP, allowing insurance companies to witness the conduct 
of CCEs, integration of State land records with NCIP etc. have already been taken to 
improve timely settlement of the claims to farmers.   
Following technologies for Objective Crop Damage & Loss Assessment and 
transparency have also been implemented recently w.e.f. 2023-24 under the scheme: 
i. YES-TECH (Yield Estimation System Based on Technology) for gradual 
migration to Remote-Sensing based yield estimation to help assess yields as well 
as fair and accurate Crop Yield Estimation. This initiative has been launched for 
paddy & wheat crops from Kharif 2023 wherein 30% weightage to yield estimation 
will mandatorily be assigned to YES-TECH derived yield. Soybean crop has been 
added from Kharif 2024 season.   
ii. WINDS (Weather Information Network and Data System) for setting up of 
Network of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) & Automatic Rain-Gauges (ARG) 
to the tune of 5 times of existing network for collecting hyper-local weather data at 
GP & Block level.  This will be fed into a National unified network of AWS & ARG 
with interoperability & sharing of data in coordination with India Meteorological 
Department (IMD).  WINDS provides data not only for YES-TECH but also for 

30 
 
effective drought & disaster management, accurate weather prediction and offering 
better parametric insurance products.  
The Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) provides for comprehensive risk 
insurance against crop damage due to non-preventable natural risks from pre-sowing to 
post-harvest for the crops/areas notified by the State Government concerned.   The losses 
to crops due to wild animals being preventable in nature were initially were not covered 
under PMFBY. However, at the request of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (M/o EFCC) and State Governments, States have been allowed to notify the losses 
by wild animals on individual assessment, as add on cover at their own cost under the 
scheme.   Detailed modalities for coverage has been given in the Operational Guidelines of 
the scheme. 
Further, during discussions between Hon’ble Chief Ministers and Hon’ble Agriculture 
Ministers of some of the States with Hon’ble Union Minister for Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare, the issue regarding coverage of loss by wild animals with Government of India 
support in premium subsidy was raised by States.  After examination of the matter, ‘in 
principle’ approval of Hon’ble Union Agriculture and Farmers Welfare Minister has been 
obtained for coverage of such losses with Government of India support in premium subsidy, 
with effect from Kharif 2026 i.e the beginning of next tender cycle for States. A Committee 
has been constituted to finalise the modalities for coverage and settlement of claims for crop 
losses arising from wild animal attacks in the interim. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Need to Strengthen Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) to Enable Them to Act as Force 
Multiplier 
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee are of the view of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) are pivotal 
institutions in India's agricultural extension system, designed to bridge the gap between 
agricultural research and its practical application by farmers. Strengthening of KVKs 
involves enhancing their capacity to serve as knowledge hubs, resource centers, and 
innovation platforms for sustainable agricultural development. They feel that since KVKs  (i) 
assess and refine agricultural technologies ensuring  their suitability for local agro-climatic 
conditions through on-farm trials; (ii)  provide skill development training for farmers, rural 
youth, and women to enhance productivity and entrepreneurship; and, (iii)  collaborate with 
agencies like Agricultural Technology Management Agencies (ATMA) for coordinated 
extension efforts and also conduct Cluster Frontline Demonstrations to ensure effective 
dissemination of technologies they may be provided with adequate physical infrastructure 
and manpower, they suggest that :   
(i) The shortage of skilled personnel experienced by many KVKs may   be 
addressed on priority as it is impacting KVKs efficiency in discharging their 
duties.  
(ii) Streamlining of administrative processes of KVKs is also the need of the hour to 
improve their operational effectiveness to act as a one stop resource centre for 
supplying seeds, bio-products, issue/circulate advisories while leveraging ICT 
tools for wider outreach.   
(iii) The KVKs may be equipped with advanced/cutting edge technologies improving 
their ability to conduct effective demonstrations and on-farm testing of latest 
technologies. Such technologies may aid the KVKs in setting up of e-linkage 

32 
 
facilities for real time agro advisories & monitoring within their jurisdiction and 
also to act as frontline demonstration cum resource centre for timely supply of 
farm inputs and effective dissemination of technologies.  
(iv) Funding to KVKs may be improved to equip them with latest technologies 
suggested at (iii) above. They are of the view that accepting and implementing 
the above suggestions result in transforming KVKs in to new version of KVK 2.0 
to act as a resource hub for all extension schemes. 
(v) KVKs may focus on climate resilient agriculture through targeted training 
programmes and promote convergence with private sector initiatives for 
resource sharing. 
(vi) KVKs should work in close tandem with State Government and invariably inform 
public representatives like MPs, MLAs, MLCs, etc. regarding their upcoming 
events in advance for seamless coordination and wider outreach.  
(vii) The Committee note that there are 95 districts which do not have any KVKs. 
Since these KVKs plays a predominant role in dissemination of latest 
technologies and process for increasing productivity and also the overall 
agricultural development, the Committee suggest that KVKs should invariably 
be set up in each and every aspirational district and those aspirational districts 
already having one KVK may provided with one more KVK to have maximum 
impact. 
Reply of the Government 
(i) The filling up of vacancies in the KVKs is a continuous process and is to be 
done by the respective Host Organisation. As per the KVK scheme, the approved posts of 
the KVKs are to be filled as per the recruitment policies and procedures of the respective 
Host Organisation with the educational qualifications as laid down by ICAR. All the Host 
Organizations have been requested to fill up the vacant posts immediately. 
(ii) The revised mandate of KVK as has been approved in EFC 2021-26 is to act 
as Single Window Knowledge, Resource and Capacity Development Centre. Accordingly, 
the mandated activities are also being revised including (i) Strengthening technology 

33 
 
demonstration and promotion; supporting entrepreneurs and farmers' organizations through 
Public Private Partnership (PPP), (ii) Dissemination of technologies specific for various agro-
climatic zones and training and capacity building for their larger adoption, (iii) Reorienting 
the KVKs as knowledge and information centres for providing farmer-centric digital solutions 
and services, (iv) Ensuring availability of quality seeds, planting materials and other 
technological inputs to the farmers in PPP mode, (v) Creating mass awareness and 
community mobilization for nature-friendly and climate resilient agriculture and allied 
sectors. 
(iii) KVKs are being equipped with advanced technologies for effective 
demonstration to the farmers and other stakeholders. KVK demonstrate agri-drone 
application, precision farming technologies, micro irrigation and protected cultivation 
technologies. KVKs are also engaged in customized agro-advisories to the farmers through 
ICT led Kisan Sarathi portal. 
(iv) New version of KVK 2.0 as proposed is the need of the hour looking into the 
backdrop of climate change vulnerabilities. KVKs are also implementing several central 
sector schemes in convergence with the other departments and ministries. Funds are also 
mobilized from these departments. The enhanced funding proposal will be included in the 
Strengthening of KVK Scheme document for the financial cycle 2026-2031. 
(v) New version of KVK 2.0 as proposed is the need of the hour looking into the 
backdrop of climate change vulnerabilities. KVKs are also implementing several central 
sector schemes in convergence with the other departments and ministries. Funds are also 
mobilised from these departments. The enhanced funding proposal will be included in the 
Strengthening of KVK Scheme document for the financial cycle 2026-2031. 
(vi) KVKs have been advised to involve the public representatives in their 
mandated activities interventions. KVKs are already involving public representatives in their 
mandate activities. Many public representatives have recently participated in the events like 
Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra, launch of instalments of PMKISAN etc.   
(vii) Presently 731 KVKs are functional in the country spearheading frontline 
extension system. “Strengthening of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) Scheme” has been 

34 
 
extended for a period of 5 years from 2021-22 to 2025-26 under XV Finance Commission 
with a provision for establishment of KVKs in 121 new districts of the country without having 
a single KVK. Presently, the districts where there are no KVKs are supported by the KVKs 
of the neighbouring districts. All aspirational districts have KVKs and the KVKs are engaged 
in technology dissemination for increasing productivity and overall agricultural development.  
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) was launched in 2005-06 with 
the objective of creating a platform at District level for integrated extension delivery by 
engaging all key stakeholders in the agricultural sector, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
operating at the same level act as an outreach arm of National Agricultural Research System 
(NARS) facilitating validation and adoption of new technologies through frontline 
demonstrations, training & awareness programmes and other initiatives. 
KVKs play an active role in the implementation of the ATMA scheme by participating 
in key decision-making bodies such as the ATMA Governing Board, ATMA Management 
Committee, and the District Farmers’ Advisory Committee (DFAC). They also contribute 
significantly to various extension activities, including organizing Farmer-Scientist 
Interactions (FSIs), providing expert support for on-the-spot guidance to ATMA field 
functionaries, conducting joint field visits with scientists and extension personnel, and 
facilitating Kisan Gosthis. Additionally, KVKs are involved in the assessment, refinement, 
validation, and promotion of innovative farming technologies, as well as addressing short-
term, location-specific researchable issues. To support these initiatives, district-level ATMA 
provides financial assistance to the respective KVKs for effective implementation of these 
activities at the field level. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
Change of Nomenclature of the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare to 
Department of Agriculture, Farmers & Farm Labourers Welfare 
Recommendation No. 5 

35 
 
The Committee are of the view that the nomenclature of the Department of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare in India may be changed to Department of Agriculture, Farmers & 
Farm Labourers Welfare. Renaming the "Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare" to 
"Department of Agriculture, Farmers & Farm Labourers Welfare" offers several potential 
benefits as the revised name explicitly acknowledges the significant role of farm labourers 
in the agricultural sector.  Farm labourers, who often belong to marginalized communities, 
are a critical part of the agricultural workforce but are frequently overlooked in policy 
discussions and welfare schemes.  This change in name, if done, signals a commitment to 
addressing their unique challenges, such as low wages, lack of social security, and poor 
working conditions. By including "Farm Labourers" in the Department's name, the 
government emphasizes a more holistic approach to agricultural welfare.  This could lead 
to targeted policies for both land-owning farmers and labourers, ensuring equitable 
development across all stakeholders in agriculture as it aligns with recommendations like 
establishing a "National Commission for Minimum Living Wages for Farm Labourers," which 
would address wage disparities and improve living standards.  The Committee further 
recommends that PM-KISAN schemes may be extended to Farm Labourers. The renaming 
reflects the diverse composition of India's agricultural sector, where 54.6% of the population 
is engaged but not all as landowners. Recognizing all contributors strengthens the sector's 
inclusivity and sustainability.   A name change could lead to enhanced data collection and 
analysis on Farm Labourers, enabling better-targeted welfare programmes. For instance, 
schemes like crop insurance or health benefits could be extended to Farm Labourers 
alongside farmers. It may also encourage State Governments to adopt similar nomenclature 
changes, fostering uniformity in addressing agricultural welfare. Symbolically, it 
demonstrates a shift toward prioritizing vulnerable groups within agriculture. Practically, it 
could translate into increased budget allocations for Farm Labourer-specific schemes and 
greater accountability in implementing these programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Agricultural labourer is a State Subject and the State Governments take appropriate 
measures for the welfare of farm labourers. However, Government of India supports the 

36 
 
efforts of States through appropriate policy measures, budgetary allocation and various 
schemes/programmes for the welfare of farmers as well as farm labourers by increasing 
production, remunerative returns and income support to farmers. However, Committee 
recommendation has been duly noted. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
Need to Tackle Issues Related to Crop Residue  
Recommendation No. 14 
 
The Committee recognises that the widespread practice of burning crop residues, 
commonly referred to as Parali, is a significant environmental concern. This practice 
releases harmful greenhouse gases such as CO2, CH4, and N2O, contributing to air 
pollution and accelerating climate change. When not properly managed, decomposing crop 
residues can also emit methane, further exacerbating global warming. Moreover, excessive 
crop residue can impede soil-seed contact, reduce soil warmth, and immobilize nitrogen, 
which negatively impacts crop germination and nutrient availability. Conversely, insufficient 
residue cover leads to soil erosion, loss of organic matter, and a reduction in water retention 
capacity. 
However, managing crop residues is not an easy task. Alternative methods for 
residue management, such as the use of happy seeders and bio-decomposers, are often 
economically unfeasible for small and marginal farmers, even with provided subsidies. 
Additionally, there is a lack of developed markets for crop residue utilization, such as for 
biofuel production or composting, which could offer farmers additional income. The narrow 
sowing window further pressures farmers to clear fields quickly, with the ash from burning 
crop residue seen as a quick way to fertilise the soil, making burning the most time-efficient 
method. 
In light of these challenges, the Committee believes that a multifaceted approach is 
needed to address crop residue management. This approach should include a combination 
of policy interventions, farmer education, technological innovations (e.g., precision 

37 
 
agriculture tools), and financial incentives. Financial support is crucial to encourage farmers 
to adopt alternative methods for utilising crop residue, such as converting it to bioenergy, 
composting, or other productive uses instead of burning. 
To effectively discourage the burning of crop residue and minimize its environmental 
impact and considering the economic viability of the farmers, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the Government provide financial assistance of Rs. 100 per quintal of 
paddy to farmers as compensation for the cost incurred in collecting Parali (paddy residue). 
This amount should be in addition to the Minimum Support Price (MSP) and directly 
transferred to farmers’ bank accounts at the time of paddy procurement. 
The financial incentives could be distributed through the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
scheme, ensuring efficient and transparent delivery to farmers’ bank accounts. The 
Committee recommends starting with a financial incentive of Rs. 100 per 100 kg of paddy 
and conducting large-scale research studies to assess the costs and returns for alternative 
crop-residue management techniques. 
The Committee also supports the creation of a market for crop residue to compensate 
farmers for the extra costs and effort involved in harvesting, collecting, and transporting it. 
Potential uses for crop residue include biofuels such as Bio CNG and ethanol, as well as 
direct fuel for brick kilns, furnaces, and thermal plants. Establishing crop residue supply 
chains over an initial period of four to five years will help foster a circular economy in 
agriculture, turning agricultural waste into a valuable resource. The Government may 
consider financial incentives for setting up a unit per district where paddy crop is grown to 
convert crop-residue/Parali into energy/electricity.  
 Once farmers are incentivised financially to avoid burning crop residue, they may 
collect it for a range of on- and off-farm purposes, such as livestock feed, bedding, fuel, 
mushroom cultivation, and building or packing materials. This approach will not only reduce 
the environmental impact of burning parali but also create new economic opportunities for 
farmers and promote sustainability in agriculture. 
Reply of the Government 

38 
 
In order to support the efforts of the concerned state governments to address air 
pollution and to subsidize machinery for management of crop residue, a scheme on Crop 
Residue Management was introduced in 2018-19. Since then more than Rs. 3607.88 
Crores have been provided to the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of 
Delhi.  More than 3.23 lakh machines have been provided to these States. These machines 
can effectively manage the paddy straw provided that these machines are utilized to their 
optimal capacities by the farmers. 
The Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) of crop residue management machines have also 
been established with 80% subsidy with the intention of making available the equipments 
and machines to the farmers as per their requirements on rental basis at the rates lower 
than the market rates. The States of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh have established 
more than 41,000 such CHCs.   
Ex-situ management is also being promoted with the boarder objectives of ensuring 
biomass supply security for pre-identified ex-situ based small-medium-large scale industrial 
projects of bio-CNG/CBG, Bio-Ethanol or Biomass based power generation and achieving 
farmers’ welfare by way of reduced stubble burning and increase in income from the sale 
of paddy residue. The DA&FW is working closely with the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy (MNRE) and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas under initiatives like the 
National Bio-Energy Mission and SATAT (Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable 
Transportation) to encourage private and public sector participation in converting crop 
residue into, Power, BioCNG and ethanol. 
Recognizing the importance of market-driven solutions, the Government has been 
actively encouraging Public-Private Partnership (PPP) models, allowing private industries 
to establish biofuel plants and composting units, which procure biomass from farmers for 
use in brick kilns, thermal plants, and industrial boilers as alternative fuels. 
Super seeder is the most preferred machine (around 70-80%) for in-situ management 
in Punjab followed by Smart Seeder and Happy Seeder. These machines can sow wheat 
directly into just-harvested rice fields without burning or removing straw. Rentals for 

39 
 
Super/Happy/Smart Seeder is around Rs. 2500/- per acre for sowing of wheat crop in one 
acre. 
It is also important to note if a farmer burns Paddy straw and then go for traditional 
sowing of wheat thereafter, then it takes cost of around 2000- 2200/- per acre for the 
traditional sowing operations of cultivating with plough/rotavator two times, planking and 
then sowing with traditional seed-cum- fertilizer drill. 
Overall benefits of in-situ residue management practices also include enrichment of 
soil fertility and savings on reduced application of fertilizers. 
Thus, traditional sowing (after burning Paddy stubble) costs almost equal to the rental 
cost of sowing of wheat crop with Super/Smart/Happy Seeder. At the worst, difference is 
minimal. 
As per the reports released by the Consortium for Research on Agroecosystem 
Monitoring and Modeling from Space (CREAMS) Laboratory, Division of Agricultural 
Physics, ICAR – Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, the paddy straw burning 
events between 15th September to 30th November during the  year 2017 in the States of 
Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh were 88948, which have been reduced to 18457 
events during 2024 for the same period, which indicates a significant 79 percent reduction 
in paddy straw burning. There is a need to implement the scheme more effectively in the 
State of Punjab. 
 As far as providing an additional incentive to farmers over and above the MSP, it is 
submitted that the Government fixes MSP for 22 mandated agricultural crops on 
recommendations of CACP, after considering the views of State Governments and Central 
Ministries/Departments concerned. 
CACP considers various factors viz. cost of production, overall demand-supply 
situations of various crops in domestic and world markets, domestic and international 
prices, inter-crop price parity, terms of trade between agriculture and non-agriculture sector, 
likely effect of price policy on rest of economy and a minimum of 50 percent as the margin 
over cost of production. 

40 
 
 Cost of production includes all paid out costs - such as hired human labour, bullock 
labour/machine labour, rent for leased in land, expenses incurred in cash/ kind on the use 
of material inputs like seeds, fertilizers, manures, irrigation charges, depreciation on 
implements and farm buildings, interest on working capital, diesel/electricity for operation 
of pump sets etc., miscellaneous expenses and imputed value of family labour. 
The MSP fixed provides at least 50% return over all India weighted average cost of 
production. These benefits of the MSP are available to the farmers all across the country. 
  Government increases the MSP of Kharif and Rabi Crops for every Marketing 
Season, to ensure remunerative prices to the growers for their produce which is in line with 
the Union Budget 2018-19 announcement of fixing the MSP at a level of at least 1.5 times 
of the All-India weighted average cost of production. This increased MSP of Kharif and Rabi 
crops ensures remunerative prices to the farmers and incentivize crop diversification. 
Additional financial incentives over and above MSP will result in a complete distortion 
of market prices and will set up a perverse incentive and may rather encourage farmers of 
other states also to burn residues expecting the government to provide for the additional 
subsidy/ compensation, worsening the situation beyond control. 
   It is also pertinent to mention that the State Government of Haryana is providing 
incentive from their own budget resources which include incentive of Rs. 1,00,000/- to the 
Red Zone Panchayats and Rs. 50,000/- to Yellow Zone Panchayat for achieving Zero 
stubble burning, Rs. 7000/- per acre for diversification of paddy area to alternative crops 
under Mera Pani Meri Virasat scheme, Rs. 4000/- per acre for adoption of direct sowing of 
rice etc. These initiatives have contributed significantly in reducing stubble burning in the 
State. Therefore, the other State Governments may consider providing the incentives to 
farmers from their own budget resources on the similar lines of Haryana Government to 
further control paddy stubble burning. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
 

41 
 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Need for Enhancement of Budgetary Allocation to Department 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee observe that the proportion of budgetary allocations made in favour 
of the Department in terms of the percentage of the total central outlay for the years 2021-
22, 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26 stood at 3.53%, 3.14%, 2.57%, 2.54% and 
2.51% respectively. This shows continuous decline in allocations to the Department as 
proportion of Central Plan outlay.  The Committee, in view of the fact that as more than 50 
% people depend on agriculture for their livelihood, desire the Ministry to arrest this declining 
trend. 
Reply of the Government 
Agriculture is a critical sector for the economy, contributing significantly to food 
security, employment, and rural livelihoods. The Department acknowledge and appreciate 
the Committee's insightful observations regarding the allocation to the Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) and its relation to the growth rate of the agriculture 
sector. However, the Department would like to highlight that the overall national priorities 
and budgetary allocations are determined based on a comprehensive assessment of 
various sectors and their respective needs.  
It may be noted that the Government of India has significantly increased budget 
allocations, rising from ₹29,772.83 crore in 2013-14 to ₹1,27,290.16 crore at BE level in 
2025-260, demonstrating its commitment to the sector. Toward this end, the Department is 
actively implementing various initiatives aimed at enhancing agricultural production and 
productivity through schemes like RKVY, KY scheme etc. with a focus on improving crop 
and livestock productivity, diversifying into high-value crops, and utilizing digital platforms to 

43 
 
facilitate better price discovery for farmers' produce; all in line with the goal of doubling 
farmers' income. The Department is also strengthening farmer support systems through 
initiatives like PM-KISAN, crop insurance schemes, and improved access to credit and 
markets.   
It may also be noted that Government of India had increased Budget Provision to 
Rs.1,31,195.20 crore at RE level in 2024-25 which is highest so far for the Department out 
of which Rs. 1,24,261.06 crore has been utilized and accordingly it is expected to increase 
the budget provision at RE level in the current year (2025-26) as well. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I of this Report.)  
 
Need for Improvement in Market Intervention scheme (MIS) 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Certain disparities in prices offered to farmers under the MIS for the same produce, 
in two separate locations in a particular region of a state, were brought to the notice of the 
Committee. The Committee after discussion, felt that there should not be any intra state 
disparity in the implementation of the Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) by 
States/Implementing agencies.  The Committee also suggest that implementing robust data 
collection systems to monitor market prices and production levels can help in making 
informed decisions about appropriate time for activating MIS.  The Committee also suggest 
the Ministry to provide training for farmers on market trends, pricing mechanisms, and ways 
to leverage the MIS can empower them to make better decisions regarding their produce. 
Regular assessments of the MIS impact on farmers' incomes and market stability can 
identify areas for improvement and ensure that the scheme adapts to changing agricultural 
landscapes.  

44 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under MIS, Market Intervention Price (MIP) is determined by the Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (A&FW) consisting of the officers of the State 
Government, the representatives of NAFED and NCCF, State intervening agencies, 
representative of the Costing Cell, DA&FW, Directorate of Economics & Statistics, 
Integrated Finance Division, DA&FW, TMOP Division and Horticulture Division, DA&FW. 
The Committee finalizes the terms and conditions with express approval of the competent 
authority in the Department that are applicable for procurement of corps throughout the 
States. The price is regularly monitored by MIS Committee during the implementing period 
of MIS through AgMarknet Portal.  
The Study of impact Evaluation of Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) was done by 
NABARD consultancy Service in 2019. The study had suggested that the farmers has 
highest level of satisfaction on majority of states about the implementation of these schemes 
& had a positive impact on their income. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of this Report.)  
 
DECLARATION OF MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE FOR ORGANIC PRODUCE 
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee, after thorough consideration, strongly advocates for the promotion of 
organic farming across the country. An initiative with focus on national health concerns, 
addressing concerns over soil and water contamination, and protecting against other 
environmental risks. There is an urgent need for a national effort to transition towards 
healthier food systems and more sustainable agricultural practices. Organic farming 
transition will help farmers move from chemical-intensive farming to natural farming on a 
large-scale. 

45 
 
The Committee acknowledges the Government’s positive initiatives to encourage 
chemical-free farming, such as the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and the 
Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER). These 
schemes support farmers from production to marketing, including certification and post-
harvest management (processing, packaging). They provide financial assistance to cover 
costs for seeds, bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides, organic manure, and more. Additionally, these 
initiatives offer support for the formation of Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs), training 
programs, and value addition. Furthermore, the Bhartiya Prakritik Krishi Padhati (BPKP) 
promotes natural farming by utilising traditional indigenous practices, excluding synthetic 
chemicals, focusing on on-farm biomass recycling, and using cow dung-urine formulations 
and plant-based preparations. 
The Committee believes that while these initiatives are valuable, more schemes and 
incentives are needed to facilitate the nationwide shift towards organic farming. The farmer 
will only shift towards organic farming and diversified agriculture if farmers are convinced 
that the shift will allow for better economic prospects and benefits than the present form of 
agriculture. 
There is need for the establishment of rapid testing mechanisms for organic produce. 
Organic farming not only enhances biodiversity but also strengthens the natural resilience 
of farmlands, making them more adaptable to climate change. Hence, it should be 
encouraged through increased financial and non-financial incentives. 
In this context, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should declare 
a Minimum Support Price (MSP) for all Organic Crops in addition to the MSP declared on 
traditional crop. 
However, the demand for MSP on organic produce should not undermine the broader 
MSP demand based on the Swaminathan formula. Instead, the legal MSP framework should 
be expanded to include organic produce. This would incentivise farmers to transition to 
organic farming, despite the challenges of lower yields in the initial years of conversion. The 
Committee believes that the MSP for organic produce should be set higher than that for 

46 
 
conventional crops to compensate for the drop in yield and the costs associated with the 
shift to organic farming.  
To determine an appropriate MSP for organic produce, extensive large-scale 
research studies should be conducted. These studies would examine the costs associated 
with transitioning to organic farming and ensure that the MSP adequately reflects the 
financial support required for this shift, particularly in terms of decreased yields per hectare 
and increased quality of the produce. The current MSP mechanism, which primarily 
considers production costs, may not fully account for these factors. Thus, the Government 
has to determine MSP on organic crops considering it to be economical for the farmer to 
shift away from traditional crops providing better income from the same size of land and 
input costs. Therefore, the MSP for organic produce should take into consideration not just 
production costs, but also the support necessary to enable farmers to successfully make the 
transition from chemical-intensive farming to organic farming. MSP Incentive for Organic 
crops will also help solve the problem of storage of food-grain as production of organic crops 
per hectare is less than traditional crop. Most importantly, the nationwide health issues 
arises from chemical-based crop production can be solved as well as increasing demand 
for India’s healthier food exports globally. 
In an effort to give fillip to the Organic Farming, the Committee strongly recommend 
that a separate budget head may be created and sufficient funding may be made available 
every year to subsidize Organic Farming for its effective promotion.  
Reply of the Government 
The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) is mandated to 
recommend Minimum Support Price (MSP) for 22 agricultural commodities and Fair and 
Remunerative Price (FRP) for Sugarcane at all India level. 
While making MSP recommendations, the Commission, as per its mandate, 
considers cost of production, supply and demand situation of various crops in domestic and 
global markets, domestic and world prices along with trade opportunities, terms of trade 
between agriculture and non-agriculture sector, optimal utilization of land, water and other 

47 
 
production resources, likely effect of price policy on rest of the economy, and a minimum of 
50 percent as the margin over the cost of production. 
 Government fixes Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for 22 mandated agricultural 
crops on the basis of the recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs & 
Prices (CACP), after considering the views of State Governments and Central 
Ministries/Departments concerned. The 22 mandated crops include 14 Kharif crops viz. 
paddy, jowar, bajra, maize, ragi, tur (arhar), moong, urad, groundnut, soyabean, 
sunflower, sesamum, nigerseed, cotton and 6 Rabi crops viz. wheat, barley, gram, masur 
(lentil), rapeseed & mustard, safflower and two commercial crops viz. jute and copra. 
 While recommending MSPs, CACP considers important factors like cost of 
production, overall demand-supply conditions, domestic and international prices, inter-
crop price parity, terms of trade between agricultural and non-agricultural sectors, the 
likely effect on the rest of the economy, besides ensuring rational utilization of land, 
water and other production resources and a minimum of 50 percent as the margin over 
cost of production.  
 The inclusion of crops under MSP framework is dependent on several factors 
which include relatively large shelf life, widely grown, item of mass consumption, 
essential for food security, among others. 
 The Union Budget for 2018-19 had announced the pre-determined principle to 
keep MSPs at levels of one and half times of the cost of production. Accordingly, 
Government had increased MSPs for all mandated Kharif, Rabi and other Commercial 
crops with a minimum return of 50 percent over all India weighted average cost of 
production from year 2018-19 onwards. 
 To make Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) more effective and transparent, a 
committee has been constituted on 12th July 2022. The subject matter of the committee also 
include (i) Suggestions on practicality to give more autonomy to Commission for Agricultural 
Costs and Prices (CACP) and measures to make it more scientific, and (ii) To strengthen the 

48 
 
Agricultural Marketing System as per the changing requirements of the country to ensure 
higher value to the farmers through remunerative prices of their produce by taking 
advantage of the domestic and export opportunities. 
 
Support given to farmers under PKVY and MOVCDNER schemes: 
Government is committed to promote Organic Farming, with emphasis on sustainable 
productivity, food security and soil health. It supports the organic farming initiative in various 
ways. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for Northeastern Region (MOVCDNER) schemes were launched in 2015-16 for 
promotion of Organic farming.  
PKVY Scheme is being implemented in a cluster mode with min. 20 ha size and states 
have been asked to implement in cluster size of 1000 ha in plain area and 500 ha in hilly area 
to facilitate marketing of organic produce. All farmers are eligible but within a group a farmer 
can avail benefit to a maximum of 2 ha and the limit of assistance is Rs.31, 500 per hac. out of 
which 47.62% i.e., Rs. 15,000 is given as incentives to a farmer for organic conversion, organic 
inputs, on farm inputs, production infrastructure, etc., shall be provided directly through DBT 
during the conversion period of 3 years. Total 14.99 lakh ha area has been covered involving 
25.30 lakhs farmers. 
MOVCDNER scheme is implementing with an aim to develop end to end organic value 
chains across all eight states of NER. The scheme provides financial support for institutional 
development (FPOs), organic certification, on-farm and off-farm inputs, quality planting 
material, custom hiring centres, post-harvest and processing infrastructure as well as for 
marketing and branding of organic produce.  
Till date, total 2.35 lakh ha area covered involving 2.70 lakh farmers, 24 organic outlets 
have been developed which are being operated by FPOs and state governments. 324-
Collection & Aggregation Units, 354-Custom Hiring Centres, 176 – small Processing units, 6- 
Integrated Processing Units and 23- pack house entities created under FPO/FPCs and private 
ownership, 254-Transportation vehicles provided to FPO/FPCs and 8 states developed their 
own brands. 

49 
 
 The scheme enables market linkages with industry players as well as with consumers 
though a whole host of marketing initiatives such as participation in buyer-seller meets, 
developing organic retail outlets within the state as well in major cities. 51 organic FPOs have 
been supported to sell their products online on Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC).  
The organic products command better price than conventionally grown produce. 
 Selected Mandis have started offering separate kiosk for organic produce. 
In response to the recommendation that a separate budget head be created and sufficient 
funding be made available every year to subsidize organic farming for its effective promotion, 
the following reply is submitted: 
Since 2015-16, the government has been prioritizing the promotion of organic farming across 
the country through two key schemes: the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), 
implemented in all States and Union Territories (except the North Eastern States), and the 
Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER). Initially, 
both schemes operated with separate budget lines. However, following the rationalization of 
the schemes, PKVY has been integrated as a component under the PM-RKVY umbrella 
scheme, with a common budget line and adequate fund allocation. Similarly, MOVCDNER has 
been included as a component under the Krishonnati Yojana (KY) umbrella scheme, also with 
a common budget line and sufficient budget allocation. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of this 
Report.)  
 
 
 
 

50 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Implementation of Universal Crop Insurance for Small Holder Farmers 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
The Committee feel that Free Compulsory Crop insurance to Small Farmers with land 
holdings of upto 2 hectares, if provided by the Government on lines of Union Government 
health insurance Scheme- Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana(PM-JAY) to all citizens of the 
country, can significantly impact the financial stability of smallholder farmers by providing 
them a safety net against crop losses and encouraging investment in better farming 
practices as they would be sure of financial compensation for losses caused by natural 
calamities, pests, or diseases.  Consequently, this step would go a long way in helping 
farmers avoid debt traps and ensuring that they can reinvest in the next crop cycle.  Crop 
insurance reduces the reliance on high-interest loans for Small holder Farmers from informal 
sources by providing timely compensation & protecting them from exploitative lenders. Small 
Holder Farmers often lack the requisite access to information, technology etc, consequently 
excluding them from formal financial systems and getting access to institutional support and 
financial aid during crises.   Even if the loss to the farmer is only limited to 10-15 percent of 
their crop, they should be adequately compensated for that, not only if the loss is over 70 
percent of the crop. By protecting small farmers from financial losses, Free Compulsory 
Universal Crop insurance to Small Holder Farmers will go a long way in removing rural 
distress, sustaining rural communities and ensuring food security for all. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation contained in the Report no. 1 on Demands 
for Grants (2024-25). 
Reply of the Government 
The review/revisions / rationalization / improvements in the crop insurance schemes 
is a continuous process and decision on suggestion/ representations/ recommendations of 

51 
 
the stakeholders/studies are taken from time to time.  Based on the experience gained, 
views of various stakeholders and with a view to ensure better transparency, accountability, 
timely payment of claims to the farmers and to make the scheme more farmer friendly, 
Government has periodically revised the Operational Guidelines of the PMFBY 
comprehensively to ensure that the eligible benefits under the scheme reach the farmers 
timely and transparently.  No proposal regarding universalization of the scheme is under 
consideration of the Government at present.  
However, on account of reduction in premium rates due to interventions of Central 
Government, some States like Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Assam, Maharashtra, Odisha, 
Meghalaya and Puducherry have paid/ decided to pay farmers share also and farmers are 
offered the scheme at very low or no cost which is a step towards universal crop insurance 
scheme. 
Further, PMFBY is currently approved for implementation by the Government till 
2025-26 and require fresh approval thereafter. The recommendation of the Committee 
regarding universal crop insurance for small and marginal farmers shall be duly considered 
at the time of seeking approvals for continuation of scheme beyond 2025-26. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No.6-1/2024-B&A dated 11th June, 2025] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
24th MARCH, 2026                                             Chairperson, 
03 CHAITRA, 1948 (Saka)             S tanding Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
  

52 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23rd March, 2026 from 1035 hrs. to 1118 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 2, First Floor, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
3. Shri Kuldeep Indora 
4. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
5. Shri Dushyant Singh 
6. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
8 Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
9. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
10 Shri Madan Rathore 
  
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Shri Fauzi Badruddin - Deputy Secretary 
 

53 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Subject Reports and Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
 *(i)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
 *( ii)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
 (iii) Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 7th Report of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare) presented during 18th Lok Sabha; 
 
 *(iv)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
 *(v)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
 *(vi)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
 
3.  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
4. The Committee adopted the Draft Action-taken Reports mentioned at para 2(iii) 
without any modifications. 
 
5. The Committee decided to consider the examination of the subject “Review of 
India's Sugar Structure - Production, Impact of Importation of Sugar from China, 
Ethanol Issues and Policy Reforms” currently under the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) during 2025-26. 
 
6. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the 
light of modifications suggested and present the Reports to Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
__________________________ 
*Matter not related to this report. 
  

54 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT 
(18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2025-26)  
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations  14 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the Government  
 Para Nos. 1,3,6,7,8,10 and 12 Total    07 
       50% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies  
 Para Nos. 4,5 and 14 Total 03 
     21.42% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 Para No. 2,9 and 11 Total 03 
  21.43% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
 Para No. 13 Total 01 
  7.15% 
 
 