  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26)' 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Tenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2025-26)] 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2025/AGRAHAYANA, 1947(SAKA) 
 
 
26 

 
  
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26)' 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Tenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2025-26)] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2025 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2025 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2025/AGRAHAYANA, 1947(SAKA)  


 
  
COA No. 525 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 

 
  
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25)  iii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)  iv 
Introduction  vi 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
15 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
25 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
26 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
31 
 
   
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 37th sitting of the Committee held on 19.09.2025 
 
 
 
32 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (18 th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024 -25) on Demands for Grants 
(2025-26)  
 
 
 
35 
 
 

 
iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025.  
  

 
iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2025-26) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
24.  Shri H. D. Devegowda 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
27.  Shri Madan Rathore 
28.  Shri S. R. Sivalingam 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
  

 
v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 3. Shri Ashwaghosh B. Lokhande - Under Secretary 
  
 
  

 
vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Sixth Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the O bservations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing (2024-25) on 'Demands for Grants (2025 -26)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries).  
 
2. The Tenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024 -25) on Demands for 
Grants (2025 -26) pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Fisheries) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2025. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received 
on 25.06.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 19th September, 2025. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2025-26) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
15 December, 2025                                             Chairperson, 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Agriculture 
                Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2025 -26) of the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Da irying (Department of Fisheries) which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2025. 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 10 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
scrutinised and categorised as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Para Nos.2,3,5,6,7,8 and 10  
              Total 07 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies:  
Recommendation Para No. Nil 
                      Total 00 
                    Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1,4 and 9 
               Total 03 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Total 00 
             Chapter-V 

 
2 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation 
of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where 
it is not possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to 
them at an early date. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
UNDER UTILISATION OF ALLOCATED FUNDS AND INCREASING SHORTFALL 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 1) 
 
1.5  The Committee had observed/recommended: 
The Committee in their 3 rd Report (DFG 2024 -25) at recommendation 
no. 1 have observed that the revised procedure for release of central funds to 
States/UTs was introduced by the Department of Expenditure, MoF w.e.f . 
31stJuly, 2021, and even after three years of its introduction, the desired results 
as envisaged by the Department, have not been achieved. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that, the Department should make serious efforts and 
proactively liaise with its c ounterparts in the States/UTs and State Fisheries 
Departments to address this issue for positive results.  
Now, the Committee have been informed that to bring more efficiency in 
cash management at both Centre and States levels, an alternative fund flow 
mechanism for releasing central funds has been introduced on “Just -in-Time” 
basis under Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) namely SNA-SPARSH from 
1st June, 2024, wherein, 28 schemes including Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) have been on boarded. Under the new system, 26 
States have been on boarded, however, the pace of fund flow has been slow 
due to la ck of understanding by the states to adhere to the 
compliances/guidelines of SNA-SPARSH, delay in contributing matching share 

 
3 
 
by the State Governments and non -receipt of physical and financial progress 
(utilization certificates) on time from States/UTs and other stakeholders.  
The Committee are concerned that, the Department is unable to 
completely utilise the allocated budget and the shortfall of the Department has 
been increasing continuously. This underutilization of funds is also affecting the 
implementation and outcomes of the flagship scheme Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and expenditure under the Scheduled Caste Sub 
Plan (SCSP) and Scheduled Tribes Sub Plan (STSP) which in turn is affecting 
the goals of uplifting the socio -economic conditions and general well-being of 
the poor and traditional fishermen of the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department may explore the possibility of devising an 
incentive scheme for State/UT governments, particularly to those States/UTs 
who promptly comply with t he SNA -SPARSH guidelines, release their state 
matching share in time along with Utilization Certificates and whose 
performance in implementing the schemes of the Department and spending 
under Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP), Scheduled Tribes Sub Plan (STSP) 
is substantial. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by 
the Department and progress achieved in this regard. 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: 
“The observation of the committee has been noted for necessary compliance. 
The Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance vide OM 
No.1(27)/PFMS/2020 dated 13th July 2023 has notified an alternative fund flow 
mechanism for releasing central funds to the State Governments on “ Just-in-
Time” basis under Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS). This new system has 
been named as SNA-SPARSH wherein 28 schemes including PMMSY have 
been on boarded with effect from 1 st June, 2024. Under this new system, 28 
States have been on -boarding on the SNA SPARSH  platform. Lack of 
understanding by the states to adhere to the compliances of SNA -SPARSH, 
transition phase between SNA and SNA -SPARSH made the process slow for 
the States to adopt the new procedure and Non- compliance of the Guidelines 
in time by the Stat es are few of the major point for slow expenditure. The 
Department has been working in close coordination with the States and these 

 
4 
 
issues have been addressed from time to time. As such, better performance in 
the upcoming days is expected.” 
1.7 The Committee, were concerned with the Department ’s inability to 
completely utilize the allocated budget , which in turn affected  the 
implementation and outcomes of the flagship scheme Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and expenditure under the Scheduled Caste Sub Plan 
(SCSP) and Scheduled Tribes Sub Plan (STSP) . The Committee,  had therefore 
recommended that, the Department may explore the possibility of devising an 
incentive scheme for State/UT governments, particularly for those States/UTs 
which promptly comply with the SNA -SPARSH guidelines and to release their 
state matching share in time along with Utilisation Certifi cates and whose 
performance in implementing the schemes of the Department and spending 
under Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP), Scheduled Tribes Sub Plan (STSP) is 
substantial. The Department, in their reply, has not provided specific inputs on 
the possibility of devising an incentive scheme, as recommended by the 
Committee, or on its potential role in improving the utilization of the allocated 
budget under SCSP and STSP. The Committee, therefo re, reiterate its 
recommendation and encourage the Department to consider formulating such 
a scheme. 
SCHEDULED CASTES SUB PLAN (SCSP) 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 4) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended: 
The Committee in their 3rd Report (DFG 2024-25) at recommendation no 
5, expressed serious concern at the declining trend of utilization of funds under 
SCSP and recommended the Department to analyze the reasons for non -
receipt of the proposals from the state Governments and initiate suitable action 

 
5 
 
including review of features, terms & conditions, eligibility criteria, etc and 
ensure the receipt of proposals from the state/ UT Governments for optimal 
utilization of the funds under SCSP.  
The Committee has been informed that the Government of India has 
highlighted the matter with the States/UTs having sizeable Schedule Caste 
beneficiaries in all the review meetings and they have been advised to ensure 
Mandatory earmarking of minimum 16.6% o f the budget of PMSSY for the 
benefits of scheduled caste beneficiaries. Further, States/UTs are advised to 
include SC/ST beneficiaries accordingly in their annual action plans and End 
Implementing Agencies i.e. Central Government entities including the National 
Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) to include suitable interventions/  
activities for supporting SC population appropriately in their respective Annual 
Action Plan or Project Proposals.  
The Committee, appreciate the efforts taken by the Department to 
ensure and encourage States/UTs to submit proposals under SCSP component 
of PMMSY, however, the Committee, observe that the actual expenditure of 
funds under SCSP component of PMMSY from the financial years 2022-23 to 
2024-25 have been continuously decreasing. The Committee infers that 
decreasing actual expenditure of funds allocated for SCSP would mean that the 
efforts taken by the Department are not materializing in increasing actual 
expenditure under SCSP. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
Department continue with their efforts so as to ensure maximum participation 
of Scheduled Castes population in the schemes implemented by the 
Department and reiterate their earlier recommendation  that the Department 
may devise a mechanism to incentivize /encourage States/UTs to send 
proposals under the SCSP so that the intended benefits of the scheme come 
to fruition. 
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: 
“The Department of Fisheries, Government of India, has consistently 
highlighted the matter in all review meetings with States/UTs having a sizeable 
Scheduled Caste beneficiary population. The States/UTs also been advised to 
ensure that minimum 16.6% of the  Schedule Caste beneficiaries are included 

 
6 
 
for financial assistance in PMMSY project proposals while preparing the state 
annual action plan. Further, the measures taken up by the Department of 
Fisheries, Government of India in this regard include: (i) Mandatory earmarking 
of minimum 16.6% of the bu dget allocated under Schedule Cast Sub -Plan 
(SCSP) for the benefits of scheduled caste beneficiaries and advising 
States/UTs to include SC/ST beneficiaries accordingly in their annual action 
plans. Specific mention has been made in the annual administrativ e approval 
of the Scheme, in accordance with the Ministry of Finance's instructions, that 
the funds earmarked for Scheduled Caste beneficiaries are to be utilized 
exclusively for their development (ii) Requesting the End Implementing 
Agencies i.e. Central Government entities including the National Fisheries 
Development Board (NFDB) to include suitable interventions/activities for 
supporting SC population appropriately in their respective Annual Action Plan 
or Project Proposals. Similarly, State Governments and Union Territories are 
regularly requested to make specific allocations for Scheduled Castes in their 
Annual Action Plans, self -contained proposals, and Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs), based on the percentage of the SC population within their jurisdiction.” 
 
1.10 The Committee were concerned about the decreasing actual expenditure 
of funds under SCSP component of PMMSY from the financial years 2022-23 to 
2024-25 and further inferred that the efforts taken by the Department are not 
materializing in increasing actual  expenditure under SCSP. The Committee, 
therefore had recommended that the Department may analyze the reasons for 
non-receipt of the proposals from the state Governments and initiate suitable 
action including review of features, terms & conditions, el igibility criteria, etc . 
and ensure the receipt of proposals from the state/ UT Governments . The 
Department, however, has not answered on this specific recommendation of the 
Committee. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the 
Department may explore the possibility of reviewing the features, terms and 

 
7 
 
conditions and eligibility criteria etc. under SCSP  to ensure maximum 
participation and optimal utilization of funds under SCSP .    
 
DEVELOPMENT OF CLIMATE RESILIENT FISHERMEN VILLAGES AROUND 
RIVERS 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 6) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended: 
 The Committee has been informed that the Department of Fisheries, 
under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), has identified 
100 coastal fishermen villages situated close to the coastline as Climate 
Resilient Coastal Fishermen Villages (CRCFV) to enhance the economic 
resilience of communities impacted by climate change along with development 
of climate -resilient fisheries through initiatives such as seaweed cultivation, 
ornamental fisheries, artificial reefs, sea ranching and promotion of green fuel 
for fishing etc. Further, safety and security measures for fishermen and fishing 
vessels, insurance programmes, livelihood and nutritional support, Kisan Credit 
Cards, training and capacity building are also focused upon. Provision of need-
based facil ities, including common facilities like fish drying yards, fish 
processing centers, fish markets, fishing jetties, ice plants, cold storages and 
emergency rescue facilities are also incorporated.  
The Committee note that the country has a vast potential in Inland fisheries 
comprising of 0.28 million km of rivers and canals, 1.2 million ha flood plain 
lakes, 2.45 million ha of ponds and tanks and 3.15 million ha of reservoirs, 
which contributes aroun d 13.9 MMT to total fish production. Most of the 
traditional fishing communities who lack socio-economic stability reside around 
these vast rivers and lakes. The Committee therefore recommend that the 
Department should devise a scheme for these traditional  fishermen 
communities who reside alongside rivers and explore the possibility of 
development of their villages into climate resilient fishermen villages in 
consultation with States/UTs. The committee would like to be apprised of the 
measures taken by the Department in this regard. 

 
8 
 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: 
“The Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) inter-alia 
provides support to the Coastal States/UTs for development of Integrated 
Modern Coastal Fishing Villages.  Under PMMSY, the proposals with total 
outlay of Rs.7756.46 lakh for development of total 11 integrated modern coastal 
villages have been approved which include (i) nine coastal villages at a cost of 
Rs. 6106.61 lakh in Kerala, (ii) one Coastal village at a cost of Rs.899.85 lakh 
in Lakshadweep and (iii) one coastal village at a cost of Rs. 75 0 lakh in West 
Bengal. In addition, under the PMMSY, the Department of Fisheries, 
Government of India, in consultation with the coastal States/UTs has also 
identified 100 coastal fishermen villages situated close to the coastline for 
development as Climate  Resilient Coastal Fishermen Villages (CRCFV) to 
make them economically vibrant fishermen villages. The National Fisheries 
Development Board (NFDB), Hyderabad has been made a nodal agency and 
the proposal for development of the identified 100 coastal villa ges at a total 
cost of Rs. 200 crore has been approved under the PMMSY. As per PMMSY 
scheme guidelines, both the components i.e. Integrated Modern Coastal 
Fishing Villages and Climate Resilient Coastal Fishermen Villages are 
implemented in coastal States a nd Union Territories only, hence, no projects 
have been sanctioned under these components to inland States. The PMMSY 
scheme has completed its schematic tenure on 31.03.2025 and one year no 
cost extension has been approved by the Government. The scheme is currently 
under evaluation. Based on the outcomes of this evaluation, the proposal for 
the inclusion of Climate -Resilient Fishermen Villages around rivers will be 
examined and considered for inclusion in the subsequent scheme.” 
 
1.13 The Committee had recommended that the Department of Fisheries 
should devise a scheme for traditional fishermen communities who reside 
alongside rivers and explore the possibility of development of their villages into 
climate resilient fishermen villages i n consultation with States/UTs. The 
Department in their reply have stated that PMMSY scheme has completed its 

 
9 
 
schematic tenure on 31.03.2025 and thereafter, one year no cost extension has 
been approved by the Government, however, the scheme is currently under 
evaluation and based on the outcomes of this evaluation, the proposal of the 
Committee for the inclusion of Climate -Resilient Fishermen Villages around 
rivers will be examined and considered for inclusion in the subsequent scheme. 
The Committee, appreciate the assurance given by the Department, and would 
further like to be apprised of the result of the said ev aluation of the PMMSY 
Scheme and their recommendation. 
 
ENHANCING THE CORPUS OF ACCIDENTAL LIFE INSURANCE FOR 
FISHERMEN 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 8) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended: 
The Committee has been informed that the Department implements The Group 
Accident Insurance Scheme (GAIS) through National Fisheries Development 
Board (NFDB) under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) since 
26th July, 2021, which provides life cover of Rs 5lac, 2.5lac and Rs. 25000 for 
fishermen against accidental death, accidental permanent/partial disability and 
accidental hospitalization respectively. Further the premium amount is shared 
between the centre and state in the ratio of 60:40 for general states, 90:10 for 
Himalayan and northeastern states and 100% by centre in case of Union 
Territories. 
The Committee are aware that most of the traditional fishermen/fishers belong 
to the socioeconomically disadvantaged strata lacking in financial stability and 
economic resources. Further, traditional fishers who venture into the sea for 
fishing activities are exposed to higher risks as fishing is one of the most 
dangerous occupations leading to many injuries and deaths annually due to 
harsh weather conditions and equipment failure. Any mishappening at sea 
leading to the loss of primary bread earner subjects the families of fishermen to 

 
10 
 
severe challenges to sustain their livelihood needs, and jeopardizes the future 
well-being of their families. Given the rising living costs and inflation, the current 
insurance cover would be insufficient to cover the basic survival needs, children 
education and debt repayments of fishermen who lose their lives. 
The Committee, therefore , recommend that the accidental Insurance cover 
under GAIS should be enhanced from Rs. 5 lac to at least Rs. 10 lac so that 
the families of the deceased fishermen are able to sustain their life with dignity 
and the financial security of their families is been taken care of. The Committee 
also observe that most of the times the fishermen families who claim the 
insurance cover are subjected to enormous paperwork and lengthy 
bureaucratic procedures and therefore, recommend that the proc edure for 
claiming insurance should be simplified and measures should be taken to 
ensure that the insurance amount is disbursed to the claimants promptly with 
least paperwork. 
 
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: 
“The Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana implemented by the 
Department has completed its schematic period on 31.03.2025 and currently 
under evaluation. Hence, increasing the accidental Insurance cover under 
GAIS from Rs. 5 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh shall be considered based on the outcomes 
of the evaluation. One online portal in this regard has been developed to submit 
the claim by the claimant/nominee/ legal heir with 120 days to process the claim 
settlement on first track basis.” 
 
1.16 The Committee had recommended that the accidental Insurance cover 
under Group Accident Insurance Scheme (GAIS) should be enhanced from Rs. 
5 lac to at least Rs. 10 lac so that the families of the deceased fishermen are able 
to sustain their life with dignity and the financial security of their families is been 
taken care of. The Committee further recommended that the procedure for 
claiming insurance should be simplified and measures should be taken to 

 
11 
 
ensure that the insurance amount is disbursed to the claimants promptly with 
least paperwork. The Department in their reply have stated that an online portal 
has been developed to submit the claim by the insurance claimant/nominee/ 
legal heir with 120 days  for settlement on first track basis. However, the 
recommendation of the Committee for increase in accidental insurance cover 
from Rs 5 lac to Rs 10 lac shall be considered based on the outcomes of 
evaluation of PMMSY. The Committee strongly believe that t he accidental 
insurance corpus should be enhanced proportionately keeping in view the 
current economic parameters and inflation and, therefore, appreciate the effort 
taken by the Department in this regard. The Committee would further like to be 
apprised of the result of the evaluation and steps taken in this direction.    
 
MATSYA SEVA KENDRA (MSK) 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 9)  
 
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended: 
The Committee has been informed that Matsya Seva Kendra (MSKs) 
are integral components of the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY) established to enhance the fisheries sector in India. They function as 
a One-Stop Solution Centers offering a range of services to fishers and fish 
farmers, including water, soil, and microbial analysis, disease testing, and 
capacity-building progr ams along with Extension and Support Services to 
disseminate modern aquaculture practices, technological advancements, and 
best practices available in fisheries management. Further, establishment of 
Matsya Seva Kendra (MSK) under PMMSY are based on proposals submitted 
by the concerned States/UTs. 
The Committee understand that MSK can play an important role in the 
overall development of the fisheries sector by increasing awareness amongst 
fishermen about the modern aquaculture practices, technological interventions 

 
12 
 
and strengthening capacity building. The Committee, therefore , recommend 
that the Department should take effective measures and ensure that Matsya 
Seva Kendra are established in every district of the country which has a 
sizeable population engaged in fisheries for their livelihood and economic 
wellbeing. The Department should actively pursue with States/UTs and 
incentivize them for establishing Matsya Seva Kendra on priority basis. 
1.18 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: 
“Establishing Matsya Seva Kendras (MSKs) is an important initiative aimed at 
strengthening the fisheries sector, especially under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) in India. These Kendras function as single-window 
service centers to support fishers, fish farmers, entrepreneurs, and other 
stakeholders in fisheries and aquaculture. Setting up Matsya Seva Kendras is 
a pivotal step in making India’s fisheries sector more organized, empowered, 
and sustainable. These centers can greatly improve fis hers' livelihoods by 
acting as knowledge and resource hubs, ensuring the holistic growth of the 
Blue Economy. Under PMMSY 102 numbers of Matsya Seva Kendras has 
been approved. All the States/UTs are requested in various review meeting to 
promote such Exten sion and support services to act as a last -mile delivery 
mechanism for fishers and fishermen in the country.”  
 
1.19 Acknowledging the importance of Matsya Seva Kendras (MSK) in  the 
overall development of fisheries sector, the Committee had recommended that 
Matsya Seva Kendra may be established in every district of the country which 
has a sizeable population engaged in fishing activities for their livelihood needs. 
The Department in their reply have stated that under PMMSY 102 Matsya Seva 
Kendras has been approved and all the States/UTs are requested in various 
review meeting to promote such extension and support services. The 
Department has not specifically addressed the Committee’s recommendation 
regarding the establishment of Matsya Seva Kendra  in every district with a 

 
13 
 
sizeable population of fishermen/fish farmers. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation and request the Department to apprise them of 
the measures taken in this regard. 
 
CONTINUATION OF PRADHAN MANTRI MATSYA SAMPADA YOJANA (PMMSY). 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 10) 
 
1.20 The Committee had observed/recommended: 
The Committee in their 3 rd Report on DFG (2024 -25) have 
recommended that Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana may be continued 
as PMMSY Phase-II for a period of another five years i.e. from FY 2025-26 to 
FY 2029-30 to focus on the strengthening of value addition infrastructure to 
enhance seafood exports, island fisheries development (Andaman & Nicobar 
and Lakshadweep Islands) and infusion and adoption of cutting-edge 
technologies to further modernise fisheries sector. 
The Committee has been informed that Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana has been extended for another one year i.e. upto 2025-26, Co-terminus 
with the 15 th Finance Commission year cycle, with no budgetary support. 
However, no decision has been taken on the extension of PMMSY for another 
five years (2026-27 to FY2030-31). Given the importance of PMMSY in bringing 
about change in the socioeconomic conditions of  the fishers of the country by 
focusing on sustainable and responsible development and boosting fi shery 
sector’s contribution to the national economy and food security, the Committee, 
reiterate their recommendation that tenure of PMMSY should be extended for 
another five years i.e. up to 2030-31. 
1.21 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: 
“For holistic development of Fisheries in the Country, the PMMSY 
scheme is implemented in all the States/UTs since 2020-21 to 2025-26. Special 
focus is being given for development of Fisheries in the States/UTs to push to 
the economic wellbeing of the fish ers of the Country in general and also 
promote inland fisheries as part of Bio-Economy.  

 
14 
 
Co-terminus with the 15 th Finance Commission year cycle, no cost extension 
up to 2025 -26 has been approved in principle for Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). Extension of PMMSY for another five years (2026-
27 to FY2030 -31) after detailed guidelines issued by DoE with a pproval of 
CA/Cabinet. 
The PMMSY is under evaluation now. Based on the evaluation report, 
necessary action shall be initiated for either continuation of the PMMSY or new 
scheme shall be formed.” 
 
1.22 Given the importance of PMMSY the Committee had reiterated their 
recommendation that the tenure of PMMSY should be extended for another five 
years i.e. up to 2030 -31. The Department, in their reply have submitted that 
Extension of PMMSY for another five ye ars (2026 -27 to FY2030 -31) may be 
considered after detailed guidelines issued by DoE with the approval of 
CA/Cabinet. Further, after evaluation report of PMMSY, necessary action shall 
be initiated for either continuation of the PMMSY or new scheme sha ll be 
formulated. The Committee, strongly believe that continuation of PMMSY shall 
strengthen value addition infrastructure and enhance seafood exports, island 
fisheries development (Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands) and 
infusion and adoption of cutting -edge tec hnologies to further modernize 
fisheries sector. The Committee, would therefore, like the Department to apprise 
the Committee on further developments in the matter. 

 
15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
2. NATIONAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT BOARD (NFDB) 
 
The Committee understands that most of the traditional fishers/fish farmers/fish 
vendors of the country belong to the underprivileged strata who do not have proper 
education/training or resources and hence are not aware about the programmes and 
schemes imp lemented by the Government intended for their socio -economic 
development. 
The Committee have been informed that under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY), National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) is the nodal agency 
for implementing the sub -component of central sector i.e. “Training, Awareness, 
Exposure & Capacity Pr ogramme” and thereby provide the necessary training to 
fishermen of the country. NFDB is also responsible to enhance domestic fish 
consumption which is an important source of cheap protein and create awareness 
about the health & nutrition benefits of fish consumption. The Committee note that 
from the FY 2021-22 up to FY 2023-24, NFDB has utilized 100 % of allocated funds, 
however, during the FY 24-25, the funds allocated to NFDB have been reduced by 23 
% over the previous FY 23-24.  
Acknowledging the important role played by NFDB in imparting education and training 
to the fishers/fish farmers, and raising awareness with regard to various schemes and 
programmes of the Department meant for their overall development, the Committee, 
recommend, that the Department may examine and consider revising the budget 
allocation for National Fisheries Development Board keeping in view its mandate i.e. 
imparting training, awareness and capacity building of fishers of the country.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:  
“Department of Fisheries in coordination with NFDB has organized various outreach 
activities to popularize schemes implemented and increasing Domestic fish 

 
16 
 
consumption through various digital platforms. The said outreach campaigns are 
taken up to create awareness in rural and urban people. The outreach activities are 
implemented directly by NFDB in coordination with State Department of Fisheries, 
KVKs, ICAR i nstitutes and state universities. Various outreach activities such as 
outdoor campaigns, Digital Campaigns, mass media campaigns, Publicity through 
electronic media announcement in railways, digital display in airports on priority 
activities, National leve l workshops on Seaweed, ornamental fisheries, create 
awareness on benefits of insurance scheme and door to door campaign on KCC 
seeking grievances. 
Presently regular outreach programs are organized on PMMKSSY, National Fisheries 
digital Platform, Cluster approach, climate resilience and Demonstration on drone 
technology & its usefulness across the country for popularization of modern 
technologies.  
The annual action plan of NFDB considered based on the proposal including training, 
awareness and capacity building received from NFDB. The suggestion of the 
committee to revise the budget allocation has been noted.” 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
 
3. ASSISTANCE TO FISHERY INSTITUTES 
 
The Committee note that the RE allocation for Assistance to Fishery Institutes 
during the FY 2024-25 has been reduced by almost 30%. Further, the Department has 
not been able to utilize completely the funds allocated during the financial years 2021-
22 up t o 2024 -25. The Committee has been informed that, out of the total funds 
allocated to Assistance to Fisheries Institutes, more than 76% of the funds are 
earmarked to two institutes namely Fishery Survey of India (FSI) and Central Institute 
of Fisheries, Nautical & Engineering Training (CIFNET) and in addition to the regular 
establishment expenditure, the expenditure of FSI, CIFNET is the operation and 
maintenance of its 14 fishery survey and training vessels. However, during the 2024 -
25 financial year only one-two vessels were in operation. 

 
17 
 
The Committee note that Fishery Survey of India is responsible for survey and 
assessment of marine fishery resources of the Indian EEZ, monitoring the fishery 
resources, maintaining data bank and dissemination of information on fishery 
resources to fishing  community and also imparting in -vessel training to CIFNET 
trainees.   
In the Union Budget 2025 -26, Hon’ble Finance Minister has stated that 
sustainable fishing in Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) and high seas will be 
promoted with special focus on Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep 
Islands. In view of the above statement and keeping in view the importance of Fishery 
Survey of India in surveying the EEZ and high seas, the Committee recommend that 
the Department take proactive measures and ensure that the funds allocated under 
Assistance to fishery Institutes are utilized  in full and all survey vessels of FSI are 
repaired along with the necessary clearances, registrations and certifications from DG 
Shipping. The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures taken by the 
Department in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:  
“Budget Estimate for the year 2025 -26 for all the fisheries institutes under the 
administrative control of Department of Fisheries has been issued. The institutes have 
been instructed to spend the funds as per the monthly/quarterly expenditure plan 
issued by Ministry of Finance. Funds have been earmarked for the dry -docking and 
maintenance of fisheries survey vessels at the respective institutes. The requirement 
of funds shall be accessed and necessary steps be taken during revised estimate to 
all the institutes.”  
  
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
5. NATIONAL FISHERIES DIGITAL PLATFORM (NFDP)-PMMKSSY 
 “The Committee have been informed that National Fisheries Digital Platform 
(NFDP) aims at formalization of fisheries sector through creation of a database of work 
based digital identities for all fisheries stakeholders through dedicated portal as well 
as mobile app. NFDP would serve as a 'one-stop' platform for information and availing 

 
18 
 
benefits under Pradhan Mantri Matya Kisan Samrighi Sah Yojana such as 
performance-based incentives, aquaculture insurance, facilitate institutional credit, 
claim application for eligible financial incentives and provisions for strengthening of 
fisheries co-operatives and fisheries’ traceability systems. 
The Committee, observe that most of the fishermen and fish farmers of the country do 
not have digital access and mobile phones and therefore are concerned as to how 
these fishers would be enrolled in NFDP. However, the committee has been informed 
that under registration module of NFDP, there are three types of registrations being 
undertaken i.e. Individual registration ii. Organization registration; and iii. VLE (Village 
Level Entrepreneur) assisted registration. The individuals/ organizations can self -
register or take assistance from CSC VLE for registration using their Aadhar 
credentials free of cost.   
The Committee appreciates the provision of Village Level Entrepreneur assisted 
registration (CSC VLE) in NFDP, however, at the same time recommends that the 
Department should also engage gram panchayats at district level and gram sabhas at 
taluka level in this regard. Further, the Department should also develop a mechanism 
to monitor the progress of fishers registered under CSC VLE and ensure that enough 
publicity is accorded for NFDP so that more and more fishers are encouraged to 
register and take advantage of the intended benefits in NFDP.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:  
“The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries Animal Husbandry and Dairying is 
interacting regularly with States/UTs and other stakeholders including Fisheries 
Cooperatives, SHGs, FFPOs, VLOs, fishers, fish farmers, fish vendors, fish workers 
etc. in order to create awareness among the stakeholders to register under NFDP and 
avail the benefits under the PM-MKSSY. 
Besides, number of Campaign have been conducted in the States/UTs for more 
publicity of PM-MKSSY and NFDP. As on date, 25 lakh registration have been done 
under NFDP portal. The Department of Fisheries is hopeful that, by December, 2025 
the registrations would be reached 1 crore in association with States/UTs, Fisheries,  
 

 
19 
 
Fish Farmers, Fish Vendors, Fish Workers, Fisheries Cooperatives, SHGs, FFPOs, 
VLOs etc.”   
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
 
6. DEVELOPMENT OF CLIMATE RESILIENT FISHERMEN VILLAGES 
AROUND RIVERS. 
 
 The Committee has been informed that the Department of Fisheries, under the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), has identified 100 coastal 
fishermen villages situated close to the coastline as Climate Resilient Coastal 
Fishermen Villages (CRCFV) to enhance the economic resilience of communities 
impacted by climate change along with development of climate -resilient fisheries 
through initiatives such as seaweed cultivation, ornamental fisheries, artificial reefs, 
sea ranching and promotion of green  fuel for fishing etc. Further, safety and security 
measures for fishermen and fishing vessels, insurance programmes, livelihood and 
nutritional support, Kisan Credit Cards, training and capacity building are also focused 
upon. Provision of need -based facilities, including common facilities like fish drying 
yards, fish processing centers, fish markets, fishing jetties, ice plants, cold storages 
and emergency rescue facilities are also incorporated.  
The Committee note that the country has a vast potential in Inland fisheries comprising 
of 0.28 million km of rivers and canals, 1.2 million ha flood plain lakes, 2.45 million ha 
of ponds and tanks and 3.15 million ha of reservoirs, which contributes around 13.9 
MMT to total  fish production. Most of the traditional fishing communities who lack 
socio-economic stability reside around these vast rivers and lakes. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the Department should devise a scheme for these 
traditional fishermen communit ies who reside alongside rivers and explore the 
possibility of development of their villages into climate resilient fishermen villages in 
consultation with States/UTs. The committee would like to be apprised of the 
measures taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
 

 
20 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:  
“The Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) inter-alia provides support 
to the Coastal States/UTs for development of Integrated Modern Coastal Fishing 
Villages.  Under PMMSY, the proposals with total outlay of Rs.7756.46 lakh for 
development of total 11 integrated modern coastal villages have been approved which 
include (i) nine coastal villages at a cost of Rs. 6106.61 lakh in Kerala, (ii) one Coastal 
village at a cost of Rs.899.85 lakh in Lakshadweep and (iii) one coastal village at a 
cost of Rs. 750 lakh in West Bengal. In addition, under the PMMSY, the Dep artment 
of Fisheries, Government of India, in consultation with the coastal States/UTs has also 
identified 100 coastal fishermen villages situated close to the coastline for 
development as Climate Resilient Coastal Fishermen Villages (CRCFV) to make them 
economically vibrant fishermen villages. The National Fisheries Development Board 
(NFDB), Hyderabad has been made a nodal agency and the proposal for development 
of the identified 100 coastal villages at a total cost of Rs. 200 crore has been approved 
under the PMMSY. As per PMMSY scheme guidelines, both the components i.e. 
Integrated Modern Coastal Fishing Villages and Climate Resilient Coastal Fishermen 
Villages are implemented in coastal States and Union Territories only, hence, no 
projects have been sanctioned under these components to inland States. The PMMSY 
scheme has completed its schematic tenure on 31.03.2025 and one year no cost 
extension has been approved by the Government. The scheme is currently under 
evaluation. Based on the outcomes of this evaluation, the proposal for the inclusion of 
Climate-Resilient Fishermen Villages around rivers will be examined and considered 
for inclusion in the subsequent scheme.” 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No .1.13 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
  

 
21 
 
7. DEVELOPMENT OF SEAWEED CULTIVATION IN INDIA 
The Committee understands that Seaweeds are valued commercially for their 
cell wall polysaccharides such as agar, algin, carrageenan etc. and for the bioactive 
metabolites, manure and fodder and also have a variety of commercial applications in 
food, pharm aceutical, cosmetics, mining industry. Further, edible seaweeds 
(macroalgae) also have the potential to provide a rich and sustainable source of 
macronutrients and micronutrients to the human diet. Seaweed resources grow best 
in the tidal and inter -tidal waters along our peninsular coastline and the Andaman -
Nicobar and Lakshadweep Archipelagos. India is bestowed with more than 0.26 million 
tonnes wet harvestable biomass of seaweeds belonging to 700 species. Seaweed 
farming is a low-cost simple technology, which is one of the effective livelihood option 
for the marine fishers. 
The Committee has been informed that guidelines for allowing Import of live 
Seaweed have been issued recently which would enable domestic multiplication and 
ensure that farmers have access to quality seed stock which would bolster the 
development of seaweed enterprises in coastal states and Islands. 
Promotion of seaweed cultivation is one of the priority under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and the country has enormous potential in 
seaweed cultivation which would improve the socioeconomic status of coastal/marine 
fishermen/farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may 
take proactive steps to promote seaweed cultivation in all the coastal states/Islands 
by providing financial, marketing and logistical support and ensure economic gains to 
the marginal marine fishermen  population along with protecting the marine 
ecosystems.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:  
“Seaweed cultivation is one of the potential area for coastal regions. It is being 
cultivated in many of the Asian countries at commercial scale. Promotion of seaweed 
cultivation under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) is a major 
initiative by the Government of India to boost coastal aquaculture, enhance fisherfolk 
incomes, and support blue economy goals.  

 
22 
 
Among the coastal states, Tamil Nadu & Gujarat are the major producers. The 
Potential of seaweed production is around 9.7 million tonnes of seaweeds in 384 
identified potential sites in the country. Projects worth Rs.196.92 crore has been 
approved for seaweed cultivation through monoline, tube -net/raft method, R&D and 
training, including a Multipurpose Seaweed Park project in Tamil Nadu. Recently, 
ICAR-Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Mand apam Regional Centre has 
also been notified by the Govern ment as Centre of Excellence (CoE) for Seaweed 
Promotion. 
Promotion of seaweed cultivation under PMMSY represents a transformative 
opportunity for India’s coastal communities. Targeted investments, technical support, 
and capacity-building initiatives have also been undertaken to promote a sustainable 
blue economy , economic empowerment, environmental conservation, and rural 
development.” 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
8. ENHANCING THE CORPUS OF ACCIDENTAL LIFE INSURANCE FOR 
FISHERMEN. 
 
The Committee has been informed that the Department implements The Group 
Accident Insurance Scheme (GAIS) through National Fisheries Development Board 
(NFDB) under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) since 26 th July, 
2021, which provides life cover of Rs 5lac, 2.5lac and Rs. 25000 for fishermen against 
accidental death, accidental permanent/partial disability and accidental hospitalization 
respectively. Further the premium amount is shared between the centre and  state in 
the ratio of 60:40 for general states, 90:10 for Himalayan and north eastern states and 
100% by centre in case of Union Territories. 
The Committee are aware that most of the traditional fishermen/fishers belong to the 
socioeconomically disadvantaged strata lacking in financial stability and economic 
resources. Further, traditional fishers who venture into the sea for fishing activities are 
exposed to higher risks as fishing is one of the most dangerous occupations leading 
to many injuries and deaths annually due to harsh weather conditions and equipment 
failure. Any mishappening at sea leading to the loss of primary bread earner subjects 

 
23 
 
the families of fishermen to severe challenges to sustain their livelihood needs, and 
jeopardizes the future well -being of their families. Given the rising living costs and 
inflation, the current insurance cover would be insufficient to cover the basic sur vival 
needs, children education and debt repayments of fishermen who lose their lives. 
The Committee, therefore recommend that the accidental Insurance cover under GAIS 
should be enhanced from Rs. 5 lac to at least Rs. 10 lac so that the families of the 
deceased fishermen are able to sustain their life with dignity and the financial security 
of their families is been taken care of. The Committee also observe that most of the 
times the fishermen families who claim the insurance cover are subjected to enormous 
paperwork and lengthy bureaucratic procedures and therefore, recommend that the 
procedure for claiming insurance should be simplified and measures should be taken 
to ensure that the insurance amount is disbursed to the claimants promptly with least 
paperwork. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:  
The Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana implemented by the Department has 
completed its schematic period on 31.03.2025 and currently under evaluation. Hence, 
increasing the accidental Insurance cover under GAIS from Rs. 5 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh 
shall be considered based on the outcomes of the evaluation. One online portal in this 
regard has been developed to submit the claim by the claimant/nominee/ legal heir 
with 120 days to process the claim settlement on first track basis. 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No .1.16 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
10. CONTINUATION OF PRADHAN MANTRI MATSYA SAMPADA YOJANA 
(PMMSY) 
The Committee in their 3 rd Report on DFG (2024-25) have recommended that 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana may be continued as PMMSY Phase-II for a 

 
24 
 
period of another five years i.e. from FY 2025 -26 to FY 2029 -30 to focus on the 
strengthening of value addition infrastructure to enhance seafood exports, island 
fisheries development (Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands) and infusion 
and adoption of cutting edge technologies to further modernise fisheries sector. 
The Committee has been informed that Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana has 
been extended for another one year i.e. upto 2025 -26, Co-terminus with the 15 th 
Finance Commission year cycle, with no budgetary support. However, no decision has 
been taken on the extension of PMMSY for another five years (2026 -27 to FY2030-
31). Given the importance of PMMSY in bringing about change in the socioeconomic 
conditions of the fishers of the country by focusing on sustainable and responsible 
development and boosting fi shery sector’s contribution to the national economy and 
food security, the Committee, reiterate their recommendation that tenure of PMMSY 
should be extended for another five years i.e. up to 2030-31. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:  
For holistic development of Fisheries in the Country, the PMMSY scheme is 
implemented in all the States/UTs since 2020 -21 to 2025 -26. Special focus is being 
given for development of Fisheries in the States/UTs to push to the economic wellbeing 
of the fishe rs of the Country in general and also promote inland fisheries as part of 
Bio-Economy.  
Co-terminus with the 15 th Finance Commission year cycle, no cost extension up to 
2025-26 has been approved in principle for Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY). Extension of PMMSY for another five years (2026 -27 to FY2030-31) after 
detailed guidelines issued by DoE with approval of CA/Cabinet. 
The PMMSY is under evaluation now. Based on the evaluation report, necessary 
action shall be initiated for either continuation of the PMMSY or new scheme shall be 
formed. 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No .1.22 of Chapter I of 
this Report.  

 
25 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
  

 
26 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. UNDERUTILIZATION OF ALLOCATED FUNDS AND INCREASING 
SHORTFALL 
 
The Committee in their 3 rd Report (DFG 2024 -25) at recommendation no. 1 
have observed that the revised procedure for release of central funds to States/UTs 
was introduced by the Department of Expenditure, MoF w.e.f. 31stJuly, 2021, and even 
after three years of its introduction, the desired results as envisaged by the 
Department, have not been achieved. The Committee, therefore, recommended that, 
the Department should make serious efforts and proactively liaise with its counterparts 
in the States/UTs and State Fisheries Departments to address this issue for positive 
results.  
Now, the Committee have been informed that to bring more efficiency in cash 
management at both Centre and States levels, an alternative fund flow mechanism for 
releasing central funds has been introduced on “Just -in-Time” basis under Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes (CSS) namely SNA -SPARSH from 1st June, 2024, wherein, 28 
schemes including Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) have been on 
boarded. Under the new system, 26 States have been on boarded, however, the pace 
of fund flow has been slow due to lack of understanding by the states to adhere to the 
compliances/guidelines of SNA-SPARSH, delay in contributing matching share by the 
State Governments and non -receipt of physical and financial progress (utilization 
certificates) on time from States/UTs and other stakeholders.  
The Committee are concerned that, the Department is unable to completely 
utilise the allocated budget and the shortfall of the Department has been increasing 
continuously. This underutilization of funds is also affecting the implementation and 
outcomes of the flagship scheme Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
and expenditure under the Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) and Scheduled Tribes 
Sub Plan (STSP) which in turn is affecting the goals of uplifting the socio -economic 
conditions and general well being of the poor and traditional fishermen of the country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may explore the 

 
27 
 
possibility of devising an incentive scheme for State/UT governments, particularly to 
those States/UTs who promptly comply with the SNA -SPARSH guidelines, release 
their state matching share in time along with Utilisation Certificates and whose 
performance in implementing the schemes of the Department and spending under 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP), Scheduled Tribes Sub Plan (STSP) is 
substantial. The Committee  would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Department and progress achieved in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:  
“The observation of the committee has been noted for necessary compliance. 
The Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance vide OM No.1(27)/PFMS/2020 
dated 13 th July 2023 has notified an alternative fund flow mechanism for releasing 
central funds to the State Governments on “ Just-in-Time” basis under Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes (CSS). This new system has been named as SNA-SPARSH 
wherein 28 schemes including PMMSY have been on boarded with effect from 1 st 
June, 2024. Under this new system, 28 States have been on-boarding on the SNA 
SPARSH platform. Lack of understanding by the states to adhere to the compliances 
of SNA -SPARSH, transition phase between SNA and SNA -SPARSH made the 
process slow for the States to adopt the new procedure and Non - compliance of the 
Guidelines in time by the States are few of the major point for slow expenditure. The 
Department has been working in close coordination with the States and these issues 
have been addressed from time to time. As such, better performance in the upcoming 
days is expected.” 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.7 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 

 
28 
 
4. SCHEDULED CASTES SUB PLAN (SCSP) 
 The Committee in their 3 rd Report (DFG 2024 -25) at recommendation no 5, 
expressed serious concern at the declining trend of utilisaztion of funds under SCSP 
and recommended the Department to analyze the reasons for non -receipt of the 
proposals from the state Governments and initiat e suitable action including review of 
features, terms & conditions, eligibility criteria, etc and ensure the receipt of proposals 
from the state/ UT Governments for optimal utilization of the funds under SCSP.  
The Committee has been informed that the Government of India has highlighted the 
matter with the States/UTs having sizeable Schedule Caste beneficiaries in all the 
review meetings and they have been advised to ensure Mandatory earmarking of 
minimum 16.6% o f the budget of PMSSY for the benefits of scheduled caste 
beneficiaries. Further, States/UTs are advised to include SC/ST beneficiaries 
accordingly in their annual action plans and End Implementing Agencies I.e. Central 
Government entities including the Na tional Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) to 
include suitable interventions/activities for supporting SC population appropriately in 
their respective Annual Action Plan or Project Proposals.  
The Committee appreciates the efforts taken by the Department to ensure and 
encourage States/UTs to submit proposals under SCSP component of PMMSY , 
however, the Committee, observe that the actual expenditure of funds under SCSP 
component of PMMSY from the financial years 2022 -23 to 2024 -25 have been 
continuously decreasing. The Committee infers that decreasing actual expenditure of 
funds allocated for SCSP would mean that the efforts taken by the Department are not 
materializing in increasing actual expenditure under SCSP. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that the Department continue with their efforts so as to ensure maximum 
participation of Scheduled Castes population in the schemes implemented by the 
Department and reiterate their earlier recommendation  that the Department may 
devise a mechanism to incentivize /encourage States/UTs to send proposals under 
the SCSP so that the intended benefits of the scheme come to fruition. 
Reply of the Government:  
“The Department of Fisheries, Government of India, has consistently 
highlighted the matter in all review meetings with States/UTs having a sizeable 

 
29 
 
Scheduled Caste beneficiary population. The States/UTs also been advised to ensure 
that minimum 16.6% of the Schedule Caste beneficiaries are included for financial 
assistance in PMMSY project proposals while preparing the state annual action plan. 
Further, the measures taken up by the Department of Fisheries, Government of India 
in this regard include: (i) Mandatory earmarking of minimum 16.6% of the budget 
allocated under Schedule Cast Sub-Plan (SCSP) for the benefits of scheduled caste 
beneficiaries and advising States/UTs to include SC/ST beneficiaries accordingly in 
their annual action plans. Specific mention has been made in the annual 
administrative approval of the Scheme, in accordance with the Ministry of Finance's 
instructions, that the funds earma rked for Scheduled Caste beneficiaries are to be 
utilized exclusively for their development (ii) Requesting the End Implementing 
Agencies i.e. Central Government entities including the National Fisheries 
Development Board (NFDB) to include suitable interve ntions/activities for supporting 
SC population appropriately in their respective Annual Action Plan or Project 
Proposals. Similarly, State Governments and Union Territories are regularly requested 
to make specific allocations for Scheduled Castes in their Annual Action Plans, self-
contained proposals, and Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), based on the percentage 
of the SC population within their jurisdiction.” 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
9. MATSYA SEVA KENDRA (MSK) 
 The Committee has been informed that Matsya Seva Kendra (MSKs) are 
integral components of the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
established to enhance the fisheries sector in India. They function as a One -Stop 
Solution Centers offering a range o f services to fishers and fish farmers, including 
water, soil, and microbial analysis, disease testing, and capacity -building programs 
along with Extension and Support Services to disseminate modern aquaculture 

 
30 
 
practices, technological advancements, and best practices available in fisheries 
management. Further, establishment of Matsya Seva Kendra (MSK) under PMMSY 
are based on proposals submitted by the concerned States/UTs. 
The Committee understand that MSK can play an important role in the overall 
development of the fisheries sector by increasing awareness amongst fishermen 
about the modern aquaculture practices, technological interventions and also 
strengthening capacity bu ilding. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
Department should take effective measures and ensure that Matsya Seva Kendra are 
established in every district of the country which has a sizeable population engaged in 
fisheries for their livelihood and economic wellbeing. The Department should actively 
pursue with States/UTs and incentivize them for establishing Matsya Seva Kendra on 
priority basis. 
Reply of the Government:  
“Establishing Matsya Seva Kendras  (MSKs) is an important initiative aimed at 
strengthening the fisheries sector, especially under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) in India. These Kendras function as single-window service 
centers to support fishers, fish farmers, entreprene urs, and other stakeholders in 
fisheries and aquaculture. Setting up Matsya Seva Kendras is a pivotal step in making 
India’s fisheries sector more organized, empowered, and sustainable. These centers 
can greatly improve fishers' livelihoods by acting as kn owledge and resource hubs, 
ensuring the holistic growth of the Blue Economy. Under PMMSY 102 numbers of 
Matsya Seva Kendras has been approved. All the States/UTs are requested in various 
review meeting to promote such Extension and support services to act as a last-mile 
delivery mechanism for fishers and fishermen in the country.”  
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of 
Fisheries F. No. j-23011/3/2025-Fy(E-25457) Dated 25th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
 

 
31 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;      CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
15 December, 2025  Chairperson 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 
  

 
32 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19th September, 2025 from 1103 hrs. to 1335 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 1, First Floor, Block -A, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
4.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
5.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
6.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
7.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
8.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
9.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
12.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
13.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
14.  Shri Madan Rathore 
15.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
16.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the  
 

 
33 
 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Subject Reports and Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*; 
(ii) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*; 
(iii) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*;  
(iv) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*; 
(v) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*; 
(vi) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*; 
(vii) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*, and 
(viii) Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 10 th Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2025 -26) of the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries)  
presented during 18th Lok Sabha. 
 
3. xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*.   
 
4. The Committee also adopted the xxxxx* 10th Report on DFG (2025 -26) with 
modifications as suggested in Annexure xxxxx* IV xxxxx*. The Committee authorized 
the Chairperson to finalize and present the Reports to Parliament.   
 
5.  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  
  
 
* Matter not related to this report. 

 
34 
 
Annexure-IV--- 
During the Sitting held on 19.09.2025, the Members made the following 
suggestions to be incorporated into the ATR on the Tenth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025 -26) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries):- 
 
Page 
no. of 
the 
Draft 
Report 
Comments 
on Para No. 
Original Comments Modification incorporated  
4 1.7   The Department, however, in 
their reply is silent on the 
possibility of devising an 
incentive scheme as 
recommended by the Committee 
and whether such an incentive 
would bear positive results in 
increasing utilization of allocated 
budget and spending unde r 
SCSP and STSP. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation and urge 
the Department on devising and 
incentive scheme as discussed 
above. 
 
The Department in their reply, has 
not provided specific inputs on the 
possibility of devising an incentive 
scheme, as recommended by the 
Committee, or on its potential role 
in improving the utilization of the 
allocated budget under SCSP and 
STSP.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation and 
encourages the Department to 
consider formula ting such a 
scheme. 
 
12-13 1.19   The Department, however, is 
silent on the recommendation of 
the Committee that Matsya Seva 
Kendra may be established in 
every district of the country 
which has a sizeable population 
of fishermen/fish farmers. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation and desire 
that the Department may further 
apprise the Committee regarding 
the measures taken in this 
matter. 
 
 The Department has not 
specifically addressed the 
Committee’s recommendation 
regarding the establishment of 
Matsya Seva Kendra in every 
district with a sizeable population of 
fishermen/fish farmers.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation and requests the 
Department to apprise it of the 
measures taken in this regard. 
 
 
  

 
35 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT 
(18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2025-26)  
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations  10 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the 
Government  
 Para Nos. 2,3,5,6,7,8 and 10 Total    07 
 Percentage     70% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 Para No. NIL Total 00 
 Percentage    00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 Para Nos. 1,4 and 9 Total 03 
 Percentage 30% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
 Para No. NIL                Total 00 
 Percentage  00% 
 
 