STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND 
FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
         
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025 / Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
16 

SIXTEENTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2024-25) 
 
          
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
 
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
            
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                  20.08.2025 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                20.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
August, 2025 / Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


 
COA No. 515 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
  

CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25)  iii 
Introduction  v 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
11 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
26 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
27 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
29 
   
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 35th sitting of the Committee held on 18.08.2025 
 
 
 
31 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
 
 
 
33 
 

iii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8 th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part -II, Para No. 3117 dated 
13.08.2025. 
  

iv 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee to submit this 
Report on their behalf, present this 16 th Report on action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024 -25)’ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Wel fare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education).   
 
2. The Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024 -25) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17 December 2024. The Action Taken Notes 
on the Report were received on 30th January, 2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 18 August, 2024 
 
4.  An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
  
            
       
 
NEW DELHI;                               CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
18 August , 2025                                                 Chairperson, 
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Agriculture
             Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Hus bandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 17th December, 2024. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 
13 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have 
been scrutinised and categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Total - 10 
Chapter II 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3,4, 5, 6, 8,11,12 and 13 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Total - NIL 
Chapter III 
 Recommendation Para No. NIL 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
Total- 02 
Chapter IV 
 
Recommendation Para Nos.  9 and 10 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Total - 01 
Chapter V 
 Recommendation Para No. 7 
   
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance would be given by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education)  to implement the Observations/ Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case s where it is not possible for the 

2 
 
Ministry/Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for 
any reason, the matter be intimated in writing to the Committee with reasons 
for non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes 
on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V 
of this Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Crop Science 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO.7) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee note that Rs. 930.22 crore has been allocated to Crop 
Science Division in BE 2024 -25 which is more than the allocation of Rs. 714.41 in 
BE 2023-24 but less than the allocation of Rs. 962.78 crore in RE 2023-24 and Actual 
Expenditure of Rs. 930.62 crore during the Financial Year 2023 -24. The Committee 
also note that many biofortified, hybrid and high yielding varieties of Field Crops – 
cereals, oilseeds, pulses, forage, fibre, sugarcane, etc have been developed, 
released and notified for commercial cultivation by the farmers which lead to increase 
in production and productivity of these crops. At the same time, the Committee also 
note that several of these high yielding varieties of crops possess certain drawbacks 
like short shelf life, tastelessness, high consumption of inputs, degradation of soil and 
water, etc . which need to be addressed on priority. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to optimally and effectively utilize the allocation made to 
this Division and lay emphasis on developing crop varieties having better productivity 
while retaining q ualities in terms of taste, flavor, shelf life, nutrients, environment 
friendliness etc.” 
 
1.6 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted:- 
 
“Crop Science Division has placed all efforts to achieve physical targets of 
the scheme “Crop Science for Food and Nutritional Security” with optimal 
utilization of allocated funds. To address the current and predicted challenges of 
agricultural crop sector , modern technological tools like genome editing, 
genomics selection, speed breeding are used on development of resource use 

3 
 
efficient, extreme climate resilient and biofortified varieties for field crops and for 
the enhancement of varietal replacement rates for addressing the gaps in 
productivity and sustainable production. Successful efforts made in the past on 
special trait v arieties includes development of 152 Bio -fortified varieties, heat 
tolerant varieties in wheat developed in major wheat growing areas of the 
country. The 14 rice varieties released and notified during 2024 with input use 
efficient traits. Efforts are made toward improving fodder and grain quality and 
shelf life of millets. Further, more focused efforts are made for addressing the 
issues of yield, short shelf life, tastelessness, flavor, nutrients, high consumption 
of inputs, degradation of soil and water, environment degradation etc. on priority 
through the various programs under the scheme.”  
 
1.7 The Committee had recommended the Department to optimally and 
effectively utilize the allocation made to Crop Science Division and lay 
emphasis on developing crop varieties having better productivity while 
retaining qualities in terms of taste, flavor, she lf life, nutrients, environment 
friendliness, etc.  The Department in its Action Taken Reply has submitted 
about placing efforts to achieve physical targets with optimal utilization of 
allocated funds, use of modern technological tools like genome editing, 
genomics selection, speed breeding etc. for devel oping special trait varieties 
and some of the special trait varieties developed. The Department has also 
submitted that efforts are made towards improving fodder and grain quality 
and shelf life of millets and for addressing the issues of yield, short shel f life, 
tastelessness, flavour, nutrients, high consumption of inputs, degradation of 
soil, water, environment etc.  The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of 
the Department, desire that the efforts of the Department to develop crop 
varieties having better yield/productivity while retaining qualities in terms of 
taste, flavour, shelf life, nutrients, environment friendliness need to be further 
strengthened and the varieties so developed need to be popularized for their 
adoption by the farmers.  The C ommittee may also be apprised about the 
achievements made in this regard. 
 
  

4 
 
B.  Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 9) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division has been allocated 
Rs. 234.89 crore in BE 2024-25 which is less than the allocation of Rs. 327.00 crore 
made in BE 2023-24 and the Actual Expenditure of Rs. 248.49 crore incurred during 
the year 2023 -24. The Committee also note that Agricultural Extension Division is 
carrying out on -farm testing to identify the location specificity of agricultural 
technologies, frontline demonstrations to demonstrate the production potential of 
different crops, training of farmers and extension personnel on knowledge and skills 
improvement and creating awareness on improved technologies among farmers of 
the country through a network of 731 Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs) spread all over 
the country. At present, 93 districts have two KVKs each and 121 districts do not 
have KVK. Also only 15 new KVKs have been opened during the last five years. 
Besides, there are inadequate infrastructure in several of the existing KVKs and 
about 30% of the sanctioned posts are vacant in KVKs across the country. In view of 
the foregoing, the Committee feel that the reduction in allocation in BE 2024 -25 to 
Agriculture Extension Division is not a step in the right direction. The Committee are 
of the considered view that there should be atleast one KVK with adequate 
infrastructure and sufficient manpower in each district of the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take steps for enhancing allocation to 
Agriculture Extension Division to achieve the desired goal.” 
 
1.9 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“The total allocation of the Scheme “Strengthening of Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
(KVKs)” for the period 2021 -26 is Rs.1202.45 Crore. Additionally, the Host 
Organization and Krishi Vigyan Kendras are also provided with funds from various 
other Ministries/Departments of the Central Government as well as the respective 
State Governments. T here are 766 districts in the country, wherein 731 KVKs are 
existing across the country and the 15 new KVKs have been opened during the last 
five years.” 
 
 
 
1.10 Viewing the reduction in allocation in Budget Estimates (2024 -25) to 
Agriculture Extension Division as a step not in right direction, the Committee 

5 
 
had recommended the Department to take steps for enhancing allocation to 
this Division so that there should be atleast one KVK with adequate 
infrastructure and sufficient manpower in each district of the country.  The 
Department, in its Action Taken Reply , has submitted the already known 
information i.e. total allocation made to the Scheme ‘Strengthening of Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)’ for the period 2021-26 and availability of funds to the 
Host Organization and KVKs from other sources, number of districts  and 
number of KVKs in the country and number of KVKs opened during the last 
five years.  The reply of the Department is completely silent on taking steps for 
enhancing allocation to the Agriculture Extension Division and for establishing 
atleast one KVK with adequate infrastructure and sufficient manpower in each 
district of the country as recommended by the Committee. 
KVKs play an important role in extension services and the benefits of the 
research and innovations in the field of agriculture reach to the farmers by 
KVKs through demonstration and dissemination of information about new 
varieties, practices and technologies.  At present, there are 121 districts in the 
country which do not have KVK.  Denial of benefits of KVKs to the farmers of 
these districts is totally unjustified and needs to be addressed on priority. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to the Department 
to take steps for enhancing allocation to Agriculture Extension Division  so 
that there should be atleast one KVK with adequate infrastructure and 
sufficient manpower in each district of the country.   
 
C. Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 10) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee note that the KVKs play an important role in extension 
services. The benefits of the research and innovations in the field of agriculture reach 
to the farmers by KVKs through demonstration and dissemination of information 
about new varieties,  practices and technologies. The Committee desire the 
Department to make the training/extension services at Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
more broad-based and inclusive by including Fishery, Animal Husbandry and other 
related subjects and also by covering m ore number of farmers without frequently 
repeating the same group of farmers for training and other extension services.” 

6 
 
 
1.12 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“KVKs organize training programmes for farmers on various facets of 
agriculture and allied sectors including fisheries, animal husbandry, horticulture, 
agro-forestry, agricultural engineering, etc. The KVKs trained 0.38 lakh farmers in 
fisheries, 1.68 lakh farmers in animal husbandry, 2.39 lakh farmers in horticulture, 
0.21 lakh farmers in agro -forestry and 0.72 lakh farmers in agricultural engineering 
during 2023 -24. Besides, the KVKs organized 6.19 lakh extension activities on 
various facets of agricultur e and allied sectors with participation of 200.58 lakh 
farmers. Since most of the farmers are engaged in multiple activities across 
agriculture and allied sectors, therefore same group of farmers may participate in 
more than one activity of KVKs covering different subject areas.” 
 
 
1.13  The Committee had desired the Department to make the 
training/extension services at Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) more broad -
based and inclusive by including Fishery, Animal Husbandry and other related 
subjects and also by covering more number of farmers without frequently 
repeating the same group of farmers for training and other extension services.  
The Department in its Action Taken Reply has submitted that various facets of 
Agriculture and Allied Sector including fisheries, animal husbandry, 
horticulture, agro-forestry, agricultural engineering etc. are covered/included 
in the training and extension programmes of the KVKs and has also furnished 
information about number of extension activities organized and number of 
farmers trained by KVKs. However, the reply of the Department on the 
recommendation of the Committee  with regard to covering more number of 
farmers without frequently repeating the same group of farmers for training 
and other extension services is quite unsatisfactory and unacceptable.  The 
Department, instead of accepting the shortcomings of trainings and extension 
services carried out by KVKs and taking corrective measures to make them 
more broad -based and inclusive, has justified the frequent participa tion of 
some group of farmers by saying that most of the farmers are engaged in 
multiple activities across Agriculture and Allied Sectors , so same group of 
farmers participate in more than one activity of KVKs covering different subject 
areas. The Committe e, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to 
make training /extension services at KVKs more broad-based and inclusive by 

7 
 
covering more number of farmers without frequently repeating the same group 
of farmers for training and other extension services.  
 
D. Agricultural Targets for 2047 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 13) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee would like to be apprised of the targets set for various 
parameters in Agricultural and Allied Sectors to be achieved by 2047 as part of Viksit 
Bharat. Further, they also want the short-term targets fixed in this regard.” 
 
1.15 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“Target of ICAR from 2024-25 to 2047 
Crop Science 
• Developing of 3500 high yielding, climate resilient, nutritionally rich, input responsive 
varieties with special emphasis on oilseeds and pulses using modern breeding tools 
including genome editing; and use of trait specific germplasm.  
• Identification of new genes and generation of genomic resources including fine 
mapping, cloning, characterization and functional validation of novel genes and 
promotors involved in biotic and abiotic stress tolerance, quality and enhanced 
productivity and their commercialized along with IP protection -160 
• Production and supply of 30.00 lakh quintal of breeder seed 
• Development of 285 rapid diagnostic tools and AI based digital forewarning systems 
for management of emerging insect-pests and diseases 
• Innovations in terms of 1350 Improved Technologies, product, processes, 
methodologies etc. 
• Registration of 2000 elite trait specific germplasm with National Gene Bank. 
• Initiating research programme to develop crop cultivate that can be grown in space 
under Gaganyan and other space explorations. 
 
Hort. Science 
• Attaining 950 million tons targeted production of horticultural crops.  
• Attaining productivity of horticultural crops at 35t/ha. 

8 
 
• Developing and providing technology support for bringing 50% production from the 
protected production conditions. 
• Standardizing & providing technology support for generating 300 million tons export-
oriented production of horticultural crops. 
• Standardizing and providing technology support for converting 250 million tons 
produce into processed and value-added products of horticultural crops.  
Animal Science 
• Complete self -sufficiency in veterinary vaccines and diagnostics (Make in India 
approach) through Development 55 Drugs / New vaccines and 200 diagnostic kits.  
• Development of 12 genome edited livestock & poultry for enhanced production; and 
pathogens for production of vaccines and diagnostics. 
• Evaluation and characterization of 320 genetic resources. 
• Registration of 300 new breeds/ varieties. 
• Development of 160 feeding modules for GHG mitigation/ production enhancement, 
100 probiotics/ herbal based therapeutics and 300 value added products and 
processes. 
• Develop 10 AI based technologies in livestock. 
• Sero-surveillance/monitoring, 50 lakhs samples testing for diseases. 
• Production and distribution of 400 lakhs chicks and 8 lakhs Piglets/ Sheep/ Goat/ 
Rabbit.  
• Development of infrastructure for producing sex -sorted semen at Animal Breeding 
Research Centre. 
• Production of 130 lakhs Semen doses. 
• To achieve an average productivity of 140 eggs per bird under backyard system of 
rearing and 300 eggs per bird per year in commercial poultry by 2047. 
Agri. Engg.  
• Development of 176 new equipment/ machinery/ technology  
• Development of 102 value-added food, fibre and other agricultural allied products 
• Conducting study on Status of Farm Mechanization of the country in different states  
• Frontline demonstrations of 500 different equipment/ machinery covering 10000 ha 
area 
• Licensing of 115 technologies 
• Patent/copy right of 95 applications 

9 
 
• Establishment of National Institute on Agricultural Robotics and AI 
 
Fisheries Science 
• In 2047, the country is projected to produce 40 mmt of fish of which 8.0 mmt will be 
contributed from capture fisheries and 32.0 mmt from aquaculture side. 
• By 2030,  the production is estimated to be at 24.0 mmt including 6.0 mmt from 
capture and 18.0 mmt from aquaculture. 
Agri. Education 
• A revised curriculum has been devised and implemented for agriculture students 
from the academic session 2024 -25 to prepare them for new challenges as part of 
Viksit Bharat  in alignment with New Education Policy (NEP) 2020 focusing on 
outcome-based learning and entrepreneurship. 
• Through various initiative and measures of Human Resource Management, ICAR is 
preparing scientists and teachers for 21st century skills in agriculture & allied sectors 
through competency -based capacity building programs and incentives through 
various fellowship and exchange programs. 
Agri. Extension 
• Customized farm advisory and extension delivery through Block Chain technology 
for traceability. 
• Futuristic, demand -based production and consumption facilitated by Real -time 
Collectives. 
• Full access to Cyber Physical Systems vis -à-vis using AI, Machine Learning, Big 
Data Analytics Problem - Solving & Real - Time Personalized Advisory and policy 
support. 
• Pathways options for resilience against multiple stressors.” 
 
 
1.16 The Committee, while desiring to be apprised about the targets set for 
various parameters in Agricultural and Allied Sectors to be achieved by 2047 
as part of Viksit Bharat, had wanted the Department to also fix short term 
targets. The Department in its Ac tion Taken Reply has apprised about the 
targets of ICAR from 2024-25 to 2047.  These targets, in view of the Committee, 
are ambitious and far -sighted having potential to revolutionize Indian 
Agriculture.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to properly plan 

10 
 
and make sincere efforts to achieve the targets set for itself as achievement of 
these targets would make Indian Agriculture and Allied Sectors modern and 
self-reliant.   
  

11 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Allocation 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
(DARE) sought an allocation of Rs. 11173.21 crore for the year 2024 -25, it got 
Rs.9941.09 Crore which is 0.21% of total Outlay (BE) of Rs. 48,20,512 crore of 
Government of India for the year. This allocation is, however higher than the 
allocations of Rs. 9504.00 crore made in BE 2023 -24 and Rs. 9876.60 crore made 
in RE 2023 -24. The Committee also note that the proportion (in % terms) of 
Budgetary Allocation (BE) made in favour of the Department out of the total Budget 
of the Government of India has progressively declined from 0.27% in the year 2020-
21 to 0.21% in 2024-25.  
    The Committee feel that inadequate Budget allocation as well as progressive 
decline in proportion of Budgetary Allocation with respect to the total Budget of the 
Government of India is not a healthy trend particularly in view of the fact that the 
Agriculture and Allied Sectors are facing numerous challenges like low productivity, 
sub-standard quality of seeds, impact of variability in weather and climate change, 
degraded soil, depleting water resources, etc.  The Committee are of the considered 
view that relevant Research and Development (R&D) is essential to develop climate 
resilient, high yielding, bio -fortified variety of seeds, new technologies, etc.  In all 
these endeavors, the DARE and the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), 
being the p remier research organization for coordinating, guiding and managing 
research and education in Agriculture and Allied activities, have to play pivotal role. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to consider increasing the 
allocation   for the Department in future.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Finance has communicated the expenditure ceilings for RE 2024-25 
of Rs.10156.35 crores which is overall increase of Rs.  215.26 crore in the Budget 
allocation over BE 2024 -25. Similarly, the ceilings of BE 2025 -26 is Rs.10466.39 
crores which is an increase of Rs.525.30 crores over BE 2024 -25 and Rs.310.04 
crores over RE 2024 -25. However, on the basis of recommendation of 

12 
 
Parliamentary Standing Committee, the department will make concerted efforts 
towards seeking enhanced budget allocation in the future as well.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 
The Committee note that Rs. 10.41 crore was allocated in BE 2023-24 under 
Capital Section (Capital Outlay on other General Economic Services) which was 
reduced to Rs. 9.96 crore in RE 2023-24. Out of this allocation,  Rs. 3.389 crore only  
was utilized dur ing the year 2023 -24.The Committee while noting the reasons for 
delay in taking up the required works resulting in surrender of  more than 60 % of the 
funds allocated at RE stage, suggest that proper planning may be put in place to use 
funds meant for capital  works.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Two Letters of Authority (LoA) for Rs. 37,40,000 and Rs. 7,27,66,448/ - were issued 
to PAO/CPWD under the object head ‘Building & Construction’.   Also, two LoAs’ for 
Rs. 7,12,236/ - and Rs. 42,72,406/ - were issued to PAO/CPWD under the budget 
head ‘Furniture & Fixtures’ by Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board(ASRB), an 
attached office of this Department. The above amounts were released through LoAs’ 
to PAO/CPWD timely.  However, CPWD, without citing any reason, at the fag end of 
the financial year 2023 -24 surrendered Rs. 5.5 cr. under ‘Building & Construction’ 
and Rs. 1.5 lac under ‘Furniture & Fixtures’.   This was the primary cause of the 
savings under Capital added with minor un-utilizations in other object heads of both 
Head Quarters and ASRB. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s 
 F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
Allocations Under Scheme Head 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
  
The Committee note that out of the total allocation (BE) of Rs. 9941.09 Crore 
to the Department (DARE) for the year 2024 -25, Rs. 2780.39 Crore has been 
allocated under Scheme Head which constitutes around 27.97% of the total 
allocation. The Allocation under Scheme Head in BE 2024-25 (Rs. 2780.39 Crore) is 

13 
 
356.98 Crore more than the allocation of Rs. 2423.41 Crore in BE 2023-24, and Rs. 
206.03 Crore more than the allocation of Rs. 2574.36 Crore in RE 2023 -24. The 
Committee also note that the Department has sought/proposed Rs. 3011.62 Crores 
under Scheme Head  for BE 2024 -25 and the Department has to prioritize its 
programs and activities in view of reduced allocations. The Committee have been 
apprised that inadequate allocation during the financial year 2023 -24 had adversely 
impacted the various planned activi ties under various Schemes. In many cases, 
capital expenditure planned in EFC/SFC could not be made due to inadequate 
budgetary allocations. Financial assistance was provided to various units from Non -
Scheme budget in order to meet its committed recurring contingencies and avoid 
crisis. The Committee are of firm opinion that inadequate allocation in BE 2024 -25 
particularly under Scheme Head would adversely impact the Scheme and 
Programmes planned by various Subject Matter Divisions (SMDs) and may impact 
the overall working of Research Institutes under the ICAR.  
The Committee are of considered view that further strengthening of Research 
and Development (R&D) eco-system for Agriculture and Allied Sectors in the country 
is indispensable for ensuring food and nutritional security and to improve profitability, 
sustainability and climate resilience. They, therefore, recommend the Department to 
take up the matter of enhancing the allocation under Central Sector Schemes with 
the Ministry of Finance in future.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has submitted proposal for seeking enhanced budget allocation of 
Rs. 3011.82 crores under Scheme Budget in RE 2024-25 to MoF. Accordingly, the 
budget ceilings in RE 2024-25 has been fixed at Rs. 3011.82 crores by MoF which 
is an increase of Rs. 231.43 crores i.e. increase of 8.32% over BE 24-25. Similarly, 
the ceilings under Scheme Budget in BE 2025-26 is Rs. 3219.22 crore which is an 
increase of Rs.  438.83 crores (i.e. 15.78% increase) over BE 2024 -25 and Rs.  
207.40 crores (i.e. 6.88% increase) over RE 2024-25. Department pursued with the 
Minister of Finance for enhanced allocations at different forum to meet the 
challenges of Agricultural research.    
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025]  

14 
 
Surrender of Funds 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
  
The Committee note that the percentage utilization of RE allocation of the 
Department for the Financial Years 2020 -21, 2021 -22, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 are 
99.01%, 99.13%, 96.71% and 99.27% respectively. There is a surrender of Rs 76.86, 
73.68, 284.74 and 72.21crore respectively during the years. The high percentage of 
utilization though is commendable, the Committee suggest that in future, efforts may 
be made to utilize fully especially funds under capital section to avoid payment of 
higher amounts due to inflation to complete the works taken under capital section. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Two Letters of Authority (LoA) for Rs. 37,40,000 and Rs. 7,27,66,448/ - were 
issued to PAO/CPWD under the object head ‘Building & Construction’.   Also, two 
LoAs’ for Rs. 7,12,236/- and Rs. 42,72,406/- were issued to PAO/CPWD under the 
budget head ‘Furniture & Fixtures’ by Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board  
(ASRB), an attached office of this Department. The above amounts were released 
through LoAs’ to PAO/CPWD timely.  However, CPWD, without citing any reason, at 
the fag end of the financial year 2023-24 surrendered Rs. 5.5 cr. under ‘Building & 
Construction’ and Rs. 1.5 lac under ‘Furniture & Fixtures’.   This was the primary 
cause of the savings under Capital added with minor un -utilizations in other object 
heads of both Head Quarters & ASRB . The Department is committed to fully utilize 
allocated funds through monthly monitoring during senior officers meeting.   
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming 
Recommendation (Para No. 5)  
Variability in weather and climate change alongwith degraded soil and 
depleting water resources are some of the major challenges confronting Indian 
Agriculture. The Committee have been apprised that a total of 286 climate resilient 
technologies have been developed for the benefit of stakeholders/ farmers of 22 

15 
 
states and 3 Union Territories (UTs). The climate resilient technologies including crop 
varieties, intercropping systems, conservation agriculture, crop diversification, 
agroforestry systems, zero till drill sowing of wheat to escape terminal heat stress, 
alternate methods of rice cultivation (system of rice intensification, aerobic rice and 
direct seeded rice), in-situ moisture conservation etc. have been disseminated 
among the farmers/ stakeholders in 151 vulnerable districts across the country The 
Committee note that Rs. 252.16 crore has been allocated to Natural Resources 
Management and National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) 
Division in BE 2024-25 which is more than the allocations of Rs. 240.00 crore in BE 
2023-24 and Rs. 239.98 c rore in RE 2023 -24. The Division had utilized 99.99% of 
allocated funds at RE during the Financial Year 2023 -24. The Committee, while 
appreciating the efforts of the DARE/ICAR, are of the view that more appropriate 
steps are required to be taken to promote Climate Resilient Farming by giving priority 
to Research for development of location-specific, cost-effective, eco-friendly Climate 
Resilient Practices and Technologies and their dissemination and demonstration on 
large scale in the country so that advers e impact of climate change on Indian 
Agriculture is minimized and food and nutritional security of the nation is maintained. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has developed and disseminated 
sustainable climate resilient technologies viz., integrated farming systems, resilient 
intercropping systems, conservation agriculture, crop diversification from paddy to 
other alternate crops like pulses, oilseeds, agroforestry systems, zero till drill sowing, 
alternate methods of rice cultivation, green manuring, integrated farming systems, 
integrated nutrient and pest management, organic farming, site specific nutrient 
management, in-situ moisture conservation, micro irrigation etc., these technologies 
have been demonstrated and disseminated in 151 vulnerable districts in 468 climate 
resilient villages in the country.  Climate research and technology development is 
strengthened under National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) to 
develop location specific, cost effective and ecofriendly practices to minimize the 
adverse impact of climate change on one hand and food security on other hand.  
Research efforts have been made to conduct block level risk and vulnerability 
assessment in Orissa and Maharashtra. The demonstration of climate resilient 
technologies and capacity building programs on climate resilient agriculture has been 
focussed to cater more number of farmers.  

16 
 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
Agricultural Engineering 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
The Committee note that Rs. 91.24 crore has been allocated to Agriculture 
Engineering Division in BE 2024-25 which is more than the allocations of Rs. 65.00 
Crore in BE 2023-24 and Rs. 70.09 Crore in RE 2023-24. The Committee have been 
apprised that the alloc ation of Rs. 70.09 Crore in RE 2023 -24 for the Agricultural 
Engineering Division was fully utilized by the end of the Financial Year 2023 -24. 
Further, the BE allocation of Agricultural Engineering Division has been enhanced 
during 2024-25 to take up advanced areas of research like development of robotics, 
Artificial intelligence, sensors and systems for quality and safety assessment and IoT 
based farm/post -harvest technologies etc.  They appreciate that out of 432 
technologies developed, 212 technologies  have been commercialised resulting in 
availability of higher efficiency machines with less drudgery and user friendly 
machines.  The Committee hope that as in the past, this year also the Department 
will be able to spend the entire enhanced allocations for the said purpose.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Agricultural Engineering Division has planned and placed all efforts to fully utilize 
the allocated amount (Rs 91.24 crore) for the year 2024-25 like last year. The Division 
had utilized 99.98% of the allocated funds during the financial year 2023-24. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s 
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
 
 
 
Animal Science  
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
  

17 
 
The Committee note that Rs. 415.15 crore has been allocated to Animal 
Science Division in BE 2024 -25 which is substantially higher than the allocations of 
Rs. 300.00 crore in BE 2023-24 and Rs. 306.72 crore in RE 2023-24. The Committee 
have been apprised t hat the research on veterinary biologicals in the  ICAR has led 
to successful eradication of  important diseases viz,. Rinderpest and contagious 
bovine pleuropneumonia from the country. ICAR has developed vaccines for 
economically important diseases for cattle in the country viz., Foot and Mouth 
Disease, Anthrax Spore,   Black Quarter (BQ), Haemorrhagic Septicaemia (HS), 
Brucella Abortus (S -19 Strain), Buffalo pox, Infectious Bovine Rhinotracheitis   and 
Lumpy Skin Disease. The Committee have also been apprised that the Department 
has planned to utilize increased funds for creating infrastructure and advanced 
research on deve lopment of new generation vaccines, identification of indigenous 
livestock, genome editing and animal genomics studies etc. for improved animal 
health and production in the Country. The Committee are of the considered view that 
Animal Husbandry sub -sector is one of the promising sources for improving farm 
incomes and every rupee spent on livestock sub-sector’s research and development 
yields much better returns. The Committee, therefore, while appreciating the 
Department for enhancing the allocation under Animal Science Division, recommend 
that emphasis should be given to research for enhancing productivity as well as 
ensuring animal health so as to increase the income of farmers and contribute 
immensely to the growth of the Indian Economy.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Animal Science Division has aligned research prioriti es to enhance animal 
productivity and health to benefit farmers and contribute to the growth of the Indian 
economy. To advance the research and development initiatives further in animal 
sciences, four All India Network programs have been initiated recently namely One 
Health approach to Zoonotic Diseases (Outlay of Rs. 11.80 crores); Challenging and 
Emerging Diseases of Livestock (Outlay of Rs. 11.20 crores), Advanced research 
project on Canines (Outlay of Rs. 17.50 crores) and Application of Genome Editing 
Technology for Improvement in Livestock Health and Production (Outlay of Rs. 40.00 
crores). These projects have been initiated to address various issues such as 
emerging livestock diseases including zoonotic infections, genome editing to 
augment production and productivity including development of new generation 

18 
 
vaccines, diagnostics and therapeutics.  During last 10 years the major contribution 
of the division for the livestock sector includes, characterization of 105 populations 
of livestock and poultry species, registered 75 indigenous animal breeds, 1 synthetic 
cattle and 2 chicken strains , Gazette notification of 220 indigenous animal breeds 
and d eveloped 19 veterinary medical devices Cryopreserved germplasm for 40 
indigenous animal breeds in form of semen and for 68 breeds/populations in form of 
somatic cells, produced 45.78 lakhs doses of frozen semen of elite germplasm of 
cattle and buffalo, developed seven improved rural chicken varieties and distributed 
1.50 crore improved chicken and duck germplasm to the farmers across the country, 
developed 65 dairy products/ processes  and c ommercialized 96 technologies to 
different dairy firms. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
Agricultural Education 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
  
The Committee note that Rs. 398.74 crore has been earmarked for 
Agricultural Education Division in BE 2024 -25 which is about 22% more than the 
allocated amount of Rs. 322.74 Crore in BE and RE 2023 -24. The Committee feel 
that there is a need to strengthen Agricultural Education in the country and the 
enhancement of allocation for Agricultural Education is a welcome step. Since most 
of the Farmers and Agricultural labourers are 10 th – 12th class dropouts, it is 
imperative that the Department take steps for introduction of Agriculture related basic 
education at school level also. Further, the Committee desire that the Department 
take steps for strengthening higher agricultural education in the country by having 
sufficient number of qualified teachers in Agriculture colleges and universities, 
provision of scho larship for all students to attract talented students to Agriculture 
Institutions and Universities, student -faculty exchange programme with foreign 
countries etc.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 

19 
 
Agricultural Higher Education in the country is being strengthened with enhancement 
in number of ICAR All India Quota seats from 15% to 20% in Undergraduate (UG) 
and from 25% to 30% in Postgraduate (PG) and Doctoral (Ph.D.) degree 
programmes. All the Agricultural Universities have also been advised to increase the 
number of seats every year by 10% in alignment with the National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020 to enhance the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER). To attract students to 
higher agricultural education and to achieve educational excellence in teaching and 
research in agriculture and allied science subjects, ICAR supports the students of 
UG, PG and Ph.D. by awarding different scholarships/fellowships. School education 
comes under the purview of NCERT, and ICAR is a part of the team of NCERT 
providing support for introduction of Agriculture related basic education at school 
level. ICAR is formulating guidelines for Dual -degree, Joint -degree and twining 
program to have more students exchange programs with foreign countries. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
Problems in implementation of  Agricultural Research Programmes 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
The Committee suggest that they may be provided a status report on the 
problems faced in implementation of Agricultural Research Programmes/ output of 
the Agricultural Research by Agriculture Research Institutes/ICAR.  
 
Reply of the Government 
A. Research Programme Implementation Level 
• Strengthening of infrastructure of ICAR Institutes:  
i) The  Institutes have contributed significantly in the food and nutritional security and 
were the hubs for ushering the green revolution in the country. During post revolution 
era each Institute has contributed land mark technologies leading to self -sufficiency 
in food grains. Now the agricultural education has also been initiated in most of the 
Institute through Education Hubs as part of ICAR -Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute, New Delhi (the Deemed to be University). To upgrade their laboratories for 
their NABL accreditation, field facilities and other essential infrastructure like students 
basic amenities (hostels, class rooms, sports) for making them competitive with 

20 
 
global institutions, one time grant for Renovation of more than 60 years old 
Institutions. 
ii) There is u rgent need for one -time grant for the renovation of the 
building/infrastructure and other facilities at the institutes which are more than 50 
years old. 
iii) Shortage of scientific, administrative and supporting manpower at all the institutes. 
Over the years, the cadre strength of scientific, technical and other support staff has 
depleted which is affecting the focused research work.  
• State-of-the art research facilities for animal Science Research: Limited 
Infrastructure is available for advanced research for molecular and vaccine 
development, whcih needs to upgraded with equipment to carry out state -of-the art 
research at par with developed countries. Very few laboratories have been accredited 
by various agencies such as NABL.   
• Geographical and Infrastructural Limitations : Some institutes are located in a 
remote and hilly region; the institute faces logistical difficulties in conducting large -
scale field trials due to availability of farmers in very remote area. 
• Strengthening breeder seed production centres:  ICAR Seed Project was 
launched during 2005-06, where processing plant and normal storage facilities were 
provided. All 65 centres under ICAR need state of art facilities like processing plant, 
temperature and humidity controlled seed stores, covered thres hing floors, and 
precision irrigation system. 
• State of art DNA Fingerprinting Facility for Seeds and Planting Material: 
Establishment of Central DNA Finger Printing Laboratory at ICAR -NBPGR, New 
Delhi and Regional DNA Fingerprinting laboratories under ICAR for checking the 
infringement and spurious quality of seed. The farmers are cheated in the name of 
quality seed where t he seed quality and genetic purity both are compromised and 
many times the same variety is sold by different names finally duping the farmers 
which miserable condition of the farmers . To check this malpractice in seed, a 
establishment of national level Central DNA Fingerprinting Facility for Agri -
Horticultural Crops with state of art facilities for ensuring genetic purity (quality) and 
varietal identity (check to misbranding) of a varieties through molecular tools ensuring 
good quality seed to the farmers. Assured quality seed, with desired level of genetic 
purity impacting at least 20% productivity will be a boon to the small holding farmers 
who are cheated by the seed suppliers. 

21 
 
• Establishing Quarantine Facilities for screening of imported germplasm: To 
enhance the productivity of oilseeds and pulse crops, large number of exotic 
germplasm is proposed. Before release of the exotic germplasm to the breeders, this 
material is grown under quarantine facility for screening against any exotic disease 
or insect.   
• Trained human resource:  Human resource challenges, such as a shortage of 
skilled researchers, and insufficient trainings in cutting edge research areas. 
Technologically, new advancements and approaches need to be implemented on 
priority. Limited opportunities  are for the scientists to visit recognized advanced 
laboratories, colleges, universities etc. abroad for research. 
• Funding for cutting edge research: For achieving the targets set for Viksit Bharat, 
adoption of new scientific tools and technologies are the need of hour for which 
enhanced funding is required. Continuous ensured funding for cutting edge research 
including upgradation of research equipment, trained human resource and chemicals 
and consumables for achieving proposed targets facing the challenge of climate 
change, shrinking cultivable areas, depleting water, degrading soils and emerging 
insect pests.      
 
B. Implementation of Research Outcome Level: 
• Frequent vacancies in AICRPs: All India Coordinated Research Projects (AICRPs) 
of different crops are having their centres in the State Agricultural Universities with 
approved scientific and other cadre manpower. Of the total salary of the staff and 
contingent grant for research; 75% is being given by the ICAR and remaining 25% 
share comes from the state. Frequent transfers of scientific staff and engaging those 
posted under AICRPs in other activities of the University, hamper the research 
activities and slow down the process of research achievements.    
• Decreasing role of Public Sector Seed Agencies: Shrinking share of public sector 
in total quality seed available to the farmers due to decreasing breeder seed demand 
and its further downstream multiplication towards foundation and certified seed. 
States are not coming forward to give the indents of breeder seed as per Seed Rolling 
Plan and depend on private sector produced seed that too procured through tender 
system. For quality seed production, one has to take breeder seed, which is multiplied 
to foundation, then certified seed, and is sold for cultivation during the third year. 
Without proper seed rolling plan, indenting breeder seed of required varieties three 

22 
 
years in advance, supplying the huge quantity of quality seed of a particular variety 
before season cannot be relied upon. 
• Control on Un-notified Varieties and Truthfully Labelled Seed: System for quality 
control of Truthfully Labelled Seed (TL) at production and post production stage and 
un-notified (research varieties/ hybrids) varieties/hybrids is major deterrent in taking 
the high yielding trait specific varieties to farmers fields.   
• Incentivizing adoption of biofortified and trait specific varieties: Farmers always 
opt for higher yields leading to higher returns. Incentives for growing biofortified and 
special trait varieties will encourage farmers to grow these varieties which will help in 
enhanced productivity and quality grains. Farm gate processing  and value chain 
development will help in increasing farmers’ income.       
• Strengthening extension system through modern digital technologies:  
Farmers’ reluctance or slow adoption of balanced dose of fertilizers, plant protection 
measures to control pest, diseases and weeds and mechanization etc. is leading to 
yield gaps interms of potential of varieties and farmer to farmer variation across the  
states.  
• Lack of coordination among various agencies:  Limited coordination among 
various stakeholders (ICAR, SAUs and private sector) leading to fragmentation of 
responsibilities, duplication of efforts and inefficiencies affecting their efficiency, 
scalability, and impact. 
• Supply and quality control of bio-pesticides and bio-fertilizers: Bio-fertilizers and 
bio-pesticides are getting more importance and are integral part of both organic and 
inorganic agriculture. The quality assurance has been a major challenge in large 
scale adoption of bio -fertilizers and bio-pesticides. Proper production and supply of 
quality bio -products will help in production of safe food keeping the environment 
clean. This will bring a revolution in organic farming and promote “Less Chemical” 
agriculture. 
• Shortage of manpower in the states implementing agencies were felt for 
implementation of the research output.   
 [Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
 
Agricultural Targets for 2047 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13)  

23 
 
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the targets set for various 
parameters in Agricultural and allied Sectors to be achieved by 2047 as part of Viksit 
Bharat. Further, they also want the short term targets fixed in this regard.  
  
Reply of the Government 
Target of ICAR from 2024-25 to 2047 
Crop Science 
• Developing of 3500 high yielding, climate resilient, nutritionally rich, input responsive 
varieties with special emphasis on oilseeds and pulses using modern breeding tools 
including genome editing; and use of trait specific germplasm.  
• Identification of new genes and generation of genomic resources including fine 
mapping, cloning, characterization and functional validation of novel genes and 
promotors involved in biotic and abiotic stress tolerance, quality and enhanced 
productivity and their commercialized along with IP protection -160 
• Production and supply of 30.00 lakh quintal of breeder seed 
• Development of 285 rapid diagnostic tools and AI based digital forewarning systems 
for management of emerging  insect-pests and diseases 
• Innovations in terms of 1350 Improved Technologies, product, processes, 
methodologies etc. 
• Registration of 2000 elite trait specific germplasm with National Gene Bank. 
• Initiating research programme to develop crop cultivate that can be grown in space 
under Gaganyan and other space explorations. 
Hort. Science 
• Attaining 950 million tons targeted production of horticultural crops.  
• Attaining productivity of horticultural crops at 35t/ha. 
• Developing and providing technology support for bringing 50% production from the 
protected production conditions. 
• Standardizing & providing technology support for generating 300 million tons export-
oriented production of horticultural crops. 
• Standardizing and providing technology support for converting 250 million tons 
produce into processed and value-added products of horticultural crops.  
Animal Science 

24 
 
• Complete self -sufficiency in veterinary vaccines and diagnostics (Make in India 
approach) through Development 55 Drugs / New vaccines and 200 diagnostic kits.  
• Development of 12 genome edited livestock & poultry for enhanced production; and 
pathogens for production of vaccines and diagnostics. 
• Evaluation and characterization of 320 genetic resources. 
• Registration of 300 new breeds/ varieties. 
• Development of 160 feeding modules for GHG mitigation/ production enhancement, 
100 probiotics/ herbal based therapeutics and 300  value added products and 
processes. 
• Develop 10 AI based technologies in livestock. 
• Sero-surveillance/monitoring, 50 lakhs samples testing for diseases. 
• Production and distribution of 400 lakhs chicks and 8 lakhs Piglets/ Sheep/ Goat/ 
Rabbit.  
• Development of infrastructure for producing sex -sorted semen at Animal Breeding 
Research Centre. 
• Production of 130 lakhs Semen doses. 
• To achieve an average productivity of 140 eggs per bird under backyard system of 
rearing and 300 eggs per bird per year in commercial poultry by 2047. 
Agri. Engg.  
• Development of 176 new equipment/ machinery/ technology  
• Development of 102 value-added food, fibre and other agricultural allied products 
• Conducting study on Status of Farm Mechanization of the country in different states  
• Frontline demonstrations of 500 different equipment/ machinery covering 10000 ha 
area 
• Licensing of 115 technologies 
• Patent/copy right of 95 applications 
• Establishment of National Institute on Agricultural Robotics and AI 
 
Fisheries Science 
• In 2047, the country is projected to produce 40 mmt of fish of which 8.0 mmt will be 
contributed from capture fisheries and 32.0 mmt from aquaculture side. 
• By 2030, the production is estimated to be at 24.0 mmt including 6.0 mmt from 
capture and 18.0 mmt from aquaculture. 
Agri. Education 

25 
 
• A revised curriculum has been devised and implemented for agriculture students from 
the academic session 2024-25 to prepare them for new challenges as part of Viksit 
Bharat in alignment with New Education Policy (NEP) 2020 focusing on outcome -
based learning and entrepreneurship. 
• Thorough various initiative and measures of Human Resource Management, ICAR 
is preparing scientists and teachers for 21 st century skills in agriculture & allied 
sectors through competency -based capacity building programs and incentives 
through various fellowship and exchange programs. 
Agri. Extension 
• Customized farm advisory and extension delivery through Block Chain technology 
for traceability. 
• Futuristic, demand -based production and consumption facilitated by Real -time 
Collectives. 
• Full access to Cyber Physical Systems vis-à-vis using AI, Machine Learning, Big Data 
Analytics Problem- Solving & Real- Time Personalized Advisory and policy support. 
• Pathways options for resilience against multiple stressors.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  

26 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
  
The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division has been allocated 
Rs. 234.89 crore in BE 2024-25 which is less than the allocation of Rs. 327.00 crore 
made in BE 2023-24 and the Actual Expenditure of Rs. 248.49 crore incurred during 
the year 2023 -24. The Committee also note that Agricultural Extension Division is 
carrying out on -farm testing to identify the location specificity of agricultural 
technologies, frontline demonstrations to demonstrate the production potential of 
different crops, training of farmers and extension personnel on knowledge and skills 
improvement and creating awareness on improved technologies among farmers of 
the country through a network of 731 Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs) spread all over 
the country. At present, 93 districts  have two KVKs each and 121 districts do not 
have KVK. Also only 15 new KVKs have been opened during the last five years. 
Besides, there are inadequate infrastructure in several of the existing KVKs and 
about 30% of the sanctioned posts are vacant in KVKs across the country. In view of 
the foregoing, the Committee feel that the reduction in allocation in BE 2024 -25 to 
Agriculture Extension Division is not a step in the right direction. The Committee are 
of the considered view that there should be atleast on e KVK with adequate 
infrastructure and sufficient manpower in each district of the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take steps for enhancing allocation to 
Agriculture Extension Division to achieve the desired goal.  
Reply of the Government 
The total allocation of the Scheme “Strengthening of Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
(KVKs)” for the period 2021 -26 is Rs.1202.45 Crore.  Additionally, the Host 
Organization and Krishi Vigyan Kendras are also provided with funds from various 
other Ministries/Departments of the Central Government as well as the respective 
State Governments. There are 766 districts in the country , wherein 731 KVKs are 

28 
 
existing across the country and the 15 new KVKs have been opened during the last 
five years. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of this 
Report 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
  
The Committee note that the KVKs play an important role in extension  
services. The benefits of the research and innovations in the field of agriculture reach 
to the farmers by KVKs through demonstration and dissemination of information 
about new varieties, practices and technologies. The Committee desire the 
Department to make the training/extension services at Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
more broad-based and inclusive by including Fishery, Animal Husbandry and other 
related subjects and also by covering more number of farmers without frequently 
repeating the same group of farmers for training and other extension services.  
Reply of the Government 
KVKs organize training programmes for farmers on various facets of agriculture and 
allied sectors including fisheries, animal husbandry, horticulture, agro -forestry, 
agricultural engineering, etc. The KVKs trained 0.38 lakh farmers in fisheries, 1.68 
lakh farmers in animal husbandry, 2.39 lakh farmers in horticulture, 0.21 lakh 
farmers in agro -forestry and 0.72 lakh farmers in agricultural engineering during 
2023-24. Besides, the KVKs organized 6.19 lakh extension activities on various 
facets of agriculture  and allied sectors with participation of 200.58 lakh farmers. 
Since most of the farmers are engaged in multiple activities across agriculture and 
allied sectors, therefore same group of farmers may participate in more than one 
activity of KVKs covering different subject areas.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of this 
Report 

29 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Crop Science 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
  
The Committee note that Rs. 930.22 crore has been allocated to Crop Science 
Division in BE 2024-25 which is more than the allocation of Rs. 714.41 in BE 2023 -
24 but less than the allocation of Rs. 962.78 crore in RE 2023 -24 and Actual 
Expenditure of Rs. 930.62 crore during the Financial Year 2023 -24. The Committee 
also note that many biofortified, hybrid and high yielding varieties of Field Crops – 
cereals, oilseeds, pulses, forage, fibre, sugarcane, etc . have been developed, 
released and notified for commercial cultivation by the farmers which lead to increase 
in production and productivity of these crops. At the same time, the Committee also 
note that several of these high yielding varieties of crops possess certain drawbacks 
like short shelf life, tastelessness, high consumption of inputs, degradation of soil and 
water, e tc. which needs to be addressed on priority. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to optimally and effectively utilize the allocation made to 
this Division and lay emphasis on developing crop varieties having better productivity 
while retaini ng qualities in terms of taste, flavor, shelf life, nutrients, environment 
friendliness etc.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Crop Science Division has placed all efforts to achieve physical targets of the scheme 
“Crop Science for Food and Nutritional Security” with optimal utilization of allocated 
funds. To address the current and predicted challenges of agricultural crop sector, 
modern technological tools like genome editing, genomics selection, speed breeding 
are used on development of resource use efficient, extreme climate resilient and 
biofortified varieties for field crops and for the enhancement of varietal replacement 
rates for addressing the gaps in productivity and sustainable production. Successful 
efforts made in the past on special trait varieties includes development of 152 Bio -
fortified varieties, heat tolerant varieties in wheat developed in major wheat growing 
areas of the country. The 14 rice varieties released and notified during 2 024 with 

30 
 
input use efficient traits. Efforts are made toward improving fodder and grain quality 
and shelf life of millets. Further, more focused efforts are made for addressing the 
issues of yield, short shelf life, tastelessness, flavor, nutrients, high consumption of 
inputs, degradation of soil and water, environment degradation etc. on priority 
through the various programs under the scheme.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2024-PIM Dated 30th January, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this 
Report  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI 
18 August, 2025  Chairperson 
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

31 
 
Annexure 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, Block -A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA),  New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
   2. Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
   3. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
   5. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
   6. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
7. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
8. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
9. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
10. Shri Murasoli S. 
11. Shri Dharambir Singh 
   12. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
   13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
   14. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
   15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
    
Rajya Sabha 
 
   16. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
   17. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
   18. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
   19. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
   20. Shri Madan Rathore 
   21. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
   22. Shri P.P. Suneer 
    
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
   
 

32 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee *xxxxxx. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and 
adoption the following Reports: 
 
(i) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(ii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(iii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(iv) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(v) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(vi)  Draft Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 2nd Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2024 -25) of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education) presented during 18th Lok Sabha; 
(vii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(viii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any 
modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present 
the Report to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
* Matter not related to this Report 

33 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT (18TH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations  13 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the Government  
Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,8,11,12 and 13 Total    10 
 Percentage     76.92% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government’s replies  
Para No. NIL Total 00 
 Percentage    0.00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos. 9 and 10 Total 02 
 Percentage 15.38% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
are still awaited 
Para No. 7 Total 01 
 Percentage  7.69% 
 