 
 
13 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries)  
 
 
‘Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of 
Fisheries Sector’ 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Seventieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24)} 
 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2025 /PHALGUNA 1946 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 
(2024-25) 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries)  
 
 
‘Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of Fisheries Sector’ 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Seventieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24)}  
 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.03.2025 
 
 Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2025  
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2025 /PHALGUNA 1946 (SAKA) 
 

 
COA No. 512 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
 
 

i 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                   PAGE 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24)……………………………  (ii)     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)……………………………  (iv) 
      
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………    (vi) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………    1-12 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations / Recommendations that have   
   been accepted by the Government ……………    13-38  
 
CHAPTER III  Observations / Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
   of the Government’s replies …………………..   39-40 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations / Recommendations in respect 
   of which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….   41  
 
CHAPTER V  Observations / Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….   42-44   
 
 
    ANNEXURE 
 
I. Minutes of the 23rd Sitting of the Committee held on 18.03.2025  45-46 
      
APPENDIX 
 
 I. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the  
Seventieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food  
Processing (2023-24)       47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar -   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Mohammad Sadique 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
21. VACANT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beedha Yadav 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Kailash Soni  
27. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar* 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
*Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar, MP, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Committee vide Bulletin Part-II, 
Para No. 7523 dated 29.09.2023 vice Shri Surendra Singh Nagar w.e.f. 26.09.2023 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj   - Director 
3. Shri N. Amarathiagan    - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ashwaghosh Bhaurao Lokhande  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
18th Lok Sabha (2024-25) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4. Shri Raj kumar Chahar 
5. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6. Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9. Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13. Shri Narayan TatuRane 
14. Shri Murasoli S 
15. Shri Dharambir Singh 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
24. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
27. Shri Madan Rathore 
28. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
29. Shri P. P. Suneer 
30. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
31. Vacant * 
 
 
 
* Vacant vice Shri Krishan Lal Panwar who resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
 

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda    - Joint Secretary 
 
2. Shri Khakhai Zou     - Director 
 
3. Shri Ashwaghosh Bhaurao Lokhande  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Thirteenth Report on Action-taken by the 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Seventieth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24) on the subject 'Employment Generation and 
Revenue Earning Potential of Fisheries Sector’ pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries). 
 
2. The Seventieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24) on the subject 
'Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of Fisheries Sector’ (2023-24) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
07.02.2024. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 7 May, 2024.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 18.03.2025. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Seventieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    New Delhi                        Charanjit Singh Channi 
18 March, 2025                                       Chairperson 
    27 Phalguna, 1946 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
                              Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventieth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2023-24) on the subject ‘Employment Generation and Revenue Earning 
Potential of Fisheries Sector’ of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Fisheries) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2024. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 18 Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been scrutinised and 
categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Para Nos.1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12,13,14,15,16,17,18  
                   Total 15 
            Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies:  
Recommendation Para No. 3,  
                           Total 01 
               Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
                     Total 0 
               Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation Para No. 6, 8 
                   Total 02 
             Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation of 
the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where it is 
not possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit 
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that future Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V of this Report 
be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
NEED FOR A SEPARATE RESEARCH COUNCIL FOR FISHERIES SECTOR 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.6) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 The Committee are happy to note that India has rich and diverse fisheries 
resources ranging from deep seas to lakes, ponds, rivers and more than 10 
Percent of the global biodiversity in terms of fish and shellfish species.   
Acknowledging the potential of Fisheries Sector of the country, the Government 
of India created a separate Department of Fisheries in February, 2019 to 
supplement the efforts of States and Union Territories and to provide sustained 
and focussed attention towards development of Fisheries Sector of the country.  
The Fisheries Sector contributes around 6.72% to Agriculture Gross Value 
Added (GVA) and 1.24 to National GVA in 2021-22 and is a major employment 
generator in direct as well as allied fishery activities.  The Fisheries Sector of the 
country possesses a huge untapped potential. At present, the national level 
research activities in Fisheries Sector are undertaken under the aegis of Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).  The Committee, taking into account 
these factors, recommend that a separate Research Council for Fishery Sector 
namely Indian Council for Fishery and Aquaculture Research under the 
Department of Fisheries be constituted as it would not only facilitate focussed 
and in-depth research in the Sector but also address the challenges faced by the 
Sector. 
 

3 
 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted:- 
 At present, there is no proposal to establish a separate Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Research Council. However, upon creation of a new Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, a Committee was constituted under 
the chairmanship of Dr. Sanjiv Balyan, Hon'ble MoS for Fisheries, Animal 
husbandry and dairying to recommend setting up of a Research Council to 
address research in fisheries and veterinary science. 
 
1.7 Acknowledging the huge potential of fisheries sector in the Country and its 
contribution to Agricultural and National GVA, the Committee had recommended 
that a separate Research Council for fishery sector namely Indian Council for 
Fishery and Aquaculture Research under the Department of Fisheries be 
constituted as it would not only facilitate focussed and in-depth research, but 
also address the challenges faced by the fishery sector. The Department in their 
reply have stated that a Committee was constituted under the chairmanship of   
Dr. Sanjiv Balyan, the then Hon’ble MoS for Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying to recommend the setting up of a Research Council to address research 
in fisheries and veterinary science. The Committee would, therefore, like to be 
apprised about the outcome of the committee constituted for setting up of a 
Research Council and further reiterate their earlier recommendation that a 
separate Research Council for Fishery Sector namely Indian Council for Fishery 
and Aquaculture Research may be established taking into consideration the 
future prospects and importance of fishery sector in the country.  
 
FISH MEAL FISH OIL INDUSTRIES (FMFO) 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.7) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 The Committee understand that sustainable fishing is imperative to the 
preservation of fish stocks and the survival of marine ecology and therefore for 
sustainable development of marine fisheries efforts should be taken to control the 
harvesting of juvenile fishes, which is also one of the reasons for the decline of 
many Fish Species including the Indian Oil Sardine and edible fishes. The 
Committee have been informed that the juvenile fish losses mainly occur when 

4 
 
they are caught as Non-targeted Species in Trawls. The Committee understand 
that the practices such as Bull trawling and LED Fishing used by FMFO 
Industries are a major cause for such juvenile fish losses. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the Minimum Legal Mesh Size regulation as declared 
by the States like Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Goa to avoid 
juvenile and small fishes catch in Trawls also needs be implemented by other 
States and the Department should take active steps in pursuing all States/UTs to 
implements such regulations. Further, the Department should devise a foolproof 
mechanism in coordination with the States/UTs to stop the use of destructive and 
banned fishing practices like Bull Trawling and LED Fishing. 
 
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:-  
 The Department of Fisheries, GoI vide OM dated 17.12.2020 inter alia 
advised States/UTs to make provisions in their Marine Fishing Regulation Acts 
(MFRAs) for implementation of the Minimal Legal Size (MLS) for various species 
of fishes as recommended by Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute 
(CMFRI). This has already been implemented by states like Kerala. Accordingly, 
remaining Coastal States have been requested to expedite issue of similar 
notification. In addition, all the Coastal States have also been prescribed use of 
square mesh cod ends in the trawlers as recommended by Central Institute of 
Fisheries Technology (CIFT) to enable escape of juvenile fishes.  
Besides, all the Coastal States/UTs have been requested to take 
necessary measures to reduce fishing efforts, and to prescribe maximum size 
and minimum mesh size for principal fishing nets as recommended by CIFT. 
Further, the functioning of fish feed/ fish meal units in the States/UTs are being 
monitored continuously, sensitizing the use of juvenile fish as feed ingredient, 
and advised not to procure juvenile fish and about the stringent action against the 
errant units.  Further, it has been requested to all the States/UTs to complete 
directory of the fish meal and fish oil plant units with necessary details for 
monitoring their activity. Massive awareness campaign among fishermen in all 
coastal districts regarding the ill effects of juvenile fishing and other destructive 
fishing practices and the need for adopting sustainable fishing practices has 
been launched. Funds for such activities made available under PMMSY Scheme 
through National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB).   

5 
 
Furthermore, the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, 
notified the ‘National Policy on Marine Fisheries, 2017’ to guide the responsible 
and sustainable fishing. Besides, Government of India promotes sustainable 
fishing and has issued advisories from time to time to coastal States/UTs for 
preventing juvenile fishing and ban on destructive fishing practices for ensuring 
sustainable fishing. Paired bottom trawling or bull trawling and use of artificial 
LED lights in fishing are banned in the Exclusive Economic Zone of India. The 
uniform ban on fishing in the Indian EEZ, beyond the territorial waters is also 
implemented for a period of 61 days, from 15th April to 14th June on the East 
Coast and from 1st June to 31st July on the West Coast, to ensure sustainable 
fishing.  
 
1.10 The Committee had recommended that Minimum Legal Mesh Size 
regulation as declared by the States like Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat 
and Goa to avoid juvenile and small fishes catch in Trawls should also be 
implemented by other States and advised that the Department should take active 
steps in pursuing all States/UTs to implements such regulations. The Committee 
appreciate the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard by advising 
the States/UTs to make provisions in their Marine Fishing Regulation Acts 
(MFRAs) for implementation of Minimal Legal Size (MLS) for various species of 
fishes. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by the 
States, other than, the five states mentioned above, in incorporating the said MLS 
in MFRAs. In case, these are not included, the Committee reiterate that the 
Department should actively pursue with States/UTs so that they adhere to the 
MLS guidelines and thereby promote sustainable fishing practices. Further, along 
with monitoring the functioning of Fish Meal Fish Oil (FMFO) industries, the 
Department should also devise a mechanism so as to penalise the errant FMFO 
units who indulge in procuring juvenile fish and also resort to using the banned 
Bull Trawling and LED fishing practices. 

6 
 
INSURANCE SCHEME FOR DAM FISHERS 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO 8) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 The Committee note that the Department of Fisheries, through National 
Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) is implementing Group Accident Insurance 
Scheme (GAIS) for Fishers under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
since 26.07.2021. Fishers involved in fishing at reservoirs/dams are also eligible 
to insure their lives against heavy rainfall/ natural disaster under this Scheme 
through the respective State Fisheries Departments/Union Territories. With 
regard to Dam Fishers, the Committee have been apprised that during heavy 
rainfall when the gates of the Dams are opened, the seeds planted by the 
Fishers in these Dams also gets washed away causing heavy losses to them and 
therefore recommend that the Department should design a Scheme for Dam 
Fishers, similar to crop insurance given under Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana 
to extend them insurance coverage against losses during heavy rainfall. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted:- 
 The Department has launched Pradhan Mantri Matsya Krishi Sah-
Samriddhi Yojana (PM-MKSSY) a central sector sub-scheme under the ongoing 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) at a total outlay of Rs. 6000 
crore for a period of four years from 2023-24 to 2026-27 wherein provision has 
been made for insurance of intensive form of aquaculture which also includes 
cage culture for fishers among others with a maximum unit size eligible to 
1800m2. At present the various guidelines including for crop aquaculture 
insurance for implementation of the scheme are being prepared and shall be 
launched shortly. 
 
1.13 The Committee had categorically recommended that the Department 
should devise a scheme similar on the lines of Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana 
for the Dam Fishers so as to insure the losses incurred by them during heavy rain 
falls. The Department, however,  in their reply have stated that under PMMKSY 
there is provision for insurance for intensive form of aquaculture and also stated 
that various guidelines including guidelines for crop aquaculture insurance are 

7 
 
being prepared. The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Department 
towards Aquaculture Insurance and would further like to be apprised about the 
details of the guidelines as and when they are finalized. However, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that a scheme should also be devised for 
insuring the aquaculture crop of fishers in Reservoirs/Dams.  
 
IMPORT IN FISHERIES SECTOR 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO 14) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 The Committee have been informed that there are certain fish varieties 
such as Haddock, Cod, Flat-Fish, Salmon, Pallock, Argentinean Red Shrimp, 
Norway Lobster which are found only in Temperate countries and certain 
varieties are being imported for supply to Hotel, Restaurants and Cafes and as 
such imports of these Fish varieties cannot be avoided.  The Committee have 
also been informed that L. Vannamei Shrimp constitutes almost 90 to 95 percent 
of our exports, however, the Mother Stock of L. Vannamei Shrimp is imported.  In 
this regard, the Committee recommend that urgent necessary action be taken to 
produce Mother Stock of L. Vannamei Shrimp in the Country thereby reducing 
the import dependency.  The Committee further note that to reduce this single 
species dependency on L. Vannamei  and species diversification two options are 
available i.e. P. Modonon and P. Indicus and accordingly recommend that the 
Department should make sure that the Genetic improvement Program by the 
Central Institute of Brackish water Aquaculture (CIBA) for development of P. 
Indicus (an indigenous Shrimp) and the Nucleus Breeding Centre (NBC) Project 
of Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) located at Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands for development of P. Monodon are fast tracked and 
completed in a time bound manner so that the Country moves up the ladder in 
achieving self-sufficiency by reducing import of Shrimp Brood Stocks and thereby 
living true to the spirit of the Atma Nirbhar Bharat. 
 
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted:- 
 The Department of Fisheries, GoI has approved the project proposal of 
Central Institute of Brackishwater Aquaculture (CIBA) entitled “Development of 
Indigenous Shrimp (Indian white shrimp) Aquaculture: Genetic Improvement 

8 
 
Program of Penaeus indicus, Phase-I” with a total project cost of Rs. 2504.40 
lakh under central sector component of PMMSY. In addition, Department, is 
supporting NBC project of MPEDA-RGCA Andaman and Nicobar Island on 
Domestication of Tiger Shrimp (Penaeus monodon). In this regard, Department 
has approved (i) Establishment of Shrimp Evaluation Study Unit (ESU) for P. 
monodon to evaluate the reproductive and growth performance of founder 
families of DTSP at Rajakkamangalam, Kanyakumari District" with a total project 
cost of Rs. 6.75 crore and (ii) Establishment of Pilot Scale BMC for P. monodon 
(Conversion of L. Vannamei BMC to P. monodon BMC) at a cost of Rs 5.32 
crore.The Department is closely monitoring the progress of all these projects to 
ensure their timely completion and to maximize the benefits for shrimp farmers 
and the overall aquaculture sector. 
 
1.16 The Committee noted that L. Vannamei Shrimp constitutes almost 90 to 95 
percent of the country’s aquaculture exports, however, the Mother Stock of           L. 
Vannamei shrimp is imported.  In this regard, the Committee recommended that urgent 
necessary action be taken to produce Mother Stock of L. Vannamei Shrimp in the 
Country, thereby, reducing the import dependency. The Department, however, in their 
reply have not given any update in this regard i.e. measures undertaken to produce 
mother stock of L. Vannamei Shrimp. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the Department should undertake necessary steps to produce the 
mother stock of L. Vannamei Shrimp in the country so as to reduce the dependency on 
its import.  
 
EXPORTS IN FISHERIES SECTOR 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO 15) 
 
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 The Committee understand that to achieve the export target set under the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) that is to double the export 
earnings to Rs. 1 lakh crores by the year 2024-25, interventions in areas such as 
Shrimp productivity, post-harvest infrastructure, improving certification and 
traceability and awareness of quality products are required.  The Committee 
appreciates the efforts taken by the Department for diversification of aquaculture 
species and Tilapia Fish in particular so as to increase its export by funding 

9 
 
Tilapia Hatcheries and Tilapia Culture through Recirculation Aquaculture System 
(RAS), Cage culture and Pond Culture. Further, MPEDA- Rajiv Gandhi Centre for 
Aquaculture has also standardised the Hatchery and grow out farming 
technology of Genetically Improved Farmed Tilapia (GIFT).  In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that similar efforts and technological hand holding should 
be accorded to other Inland Fresh Water commercially important  Fish varieties 
such as Rohu, Catla, Magur, Vaam and Hilsa so that they contribute in achieving 
the targets set under the PMMSY.  The Committee note that Disease 
Management and Certification and Traceability are very important areas where 
intervention is needed so as to increase the export competitiveness of the 
Fisheries Sector and thus, a mechanism should be put in place which would 
make the Fish Farmers aware of the contents of the Aquaculture Inputs such as 
production booster used by them.  The Committee also recommend that the 
issues pertaining to Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) and Technical Barrier to 
Trade (TBT), which are hampering the exports to various countries need be 
addressed in a concrete manner and the Department should strive hard to 
overcome these issues. 
 
1.18 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted:- 
  The Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana being implemented with 
effect from 2020-21 intends to address critical gaps in fish production and 
productivity, quality, technology, post-harvest infrastructure and management, 
modernization and strengthening of value chain, traceability, establishing a robust 
fisheries management framework and fishers’ welfare. Under the PMMSY, 
aquaculture is one of the prominent activities for enhancing fish production. 
PMMSY also focuses on expansion, diversification and intensification of 
aquaculture including productive utilization of land and water, supply of quality 
and affordable seed and feed, species diversification and genetic improvement, 
aquatic health management, infusion of modern technologies such as Re-
circulatory Aquaculture Systems, Biofloc, cage culture, pen culture, sea ranching, 
artificial reefs, mariculture including open sea cage culture etc. PMMSY inter-alia 
provides financial support for post- harvest facilities, fish transport, value addition 
& marketing to improve value realization to fishers, construction of ponds, tanks, 
hatcheries and necessary inputs for undertaking fish farming, and development of 

10 
 
fisheries infrastructure, cold chain facilities, fish market infrastructure and such 
other activities to improve price realization.  
 
   In regard to Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) and Technical Barrier to 
Trade (TBT), as per the legal and trade policies, importing countries enforce 
various regulatory measures to ensure the safety and quality of the products 
placed in their markets. The range and stringency of the requirements, including 
prior registration, testing and certification may differ from one country to another, 
depending on their developmental status as well status of their regulatory 
structures. These measures apply equally to both domestic manufacturers and 
the importers. However, such measures may sometimes act as trade barriers due 
to various reasons such as gap in the regulatory frameworks and quality 
compliance requirements of the trade partners, lack of transparency, arbitrariness 
or differing interpretation of the rules, improper implementation etc. 
   It is pertinent to mention that taking cognizance of the challenges involved 
in mapping the trade barriers, and to give increased focus, a task force has been 
setup under Department of Commerce, to identify, categorize and develop tailored 
strategies for resolution of these identified non-tariff barriers. Further, the Export 
Promotion councils, dedicated commodity and territorial divisions within the 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, also constantly monitor and keep track of the 
emerging trade barriers and work with stakeholders, through bilateral institutional 
mechanisms to resolve measures that unnecessarily restrict trade. Department of 
Fisheries, GoI regularly discuss the non-tariff barriers under available institutional 
frameworks with Department of Commerce.  Further, in some Free Trade 
Agreements, specific provisions are available for regulatory cooperation and 
expediting regulatory approvals including through Mutual Recognition Agreements 
(MRAs). The resolution of trade barriers including ensuring increased and 
effective market access is a continuous process and endeavor. Department of 
Fisheries also engages in regulatory cooperation to help ensure that global rules 
governing the regulatory structures are favorable and consistent. 
 
1.19 The Committee appreciate the persistent measures undertaken by the 
Department in collaboration with the Department of Commerce so as to address the 
issues pertaining to Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) and Technical Barrier to Trade 

11 
 
(TBT). However, the Committee had also recommended that technological hand holding 
as has been provided for development and export of Tilapia Fish should be accorded to 
other Inland fresh water commercially important fish varieties such as Rohu, Catla, 
Magur, Vaam and Hilsa so that they also contribute in achieving the export earnings 
targets set under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). The Department, 
however, has not given any information on the same. Further, the Committee had also 
recommended that a mechanism may be put in place which would make the fish 
farmers aware of the contents of the aquaculture inputs used by them such as 
production booster to address the issues of Content labeling, Certification and 
Traceability. The Department, however, has not given any reply on the same. The 
Committee therefore reiterate their recommendation and suggest that the Department 
should actively take measures and provide technological handholding for development 
and export of Inland fresh water commercially important variety of fishes other than 
Tilapia and also put in place a robust mechanism so as to address the issues of Content 
labeling and Certification so that the fish exports from the country are not rejected by 
importing countries on grounds of not adhering to International/European Standards and 
having banned contents or doubtful traceability. 
 
KISAN CREDIT CARD 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO 16) 
 
1.20 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 The Committee note that the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) facility was 
extended to Fisheries and Animal Husbandry Farmers in 2018-19 to help them 
meet their Working Capital needs.  The Rate of Interest on the Loans under KCC 
is presently 7% and 3% subvention is given by the Central Government in case 
of timely repayment by the Farmers.   However, some States are also giving 
another 4% Subvention/Rebate from their own account to make the real rate of 
interest to Zero for the Farmers.  The Committee appreciate that separate 
Working Capital and Term Loan Targets for KCC have been accorded to the 
Fisheries Sector by the Department of Financial Services so as to improve the 
credit flow into the Sector.  The Committee further note that a large number of 
applications from Fishers Sector for KCC remain pending in many States/UTs.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that KCC be issued to all eligible persons 
without delay.  The Committee also recommend that the Department should 

12 
 
coordinate with all the States/UTs so as to explore the possibility of providing 
Interest Free Loans to Farmers under KCC as has been done by some States by 
extending another 4 Percent of Interest Subvention/Rebate over and above the 3 
Percent available, so that the interest rate under KCC becomes zero. 
 
1.21 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted:- 
The Department of Financial Services (DFS), Ministry of Finance, Govt. of 
India, has been streamlining the process of credit delivery through KCC to animal 
husbandry and fisheries farmers, by issuing the Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) / Guidelines for the issue of separate KCC for animal husbandry, dairy 
and fisheries farmers to all banks on 24.09.2021. Thereafter, DFS, vide letter 
dated 28.04.2023 and email dated 24.08.2023 has advised all banks and SLBCs 
respectively, to dispose of all the pending applications for the fisheries sector. 
The DFS, along with the Department of Fisheries, is reviewing from time to time 
the progress of the KCC facility for fish farmers through nation-wide campaigns 
and other modes of outreach for optimum saturation of the Kisan Credit Card 
scheme. 
The Committee's recommendation for exploring the possibility of providing 
interest-free loans to farmers under KCC has been taken up with the Department 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, M/o Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt. 
of India, which has introduced and runs the KCC Scheme. 
 
1.22 The Committee appreciate that the Department has taken up the 
recommendation of the Committee, for providing interest-free loans to farmers 
under KCC, with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, M/o 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, GOI which has introduced and runs the KCC 
scheme. However, the Committee would like to be further apprised on the matter 
and also reiterate its earlier recommendation that the Department should 
coordinate with all the States/UTs and explore the possibility of providing Interest 
free loans to farmers under KCC as has been done by some States by extending 
another 4 Percent of Interest Subvention/Rebate over and above the 3 Percent 
available, so that the interest rate under KCC becomes zero. 
 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
1. ACTION PLAN FOR UTILIZATION OF AVAILABLE RESOURCES IN 
FISHERIES SECTOR 
 
The Committee note that Marine Resources of the country comprise an Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) of 2.02 Million Sq. Kms, a Continental Shelf area of 0.53 Million 
Sq. Kms and a Coastline of 8,118 Kms.  The inland resources comprise of 0.27 Million 
Kms of rivers and canals, 1.2 million ha floodplain lakes, 2.45 Million Ha of Ponds and 
Tanks and 3.15 Million Ha of Reservoirs.  Inland Fisheries presently have a share of 75 
Percent in total Fish Production of the country.   In 2018, total fisheries potential of India 
was estimated at 22.31 MMT consisting of the Marine Fisheries potential at 5.31 MMT 
and the Inland Fisheries potential at 17 MMT.  During 2021-22, 77 Percent of Marine 
Fisheries potential and 71 Percent of the Inland Fisheries potential have been 
harnessed.  During the financial year 2022-23, out of the estimated total Fish Production 
of 16.24 Million Metric Tonne (MMT) the contribution of Inland sector was 12.12 MMT 
and that of marine sector was 4.13 MMT.   The full potential of the Fisheries Sector is 
yet to be realized due to critical gaps in production inputs, investment, infrastructure, 
value addition, technological know-how and skilled manpower.  The Committee 
therefore, recommends that the Government should prepare an action plan for optimal 
utilization of its Inland and Marine resources especially Deep-sea fishing Resources in a 
time bound manner.  The Committee feel that New Scheme Components may be 
formulated under the Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund 
(FIDF) and the Prime Minister Matsya SampadaYojana (PMMSY) for the purpose.  The 
Committee would like a to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department of Fisheries, (erstwhile Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries on 09.3.2017 had introduced a sub-component under Blue 
Revolution Scheme, namely, “Assistance for Deep Sea Fishing” which aims to promote 
Deep Sea Fishing to the Indian traditional fishers. Based on the amended guidelines of 
Blue Revolution Scheme for component of assistance for Deep Sea Fishing with central 

14 
 
financial assistance of 50 % of the project cost subject to maximum of Rs. 40 lakh per 
vessel was released to Govt. of Tamil Nadu. For other states/UTs i.e. Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Odisha, Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Daman & Diu, financial assistance for 
Deep Sea Fishing was same as it is being implemented in the entire scheme of Blue 
Revolution i.e. 40% for general categories; 60% for SC-ST & Women (with 60:40 
percent of subsidy sharing between Centre and State) as per the guidelines. Under the 
said scheme, the Central Government has provided financial assistance for 
procurement of resource specific Deep Sea Fishing Vessels at the unit cost of Rs.80 
lakhs for tuna long lining by traditional fishers/ their Self-Help Groups/ Associations, etc. 
 
Another sub-component namely “Conversion of Trawlers into Resource Specific 
Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels” has also been introduced by Department of Fisheries under 
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development 
and Management of Fisheries on 27thAugust 2018 to provide financial assistance to 
fishermen for Conversion of Trawlers into Resource Specific Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels, 
for which unit cost was limited to Rs.15 lakhs for central financial assistance. The 
scheme is being implemented by the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB), 
Hyderabad. 
 
Currently, financial assistance is being provided under Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
SampadaYojana (PMMSY) through States/UTs to traditional fishermen for acquiring 
deep sea fishing vessels (unit cost of Rs.120 lakhs), for up gradation of existing fishing 
vessels for export competency (unit cost of Rs.15lakhs) and for fishing gear for 
fishermen/fishermen groups through State/UT Governments (unit cost of Rs.5lakhs). 
The subsidy assistance is being provided @ 40% for general categories; 60% for SC-
ST &Women (with 60:40 percent of subsidy sharing between Centre and State) as per 
the guidelines. Training and capacity building for undertaking deep-sea fishing is also 
being supported under PMMSY, if required, in collaboration with important maritime 
nations. Financial assistance is also provided to coastal states/UTs for acquiring of 
technologically advanced fishing vessels with unit cost of Rs.5000 lakhs. 
 
Furthermore, to address the infrastructure requirement for fisheries sector, the 
Government of India, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying during 
2018-19 created and implemented the Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure 

15 
 
Development Fund (FIDF) with a total funds size of Rs 7522.48 crore. The FIDF further 
intensifies development of various fisheries infrastructures like fishing harbours, fish 
landing centers, ice plants, cold storage, fish transport facilities, integrated cold chain, 
modern fish markets, Brood Banks, Hatcheries, aquaculture development, Fish Seed 
Farms, state of art of fisheries training centres, fish processing units, fish feed 
mills/plants, cage culture in reservoir, Introduction Deep Sea Fishing Vessels, disease 
Diagnostic Laboratories, Mariculture and Aquatic  Quarantine Facilities. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
2. CONSERVATION MEASURES FOR SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION IN 
FISHERIES SECTOR  
 
The Committee note that Fisheries is a fast-growing Sector in India, which 
provides nutrition and food security to a large population of the country besides 
providing livelihood, income and employment to more than 2.80 crore people.  However, 
the Fisheries Sector has the risk of losing its sustainable production in the long run 
unless necessary conservation measures are taken.  Factors such as Overfishing, 
Harmful fishing practices, Pollution, Disease outbreak, Destruction of habitat, Climate 
change, etc. would adversely affect the Fisheries Resources of the country.  
Conservation and Resource enhancement measures are essential to ensure aquatic 
bio-diversity and sustainability in Fisheries Sector.  Against this backdrop, the 
Committee appreciate that the Government has banned Bull-trawling and use of 
Artificial Lights / LED Light for fishing.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department needs to taken proactive conservation measures to protect sustainability of 
fishery resources and Fisheries Sector of the country.  The Committee, in particular, 
desire that breeding and propagation of all important fish species of the country be 
ensured by suitably developing hatchery infrastructure of Fisheries Sector of the 
country.   The Committee would like to be apprised of the action in the matter. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying is implementing a flagship scheme namely Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY) for a period of 5 years with effect from the financial year 2020-21 to 

16 
 
FY 2024-25 in all the States and Union Territories (UTs) for holistic development of the 
fisheries sector in the country under which several initiatives have been taken as 
proactive conservation measures to protect sustainability of fishery resources and 
Fisheries Sector of the country. The brief of these initiatives taken by the Department 
are as under: 
Conservation of fishery resources is a vital aspect of sustainable fisheries 
management. Seasonal ban on fishing or also referred to as ‘closed season’ is an 
important measure of conservation being practiced in the country. Recognizing the need 
to improve the sustainability of the resources, stem the depletion and also save lives 
when the seas are rough, placing a seasonal fishing ban with the twin objectives of 
resource sustainability and reducing accidents/fatalities at sea was initiated by the then 
Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India in the mid-nineties that subsequently led to 
the enforcement of a uniform seasonal ban on fishing in the territorial waters under the 
jurisdiction of the coastal States and the Union Territories and also in the EEZ. 
Accordingly, currently, 61 days of uniform seasonal fishing ban is implemented in both 
East coast (15th April to 14th June) and West Coast (1st June to 31st July.), as per the 
order issued from this Department.  
Similarly, some of the inland States also impose restrictions or seasonal ban on 
fishing activities during monsoon period to facilitate spawning and recruitment of fishes. 
The states of Chhattisgarh (16th June-15th August), Bihar (15th June -15th August), 
Assam (1st April 15th July), Himachal Pradesh (16th June-15th august), Madhya 
Pradesh (15th June-15th August) and Uttar Pradesh (15th June-31st August), have 
reported to impose fishing ban in the inland natural waters as a measure of 
conservation of fishes in the respective states. 
Further, riverine fishery resources are increasingly threatened by the 
environmental pollution and human activities, dominating the natural ecosystem and this 
impact has accelerated an irreversible damage to the habitat, ecosystem functioning, 
biodiversity, and the traditional fishery and artificial-culture industries. River Ranching 
helps in achieving sustainable fisheries, reducing habitat degradation, conserving 
biodiversity, maximizing social-economic benefits, and assessing ecosystem services. 
Recognizing its importance and keeping in view of aims & objectives of PMMSY, the 
Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, 
Government of India has incorporated this additional activity for River Ranching under 
the Central Sector Component of PMMSY to sustain and conserve the biodiversity in 

17 
 
the river, facilitate regular stocking of fingerlings of cultivable carps to enhance 
productivity, increase fish production, enhance income and livelihood opportunities to 
communities’ dependent on these resources. In this regard, the Department under the 
aforesaid Scheme has so far sanctioned ranching of 1007.59 lakh fingerlings at a total 
cost of 30.23 crore in 17 states namely Uttar Pradesh, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, 
Tripura, Uttarakhand, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Sikkim, West Bengal, Nagaland, Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh. 
PMMSY also supports fish seed stocking of reservoirs, wetlands like beels, ox-
bow lakes etc.to enhance the production of these essential waterbodies. Reservoirs are 
usually called ‘sleeping giants’ because their potential is untapped. PMMSY supports 
stocking of reservoirs with quality fingerlings of Indian Major Carps and other suitable 
species, creation of in-situ hatcheries and fingerlings rearing units for production of 
quality fingerlings for stocking, integrated development of reservoirs etc. Till date under 
PMMSY, 4.17 lakh hectares of Reservoir area have been stocked with 41.68 crore 
fingerlings at a total investment of Rs. 226.48 crore. 
Besides, to improve the condition of coastal fisheries, The Department in        
2022-23 under PMMSY has introduced Artificial Reefs and Sea Ranching activities, to 
help in rebuilding of fish stocks and to promote sustainability in inshore/coastal fisheries. 
Artificial reefs are man-made or natural objects placed in selected areas of the marine 
environment to provide or improve solid and rough bottom habitat and thereby increase 
the productivity and harvest ability of certain fish valuable to fishers. They help in 
augmenting the productivity of the marine ecosystem by increasing the available area 
for food, shelter and breeding activities for fishes and other marine organisms and by 
increasing the breeding activity and the survival of young ones. While, sea ranching 
technique involves brood stock development, breeding, larval rearing on large scale, 
nursery rearing, release of seed at suitable sites and monitoring of the released and 
natural stocks to assess the impact. Till date, under PMMSY, installation of 720 Artificial 
reef units have been sanctioned at an investment of Rs. 224.10 crore.   

18 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
4. RURAL FISHERS AND PRESERVATION OF INDIGENOUS BREEDS 
The Committee understand that the Indigenous Breeds of fishes form a major 
component for providing nutrition to the Rural Fishers and the preservation of such 
Indigenous Breeds is very important for the economic and nutritional well being of the 
Rural Fishers. The Committee appreciate that for conserving Indigenous Breeds the 
Department of Fisheries encourages River Ranching under Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana. However, the Committee have been informed that the commercial 
breeding, propagation and culture expansion of the fish species like Magur, Singhi, 
Pabda and Koi which have medicinal properties has been low due lack of adequate 
Hatchery Infrastructure and therefore recommend that the Department should strive 
towards establishing necessary Hatchery Infrastructure required for all important 
indigenous species of the country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
It is essential to expand (both horizontally and vertically), intensify and diversify 
inland fisheries and aquaculture, focus on diversification of species, introduction of new 
species and peg the critical gaps in the demand and supply of quality brood and seed of 
cultivable species and species-specific feeds. Accordingly, the Department under 
PMMSY supports Species Diversification through new candidate species having high 
production and market potential like Pangasius, Tilapia species, native catfishes (magur 
and singhi) and Scampi (freshwater prawn). Hatchery technology of catfishes (Singhi 
and Magur) has been established by ICAR-Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture 
(CIFA) and currently the technology transfers for the same along with necessary training 
and knowledge dissemination to the farmers and prospective private beneficiaries are 
being carried out by ICAR-CIFA. Further it may be stated that a National Freshwater 
Fish Brood Bank (NFFBB) was established in the year 2013, under the aegis of National 
Fisheries Development Board which maintains good quality and/ or genetically 
improved Fish brood-stock obtained from research organizations in order to produce 
breeder seed and distribute these breeder seed (fry/fingerlings), including indigenous 
fish breeds like magur and Singhi, to accredited hatcheries as source for brood stock for 

19 
 
further multiplication and supply to farmers to meet the seed demand from across the 
states in support of fisheries sector growth. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
5. PROMOTION OF  DEEP-SEA FISHING TOWARDS OPTIMAL UTILIZATION 
OF RESOURCES  
 
The Committee note that the country has an estimated harvestable marine 
fisheries potential of 5.31 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) which include the Deep-sea 
resources of 3.30 MMT in its Exclusive Economic Zone.  The Deep-sea Resources 
have further harvestable potential in the Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (ABNJ).  
The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Government to promote Deep-sea 
fishing through different Scheme components of the Central Sector Scheme on Blue 
Revolution and the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana, hold the view that the 
Department should strive hard to fully utilize the Deep-sea resources of the country.  
Proper utilization of available resources besides generating additional employment 
opportunities would also bring proportionate revenues for the States.  The Committee 
also appreciate the efforts taken by the Department in modernising the Deep Sea 
Fishing Vessels and providing on board training to traditional fishermen for enhancing 
their skills and capabilities and modernising of Fishing Harbors and recommend that the 
Department should strive harder to see that these initiatives bear fruit in a target 
oriented and time bound manner so that large deep sea long liners equipped with 
adequate carrying capacity and On-board Post Harvest Handling Facilities are 
commissioned to harness the deep sea resources of the Country to the fullest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for procurement of Deep-Sea Fishing 
Vessels from the empanelled shipyards is developed by Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways (MoPSW) and three variants of Fishing vessels designs are developed by 
Cochin Shipyard Ltd. These SoPs and variant models recommended by the nodal 
authority of the MoPSW have been shared with the Coastal States/UTs for 
implementation. Further an updated SOP developed by MoPS&W for procurement of 

20 
 
Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels of both steel hull and FRP Fishing Vessels with qualifications 
of FRP boat building yard was also circulated to coastal States/UTs. 
Besides, the Department through National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) 
under PMMSY provides financial assistance for Capacity Building of fishermen in Deep 
Sea Fishing & Onboard Handling of Tuna Training Programme for Fishermen and Skill 
Development Programmes for Fishermen through Central Fisheries Nautical 
Engineering and Training (CIFNET). 
Besides, financial support to ITUS Sports and Safety Pvt. Ltd. for organizing 
capacity building activities for empowering Fishermen and Marine Enforcement Wing 
candidates of Tamil Nadu State on various rescue operations with different courses            
like i) Open Water Rescue Course, ii) Rescue Boat Operations Course, iii) Advance 
Technical Rescue Course, iv) Maintenance Technical Course have also been provided. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
7. FISH MEAL FISH OIL INDUSTRIES (FMFO) 
The Committee understand that sustainable fishing is imperative to the 
preservation of fish stocks and the survival of marine ecology and therefore for 
sustainable development of marine fisheries efforts should be taken to control the 
harvesting of juvenile fishes, which is also one of the reasons for the decline of many 
Fish Species including the Indian Oil Sardine and edible fishes. The Committee have 
been informed that the juvenile fish losses mainly occur when they are caught as Non-
targeted Species in Trawls. The Committee understand that the practices such as Bull 
trawling and LED Fishing used by FMFO Industries are a major cause for such juvenile 
fish losses. The Committee therefore recommend that the Minimum Legal Mesh Size 
regulation as declared by the States like Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat and 
Goa to avoid juvenile and small fishes catch in Trawls also needs be implemented by 
other States and the Department should take active steps in pursuing all States/UTs to 
implements such regulations. Further, the Department should devise a foolproof 
mechanism in coordination with the States/UTs to stop the use of destructive and 
banned fishing practices like Bull Trawling and LED Fishing. 
 

21 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department of Fisheries, GoI vide OM dated 17.12.2020 inter alia advised 
States/UTs to make provisions in their Marine Fishing Regulation Acts (MFRAs) for 
implementation of the Minimal Legal Size (MLS) for various species of fishes as 
recommended by Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI). This has 
already been implemented by states like Kerala. Accordingly, remaining Coastal States 
have been requested to expedite issue of similar notification. In addition, all the Coastal 
States have also been prescribed use of square mesh cod ends in the trawlers as 
recommended by Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT) to enable escape of 
juveniles fishes.  
 
Besides, all the Coastal States/UTs have been requested to take necessary 
measures to reduce fishing efforts, and to prescribe maximum size and minimum mesh 
size for principal fishing nets as recommended by CIFT. Further, the functioning of fish 
feed/ fish meal units in the States/UTs are being monitored continuously, sensitizing the 
use of juvenile fish as feed ingredient, and advised not to procure juvenile fish and 
about the stringent action against the errant units.  Further, it has been requested to all 
the States/UTs to complete directory of the fish meal and fish oil plant units with 
necessary details for monitoring their activity. Massive awareness campaign among 
fishermen in all coastal districts regarding the ill effects of juvenile fishing and other 
destructive fishing practices and the need for adopting sustainable fishing practices has 
been launched. Funds for such activities made available under PMMSY Scheme 
through National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB).   
Furthermore, the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, notified 
the ‘National Policy on Marine Fisheries, 2017’ to guide the responsible and sustainable 
fishing. Besides, Government of India promotes sustainable fishing and has issued 
advisories from time to time to coastal States/UTs for preventing juvenile fishing and 
ban on destructive fishing practices for ensuring sustainable fishing. Paired bottom 
trawling or bull trawling and use of artificial LED lights in fishing are banned in the 
Exclusive Economic Zone of India. The uniform ban on fishing in the Indian EEZ, 
beyond the territorial waters is also implemented for a period of 61 days, from 15th April 
to 14th June on the East Coast and from 1st June to 31st July on the West Coast, to 
ensure sustainable fishing.  
 

22 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.10 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
9. CAGE CULTURE IN RESERVOIRS 
The Committee have been informed that there are about 5701 large dams in the 
country and many medium and small reservoirs with coverage of about 32 Lakh 
Hectares. These reservoirs which are also called as ‘sleeping giants’ if harnessed 
properly have the capacity to enhance the fish production capacity of the country 
manifold. The Committee therefore recommend that the Department should take 
concrete steps to promote Cage Culture in these reservoirs so as to increase the Fish 
production capacity of the Country.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Considering their immense potential, PMMSY supports large-scale cage 
cultivation in the Reservoir for sustainable utilization of this rightly called, ‘sleeping 
giants’ of the Indian aquaculture and inland capture sector to increase the overall 
production contribution of Inland aquaculture to new heights. Further, due, to the 
immensely high demand for reservoir cages in the sector, and importance of utilizing 
these reservoirs, under PMMSY during the last four financial years (2020-21 to 2023-
24), 50,710 cages for installation in reservoirs have been sanctioned at a total outlay of 
Rs.1496.59 crore against the allotted target of 20,000 at an overall outlay of Rs.600 
crore which could potentially add to an additional production of 1.52 lakh tonnes 
@3ton/cage/year. 
Additionally, PMMSY supports Integrated development of reservoirs, a Non-
beneficiary sub component for holistic development of fisheries in the reservoirs which 
includes construction of cages with floating working station (large and medium reservoir 
only), storage shed,  purchase of boats with ice holding boxes and necessary gear, 
construction of landing centre including berthing platforms cum auction centre, 
establishment of hatchery of appropriate capacity, seed rearing ponds near the 
reservoirs, establishment of rearing cage for rearing of fingerlings, establishment of 

23 
 
small  feed mill,  Post- harvest infrastructure for management of processing (depending 
on the production), marketing  in hygienic condition, establishment of ice plant of 
appropriate production capacity,  refrigerated and insulated trucks, auto rickshaw with 
ice boxes, Motor cycle with ice boxes,  setting of  fish retail outlets, setting of  movable 
fish retail outlet. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
10. PROMOTION OF FISH PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION 
The Committee have been informed that India is the Third Largest Fish 
Producing Country in the world and accounts for 7.96 Percent of the Global Production.  
The total Fish Production during FY 2022-23 was estimated at 16.25 Million Metric 
Tonnes (MMT) with a contribution of 12.12 MMT from Inland sector and 4.13 MMT from 
Marine sector.  The Fisheries Sector of India has shown an impressive growth rate of 
9.03% (Constant Price 2011-12) during 2015-16 to 2020-21.  The share of Fisheries 
Sector in the total Gross Value Added (GVA) was 0.84% in 2011-12 and the same 
increased to 1.09% in 2020-21.  The Per capita Fish Consumption in India was 5 to 6 
Kg as compared to 24 Kg in Japan.  The Committee also take note that world-wide, the 
trade in frozen-fish constitutes 80% of trade in fish & fish-products, whereas it negligible 
in India.  Further, the Department has undertaken a study through National Council of 
Applied Economic Research (NCAER) to find out the State-wise and major species-
wise demand supply gap in the country so as to formulate region specific strategies to 
increase market infrastructure, supply and consumption.  Fish is a cheap source of 
protein and also possesses certain medicinal value and in addition it also has necessary 
potential for food-security for the country.  Taking into account the aforesaid factors, the 
Committee recommend that the Department shall expeditiously find out the demand and 
supply gap in Fish and Fish-products in the country and take appropriate measures to 
promote fish consumption and production of fish and fish-products including frozen-fish 
in the country. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this 
regard. 
 

24 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
In order to promote the fish production accompanied by enhanced domestic fish 
consumption in India, Department of Fisheries has undertaken a study to assess the 
supply and demand gap in production and domestic consumption through National 
Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) which carried out a survey on 
species-wise fish demand across 24 states/UTs in the country to determine the 
estimation of consumption demand at the household level and expenditures. A sample 
of 105 districts was allocated as first-stage units to all 24 selected States/ UTs in 
proportion to the total number of fish-consuming households. A structured questionnaire 
and sample of 8,040 households from rural and 4,560 samples from urban, was 
prepared for this purpose which helped to collate data on the consumption of fish and 
related expenditures. The study revealed that in 2022 the household monthly 
consumption expenditure on fish in proportion to total food expenses has gone up to 
16.77 per cent as compared to 7.63 per cent in 2011-12 in rural and urban areas 
combined. Monthly consumption of fish per household has also shown a quantum leap 
over this period from 2.66 kg in 2011 to 4.99 kg in 2022 (urban and rural areas 
combined).As regards the consumption by type of fish, freshwater fish has the major 
share of 77.0 per cent followed by marine fish at 16.0 per cent. The share of processed/ 
preserved fish forms just 0.3 per cent. Among the states, fish is the most preferred 
animal product in West Bengal (76 %), followed by Tripura (73%) and Puducherry 
(68%). Rohu and Catla are the two most preferred freshwater fish species in India. 
Among Marine fish, Sardine and Bhetki are mostly preferred. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
11. PROMOTION OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES IN FISH PRODUCTION    
The Committee note that at present the contribution of Freshwater Fisheries and 
Marine Fisheries in India’s Fish Production is about 75%: 25% respectively and the total 
fish production during FY 2022-23 was estimated at 16.25 MMT. Adoption of new and 
innovative production technologies, management and utilization of underutilized water 
bodies, and deployment of effective marketing strategies are very essential to achieve 
the targeted increase in fish-production.  The Government is implementing the Pradhan 

25 
 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and the Scheme of Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Development Fund (FIDF) to address critical gaps in fish production and 
productivity, quality, technology, post-harvest infrastructure, strengthening of value 
chain, enhancement of fisheries export, establishment of robust fisheries management 
framework, fishers’ welfare, etc. Under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana, a 
target to increase fish production to 22 MMT by the year 2025 has been set.  The 
Committee also taken note that Biofloc Technology (BFT) is one of the highly 
productive, environment friendly aquaculture techniques which reduces water use, land 
use, spread of disease, and also reduces the pressure on capture fisheries. The 
Committee therefore recommend that the Department should review the progress in the 
implementation of PMMSY and take further necessary steps to increase production 
through popularization of new innovative technologies including like Bio-floc Technology 
in the Fisheries Sector of the country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department of Fisheries under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY) gives emphasis towards promotion of sustainable fish production 
systems/methods with minimal environmental impacts. To this extent, interventions 
aimed at technology infusion and water management to harvest ‘more crop per drop’ 
are supported under PMMSY both in inland and marine sectors. Under technology 
infusion in the aquaculture sector, new technology induction such as High-density 
aquaculture in ponds, Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (RAS) and Biofloc culture etc. 
are supported under PMMSY. As on date, during the last four financial years (2020-21 
to 2023-24), 11,995 RAS units at a total outlay of Rs. 888.34 and establishment of 4013 
biofloc culture units at a total outlay of Rs. 475.48 crore has been sanctioned under 
PMMSY. Further, under PMMSY, construction of 3627 hectares of high density-
aquaculture freshwater biofloc ponds and 142 hectares of brackishwater biofloc ponds 
has been established at a total outlay of Rs. 599.68 crore. 
 

26 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
12. FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
FUND (FIDF) 
 
The Committee have been informed that certain Activities/Projects undertaken 
under Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) such as 
Aquaculture, Fishing Harbours, Fish Landing Centres, Cold Storages, pre-harvest 
services and post-harvest Infrastructure are labour intensive activities and in turn 
generate a lot of direct and indirect employment opportunities. The Committee have 
also been informed that the sanction rate under FIDF is low since most of the Projects 
that have been approved are Big Projects and further the participation of private sector 
in FIDF Scheme is less because only interest subvention was provided to them. The 
Committee acknowledges that FIDF is a demand driven Scheme, however, at the same 
time, The Committee also understand that the Projects that are been funded under 
FIDF play a vital role in generating employment, be it direct or indirect.  The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the Department should take effective measures so as to 
encourage participation of private players from all the States/UTs in the FIDF Scheme in 
setting up of Projects, which would, in turn, boost both the employment and revenue 
generation.  The Department, therefore, should also take measures to ease out the 
process of sanctioning approval to such Projects. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying, Government of India has approved proposal for extension of Fisheries 
Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) for another period of 3 years from 1.4.2023 to 
31.3.2026 within the already approved fund size of Rs 7522.48 crore and budgetary 
support of Rs. 939.48 crore.  
FIDF provides credit guarantee facility to the projects of entrepreneurs, individual 
farmers, and cooperatives from the existing credit guarantee fund of Infrastructure 
Development Fund of Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying. Further, the 
extension of FIDF for a further period of three years will leverage the financial 
resources, encourages more investments in development of infrastructure for fisheries 

27 
 
and aquaculture both from the public and private sector, thereby promoting economic 
development and expansion of fisheries and aquaculture sector. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
13. POST-HARVEST INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT IN FISHERIES 
SECTOR  
 
The Committee note that currently the Post-Harvest Losses (PHL) in Fisheries 
Sector are reported to be 20-25% and one of the Objectives of the Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) is to bring down these losses to 10% by the year 
2024-25.   However, the Department has not undertaken any comprehensive study in 
the last five years to assess the Percentage of PHL in Fisheries Sector and therefore 
the Committee recommend that the Department should undertake a comprehensive 
study to compute these losses and find ways to decrease these losses by strengthening 
the infrastructure of Fishing Harbors and Fish Landing Centres and also by modernising 
them. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
has recently entrusted a study on “Assessment of Post-Harvest Losses in Inland and 
Marine Fisheries in India and to suggest measures to minimize the losses” to National 
Productivity Council (under Department for Promotion of Industry & Internal Trade, 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India) and after completion of the 
study, the suggestions/measures shall be considered for further deliberations and 
implementation. The comprehensive study on post-harvest loss (PHL) in the fisheries 
sector involves the participation and contribution of different stakeholders including 
other Central Ministries/Autonomous  
In addition, the department is taking up the matter with concerned stakeholders 
for reduction in PHL by strengthening the infrastructure of Fishing Harbors and Fish 
Landing Centres and also by modernizing them in various States/UTs under PMMSY. In 
this regard, to provide safe landing, berthing & post-harvest infrastructure facilities so far 
54 projects worth Rs.2610 crore have been approved for development and 

28 
 
modernization of fishing harbours and fish landing centres in the country. Besides, 587 
Ice plants/cold storages, 362 Refrigerated vehicles and 1304 insulated vehicles of total 
project cost of Rs. 816.30 crore have been supported for fish preservation and transport 
to reduce the post-harvest losses in fisheries sector. In addition, under FIDF, 22 nos. of 
fishing harbours and 24 nos. of fish landing centre projects have been approved at a 
total cost of Rs.4905.77 crore and Rs.182.20 crore respectively. Moreover, PMMSY 
also supports for strengthening of post-harvest infrastructure including cold chain for 
reduction of post-harvest losses. The activities supported under PMMSY 
include construction of cold storages & Ice plants, cold chain facilities including 
transport vehicles including refrigerated and insulated vehicles, ice flaking and ice 
crushing units, ice/fish holding boxes, etc, wholesale fish market, retail markets, fish 
kiosks. Besides, the scheme also supports for construction of Fishing Harbours and 
Fish Landing Centres. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
14. IMPORT IN FISHERIES SECTOR 
The Committee have been informed that there are certain fish varieties such as 
Haddock, Cod, Flat-Fish, Salmon, Pallock, Argentinean Red Shrimp, Norway Lobster 
which are found only in Temperate countries and certain varieties are being imported for 
supply to Hotel, Restaurants and Cafes and as such imports of these Fish varieties 
cannot be avoided.  The Committee have also been informed that L. Vannamei Shrimp 
constitutes almost 90 to 95 percent of our exports, however, the Mother Stock of L. 
Vannamei Shrimp is imported.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that urgent 
necessary action be taken to produce Mother Stock of L. Vannamei Shrimp in the 
Country thereby reducing the import dependency.  The Committee further note that to 
reduce this single species dependency on L. Vannamei  and species diversification two 
options are available i.e. P. Modonon and P. Indicus and accordingly recommend that 
the Department should make sure that the Genetic improvement Program by the 
Central Institute of Brackish water Aquaculture (CIBA) for development of P. Indicus (an 
indigenous Shrimp) and the Nucleus Breeding Centre (NBC) Project of Marine Products 
Export Development Authority (MPEDA) located at Andaman and Nicobar Islands for 

29 
 
development of P. Monodon are fast tracked and completed in a time bound manner so 
that the Country moves up the ladder in achieving self-sufficiency by reducing import of 
Shrimp Brood Stocks and thereby living true to the spirit of the AtmaNirbhar Bharat. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department of Fisheries, GoI has approved the project proposal of Central 
Institute of Brackishwater Aquaculture (CIBA) entitled “Development of Indigenous 
Shrimp (Indian white shrimp) Aquaculture: Genetic Improvement Program of Penaeus 
indicus, Phase-I” with a total project cost of Rs. 2504.40 lakh under central sector 
component of PMMSY. In addition, Department, is supporting NBC project of MPEDA-
RGCA Andaman and Nicobar Island on Domestication of Tiger Shrimp (Penaeus 
monodon). In this regard, Department has approved (i) Establishment of Shrimp 
Evaluation Study Unit (ESU) for P. monodon to evaluate the reproductive and growth 
performance of founder families of DTSP at Rajakkamangalam, Kanyakumari District" 
with a total project cost of Rs. 6.75 crore and (ii) Establishment of Pilot Scale BMC for 
P. monodon (Conversion of L. vannamei BMC to P. monodon BMC) at a cost of Rs 5.32 
crore.The Department is closely monitoring the progress of all these projects to ensure 
their timely completion and to maximize the benefits for shrimp farmers and the overall 
aquaculture sector. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.16 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
15. EXPORTS IN FISHERIES SECTOR 
The Committee understand that to achieve the export target set under the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) that is to double the export 
earnings to Rs. 1 lakh Crores by the year 2024-25, interventions in areas such as 
Shrimp productivity, post-harvest infrastructure, improving certification and traceability 
and awareness of quality products are required.  The Committee appreciates the efforts 
taken by the Department for diversification of aquaculture species and Tilapia Fish in 

30 
 
particular so as to increase its export by funding Tilapia Hatcheries and Tilapia Culture 
through Recirculation Aquaculture System (RAS), Cage culture and Pond Culture. 
Further, MPEDA- Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Aquaculture has also standardised the 
Hatchery and grow out farming technology of Genetically Improved Farmed Tilapia 
(GIFT).  In this regard, the Committee recommend that similar efforts and technological 
hand holding should be accorded to other Inland Fresh Water commercially important  
Fish varieties such as Rohu, Catla, Magur, Vaam and Hilsa so that they contribute in 
achieving the targets set under the PMMSY.  The Committee note that Disease 
Management and Certification and Traceability are very important areas where 
intervention is needed so as to increase the export competitiveness of the Fisheries 
Sector and thus, a mechanism should be put in place which would make the Fish 
Farmers aware of the contents of the Aquaculture Inputs such as production booster 
used by them.  The Committee also recommend that the issues pertaining to Sanitary 
and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) and Technical Barrier to Trade (TBT), which are hampering 
the exports to various countries need be addressed in a concrete manner and the 
Department should strive hard to overcome these issues. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 The Pradhan Mantri Matsya SampadaYojana being implemented with effect from 
2020-21 intends to address critical gaps in fish production and productivity, quality, 
technology, post-harvest infrastructure and management, modernization and 
strengthening of value chain, traceability, establishing a robust fisheries management 
framework and fishers’ welfare. Under the PMMSY, aquaculture is one of the prominent 
activities for enhancing fish production. PMMSY also focuses on expansion, 
diversification and intensification of aquaculture including productive utilization of land 
and water, supply of quality and affordable seed and feed, species diversification and 
genetic improvement, aquatic health management, infusion of modern technologies 
such as Re-circulatory Aquaculture Systems, Biofloc, cage culture, pen culture, sea 
ranching, artificial reefs, mariculture including open sea cage culture etc. PMMSY inter-
alia provides financial support for post- harvest facilities, fish transport, value addition & 
marketing to improve value realization to fishers, construction of ponds, tanks, 
hatcheries and necessary inputs for undertaking fish farming, and development of 
fisheries infrastructure, cold chain facilities, fish market infrastructure and such other 
activities to improve price realization.  

31 
 
 In regard to Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) and Technical Barrier to 
Trade (TBT),as per the legal and trade policies, importing countries enforce various 
regulatory measures to ensure the safety and quality of the products placed in their 
markets. The range and stringency of the requirements, including prior registration, 
testing and certification may differ from one country to another, depending on their 
developmental status as well status of their regulatory structures. These measures 
apply equally to both domestic manufacturers and the importers. However, such 
measures may sometimes act as trade barriers due to various reasons such as gap in 
the regulatory frameworks and quality compliance requirements of the trade partners, 
lack of transparency, arbitrariness or differing interpretation of the rules, improper 
implementation etc. 
It is pertinent to mention that taking cognizance of the challenges involved in 
mapping the trade barriers, and to give increased focus, a task force has been setup 
under Department of Commerce, to identify, categorize and develop tailored strategies 
for resolution of these identified non-tariff barriers. Further, the Export Promotion 
councils, dedicated commodity and territorial divisions within the Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry, also constantly monitor and keep track of the emerging trade barriers and 
work with stakeholders, through bilateral institutional mechanisms to resolve measures 
that unnecessarily restrict trade. Department of Fisheries, GoI regularly discuss the non-
tariff barriers under available institutional frameworks with Department of Commerce.  
Further, in some Free Trade Agreements, specific provisions are available for regulatory 
cooperation and expediting regulatory approvals including through Mutual Recognition 
Agreements (MRAs). The resolution of trade barriers including ensuring increased and 
effective market access is a continuous process and endeavor. Department of Fisheries 
also engages in regulatory cooperation to help ensure that global rules governing the 
regulatory structures are favorable and consistent. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.19 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 

32 
 
16. Kisan Credit Card  
The Committee note that the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) facility was extended to 
Fisheries and Animal Husbandry Farmers in 2018-19 to help them meet their Working 
Capital needs.  The Rate of Interest on the Loans under KCC is presently 7% and 3% 
subvention is given by the Central Government in case of timely repayment by the 
Farmers.   However, some States are also giving another 4% Subvention/Rebate from 
their own account to make the real rate of interest to Zero for the Farmers.  The 
Committee appreciate that separate Working Capital and Term Loan Targets for KCC 
have been accorded to the Fisheries Sector by the Department of Financial Services so 
as to improve the credit flow into the Sector.  The Committee further note that a large 
number of applications from Fishers Sector for KCC remain pending in many 
States/UTs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that KCC be issued to all eligible 
persons without delay.  The Committee also recommend that the Department should 
coordinate with all the States/UTs so as to explore the possibility of providing Interest 
Free Loans to Farmers under KCC as has been done by some States by extending 
another 4 Percent of Interest Subvention/Rebate over and above the 3 Percent 
available, so that the interest rate under KCC becomes zero. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department of Financial Services (DFS), Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India, 
has been streamlining the process of credit delivery through KCC to animal husbandry 
and fisheries farmers, by issuing the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) / Guidelines 
for the issue of separate KCC for animal husbandry, dairy and fisheries farmers to all 
banks on 24.09.2021. Thereafter, DFS, vide letter dated 28.04.2023 and email dated 
24.08.2023 has advised all banks and SLBCs respectively, to dispose of all the pending 
applications for the fisheries sector. The DFS, along with the Department of Fisheries, is 
reviewing from time to time the progress of the KCC facility for fish farmers through 
nation-wide campaigns and other modes of outreach for optimum saturation of the 
Kisan Credit Card scheme. 
The Committee's recommendation for exploring the possibility of providing 
interest-free loans to farmers under KCC has been taken up with the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, M/o Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India, 
which has introduced and runs the KCC Scheme. 

33 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.22 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
17. REVENUE EARNING POTENTIAL OF FISHERIES SECTOR 
The Committee note that Inland Fisheries Sector is by and large, fully in the 
domain of State Governments, while Marine Sector is a shared responsibility between 
the Central and Coastal State Governments. According to Department of Fisheries, 
States will develop comprehensive Leasing and Licensing Policy for all Public Water 
Bodies by balancing competing objectives of resource development, livelihoods, welfare 
and revenue generation, etc. , with due priority to local fishing communities and other 
stakeholders while respective agencies may continue to retain trusteeship/custodial 
rights of these resources.  The State wise details regarding revenue generation through 
fisheries are not readily available.  However, the Government has taken various steps to 
boost the Revenue Earning potential of the Fisheries Sector through steps taken for 
increasing fish production and productivity, reduction in post-harvest loses,  disease 
management and risk reduction, establishment of artificial reefs,  river/sea ranching and 
stocking of rivers and reservoirs.   The Fisheries Sector, which has been key in 
stimulating growth for both of Fisheries and Allied Sectors thereby directly and 
indirectly, contributes to the National GVA.  A large section of people of the country are 
getting their livelihood and employment from Fisheries Sector.  Moreover, Fisheries 
Sector has now emerged as a sunrise sector and Fish and Fisheries Products are 
among the most traded food commodities in the World.   As such, this Sector possesses 
huge potential to contribute the much required revenues to the Government at different 
levels.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend for taking all necessary steps 
for the growth and development of Fisheries Sector of the country.   The Committee in 
particular recommend that the potential areas in Fisheries Sector of each State/UT be 
clearly identified and they should be duly encouraged and incentivized to ensure more 
capital investments and optimal utilization of Fisheries Resources in a Target-oriented 
manner and fixed time frame. 
 

34 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Government has committed a historic investment of Rs. 38,572 Crore since 
2014 in the stepwise manner under different schemes to propel the growth and 
development of the fisheries and aquaculture sector. Launched in 2020, the PMMSY 
with the total investment of Rs. 20,050 Crore set an ambitious target of increasing the 
production to 22 million MT, doubling the export earning potential to 1 lakh Crore and 
generation of about 15 lakhs direct gainful employment opportunities and thrice the 
number as indirect employment opportunities along the supply and value chain by 2024-
25. PMMSY adopted a state-specific approach, allocating designated investments and 
setting targeted production goals for each state over a five-year period. 
The Government is focusing on the technology infusion in the sector by 
promoting RAS, Biofloc, Reservoir Cage Culture and Open Sea Cage Culture and has 
invested Rs. 2936.30 Crore under PMMSY as on date. These technologies are helping 
to harness the potential of available resources in the states, which is leading to 
increased revenue generation. 
The Government recognizes importance of FFPOs and Cooperatives in the 
development of the sector and boosting the revenue generation in the fisheries sector. 
Thus, Government supports the formation and capacity building of FFPOs and 
Cooperatives. The Government has sanctioned 544.85 Cr for the formation of FFPOs. 
In order to convert the waste land to wealth land, the Government brought 2855.59 Ha 
of pond area under saline-alkaline aquaculture while 1,380.86 Ha of pond area under 
brackish water aquaculture with a support from PMMSY. 
India's diverse geography fosters varied fisheries activities across its states. 
Several states have emerged as leaders in adopting various practices to augment 
fisheries revenue, each with its own focus. Investment in various activities under 
PMMSY and the leading state under each category is as under: 
Sr. 
No 
Activity under PMMSY Investment 
under PMMSY  
(Rs. in Crore) 
Leading States 
1 RAS 888.34  Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, and Madhya Pradesh 
2 Biofloc 475.48  Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Bihar, and Haryana 

35 
 
3 Reservoir Cage Culture 1496.59  Maharashtra, Gujarat, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, and 
Odisha 
4 Open Sea Cage Culture 75.90  Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Tamil 
Nadu and Maharashtra 
5 Deep Sea Fishing  555.60  Gujarat, Karnataka, Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, and 
Maharashtra 
6 Ponds for Saline-Alkaline 
Aquaculture 
201.53 Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar 
Pradesh 
7 Ponds and Hatcheries for 
Brackish water 
Aquaculture 
109.51 Odisha, Gujarat, Kerala, Tamil 
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh 
8 Ponds, hatcheries, 
raceways and RAS for 
Cold Water fisheries 
608.92 Himalayan and North-Eastern 
States 
9 Bivalve Cultivation Units 2.98  Kerala, Karnataka, and Assam 
10 Ornamental Fish Breeding 
and Rearing Units 
129.70 Kerala, West Bengal, Sikkim, 
Assam, and Tamil Nadu 
11 Seaweed Culture units 82.83  Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, and 
Tamil Nadu 
 
Moreover, newly launched PM-MKSSY, a sub-scheme of PMMSY with an investment of 
Rs. 6,000 Crore will support 6.4 lakh micro-enterprises and 5,500 fisheries 
cooperatives, providing access to institutional credit and will incentivize fisheries and 
aquaculture microenterprises through performance grants for improving fisheries sector 
value-chain efficiencies including creation and maintenance of jobs. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
18. EMPLOYMENT GENERATION IN FISHERIES SECTOR 
The Committee note that the Fisheries Sector of the country is a fast-growing 
sector in India, which besides providing income and employment to more than 2.80 
Crore people also provides nutrition and food security to a large population of the 
country.  It is also growing as one of the important foreign exchange earner for the 

36 
 
country.  The contribution of Fisheries Sector to Gross Value Added (GVA) at constant 
prices in 2022-23 has been estimated at Rs.1,37,716 crore.  Jobs in this Sector range 
from production and sale of inputs to fishing, fish-farming, harvesting, processing, 
marketing and distribution of fish. Fishing and aquaculture operations can be informal 
and small-scale as well as highly organized and industrial in nature.  Estimation of 
employment potential in Fisheries Sector quantitative terms is reportedly a complex 
task, as fish is a natural resource and its availability, demand and price realization is 
also highly dependent on multiple compounding factors such as environment market 
dynamics, climate change, changes in productivity, various regulations, quota-based 
regime or a fusion of both etc.   However, in the last five years, the total employment 
generation under all Schemes of the Department is reportedly 26,99,320.  
 Under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana, (PMMSY), total project cost 
worth of Rs 11,029.34 Crore have been approved and a total Investment of Rs.9866.67 
Crore has been made since inception of the Scheme for various fisheries 
developmental activities with a view to generate nearly 7,64,380 direct employment in 
Fisheries Sector.  The Department plans to achieve an ambitious employment 
generation target of 55 Lakh by the year 2024-25 under PMMSY. The Committee 
appreciates the achievements made by the Department in the implementation of its 
various Schemes and Programmes, which has resulted in generation of a substantial 
number of employment in the Fisheries Sector.  The Committee at the same time hold 
the view that the full potential of the Fisheries Sector yet remains to be realized in the 
Country.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that investments in Fisheries Sector, 
especially in the areas having the potential for enhancement of export, Post-harvest 
processing and import substitution, be increased to optimally utilize the resources 
available in this sector as it will bring about the necessary employment generation in 
this Sector.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this matter. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Government of India recognizes the importance of investment in activities 
that have the potential to enhance export, post-harvest processing, and import 
substitution. These activities are seen as a way to further give impetus to the overall 
growth and development of the fisheries sector. 

37 
 
The Government has approved projects worth Rs. 18721.03 crore under the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) till now. These projects have led to 
the creation of a total of 45,59,317 employment opportunities, out of which 11,46,219 
are direct employment opportunities. As the government continues to make progress in 
production and value chain related activities year on year, further employment 
generation is expected to boost the sector. 
In order to enhance export and post-harvest processing, the government has 
invested in potential fisheries activities under the PMMSY as under below. These 
activities are expected to increase employment generation in the sector. 
Sr. 
No. 
Activity Total 
Investment 
 (Rs. In Lakhs) 
GoI Share 
 (Rs. In Lakhs) 
1 Value Added Enterprises 5420.88  2185.68 
2 Cold Storages and Ice Plants 46422.00  15700.48 
3 Fish Transportation Facilities 68975.20  22087.27 
4 Deep Sea Fishing Vessels 55560.00  15772.80 
5 Up gradation of existing 
fishing vessels for export 
Competency 
16874.63 4662.98 
6 Providing  boats 
(replacement) and nets for 
traditional fishermen 
24327.90 7136.69 
7 Integrated Aquaparks 50278.04  31597.14 
 
The above investment has led to increase the level of seafood and processed 
food production. As a result, India exported 17,35,286 MT of seafood worth 
Rs.63,969.14 Crore during the year 2022-23. This is the highest ever export in terms of 
both volume and value. Frozen shrimp continues to be the major item of export in terms 
of quantity and value. It accounted for a share of 40.98% in quantity and 67.72% of the 
total USD earnings during the year 2022-23. India is the world's leading producer of 
cultured shrimp. The government's focus on area expansion under shrimp farming has 
led to an increase in shrimp production from 3.22 lakh tonnes in 2013-14 to 
approximately 11.84 lakh tonnes in 2022-23, an impressive growth of 270%. This has 
also led to an increase in export earnings from the fisheries sector. 
 India mainly imports feed ingredients, brood, seed, and processed products. In 
order to reduce import dependence and make India self-sufficient, the Government has 
taken a number of initiatives. These initiatives include initiating 6 Genetic Improvement 
Programs, establishing one Nucleus Breeding Centre, 24 Brood Bank facilities and 

38 
 
Brood Multiplication Centres. Additionally, 108 value-added enterprises have been 
supported to reduce import dependence on processed products. The government is 
also focused on promotion of seaweed cultivation in order to reduce its import 
dependency. The establishment of these infrastructures and the further ensuring of an 
effective network and distribution system will help to make India self-reliant in seed, 
feed, and processed food. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
3. DEVELOPMENT OF ARTIFICIAL REEFS 
The Committee note that the Department of Fisheries has formulated a plan for 
inclusion of “Promotion of sustainable fisheries and livelihoods through Artificial Reefs 
and Sea Ranching” as a sub activity under the “Integrated Modern Coastal Fishing 
Villages” (IMCFV) to rebuild fish stocks and promote sustainability in inshore/coastal 
fisheries and protect the livelihood of dependent fisher folks.  However, it is observed 
that only from the States of Tamil Nadu and Odisha, Detailed Project Report (DPR) has 
been received for setting up of Artificial Reefs in the fishing villages, which are selected 
for proposed development of Artificial Reefs under PMMSY. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Department should take necessary measures and see that 
proposals are received from all the States for development of Artificial Reefs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
During Financial Year- 2022-23 under Pradhan Mantri Matsya SampadaYojana  
(PMMSY) this Department introduced Artificial Reefs activity, to help in rebuilding of fish 
stocks and to promote sustainability in inshore/coastal fisheries. Artificial reefs are man-
made or natural objects placed in selected areas of the marine environment to provide 
or improve solid and rough bottom habitat and thereby increase the productivity and 
harvest ability of certain fish valuable to fishers. As on date this Department has 
sanctioned establishment of 720 units of Artificial reef proposals from 11 Coastal States 
and Union Territories at a total outlay of Rs. 224.10 crore. State-wise list of artificial 
reefs sanctioned under PMMSY till date are as under: 
 
Sl.N Name of the 
States 
 Total of as on date 
 Rs. In Lakhs 
Physical 
(No.) 
Proj. Cost GoI Share 
1 Andhra Pradesh 22.00  770.00 462.00 
2 Goa 14.00  434.00 260.40 
3 Gujarat 25.00  775.00 465.00 

40 
 
4 Karnataka 56.00  1736.00 1041.60 
5 Kerala 42.00  1302.00 781.20 
6 Lakshadweep 2.00  64.50 64.50 
7 Odisha 93.00  2883.00 1729.80 
8 Maharashtra 182.00  5642.00 3385.20 
9 Puducherry 14.00  434.00 434.00 
10 Tamil Nadu 200.00  6200.00 2480.00 
11 West Bengal 70.00  2170.00 1302.00 
Total 720.00  22410.50 12405.70 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
 

41 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
CHAPTER - V  
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
6. NEED FOR A SEPARATE RESEARCH COUNCIL FOR FISHERIES SECTOR  
The Committee are happy to note that India has rich and diverse fisheries 
resources ranging from deep seas to lakes, ponds, rivers and more than 10 Percent of 
the global biodiversity in terms of fish and shellfish species.   Acknowledging the 
potential of Fisheries Sector of the country, the Government of India created a separate 
Department of Fisheries in February, 2019 to supplement the efforts of States and 
Union Territories and to provide sustained and focussed attention towards development 
of Fisheries Sector of the country.  The Fisheries Sector contributes around 6.72% to 
Agriculture Gross Value Added (GVA) and 1.24 to National GVA in 2021-22 and is a 
major employment generator in direct as well as allied fishery activities.  The Fisheries 
Sector of the country possesses a huge untapped potential. At present, the national 
level research activities in Fisheries Sector are undertaken under the aegis of Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).  The Committee, taking into account these 
factors, recommend that a separate Research Council for Fishery Sector namely Indian 
Council for Fishery and Aquaculture Research under the Department of Fisheries be 
constituted as it would not only facilitate focussed and in-depth research in the Sector 
but also address the challenges faced by the Sector. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
At present, there is no proposal to establish a separate Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Research Council. However, upon creation of a new Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying, a Committee was constituted under the chairmanship 
of Dr SanjivBalyan, Hon'ble MoS for Fisheries, Animal husbandry and dairying to 
recommend setting up of a Research Council to address research in fisheries and 
veterinary science. 
 

43 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.7 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
8. INSURANCE SCHEME FOR DAM FISHERS 
The Committee note that the Department of Fisheries, through National Fisheries 
Development Board (NFDB) is implementing Group Accident Insurance Scheme (GAIS) 
for Fishers under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya SampadaYojana since 26.07.2021.   
Fishers involved in fishing at reservoirs/dams are also eligible to insure their lives 
against heavy rainfall/ natural disaster under this Scheme through the respective State 
Fisheries Departments/Union Territories. With regard to Dam Fishers, the Committee 
have been apprised that during heavy rainfall when the gates of the Dams are opened, 
the seeds planted by the Fishers in these Dams also gets washed away causing heavy 
losses to them and therefore recommend that the Department should design a Scheme 
for Dam Fishers, similar to crop insurance given under Pradhan Mantri Fasal 
BimaYojana to extend them insurance coverage against losses during heavy rainfall. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Department has launched Pradhan Mantri Matsya Krishi Sah-Samriddhi 
Yojana (PM-MKSSY) a central sector sub-scheme under the ongoing Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) at a total outlay of Rs. 6000 crores for a period of 
four years from 2023-24 to 2026-27 wherein provision has been made for insurance of 
intensive form of aquaculture which also includes cage culture for fishers among others 
with a maximum unit size eligible to 1800m2. At present the various guidelines including 
for crop aquaculture insurance for implementation of the scheme are being prepared 
and shall be launched shortly. 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/4/2023-Fy (Coord) (E-23114) dated 7th May, 2024 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.13 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New Delhi              Charanjit Singh Channi 
18 March, 2025                       Chairperson 
27 Phalguna, 1946 (saka)                         Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
                               Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 

45 
 
Annexure 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 18th March, 2025 from 1000 hours to 1105 
hours in Committee Room No. 2, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi  – Hon’ble Chairperson 
 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
5.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
6.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
7.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
8.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
9.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
10.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
11.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
12.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
13.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
14.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
16.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
17.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
18.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
19.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
20.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
21.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
22.  Shri Madan Rathore 
23.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
24.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
  

46 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Khakhai Zou   –  Director  
3. Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria – Deputy Secretary   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption the 
following Reports: 
 
(i)  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx; 
(ii)  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx; 
(iii)  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx; 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 70th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘Employment Generation and Revenue Earning 
Potential of Fisheries Sector’ pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report at Sl. No. (ii) 
with some modifications as shown at Annexure. The Draft Reports at Sl. No. (i), (iii) and 
(iv) were adopted without any modifications and the Committee authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize and present these Reports to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

47 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE SEVENTIETH REPORT OF STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24)              
(17TH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              18 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Para Nos.  1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12,13,14,15,16,17,18   
Total          15    
Percentage                   83.33% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para No. 3         
Total                     01 
Percentage                     5.56% 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 Para No.  0  
 Total            00 
 Percentage                                      00.00% 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 Para Nos.   6, 8      
 Total                     02  
 Percentage                     11.11%  
 
 