   
            STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25)   EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA    MINISTRY OF COOPERATION DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)  [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)]  NINETEENTH REPORT       LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI AUGUST, 2025 / SHRAVANA, 1947 (SAKA)  
19 

NINETEENTH REPORT  STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25)   EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA    MINISTRY OF COOPERATION DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)  [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)]   Presented to the Lok Sabha on               20.08.2025 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on      20.08.2025     LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  AUGUST, 2025 /  SHRAVANA, 1947 (SAKA)    


 
 
 
COA No. 518 
 
       
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 

 
 
 
 
<CONTENTS> 
 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) ……………….. (iii) 
Introduction ………………………………………………….. (v) 
Chapter I Report…………………………… 1 
Chapter II    Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government 
7 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
13 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
19 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
24 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 35th Sitting of the Committee held on 18.08.2025 25 
APPENDIX 
*Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
27 
  

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2024-25) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
     23 
     24 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
       25 Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26 Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27 Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28 Shri Madan Rathore 
29 Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30 Shri P. P. Suneer 
31 Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala   
__________________________________________________________________ 
* Vacant vice Shri Krishan Lal Panwar resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024.  
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee o 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f. on 8th August, 202, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II 
Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025. 

iv 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Sanwaria  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ujjwal Yadav   - Assistant Security Officer 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing (2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
this Report on their behalf, present this 19th Report on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Cooperation.  
 
2. The Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Cooperation was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17 December, 2024. The Action 
Taken Notes on the Report were received on 19.03.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 18.08.2025. 
 
4.  An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
            
      
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                             CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
18th August, 2025                                                        Chairperson 
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Agriculture 
   Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on “Demands for Grants (2024-25)” pertaining to the Ministry 
of Cooperation which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 17th December, 2024. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Cooperation have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect 
of all the 08 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies 
have been scrutinised and categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Chapter-II 
(Total - 05) 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, & 6 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
Chapter-III 
(Total - 02) 
Recommendation Para Nos. 4, 7 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
Chapter-IV 
(Total- 01) 
Recommendation Para No.  8 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Chapter-V 
(Total - 00) 
Recommendation Para No. Nil 
   
1.3 The Committee believe that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement the 
Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported 
to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that 

2 
 
further Action-taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished at the earliest but not later than six months in 
any case. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on  the 
Observation/Recommendation on Para No-8 in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
REVITALIZATION OF THE COOPERATIVE SECTOR  
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.8) 
  
1.5.  The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
The Committee have been apprised of the various efforts being made by the 
Government to revitalize the cooperative sector by aligning its activities with 
those of various government schemes, like Dairy Infrastructure Development 
Fund, National Programme for Dairy Development, PM Matasya Sampada 
Yojna, Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Fund. The Committee while 
appreciating the efforts made by the Government in creating 4833 new Dairy 
Cooperative Societies and 423 new Fisheries Cooperative Societies and also 
for creating 03 new National level Cooperative Societies, i.e., National 
Cooperative Exports Limited, National Cooperative Organics Limited and 
Bharatiya Beej Sahkari Samiti Limited, recommend that there is an urgent 
need to substantially enhance the role of Cooperatives involved in farming 
sectors through measures, like, diversification of crops, organic and natural 
farming, providing subsidy to cooperatives being run by marginal, small and 
landless farmers. The Committee also recommend that concerted efforts may 
also be made to revive the closed or dormant cooperatives by infusing 
requisite funds and bringing in required structural changes in their working. 
 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have submitted:-  
 
(a) Ministry of Cooperation has taken initiative to usher Cooperative-led "White 
Revolution 2.0” is aimed at expanding cooperative coverage, employment 
generation and women's empowerment with an objective "To increase the 
milk procurement of dairy cooperatives by 50% from the present level over 
next five years by providing market access to dairy farmers in uncovered areas 
and increasing the share of dairy cooperatives in organised sector." 
 

3 
 
Ministry of Cooperation in collaboration with NDDB, launched an SOP on 
September 19, 2024, at ICAR, Pusa, New Delhi, under the Hon’ble Home and 
Cooperation Minister leadership and guidance. 
 
The Ministry of Cooperation launched the Cooperative-led "White Revolution 
2.0" to expand cooperative coverage, generate employment, and empower 
women on 25/12/2024. 
 
I. The White Revolution 2.0 would involve following activities: 
 
 Setting up and strengthening of around 1,20,000 new/existing 
Dairy Cooperative Societies (DCS)/Multipurpose-DCS (M-DCS)/ 
Multipurpose-PACS (M-PACS). 
 
 Linking these cooperatives with milk routes either by expansion of 
existing milk routes or by creating new milk routes. 
 
 Providing enabling infrastructure e.g. Automatic Milk Collection 
Units, Data Processing Milk Collection Units, testing equipment, 
Bulk Milk Coolers, etc., as per the requirement, for carrying out 
dairy activities. 
 
II. Outcome of the White Revolution 2.0 after 5 years may be as 
follows: 
 
 75,000 new M-DCS/M-PACS will be set up. 
 
 46,422 existing village-level DCS/PACS will be strengthened. 
 
 The milk procurement by cooperatives would be increased by 50%. 
 
 It will provide market access to smallholder dairy farmers while 
ensuring fair and remunerative prices. 
 
 It will help in furthering the network of primary dairy cooperatives 
and help strengthening the entire milk value chain including milk 
procurement, testing, chilling, logistics and processing 
infrastructure. 
 
 Women being an important stakeholder in dairy, greater emphasis 
on having women as member. 
 

4 
 
 Enhanced procurement would help in increasing the share of 
organised sector in dairy industry which is still dominated by the 
unorganised sector. This will help in ensuring food safety & quality 
control and increased availability of fresh and hygienic milk & milk 
products. 
 
 The initiatives will help in developing the sector and increasing milk 
production to meet the domestic demand and also tap the export 
potential. 
 
Initially the White Revolution 2.0 will be implemented with financial assistance 
to 1,000 M- PACSs at rate of ₹ 40,000/- per M-PACS from resources of NDDB, 
for initiating dairy activities. Subsequently this initiative is to be driven by the 
financial assistance under proposed National Dairy Development Program 2.0 
(NPDD 2.0) of Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD), 
Government of India. The NPDD 2.0 will be implemented as per guidelines 
issued by DAHD. 
 
(b)  National Cooperative Organics Limited (NCOL)- NCOL has been set up to 
provide institutional support for aggregation, certification, testing, 
procurement, storage, processing, branding, labelling, packaging, logistic 
facilities, marketing of organic products and facilitate in arranging financial 
assistance to the organic farmers through its member Cooperatives including 
PACS/FPOs along with promotional and developmental activities of organic 
products with the help of various schemes and agencies of the Government. 
The NCOL will help in marketing of authentic and certified organic products to 
increase production of organic products by the cooperatives at various levels.  
 
Progress: 
 
i A total of 5,185 cooperatives have become members of NCOL. 
 
ii NCOL has started using brand name of “Bharat Organics” and has so 
far marketed 21 organic products (Masoor whole, Masoor Malka, 
Rajma Citra, Urad Whole, Urad Split, Kabuli chana, Chana Dal, Brown 
Chaana, Arhar Dal, Moong Dal, Moong Whole, Moong Split, Wheat 
Atta, Coriander Powder, Coriander Whole, Turmeric Powder, 
Fenugreek, Jaggery Cube, Jaggery Powder, Brown Sugar, Khandsari 
Sugar) worth around Rs. 167.1 lakh. 
 
iii NCOL has entered into MoU with nodal agencies of 10 states i.e., 
Uttarakhand, Nagaland, Assam, Meghalaya, Chhattisgarh, Tripura, 

5 
 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Punjab to facilitate organic 
procurement.  
 
iv MoU signed with NDDB-MRIDA on 22nd Oct, to align the supply of bio 
inputs to farmers to promote organic farming and to create model Bio 
village. 
 
v MoU signed with MDFVPL (Mother dairy) on 22nd Oct, to distribute 
Bharat Organics brand products across channels - GT, MT and E-com, 
etc. 
 
vi MoU signed with National Cooperative Exports Limited (NCEL) on 
20.12.2024. 
 
vii The new Moti Bagh Safal outlet has been made a model outlet for 
organic products. 
 
viii Bharat Organics brand introduced in Amul, Big Basket, Flipkart, NCCF 
outlet on metro stations (Rajiv Chowk), etc. 
 
ix Finalized the packaging units for Cereals, Pulses and Sweeteners. The 
processing unit for Sweeteners and wheat has also been finalized. 
 
x Introducing QR code on new packaging to facilitate the customer to 
see the test report for each lot. 
 
Future Vision: 
 
i. NCOL envisages to become the largest organic food player in the 
country by 2035 having a direct sourcing base from its members. 
 
ii  also envisages to achieve a cumulative turnover of ₹ 1,00,000 Cr 
(including exports of organic products through NCEL) by the year 2035. 
 
(c)  The Government, on 15th February, 2023, approved the Plan for strengthening 
cooperative movement in the country and deepening its reach up to the 
grassroots. The Plan entails establishment of new multipurpose PACS or 
primary dairy/ fishery cooperative societies covering all the Panchayats/ 
villages in the country over a period of five years through convergence of 
various existing GOI schemes, National Programme for Dairy Development 
(NPDD), PM Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), including Dairy 
Infrastructure Development Fund (DIDF), etc.  
 
This plan is being implemented with the support of National Cooperative 
Development Corporation (NCDC), National Bank for Agricultural and Rural 

6 
 
Development (NABARD), National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), 
National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB), National Level Cooperative 
Federations and State Governments. Efforts are also being made to revive 
the dormant/ defunct societies by providing them the benefits of these 
schemes/ initiatives. 
 
1.7 Consequent to gleaming through the details available on the National 
Cooperative Database, the Committee infer that total number of 1,45,796 
Cooperative Societies have been identified as non-functional. The biggest 
chunk of the defunct/non-functional Cooperative Societies are the Primary 
Cooperatives, i.e., 1,45,740. Though the Ministry have assured that efforts are 
being made to revive the dormant/ defunct societies by providing them the 
benefits of these schemes/ initiatives, however, the details in this regard have 
not been provided. The Committee are of the considered view that taking timely 
steps to prevent the Cooperative Societies becoming defunct and revival of the 
existing defunct societies is the common responsibility of all the interested 
parties, like Central Government, State Government and the Cooperative 
Societies, so that the cooperative movement could be strengthen in the 
country. The Committee in no uncertain words exhort that the Ministry must 
explore the possibility of a policy intervention to provide financial support and 
provide them the other requisite technical know-how / technological support / 
training programmes, etc., in this regard. The Committee further desire that an 
oversight Committee should also be constituted to oversee the functioning of 
such revived Cooperative Societies so as to ensure recurrence of their 
becoming defunct are avoided.  

7 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF RESOURCES 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 1) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Cooperation was allocated Rs.900 
Crore and Rs.1624.74 Crore at the Budget Estimate (BE) and Revised Estimate (RE) 
stages, respectively for the year 2022-23 when it got its first separate budget. The 
Committee appreciate that the Ministry could spend Rs.12 Crore (approx.) more than 
the RE allocation for various path breaking initiatives taken by them in the 
Cooperative sector. In the year 2023-24, though higher allocation of Rs.1150.38 
Crore at BE stage was made, it was reduced to Rs.747.84 Crore. Out of this amount, 
the Ministry, however, could spend Rs.688.88 Crore amounting to under-utilization 
of Rs.59 Crore and this representing 91% of RE allocation. The surrendering was 
attributed to non-receipt of proposals from the States for computerization of PAC 
Scheme, non-readiness of the States/ UT in complying with the procedural 
requirements i.e. non opening, non-mapping of SNA a/cs, shortage of staff, smaller 
no of advertisements, etc. The Committee also note that allocation of higher BE of 
Rs.1183.39 Crore vis-à-vis that of 2022-23 is to cater to the requirements of various 
ongoing schemes/projects such as (i) anticipated increase in proposals from State 
Governments for Computerization of Primary Agricultural Credit Cooperatives 
(PACs), (ii) Grants in-Aid to the National Cooperative Development Corporation 
(NCDC), etc. The Committee while suggesting to sensitize the States for fulfilling 
procedural formalities for releasing the funds for the said schemes through regular 
review meetings hope that the enhanced fund allocation will be entirely used for the 
purpose in the current financial year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Cooperation acknowledges the Committee’s observations and 
its recognition of the Ministry's efforts in effectively utilizing allocated funds for path-
breaking initiatives in the cooperative sector. 
The Ministry notes the Committee’s concerns regarding the under-utilization 
of ₹59 crore (9% of the Revised Estimate allocation) in FY 2023-24, which primarily 

8 
 
resulted from procedural delays at the State/UT level, including non-receipt of 
proposals for the computerization of PACS, delays in compliance with Single Nodal 
Account (SNA) requirements etc. The Ministry is actively addressing these 
challenges through regular monthly review meetings under chairmanship of 
Secretary, Ministry of Cooperation with State Governments, Registrar of Cooperative 
Societies (RCS), NABARD and key stakeholders to monitor the progress of the 
projects expediting compliance with procedural formalities, ensure timely submission 
of proposals, and facilitate fund disbursement from Central Government. Further, a 
phased approach is being followed, with targeted fund disbursement based on State 
readiness, priority given to those who meet requisite criteria.  
 
Further, overall implementation framework includes PFMS-based reporting 
dashboards, and regular review meetings through VC at Secretary level with 
States/UTs.   With the above-mentioned steps, Ministry is making all the required 
efforts to disburse the funds allocated at RE 2024-25 Stage under various schemes. 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
(File No. H-12/1/2025-MoC dated 17.03.2025) 
 
 
NEW NATIONAL CORPORATION POLICY 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.2) 
 
The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
 The Committee appreciate that the Ministry of Cooperation has decided to 
formulate a New National Cooperation  Policy to realize the vision of 'Prosperity through Cooperation’ and note that concrete steps such as constitution of National Level Committee (NLC), preparation of draft report and its consideration, etc. The objective of the proposed new policy is to make the Cooperative Societies more effective and efficient and also to bring about improvement and transparency in their functioning leading to realization of the vision of “Sahkar se Samriddhi”. The Committee suggest that the new policy may be unveiled at the earliest. 
 
  

9 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The formulation of New National Cooperation Policy (NCP) has been envisaged to fulfill the mandate of the Ministry of Cooperation - "Sahakar se Samriddhi." A National level committee was constituted on 2.9.2022 under Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu with experts of the cooperative sector, representatives from National/State/District/Primary level cooperative societies, Secy. (Coop.) and RCSs from States/UTs and officers from Central Ministries/Departments to formulate the New Cooperation Policy to provide a framework to unlock the true potential of the Cooperative sector. The Committee conducted four regional workshops throughout the country to elicit suggestions from stakeholders. The received suggestions have been incorporated into the draft policy appropriately. The draft policy has been prepared and is under finalization. The Ministry later on informed that the New National Cooperation Policy 2025 has been unveiled by the Hon’ble Home & Cooperation Ministry on               24th July 2025.  
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
(File No. H-12/1/2025-MoC dated 17.03.2025) and 
(File No.S-11016/14/2021-CPC dated 19.07.2025) 
 
WORLD’S LARGEST GRAIN STORAGE PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that in order to address the shortage of 
decentralized food grain storage capacity in the country, the Government has 
approved rolling out of the World’s largest Grain Storage Plan in Cooperative Sector 
as a pilot project. As a part of the plan, pilot project has been put in place under which 
11 PACs in 11 States. The plan facilitates creation of godowns and other agri-
infrastructure, including custom hiring center, processing units, etc. at Primary 
Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) level through convergence of various existing 
Government of India schemes. The Committee while noting the progress made in 
this regard, suggest that pilot projects may be undertaken in other states also to 
appreciate its advantages and to enable smooth rolling of the plan at pan India level 
in the near future.    
  
  

10 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Under the pilot project, godowns have been constructed in 11 PACS of 11 
States. Further, it is apprised that foundation stones have been laid in 500 additional 
PACS from different States for godown construction.  
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
(File No. H-12/1/2025-MoC dated 17.03.2025) 
 
 
GRANTS IN-AID TO NCDC FOR STRENGTHENING OF COOPERATIVE SUGAR 
MILLS (CSMS) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that under the scheme “Grant-in-Aid to National 
Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC)” for strengthening of Cooperative 
Sugar Mills (CSM)” Rs. 1000 Crore grant was approved for the purpose to be 
released in two installments (Rs. 500 Crore each) during 2022-23 and 2023-24.  This 
grant is meant for the purpose of borrowing additional fund from the market for setting 
up of Ethanol/ Cogeneration plant and for meeting working capital requirements. The 
Committee, however note that first installment of the grant of Rs. 500 Crore could be 
released only on the last day i.e. 31 March, 2023 of the financial Year 2022-23 and 
due to considerable CNA balances, only token amount was sanctioned for 2023-24. 
The Committee further note that as certain challenges were faced in implementing 
the scheme, request was made to M/o Finance to extend the validity of the period by 
one more year i.e. up to 2024-25. As on 30.10.2024, NCDC sanctioned Rs.7790 
Crore to 52 CSMs. The Ministry, however, in reply to a connected query furnished 
that so far 31 CSMs were given loans out of the sanctioned amount of Rs.7,790 
Crore. The Committee want the Ministry to clarify the differing data on the working 
capital loans sanctioned and request to   apprise them of the latest outcome in this 
regard.  
 
  

11 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To clarify the data on working capital, the latest position in respect of loan 
given by NCDC under the Scheme namely “Grant-in-aid to NCDC for strengthening 
of Cooperative Sugar Mills (CSMs) is as under: 
 
NCDC has so far sanctioned 87 loan amounting ₹9893.12 crore to 48 CSMs. 
State wise details are annexed as Annexure-I. 
The utilization of the fund resulted in outcomes is given below: 
 
Annexure-I 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature performance / 
targets Performance / target achieved 
1 Physical performance / 
target 
Loans have been sanctioned to  
i) 8 loans for setting up of Ethanol plant. 
ii) 78 loans for meeting their working 
capital requirement. 
ii) 1 loan for setting up of Cogeneration 
plant. 
2 Financial performance / 
target 
NCDC has sanctioned 87 loans 
amounting ₹9893.11 crore to 48 CSMs. 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
(File No. H-12/1/2025-MoC dated 17.03.2025) 
 
 
MAKING THE PACS SELF-SUSTAINABLE BY DIVERSIFICATION OF BUSINESS 
ACTIVITIES 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 
 The path breaking initiative of the Govt. to diversify  and augment the sources 
of income of the small and marginal farmers by enabling the PACs to function as 
Common Service Centres providing e-services to common citizens, such as Pradhan 
Mantri Bharatiya Jan Aushadi Kendra (providing quality generic medicines to rural 
citizens at affordable rates), Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samriddhi Kendra  (providing 
fertilisers and agri-services like soil testing, training, etc. to farmers) and 
Distributorship of LPG/CNG/Petrol/Diesel, Paani Samiti, etc. (provides O&M services 
under Rural Piped Water Supply Schemes, etc.  will go a long way in the annals of 
cooperative movement in the country.   The   Committee, however, note with concern 
that PACs are allowed to apply for LPG distributorship under Combined Category 

12 
 
(CC) of Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs). The number of such distributorships to 
the said category, the Committee apprehend, may not be in proportion to the huge 
requirement of PACs. The Committee are of the view that the matter may be taken 
up with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (M/o P&NG) to consider the 
possibility of increasing the number of LPG distributorship under CC category as they 
believe that this will be game changer for the fortunes of PACs.  The Committee may 
be apprised of the outcome of the discussions with the M/o P&NG in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Cooperation welcomes the Committee’s appreciation of the 
Government’s initiative to diversify PACS business activities and augment income 
sources for small and marginal farmers. Enabling PACS to diversify their business 
activities and function as Common Service Centers (CSCs), Pradhan Mantri 
Bharatiya Jan Aushadhi Kendras (PMBJKs), Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samriddhi 
Kendras (PMKSKs), Petrol/ Diesel Retailers, LPG Distributors, etc. would 
significantly contribute to making them self-sustainable economic entities. 
 
Regarding PACS being allowed to apply for LPG distributorship under the 
Combined Category (CC), Ministry of Cooperation has taken up the matter with the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (M/o P&NG) to explore the possibility of 
increasing the number of LPG distributorships under the CC category to 
accommodate more PACS. In this regard, a meeting was held on 16.12.2024 with 
representatives from Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) for Petrol/ Diesel 
Retailership and LPG Distributorship wherein they have been requested to share a 
tentative timeline for the release of next advertisements, so that the same may be 
conveyed to States/ UTs for ensuring application by PACS to all such advertised 
locations. The Ministry is actively engaging with the concerned stakeholders to 
ensure equitable opportunities for PACS.  
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
(File No. H-12/1/2025-MoC dated 17.03.2025) 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
COMPUTERIZATION OF PRIMARY AGRICULTURAL CREDIT SOCIETIES 
(PACS) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note that a project for computerization of functional PACs with 
a total financial outlay of Rs.2,516 Crore to bring them onto Enterprise Resources 
Planning (ERP) based common national software, linking them with NABARD 
through State Cooperative Banks and District Central Cooperative Banks has been 
initiated and proposals for computerization of 67,930 PACs from 30 States/UTs have 
been sanctioned so far. The Committee note that so far 40,348 PACs have been on-
boarded on ERP software which comes to merely 59%. The remaining 41 % of the 
targeted PACs are required to be onboarded before March, 2025 as per the Plan. 
While expressing satisfaction over the progress made so far in the project for 
computerization of PACS, the Committee recommend the Ministry to pursue the 
matter vigorously and take all necessary steps for timely completion of the project so 
as to strengthen the cooperative sector and bring remarkable improvement in their 
functioning and operations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is informed that under the computerization of PACS Scheme/Project, 
proposals for the computerization of 67,930 PACS from 30 States/UTs have been 
sanctioned, and significant progress has been made in implementation, as reflected 
in the status as of 24.02.2025: 
Stage States/ UTs 
Underway 
Total 
PACS 
% Total 
Hardware Delivered 29 62,487 92% 
ERP Onboarded 30 53,588 79% 
Go-Live 30 42,268 62% 
  

14 
 
 
While 53,588 PACS (79%) have been onboarded onto the ERP system, the 
Ministry remains committed to ensuring the timely onboarding of the remaining 
14,342 PACS before March 2025, in line with the approved implementation plan. 
To accelerate the completion of the project and address the remaining gaps, 
this Ministry is working in close coordination with all the stakeholders concerned, 
including State/ UT Governments. Regular review meetings are held under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Cooperation with ACS/ Principal Secretary/ 
Secretary of Cooperation Department and Registrars of Cooperative Societies of 
States/ UTs on a monthly basis to review the progress of implementation of these 
initiatives. In addition to this, senior officers of the Ministry, up to Director/ Deputy 
Secretary level visit States/ UTs to monitor the progress of implementation on the 
ground.  
Further, States/UTs have been recently directed to maintain dedicated project 
teams (Project Management Units- PMUs) for implementation, monitoring, 
evaluation, and timely course correction, ensuring optimal fund utilization while 
maintaining focus on quality project outcomes. 
The Ministry remains committed to achieving full-scale implementation of the 
PACS Computerization Project within the stipulated timeline. 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
(File No. H-12/1/2025-MoC dated 17.03.2025) 
 
ALLOCATION FOR SCSP, STSP AND NER CATEGORY 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that the major flagship schemes being 
run by the Ministry, viz., computerization of PACS, Grant-in-aid to NCDC for 
strengthening of CSMs and strengthening of Co-operatives through IT intervention 
have been granted exemption from making mandatory allocation under SCSP, STSP 
and NER category. The Committee have further been apprised that no State/UTs 
wise allocation under NER component was made under the Schemes implemented 
by the Ministry. The Committee are of the considered view that the upliftment of the 
members of marginalized sections of the society, like Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes and people living in far-flung areas of the country deserve more 

15 
 
focus and attention while formulating and implementing the schemes and 
programmes by the Government. This is an accepted fact that the participation of the 
members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in forming the Cooperative 
Societies and running them is very low and needs to be raised in proportion to their 
population. Similarly, there is ample opportunity for the cooperative sector to grow in 
the North-Eastern States and therefore, there is need to encourage the people to set-
up Cooperative Societies which would go a long way in giving their economy the 
much-needed boost. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
may consider the exemption granted in respect of mandatory allocation under SCSP, 
STSP and NER category for the major schemes being run by the Ministry of 
Cooperation. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in the 
matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Cooperation acknowledges the Committee’s observations 
regarding the exemption granted to major flagship schemes, namely 
Computerization of PACS, Grant-in-Aid to NCDC for strengthening of Cooperative 
Sugar Mills (CSMs), and Strengthening of Cooperatives through IT Intervention, from 
mandatory allocations under the Scheduled Caste Sub-Plan (SCSP), Scheduled 
Tribe Sub-Plan (STSP), and North Eastern Region (NER) category. 
In this regard, the rationale for exemption & steps taken for inclusive growth 
of Cooperatives including NER & SC/ST communities are placed below: 
(a) Nature of the Exemption & Justification 
o The exemption was obtained and granted by the authorities considering 
the specific nature of the schemes, which focus on institutional 
strengthening and digital transformation rather than individual 
beneficiary-based interventions. 
o Unlike direct welfare schemes, these initiatives involve upgrading 
infrastructure, modernizing governance systems, and enhancing digital 
financial services, which indirectly benefit all PACS members, including 
SC/ST communities and North-Eastern States. 
(b) Ensuring SC/ST Participation in Cooperatives 

16 
 
o Under the Computerization of PACS Scheme/Project and 
Strengthening of Cooperatives through IT intervention Scheme/Project, 
financial inclusion is being promoted by enabling PACS to offer digital 
banking and credit services to marginalized farmers, including those 
from SC/ST communities.  Also, O/o of Registrar of Cooperative 
Societies are being computerized which would benefit all the 
Cooperatives including those from NER and SC/ST communities. 
(c) Support for North-Eastern States 
o While there is no separate NER-specific allocation under the schemes 
being run by Ministry of Cooperation presently, yet all functional PACS, 
ARDBs and RCS located in the North-Eastern Region (NER) are 
covered under the concerned schemes/projects. 
o It may be pertinent to mention that ‘Computerization of ARDBs’ project, 
6 ARDB units in State of Tripura are to be computerized. So far, Rs 
3.86 lakh have been released to the State, as per their fund 
requirements.  
o Despite exemption from mandatory allocations under the North Eastern 
Region (NER) category, under the Computerization of PACS Project, 
the Ministry of Cooperation has disbursed a total of Rs 30.62 crore to 
North Eastern Region (NER) States, as per their fund requirements. 
The details of funds released so far in last three financial years is 
tabulated below: 
(Rs. in actuals) 
S 
No. States/UTs Amount released 
in FY 2022-23 
Amount 
released in  
FY 2023-24 
Amount 
released in 
FY 2024-25 
Total amount 
released 
1 Manipur 2,55,00,000  0 0 2,55,00,000 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 15,00,000  12,00,000 9,07,704 36,07,704 
3 Tripura 2,95,00,000  1,12,50,000 3,03,30,709 7,10,80,709 
4 Sikkim 1,18,00,000  90,00,000 0 2,08,00,000 
5 Meghalaya 1,23,00,000  0 0 1,23,00,000 
6 Mizoram 27,00,000  0 44,36,418 71,36,418 
7 Assam 6,41,00,000  2,45,25,000 3,29,96,165 12,16,21,165 
8 Nagaland 36,00,000  2,45,68,555 1,59,98,098 4,41,66,653 
Total 15,10,00,000  7,05,43,555 8,46,69,094 30,62,12,649 
  

17 
 
o Similarly, the Project of Computerization of RCS has the exemption granted 
for mandatory allocation under SCSP, STSP and NER Category. However, in 
the Current Financial Year, Rs. 169.7 lakhs have been released and further 
Rs. 98.61 lakhs have been sanctioned for release to North Eastern States as 
per the following details: - 
 
 
S. N States 
Funds released in 
2024-2025 
(Rs in Lakhs) 
Remarks 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 88.4  
2. Assam -  
3. Manipur -  
4. Meghalaya -  
5. Mizoram 75  
6. Nagaland 21.67 Being released, all 
approvals taken 7. Tripura 76.94 
8. Sikkim 6.30  
 Total 268.31  
 
The Ministry acknowledges the Committee’s recommendation to 
reassess the exemption granted under SCSP, STSP, and NER 
categories. However, revising the allocation criteria within the projects 
is not feasible due to the following reasons: 
(a) Institutional Nature of the Schemes: Unlike direct welfare programs, 
these initiatives focus on infrastructure development, governance 
modernization, and digital financial integration, which benefit all PACS 
members, including SC/ST communities, in a holistic manner rather 
than through individual beneficiary targeting. 
(b) Advanced Stage of Implementation: Given the significant progress in 
the implementation of these projects, altering the allocation pattern at 
this stage may pose operational and financial challenges, potentially 
delaying the project’s completion and impacting its objectives. 
(c) Approval for Exemption: The exemption from mandatory allocation 
under SCSP, STSP, and NER categories has been granted at the 

18 
 
appropriate levels, and any modification would require a policy-level 
reconsideration. 
In view of these considerations, the existing exemption remains 
essential to ensure the smooth and timely execution of the projects. 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
(File No. H-12/1/2025-MoC dated 17.03.2025) 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
REVITALIZATION OF THE COOPERATIVE SECTOR  
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 
 The Committee have been apprised of the various efforts being made by the 
Government to revitalize the cooperative sector by aligning its activities with those of 
various government schemes, like Dairy Infrastructure Development Fund, National 
Programme for Dairy Development, PM Matasya Sampada Yojna, Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Infrastructure Fund. The Committee while appreciating the efforts made 
by the Government in creating 4833 new Dairy Cooperative Societies and 423 new 
Fisheries Cooperative Societies and also for creating 03 new National level 
Cooperative Societies, i.e., National Cooperative Exports Limited, National 
Cooperative Organics Limited and Bharatiya Beej Sahkari Samiti Limited, 
recommend that there is an urgent need to substantially enhance the role of 
Cooperatives involved in farming sectors through measures, like, diversification of 
crops, organic and natural farming, providing subsidy to cooperatives being run by 
marginal, small and landless farmers. The Committee also recommend that 
concerted efforts may also be made to revive the closed or dormant cooperatives by 
infusing requisite funds and bringing in required structural changes in their working”.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a)  Ministry of Cooperation has taken initiative to usher Cooperative-led "White 
Revolution 2.0” is aimed at expanding cooperative coverage, employment generation 
and women's empowerment with an objective "To increase the milk procurement of 
dairy cooperatives by 50% from the present level over next five years by providing 
market access to dairy farmers in uncovered areas and increasing the share of dairy 
cooperatives in organised sector. 
 
Ministry of Cooperation in collaboration with NDDB, launched an SOP on 
September 19, 2024, at ICAR, Pusa, New Delhi, under the Hon’ble Home and 
Cooperation Minister leadership and guidance. 
 

20 
 
The Ministry of Cooperation launched the Cooperative-led "White Revolution 
2.0" to expand cooperative coverage, generate employment, and empower women 
on 25/12/2024. 
 
III. The White Revolution 2.0 would involve following activities: 
 
 Setting up and strengthening of around 1,20,000 new/existing Dairy 
Cooperative Societies (DCS)/Multipurpose-DCS (M-DCS)/ 
Multipurpose-PACS (M-PACS). 
 
 Linking these cooperatives with milk routes either by expansion of 
existing milk routes or by creating new milk routes. 
 
 Providing enabling infrastructure e.g. Automatic Milk Collection Units, 
Data Processing Milk Collection Units, testing equipment, Bulk Milk 
Coolers, etc., as per the requirement, for carrying out dairy activities. 
 
IV. Outcome of the White Revolution 2.0 after 5 years may be as 
follows: 
 
 75,000 new M-DCS/M-PACS will be set up. 
 
 46,422 existing village-level DCS/PACS will be strengthened. 
 
 The milk procurement by cooperatives would be increased by 50%. 
 
 It will provide market access to smallholder dairy farmers while 
ensuring fair and remunerative prices. 
 
 It will help in furthering the network of primary dairy cooperatives and 
help strengthening the entire milk value chain including milk 
procurement, testing, chilling, logistics and processing infrastructure. 
 
 Women being an important stakeholder in dairy, greater emphasis on 
having women as member. 
 
 Enhanced procurement would help in increasing the share of organised 
sector in dairy industry which is still dominated by the unorganised 
sector. This will help in ensuring food safety & quality control and 
increased availability of fresh and hygienic milk & milk products. 
 

21 
 
 The initiatives will help in developing the sector and increasing milk 
production to meet the domestic demand and also tap the export 
potential. 
 
Initially the White Revolution 2.0 will be implemented with financial assistance 
to 1,000 M- PACSs at rate of ₹ 40,000/- per M-PACS from resources of NDDB, 
for initiating dairy activities. Subsequently this initiative is to be driven by the 
financial assistance under proposed National Dairy Development Program 2.0 
(NPDD 2.0) of Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD), 
Government of India. The NPDD 2.0 will be implemented as per guidelines 
issued by DAHD. 
 
(b)  National Cooperative Organics Limited (NCOL)- NCOL has been 
set up to provide institutional support for aggregation, certification, testing, 
procurement, storage, processing, branding, labelling, packaging, logistic 
facilities, marketing of organic products and facilitate in arranging financial 
assistance to the organic farmers through its member Cooperatives including 
PACS/FPOs along with promotional and developmental activities of organic 
products with the help of various schemes and agencies of the Government. 
The NCOL will help in marketing of authentic and certified organic products to 
increase production of organic products by the cooperatives at various levels.  
 
Progress: 
 
i A total of 5,185 cooperatives have become members of NCOL. 
 
ii NCOL has started using brand name of “Bharat Organics” and has so 
far marketed 21 organic products (Masoor whole, Masoor Malka, 
Rajma Citra, Urad Whole, Urad Split, Kabuli chana, Chana Dal, Brown 
Chaana, Arhar Dal, Moong Dal, Moong Whole, Moong Split, Wheat 
Atta, Coriander Powder, Coriander Whole, Turmeric Powder, 
Fenugreek, Jaggery Cube, Jaggery Powder, Brown Sugar, Khandsari 
Sugar) worth around Rs. 167.1 lakh. 
 
iii NCOL has entered into MoU with nodal agencies of 10 states i.e., 
Uttarakhand, Nagaland, Assam, Meghalaya, Chhattisgarh, Tripura, 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Punjab to facilitate organic 
procurement.  
 
iv MoU signed with NDDB-MRIDA on 22nd Oct, to align the supply of bio 
inputs to farmers to promote organic farming and to create model Bio 
village. 
 

22 
 
v MoU signed with MDFVPL (Mother dairy) on 22nd Oct, to distribute 
Bharat Organics brand products across channels - GT, MT and E-com, 
etc. 
 
vi MoU signed with National Cooperative Exports Limited (NCEL) on 
20.12.2024. 
 
vii The new Moti Bagh Safal outlet has been made a model outlet for 
organic products. 
 
viii Bharat Organics brand introduced in Amul, Big Basket, Flipkart, NCCF 
outlet on metro stations (Rajiv Chowk), etc. 
 
ix Finalized the packaging units for Cereals, Pulses and Sweeteners. The 
processing unit for Sweeteners and wheat has also been finalized. 
 
x Introducing QR code on new packaging to facilitate the customer to 
see the test report for each lot. 
 
 
Future Vision: 
 
i. NCOL envisages to become the largest organic food player in the 
country by 2035 having a direct sourcing base from its members. 
 
ii  also envisages to achieve a cumulative turnover of ₹ 1,00,000 Cr 
(including exports of organic products through NCEL) by the year 2035. 
 
(c)  The Government, on 15th February, 2023, approved the Plan for 
strengthening cooperative movement in the country and deepening its 
reach up to the grassroots. The Plan entails establishment of new 
multipurpose PACS or primary dairy/ fishery cooperative societies 
covering all the Panchayats/ villages in the country over a period of five 
years through convergence of various existing GOI schemes, National 
Programme for Dairy Development (NPDD), PM Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY), including Dairy Infrastructure Development Fund 
(DIDF), etc.  
 
This plan is being implemented with the support of National 
Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC), National Bank for 
Agricultural and Rural Development (NABARD), National Dairy 
Development Board (NDDB), National Fisheries Development Board 
(NFDB), National Level Cooperative Federations and State 
Governments. Efforts are also being made to revive the dormant/ 

23 
 
defunct societies by providing them the benefits of these schemes/ 
initiatives”. 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
(File No. H-12/1/2025-MoC dated 17.03.2025) 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-1 of 
this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
–   NIL  – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                             CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
18th August, 2025                                                        Chairperson 
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Agriculture 
   Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

25 
 
Annexure 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
   2. Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
   3. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
   5. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
   6. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
7. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
8. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
9. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
10. Shri Murasoli S. 
11. Shri Dharambir Singh 
   12. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
   13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
   14. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
   15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
    
Rajya Sabha 
 
   16. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
   17. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
   18. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
   19. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
   20. Shri Madan Rathore 
   21. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
   22. Shri P.P. Suneer 
    
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director  
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
   
 
 

26 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee xxxxxx. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption 
the following Reports: 
 
(i) *xxxxx 
(ii) *xxxxx  
(iii) *xxxxx  
(iv) *xxxxx  
(v) *xxxxx  
(vi) *xxxxx 
(vii) Draft Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 6th Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Cooperation presented during 18th Lok Sabha and 
(viii) *xxxxx. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any 
modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present 
the Report to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
 
* Matter not related to this Report 

27 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 6TH REPORT OF 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND 
FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25)(18TH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  08 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5 & 6 
 Total 05 
 Percentage 62.5% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
  
Recommendation Para Nos. 4, 7 
 Total 02 
 Percentage 25% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
  
Recommendation Para Nos. 8 
 Total 01 
 Percentage 12.5% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Para No. Nil 
 Total Nil 
 Percentage Nil 
   
 