 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND 
FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
         
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025 / Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
17 

 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2024-25) 
 
          
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
            
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                  20.08.2025 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                20.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
August, 2025 / Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


 
 
COA No. 516 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) …………………………………….. Iii 
Introduction ……………………………………………………………………….. v 
Chapter I Report…………………………… 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
12 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
19 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
20 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
24 
   
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 35th sitting of the Committee held on 18.08.2025 
 
 
30 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
 
 
 
32 
 

iii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha , Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8 th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part -II, Para No. 3117 dated 
13.08.2025. 
  

iv 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee to submit this 
Report on their behalf, present this 17th Report on action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on ‘Demands for Grants (202 5-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare  (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education).   
 
2. The Eighth Report ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing ( 2024-25) on  ‘Demands for 
Grants (202 5-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12 March, 2025. The Action Taken Notes 
on the Report were received on 16 May, 2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 18 August, 2024 
 
4.  An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report ( Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
  
            
       
 
NEW DELHI;                                CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
18 August , 2025                                               Chairperson, 
27Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Agriculture 
            Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report ( Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Hus bandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 12th March 2025. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 
13 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have 
been scrutinised and categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Total - 07 
Chapter II 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 2,4,5,8,9,10 and 12 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Total - NIL 
Chapter III 
 Recommendation Para No. NIL 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
Total- 02 
Chapter IV 
 
Recommendation Para Nos.  11 and 13 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Total - 04 
Chapter V 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 1,3,6 and 7 
   
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance would be given by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) to implement the Observations/ Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In cases where it i s not possible for the 
Ministry/Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for 

2 
 
any reason, the matter be intimated in writing to the Committee with reasons 
for non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes 
on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V 
of this Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Budgetary Allocation 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO.3) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee have been apprised that the Central Island Agricultural 
Research Institute (CIARI), Sri Vijaya Puram (Port Blair) was established in 1978 and 
most of the buildings are very old and due to the inclement weather conditions and 
earthquake prone area prevailing in these Islands, repairs and renovations need to 
be carried out at regular intervals. In this regard, a one -time Special Grant may be 
provided for the major renovations and repair of the laboratories, office and 
residential buildings. The Committee, while sympathetic to the demand of the 
Institute, recommend the Department to consider favorably a provision for allocation 
of funds for periodic renovations and repair of the laboratories, office and residential 
buildings of the Institute.” 
 
1.6 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted:- 
 
“Department has allocated f unds for repair and maintenance to ICAR-CIARI 
for EFC Period 2021 -26. In addition, need/demand-based request under this Head 
is considered in respective Annual Plan periods including justified demands under 
Corpus Fund Scheme.  A onetime catch -up grant for building and related 
infrastructure for ICAR-CIARI shall be considered during the next EFC ( 2026-31) 
period.”  
 
1.7 The Committee, while sympathetic to the demand of the Central Island 
Agricultural Research Institute (CIARI), Sri Vijaya Puram(Port Blair) for a one -
time special grant for the major renovations and repair of the laboratories, 
office and residential buildings, had recommended the Department to consider 
favorably a provision for allocation of funds for periodic renovations and repair 

3 
 
of the laboratories, office and residential buildings of the Institute.  The 
Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted about allocation of funds 
for repair and maintenance to ICAR -CIARI for EFC Period 2021 -26 and 
consideration of need/demand -based request under this Head in respective 
Annual Plan periods including justified demands under Corpus Fund Scheme.  
The Department has also submitted that a one-time catch-up grant for building 
and related infrastructure for the Institute shall be consider ed during the next 
EFC (2026 -31), which in view of the Committee, would be a step in right 
direction. The Committee also hope that the Department would be taking all 
necessary action for grant of requisite amount to the Institute at the earliest so 
that renovations and repairs of the buildings could be done on time. 
 
B. Agricultural Engineering 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 6) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee note that Rs. 95.74 crore has been allocated to the 
Agricultural Engineering Division in BE 2025-26 which is more than the allocation of 
Rs. 91.24 crore in BE & RE 2024-25. The Committee have been apprised that in last 
five years, 434 technologies have been developed by the Division out of which 213 
have been commercialized. The Committee also note that announcement f or the 
establishment of Makhana Board in Bihar has been made in Budget 2025 -26 to 
improve production, processing, value addition and marketing of Makhana. The 
Committee, however, are concerned to note that no sufficient machinery and 
equipment is available  for harvesting and processing of Makhana. Further, the 
functioning of Makhana Research Institute at Darbhanga, Bihar, needs to be made 
effective by providing resources and manpower.  The Committee believe that revival, 
development and effective functionin g of Makhana Research Institute is a pre 
requisite for the successful implementation of the proposal for setting up of Makhana 
Board.” 
 
1.9 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“The Research Centre for Makhana (Darbhanga) is in operation under the 
ICAR-Central Institute of Post -Harvest Engineering and Technology (CIPHET), 
Ludhiana as per approved scheme “Agriculture Production and Post -Production 

4 
 
Mechanisation Augmented with Innovative Technologies for Sustainable 
Development” for the 2020 -21 to 2025 -26 period. The proposal for restoration of 
national status of Makhana Centre along with deployment of manpower has been 
submitted to Ministry of Finance for concurrence.     
The Research Centre for Makhana has played a significant role in enhancing 
makhana yield, quality and sustainabili ty in production and processing through 
development of high -yielding makhana variety (Swarna Vaidehi) . The field system 
introducing of makhana cultivation with improved package of practices has led to 
higher yield and better quality, along with rapid area expansion under makhana 
cultivation.  
Several equipment/machines for Makhana roasting, popping and value-added 
products have been developed and licensed to manufacturers for commercialization 
namely Makhana seed washer, Makhana seed grader, Makhana seed primary 
roasting machine, Makhana seed p opping machine, Popped Makhana grader and 
various types of value-added products.  
The Centre has collaborated with Government Institutions, state agencies, 
educational institutions and private enterprises to support and provide technical 
know-how in production and processing of makhana and water chestnut. The centre 
has trained thousands of farmers and entrepreneurs, driving regional industries and 
livelihoods. The cultivation of Makhana has expanded from approximately 13,000 to 
35,000 hectares across multiple states. 
Training cum Incubation Centre has been started and a laboratory is being set 
up for quality assessment of Makhana. Mechanization is promoted for rapidity and 
better hygiene of the processed products , quality high yielding seeds is distributed 
for improving yield and quality of the processed makhana products. Regular training 
on production, processing, value addition and marketing of Makhana are rendered to 
farmers and entrepreneurs.” 
 
 
 
1.10 Concerned with the non -availability of sufficient machinery and 
equipment for harvesting and processing of Makhana, the Committee had 
recommended to make the functioning of Makhana Research Institute at 
Darbhanga, Bihar effective by providing resources and  manpower for the 
successful implementation of the proposal for setting up of Makhana Board, 

5 
 
as announced in the Budget 2025-26, to improve production, processing, value 
addition and marketing of Makhana.  The Department, in its Action Taken 
Reply, has submitted about the role played by the Research Centre for 
Makhana (Darbhanga) in enhancing yiel d, quality and sustainability in 
production and processing through development of high -yielding Makhana 
variety and introduction of the field system of Makhana cultivation with 
improved package of practices; development of equipment/machines for 
roasting, popping and value -added products; collaboration with Government 
Institutions, State Agencies, educational institutions and private enterprises to 
support and provide technical know -how in production and processing of 
Makhana; training of farmers and entrep reneurs; starting of Training cum 
Incubation Centre; promotion of mechanization of rapidity and better hygiene; 
distribution of quality high yielding seeds, etc. The Department has also 
submitted that the proposal for restoration of national status of Makh ana 
Centre along with deployment of manpower has been submitted to Ministry of 
Finance for concurrence and a laboratory is being set up for quality 
assessment of Makhana. The Committee desire the Department to pursue 
vigorously with the Ministry of Finance  for their concurrence to the proposal 
of the Department and also to expedite setting up of the laboratory for quality 
assessment of Makhana so that the aims and objectives envisaged in 
establishment of Makhana Board in Bihar are realized fully. The Commit tee 
may also be informed about the progress made in the matter. 
 
C. Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 11) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division has been allocated 
Rs. 204.23 crore in BE 2025-26 which is less than the allocation of Rs. 234.89 crore 
made in BE 2024 -25. The Committee also note that Agricultural Extension Division 
is carrying out  on-farm testing to identify the location specificity of agricultural 
technologies, frontline demonstrations to demonstrate the production potential of 
different crops, training of farmers and extension personnel on knowledge and skills 
improvement and creating awareness on improved technologies among farmers of 
the country through a network of 731 Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs) spread all over 

6 
 
the country. At present, 93 districts have two KVKs each and 121 districts do not 
have KVKs. Further , 15 new KVKs only  have been opened during the last five years. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for not setting up of even a 
single KVK in 121 districts. Further, as recommended in their Demands for Grants 
(2025-26) report, the Committee suggest the DARE to address the following issues  
in coordination with D/o Agriculture & Farmers Welfare :  
(i) The shortage of skilled personnel experienced by many KVKs may   be 
addressed on priority as it is impacting KVKs efficiency in discharging their 
duties.  
(ii) Streamlining of administrative processes of KVKs is also the need of the 
hour to improve their operational effectiveness to act as a one stop 
resource centre for supplying seeds, bio -products, issue/circulate 
advisories while leveraging ICT tools for wider outreach.   
(iii) The KVKs may be equipped with advanced/cutting edge  technologies 
improving their ability to conduct effective demonstrations and on -farm 
testing of latest technologies. Such technologies may aid the KVKs in setting 
up of e -linkage facilities for real time agro advisories & monitoring within 
their jurisdiction and also to act as frontline demonstration cum resource 
centre for timely supply of farm inputs and effective dis semination of 
technologies.  
(iv)  Funding to KVKs may be improved to equip them with latest technologies 
suggested at (iii) above. They are of the view that accepting and 
implementing the above suggestions result in transforming KVKs in to new 
version of KVK 2.0 to act as a resource hub for all extension schemes. 
(v) KVKs may focus on climate resilient agriculture through targeted training 
programmes and promote convergence with private sector initiatives for 
resource sharing. 
(vi) KVKs should work in close tandem with State Government and invariably 
inform public representatives like MPs, MLAs, MLCs, etc . regarding their 
upcoming events in advance for seamless coordination and wider 
outreach.” 
 
 

7 
 
1.12 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“Presently 731 KVKs are functional in the country spearheading frontline extension 
system. “Strengthening of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) Scheme” has been 
extended for a period of 5 years from 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 under XV Finance 
Commission with a provision for establishment of KVKs in 121 new districts of the 
country without a single KVK. KVKs are also functional in aspirational districts.  
(i) The filling up of vacancies in the KVKs is a continuous process and is the 
responsibility of the respective Host Organisation. As per the KVK scheme, the 
approved posts of the KVKs are filled as per the recruitment policies and 
procedures of the respective Host Organisation with the educational qualifications 
as laid down by ICAR. All the Host Or ganizations have been requested to fill up 
the vacant posts immediately. 
(ii) The revised mandate of KVK as has been approved in EFC 2021 -26 is to act as 
Single Window Knowledge, Resource and Capacity Development Centre. 
Accordingly, the mandated activities are revised including (i) Strengthening 
technology demonstration and promotion; supporting entrepreneurs and farmers' 
organizations through Public Private Partnership (PPP), (ii) Dissemination of 
technologies specific for various agro -climatic zones and training and capacity 
building for their larger adoption, (iii) Reorienting th e KVKs as knowledge and 
information centres for providing farmer-centric digital solutions and services, (iv) 
Ensuring availability of quality seeds, planting materials and other technological 
inputs to the farmers in PPP mode, (v) Creating mass awareness and community 
mobilization for nature-friendly and climate resilient agriculture and allied sectors. 
(iii) KVKs are equipped with advanced technologies for effective demonstration to the 
farmers and other stakeholders. KVK demonstrate agri -drone application, 
precision farming technologies, micro irrigation and protected cultivation 
technologies. KVKs are also engaged in customised agro -advisories to the 
farmers through ICT led Kisan Sarathi portal. 
(iv) New version of KVK 2.0 as proposed is the need of the hour looking into the 
backdrop of climate change vulnerabilities. KVKs are also implementing several 
central sector schemes in convergence with the other departments and 
ministries. Funds are also mobilised from these departments. The enhanced 

8 
 
funding for the Strengthening of KVK Scheme will be asked for the financial cycle 
2026-27 to 2030-31. 
(v) KVKs have focus on climate resilient agriculture at the field level under the aegis 
of National Innovations for Climate Resilience Agriculture (NICRA) covering the 
Climate Smart Village clusters is being provided in 151 most vulnerable districts 
of the country. The interventions also include training and capacity development 
of the stake holders for promotion of climate resilient agriculture. Collaboration 
with private partners are also being undertaken to have not only with other public 
partners but also taking private sector in the loop. 
(vi) KVKs have been advised to involve the public representatives in their mandated 
activities interventions. KVKs are already involving public representatives in their 
mandate activities. Many public representatives have recently participated in the 
events like Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra, launch of instalments of PMKISAN etc.” 
 
 
1.13  The Committee, while desiring to be apprised of the reasons for not 
setting up of even a single KVK in 121 districts, had suggested the Department 
to address, in coordination with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare, the issue of the shortag e of skilled personnel in KVKs, streamlining 
of administrative processes of KVKs to improve their operational 
effectiveness, equipping KVKs with advanced/cutting edge technologies, 
improving funding to KVKs, focus of KVKs on climate resilient agriculture 
through targeted training programmes and promote convergence with private 
sector initiatives for resource sharing, working of KVKs in close tandem with 
State Government and invariably informing Public Representatives like MPs, 
MLAs, MLCs, etc. regarding the ir upcoming events in advance for seamless 
coordination and wider outreach.  The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, 
has submitted about the number of KVKs functional in the country, extension 
of ‘Strengthening of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) Scheme’ fo r a period of 5 
years from 2021-22 to 2025-26 under XV Finance Commission with a provision 
for establishment of KVKs in 121 new districts of the country with a single KVK, 
process of filling of vacancies in the KVKs, revised mandate of KVK as 
approved in EFC 2021-26, need of new version of KVK 2.0, equipping of KVKs 
with advanced technologies, focus of KVK on climate resilient agriculture at 
the field level under the aegis of National Innovations for Climate Resilience 

9 
 
Agriculture (NICRA) and advisory issued to KVKs to involve the Public 
Representatives in their mandated activities interventions.  However, the 
Committee note that the reply of the Department is not satisfactory and, on 
some points, vague and very casual in nature. The Department has not stated 
anything about the reasons for not setting up of even a single KVK in 121 
districts of the country. The sentence referring extension of ‘Strengthening of 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) Scheme’ under XV Finance Commission seems 
ambiguous and needs clarity in view of the fact that only 15 new KVKs have 
been opened during the last five years.  Further, the issues of the shortage of 
skilled personnel in many KVKs and improving the funding to the KVKs have 
not been addressed  properly in the replies. Also, the contention of the 
Department that KVKs are equipped with advanced technologies for effective 
demonstration to the farmers and other stakeholders is out of sync with 
ground realities.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation as 
stated above in Para 1.11. 
 
D. Manpower in ICAR Institutes  
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 13) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee note that a large number of posts including those in scientific, 
administrative and technical categories are lying vacant at various Institutes of the 
ICAR. The Committee have been apprised that vacancies in different cadres / 
positions do not affect functioning and achievement of desired results as officiating 
arrangements are made and work is carried out throug h available manpower. The 
Committee, while not agreeing to the contention of the Department that vacancies 
are not affecting the functioning of the Institute s, recommend the Department to fill 
up the vacant scientific, administrative and technical posts at  Institutes of ICAR at 
the earliest for the smooth and more meaningful functioning of the Institutes.” 
 
1.15 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“The Recruitment of various positions in different cadre (Scientists, Technical, 
Administrative and Finance) is a continuous process which is done in a timely manner 
by taking advance actions, wherever possible.  ICAR keeps on making all efforts for 
filling up of vacant posts, as and when vacancies arise. The recruitment of  621 

10 
 
scientific positions have been completed and 458 positions have already been 
notified by Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board (ASRB).  Recruitment of 802 
Positions of Technician (T-l) (Level-3) and 190 positions of Senior Technical officers 
(STO)/ Subject Matter Specialist (SMS) (T -6) (Level -I0) h ave been completed. 
Recruitment of 124 positions in the grade of STO/ SMS  and approx.1200 positions 
of T-3 (Level-5) have been forwarded to ASRB for direct recruitment.  Vacancies in 
the grade of AO/FAO and Assistant have recently been filled through Direct 
Recruitment, and efforts are also made to fill the vacancies caused due to non-joining 
of successful candidates. Recruitment Examination for the posts of Assistant Director 
(Official language) has also been conducted. The Council has also taken steps 
towards filling up the DR vacancies on a yearly basis.” 
 
 
1.16 Taking note of the fact that a large number of posts including those in 
scientific, administrative and technical categories are lying vacant at various 
Institutes of the ICAR, the Committee had recommended the Department to fill 
up these vacant posts at th e earliest for the smooth and more meaningful 
functioning of these Institutes.  The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has 
submitted that the recruitment of various positions in different cadre is a 
continuous process and ICAR keeps on making all efforts for filling up of 
vacant posts. The Department has also submitted that some posts have 
recently been filled through Direct Recruitment, for some recruitments have 
been completed; for some Recruitment Examination have been conducted; for 
some notification has been issued and for some requests have been forwarded 
to Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board (ASRB) for direct recruitment. 
However, the Committee note that even after the completion of recruitment 
processes of all the instances mentioned in the reply of the Department, a large 
number of vacant posts in different cadres will still remain unfilled leave aside 
vacancy caused due to superannuation and other factors. The Committee also 
note that despite having an independent recruitment agency the Agricultural 
Scientists Recruitment Board (ASRB), the Department has not fixed any 
definite timeline to fill all the vacant posts in the Institutes of ICAR. The matter 
of vacant positions in the Institutes is also serious as these vacancies have 
been continuing for past several years adversely affecting the functioning of  
 

11 
 
these Institutes.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to the Department to fill up the vacant scientific, 
administrative and technical posts at Institutes of ICAR at the earliest for the 
smooth and more meaningful functioning of the Institutes. 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
Budgetary Allocation 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
The Committee note that Rs. 6.50 crore was allocated in BE 2024 -25 under 
Capital Section (Capital Outlay on other General Economic Services) which was 
reduced to Rs. 3.82 crore in RE 2024 -25. Out of this allocation, Rs. 2.05 crore only 
was utilized till the end of January 2025 which is around 54% of RE allocation.  The 
Committee, would like to be apprised of whether the Department would be in a 
position to fully utilize the RE allocation. They would also like the Ministry to inform 
the Committee as to why t here is delay in spending the allocated funds and the 
reasons for seeking higher allocations in BE 2025 -26 compared to RE of 2024 -25.  
The Committee also feel that when the allocated resources, however, small amounts 
they are and that too meant for creatio n of capital assets, could not be spent, the 
Ministry may not have any basis for asking more funds from the Government. 
 
Reply of the Government 
An approximate amount of Rs. 3.16 crore has been utilized in the FY 2024-25 
under Capital Section. The shortfall under Capital head is mainly under Object Head 
“Furniture and Fixtures” on account of surrender of Rs. 41.32 lakhs Letter of Authority 
(LoA) amount by CPWD at fag end of the FY 2024 -25 and some amount of less 
utilization under “Information, Computer, Tele (ICT)” of ASRB. New building for 
Agricultural Scientist Recruitment Board  (ASRB) was under construction with allied 
infrastructure. Now, the building is completed and ASRB has shifted to the new 
building. Payments under Capital Section for the same is required to be paid in FY 
2025-26.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
 
 

13 
 
Allocations Under Scheme Head 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 The Committee note that out of the total allocation (BE) of Rs. 10466.39 Crore 
to the Department (DARE) for the year 2025 -26, Rs. 3219.22 Crore has been 
allocated under Scheme Head which constitutes around 30.75 % of the total 
allocation. The Allocation un der Scheme Head in BE 2025 -26 (Rs. 3219 Crore) is 
438 Crore more than the allocation of Rs. 2780 Crore in BE 2024 -25 and Rs. 207 
Crore more than the allocation of Rs. 3011.82 Crore in RE 2024-25. The Committee 
also note that the Department has sought / pro posed Rs. 3237.09 Crores under 
Scheme Head for BE 2025 -26. The analysis of the data reveals that since 2020 -21 
the actual spending under the scheme head has been lower than even Revised 
Estimates. In other words, these funds have been surrendered except in  the year 
2022-23. Further, the Committee note that in the year 2024-25, out of RE of Rs. 3012 
crore, in the first 10 months of the year, it could spend Rs.  2085 crore only leaving 
Rs. 925 crore for spending in rest of the two months of the financial year . The 
Committee hope that the funds will be fully spent for the intended purposes before 
the end of the financial year.  
Reply of the Government 
As per Pr.  AO Expenditure Statement, the Scheme Budget utilized for F.Y. 
2024-25 is Rs.  295862.81 lakh as against RE 2024 -25 is of Rs.301182.00 lakh. 
Therefore, fund utilization is of 98.23%, highlighting the optimum utilization of budget 
allocated for the current F.Y. 2024 -25. The Department is committed to  make 
concerted efforts for efficient and complete utilization of the allocations for the coming 
fiscal years.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
 
Natural Resources Management and National Innovations in Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (NICRA) 
Recommendation (Para No. 5)  
The Committee note that Natural Resources Management and National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) Division has been allocated Rs. 

14 
 
229.09 crore in BE 2025 -26 which is less than the allocation of Rs. 252.16 crore in 
BE and RE 2024 -25. The Committee also note that the Division is conducting 
research in farmers’ participatory mode to develop the location specific, cost 
effective, eco -friendly, climate resilient technologies keeping in view the farmers’ 
resource availability, traditional / indigenous technology knowhow and grass -root 
farm innovations to enhance agricultural production, productivity and profitability in 
the country. The Committee have been apprised that a total of 286 climate resilient 
technologies including crop varieties, intercropping systems, conservation 
agriculture, crop diversification, agroforestry systems, etc have been developed and 
disseminated  for the benefit of  stakeholders / farmers of 22 States and 3 Union 
Territories (UTs).  In view of the role of the NICRA in developing new technologies, 
the Committee are of the view that fund constraints may not be allowed to come in 
its effective functioning.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The budget and activities for Natural Resource Management (NRM) including 
NICRA has been already approved by the Cabinet for the EFC (2020-21 to 2025-26) 
with a total budget allocation of Rs. 1115.05 Crores, for the predefined activities of 
research for development of technologies for natural resource management. The 
activities are carried out as per approved EFC (2020-21 to 2025-26). Since, 2025-26 
is the last year of EFC, the activities are carried out as per approved plan, so, budget 
may not be a constraint for effective functioning of activities related to NRM including 
NICRA. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
Horticulture Science 
Recommendation (Para No. 8)  
The Committee note that Rs. 318.91 crore has been allocated to Horticulture 
Science Division in BE 2025-26 which is more than the allocation of Rs. 257.07 crore 
in BE & RE 2024 -25. The Committee have been apprised that a significant amount 
of budget has been proposed under the new initiative on enabling climate resilience 
and ensuring food and nutritional security through genome editing in horticultural 
crops. The Committee, while appreciating the Department for enhancing the 

15 
 
allocation to the Horticulture Division, desire that emphasis should also be given for 
conservation and development of indigenous medicinal herbs and plants.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Department has due emphasis of research on conservation and development 
of indigenous medicinal herbs and plants under the ICAR-Directorate of Medicinal 
and Aromatic Plants Research (ICAR-DMAPR), Ananad, Gujarat & the ICAR-Indian 
Institute of Horticultural Research, Bengaluru (ICAR -IIHR). Presently a total of 15 
medicinal and aromatic plants namely aloe, ashwagandha, giloe, guggal, isabgol, 
safed musli, senna, kalmegh, satavari, salparni, betelvine (Piper betle) , 
mandukaparni (Centella asiatica), bhringraj (Eclipta alba), lemongrass & palmarosa 
are under taken for  research. 
• A total of 2,326 germplasm accessions have been collected, maintained/ and are 
utilized in crop improvement programmes  for breeding of improved varieties of 
MAPs. Further, a total of 672 germplasm resources of herbal medicinal plants 
such as mandukparni (28), gurmar (53), shankhpushpi (86), kalmegh (51), 
brahmi (115), aloe vera (30), betel vine (109) and one herbal garden with nearly 
200 different medicinal herb & aromatic plants species have been maintained 
under field gene banks.The location-specific R&D is carried out on more than 60 
medicinal herb & aromatic plants through 26 centres spread across 20 states of 
the Country 
• So far, a total of   34 improved varieties; five in asalio, four each in isabgol, 
ashwagandha and betel vine; two each in velvet bean, mandukparnee, kalmegh 
and holy basil/tulsi ( Ocimum tenuiflorum ); and, one each in Basil ( Ocimum 
basilicum) mandukaparni, lal chitrak, bach, lemongrass, opium poppy, shatavari, 
madhunashini and makoi have been identified for cultivation under different 
agroclimatic conditions. 
• In all, Good Agricultural Practices have been standardized for 27 medicinal and 
aromatic plants under varied agroclimatic conditions.  
• During the year 2019 -20 to 2023-24, a total of 79 training organised benefitting 
7,292 farmers and other stakeholders. 
• Department has also entered a tripartite MoU with AYUSH and CSIR, for 
advancing R&D on medicinal herbs and aromatic plants in the country. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 

16 
 
Animal Science  
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
The Committee note that Rs. 504.04 crore has been allocated to Animal Science 
Division in BE 2025-26 which is substantially higher than the allocations of Rs. 415.15 
crore in BE and RE 2024 -25. The Committee also note that the Division has utilized 
only Rs. 247.90 crore till 31st January, 2025 which is less than 60% of allocated fund 
in RE 2024 -25. The Committee have been apprised that the ICAR has developed 
vaccines for several important / emerging animal diseases and its research on 
veterinary biologicals has successfully eradic ated diseases like Rinderpest and 
Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia (CBPP) from India.  In this context, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for high cost of In -Vitro-
Fertilization (IVF) technology for the livestock which is hindering its accessibility to the 
farmers and the measures taken to address the issue and make the cost more 
affordable to the farmers.   
Reply of the Government 
The Animal Science Division has utilised 97.8 % of allocated funds during the 
year 2024-25.  The widespread adoption of IVF is hindered by high costs, primarily 
due to the reliance on imported hormones, media and consumables. ICAR -NDRI, 
Karnal, is actively engaged in developing affordable, locally produced culture media 
to reduce dependence on expensi ve imports. Additionally, fostering and supporting 
start-ups focused on producing hormones, plastic ware and essential instruments 
within the country will further drive down costs and enhance accessibility. ICAR aims 
to make IVF technology more affordable and widely accessible by developing 
indigenous solutions; ultimately benefiting farmers and strengthening the livestock 
industry. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
Animal Science 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
  
The Committee note that ‘Mission towards zero non -descript AnGR in India’ 
has been launched by the Department to characterize, catalogue and register 

17 
 
livestock, poultry and dog breeds of the country. As part of this, ICAR has devised a 
standard process of characterization, cataloguing and registration of animal genetic 
resources of the country. So far, the Committee note that registration of a total of 229 
indigenous breeds and one synthetic cattle breed, namely, ‘Frieswal’ has been 
completed by the end of January 2025 and the Division has planned to get registered 
40 – 50 new populations of the indigenous breeds in the next four to five years in the 
country. The Committee while appreciating the widely recognized initiative, hope that 
the department will be able achieve the targets set i.e. the registration of 40 – 50 new 
populations of the indigenous breeds in the next four to five years.  
Reply of the Government 
ICAR has initiated a mission approach for identifying new indigenous 
populations of livestock, poultry and dog across the country in August 2021. Since 
then, a total 29 indigenous animal breeds have been registered and Gazette notified. 
Till date, total 22 9 indigenous animal breeds have been registered by the ICAR. 
Further, around 80 breed applications of various livestock, poultry and dog species 
are under consideration for the registration at ICAR -National Bureau of Animal 
Genetic Resources (Karnal). Amon g these, around 12 -15 breeds to be registered 
during the current year and aro und 50 breeds in next 4 -5 years. The exploratory 
survey are conducted by the ICAR- NBAGR in various states/UTs under the Mission, 
more than 60 new animal populations were identified across the Country. The newly 
identified populations are characterized by 33 centres in 26 states/UTs under the 
Network Project (NWP) on Animal Genetic Resources. During 2024-25, the 18 new 
populations have been characterized.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
Agriculture Education 
Recommendation (Para No. 12)  
      The Committee note that Rs. 630.17 crore was allocated to the Agricultural 
Education Division in RE 2024-25 which is Rs. 231.43 crore more than the allocation of 
Rs. 398.74 crore in BE 2024 -25. The Ministry informed the Committee that Rs. 378.44 
crore only has been utilized by the Division till 31st January, 2025 which is approximately 
60% of the RE allocation. The Committee also note  that Rs.708.94 crore has been 

18 
 
allocated to the Division in BE 2025 -26 which is higher than last year BE & RE 
allocations. The Committee feel that there is a need to strengthen Agricultural Education 
in the country to produce skilled human resource which would ensure increase in 
production and  productivity on sustainable basis. The Committee, therefore, while 
appreciating the Department for enhancing the allocation under Agricultural Education 
Division, recommend for proper and effective utilization of allocated fund so as to 
achieve the intended objectives. 
Reply of the Government 
The Agricultural Education Division placed efforts for optimum and effective 
utilisation of the fund allocation and division utilised 99.7 % fund allocation (RE) 
during the year 2024-25. An amount of Rs.708.94 crore has been allocated (BE) to 
the Division for the year  2025-26, which is higher than the BE allocations of Rs. 
630.17 crore for the year 2024 -25. The enhanced BE  allocations during 2025-26 is 
essential for strengthening and quality assurance Agricultural Education in the 
country through provision for financial assistance pertaining to student amenities and 
upgradation of teaching and learning facilities across agricultural universities.   This 
would lead to skilled human resource in agriculture and allied areas.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division has been allocated 
Rs. 204.23 crore in BE 2025-26 which is less than the allocation of Rs. 234.89 crore 
made in BE 2024 -25. The Committee also note that Agricultural Extension Division 
is carrying out  on-farm testing to identify the location specificity of agricultural 
technologies, frontline demonstrations to demonstrate the production potential of 
different crops, training of farmers and extension personnel on knowledge and skills 
improvement and creating awareness on improved technologies among farmers of 
the country through a network of 731 Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs) spread all over 
the country. At present, 93 districts have two KVKs each and 121 districts do not 
have KVKs. Further, 15 new KVKs only have been opened during the last five years. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for not setting up of even a 
single KVK in 93 districts. Further, as recommended in their Demands for Grants 
(2025-26) report, the Committee suggest the D ARE to address the following issues 
in coordination with D/o Agriculture & Farmers Welfare:  
(i) The shortage of skilled personnel experienced by many KVKs may   be 
addressed on priority as it is impacting KVKs efficiency in discharging their 
duties.  
(ii) Streamlining of administrative processes of KVKs is also the need of the 
hour to improve their operational effectiveness to act as a one stop 
resource centre for supplying seeds, bio -products, issue/circulate 
advisories while leveraging ICT tools for wider outreach.   
(iii) The KVKs may be equipped with advanced/cutting edge  technologies 
improving their ability to conduct effective demonstrations and on -farm 
testing of latest technologies. Such technologies may aid the KVKs in setting 
up of e -linkage facilities for real time agro advisories & monitoring within 
their jurisdiction and also to act as frontline demonstration cum resource 

21 
 
centre for timely supply of farm inputs and effective dissemination of 
technologies.  
(iv)  Funding to KVKs may be improved to equip them with latest technologies 
suggested at (iii) above. They are of the view that accepting and 
implementing the above suggestions result in transforming KVKs in to new 
version of KVK 2.0 to act as a resource hub for all extension schemes. 
(v) KVKs may focus on climate resilient agriculture through targeted training 
programmes and promote convergence with private sector initiatives for 
resource sharing. 
(vi) KVKs should work in close tandem with State Government and invariably 
inform public representatives like MPs, MLAs, MLCs, etc regarding their 
upcoming events in advance for seamless coordination and wider 
outreach.  
Reply of the Government 
Presently 731 KVKs are functional in the country spearheading frontline 
extension system. “Strengthening of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) Scheme” has 
been extended for a period of 5 years from 2021 -22 to 2025-26 under XV Finance 
Commission with a provision for establishment of KVKs in 121 new districts of the 
country without a single KVK. KVKs are also functional in aspirational districts.  
(i) The filling up of vacancies in the KVKs is a continuous process and is the 
responsibility of the respective Host Organisation. As per the KVK scheme, the 
approved posts of the KVKs are filled as per the recruitment policies and 
procedures of the respective Host Organisation with the educational 
qualifications as laid down by ICAR. All the Host Or ganizations have been 
requested to fill up the vacant posts immediately. 
(ii) The revised mandate of KVK as has been approved in EFC 2021 -26 is to act as 
Single Window Knowledge, Resource and Capacity Development Centre. 
Accordingly, the mandated activities are revised including (i) Strengthening 
technology demonstration and promotion; supporting entrepreneurs and farmers' 
organizations through Public Private Partnership (PPP), (ii) Dissemination of 
technologies specific for various agro -climatic zones and training and capacity 
building for their larger adoption, (iii) Reorienting th e KVKs as knowledge and 
information centres for providing farmer-centric digital solutions and services, (iv) 

22 
 
Ensuring availability of quality seeds, planting materials and other technological 
inputs to the farmers in PPP mode, (v) Creating mass awareness and community 
mobilization for nature-friendly and climate resilient agriculture and allied sectors. 
(iii) KVKs are equipped with advanced technologies for effective demonstration to the 
farmers and other stakeholders. KVK demonstrate agri -drone application, 
precision farming technologies, micro irrigation and protected cultivation 
technologies. KVKs are also engaged in customised agro -advisories to the 
farmers through ICT led Kisan Sarathi portal. 
(iv) New version of KVK 2.0 as proposed is the need of the hour looking into the 
backdrop of climate change vulnerabilities. KVKs are also implementing several 
central sector schemes in convergence with the other departments and 
ministries. Funds are also mobilised from these departments. The enhanced 
funding for the Strengthening of KVK Scheme will be asked for the financial cycle 
2026-27 to 2030-31. 
(v) KVKs have focus on climate resilient agriculture at the field level under the aegis 
of National Innovations for Climate Resilience Agriculture (NICRA) covering the 
Climate Smart Village clusters is being provided in 151 most vulnerable districts 
of the country. The interventions also include training and capacity development 
of the stake holders for promotion of climate resilient agriculture. Collaboration 
with private partners are also being undertaken to have not only with other public 
partners but also taking private sector in the loop. 
(vi) KVKs have been advised to involve the public representatives in their mandated 
activities interventions. KVKs are already involving public representatives in their 
mandate activities. Many public representatives have recently participated in the 
events like Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra, launch of instalments of PMKISAN etc.   
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of this Report. 
 
  

23 
 
Manpower in ICAR Institutes  
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
The Committee note that a large number of posts including those in scientific, 
administrative and technical categories are lying vacant at various Institutes of the 
ICAR. The Committee have been apprised that vacancies in different cadres / 
positions do not affect functioning and achievement of desired results as officiating 
arrangements are made and work is carried out through available manpower. The 
Committee, while not agreeing to the contention of the Department that vacancies 
are not affecting the functioning of the Institute, recommend the Department to fill up 
the vacant scientific, administrative and technical posts at Institutes of ICAR at the 
earliest for the smooth and more meaningful functioning of the Institutes.  
Reply of the Government 
The Recruitment of various positions in different cadre (Scientists, Technical, 
Administrative and Finance) is a continuous process which is done in a timely manner 
by taking advance actions, wherever possible.  ICAR keeps on making all efforts for 
filling up of vacant posts, as and when vacancies arise. The recruitment of  621 
scientific positions have been completed and 458 positions have already been 
notified by Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board (ASRB).  Recruitment of 802 
Positions of Technician (T-l) (Level-3) and 190 positions of Senior Technical officers 
(STO)/ Subject Matter Specialist (SMS) (T -6) ( Level-I0) h ave been completed. 
Recruitment of 124 positions in the grade of STO/ SMS  and approx.1200 positions 
of T-3 (Level-5) have been forwarded to ASRB for direct recruitment.  Vacancies in 
the grade of AO/FAO and Assistant have recently been filled through Direct 
Recruitment, and efforts are also made to fill the vacancies caused due to non-joining 
of successful candidates. Recruitment Examination for the posts of Assistant Director 
(Official language) has also been conducted. The Council has also taken  steps 
towards filling up the DR vacancies on a yearly basis. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of this Report. 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
Budgetary Allocation 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
The Committee note that the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education (DARE) sought an allocation of Rs. 11253.07 crore for the year 2025 -26, 
it got Rs. 10466.39 crore which is 0.21% of total Outlay (BE) of Government of India 
for the year. This al location is, however, higher than the allocations of Rs. 9941.09 
crore made in BE 2024 -25 and Rs. 10156.35 crore made in RE 2024 -25. The 
Committee also note that the proportion (in percentage terms) of Budgetary 
Allocation (BE) made in favour of the Depart ment out of the total BE allocations of 
the Government of India has declined from 0.27% of the total outlay in the year 2020-
21 to 0.21% in 2025-26. During the last three years the allocation is constant i.e. 0.21 
% of the total outlay (BE) of the Central Government.  The Committee feel that 
decline / stagnant allocations as percent of total outlays of the Government of India 
is not a healthy trend as they hamper Research, education and extension services 
provided by the Department to the farming Community.   It is in this context, the 
Committee tend to agree with the suggestion of the Department for enhancement of 
Budget allocation to the tune of one per cent of Agri-GDP to address the priority and 
challenging issues of agriculture through Agricultural Resea rch, Education and 
Extension. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to consider 
increasing the allocation for the Department to achieve the goal of making Indian 
agricultural system modern and self-reliant.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Department will continue to make concerted efforts towards seeking 
enhanced budget allocations to address the priority and challenging issues of Indian 
Agriculture through agricultural research, education and extension.   
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
  

25 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
The Committee have been apprised that the Central Island Agricultural 
Research Institute (CIARI), Sri Vijaya Puram (Port Blair) was established in 1978 and 
most of the buildings are very old and due to the inclement weather conditions and 
earthquake prone area prevailing in these Islands, repairs and renovations need to 
be carried out at regular intervals. In this regard, a one -time Special Grant may be 
provided for the major renovations and repair of the laboratories, office and 
residential buildings. The Committee, while sympathetic to the demand of the 
Institute, recommend the Department to consider favorably a provision for allocation 
of funds for periodic renovations and repair of the laboratories, office and residential 
buildings of the Institutes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Department has allocated f unds for repair and maintenance to ICAR -CIARI 
for EFC Period 2021 -26. In addition, need/demand-based request under this Head 
is considered in respective Annual Plan periods including justified demands under 
Corpus Fund Scheme.  A onetime catch -up grant for building and related 
infrastructure for ICAR-CIARI shall be considered during the next EFC ( 2026-31) 
period.   
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of this Report. 
Agricultural Engineering 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
The Committee note that Rs. 95.74 crore has been allocated to the Agricultural 
Engineering Division in BE 2025 -26 which is more than the allocation of Rs. 91.24 
crore in BE & RE 2024-25. The Committee have been apprised that in last five years, 
434 technologies have been developed by the Division out of which 213 have been 
commercialized. The Committee also note that announcement for the establishment 

26 
 
of Makhana Board in Bihar has been made in Budget 2025-26 to improve production, 
processing, value addition and marketing of Makhana. The Committee, however, are 
concerned to note that no sufficient machinery and equipment is available for 
harvesting and processing of Makhana. Further, the functioning of Makhana 
Research Institute at Darb hanga, Bihar, needs to be made effective by providing 
resources and manpower.  The Committee believe that revival, development and 
effective functioning of Makhana Research  Institute is a pre requisite for the 
successful implementation of the proposal for setting up of Makhana Board. 
Reply of the Government 
The Research Centre for Makhana (Darbhanga) is in operation under the 
ICAR-Central Institute of Post -Harvest Engineering and Technology (CIPHET), 
Ludhiana as per approved scheme “Agriculture Production and Post -Production 
Mechanisation Augmented with Innov ative Technologies for Sustainable 
Development” for the 2020 -21 to 2025 -26 period. The proposal for restoration of 
national status of Makhana Centre along with deployment of manpower has been 
submitted to Ministry of Finance for concurrence.     
The Research Centre for Makhana has played a significant role in enhancing 
makhana yield, quality and sustainabili ty in production and processing through 
development of high -yielding makhana variety (Swarna Vaidehi) . The field system 
introducing of makhana cultivation with improved package of practices has led to 
higher yield and better quality, along with rapid area expansion under makhana 
cultivation.  
Several equipment/machines for Makhana roasting, popping and value -added 
products have been developed and licensed to manufacturers for commercialization 
namely Makhana seed washer, Makhana seed grader, Makhana seed primary 
roasting machine, Makhana seed p opping machine, Popped Makhana grader and 
various types of value-added products.  
The Centre has collaborated with Government Institutions, state agencies, 
educational institutions and private enterprises to support and provide technical 
know-how in production and processing of makhana and water chestnut. The centre 
has trained thousands of farmers and entrepreneurs, driving regional industries and 
livelihoods. The cultivation of Makhana has expanded from approximately 13,000 to 
35,000 hectares across multiple states. 

27 
 
Training cum Incubation Centre has been started and a laboratory is being set up for 
quality assessment of Makhana. Mechanization is promoted for rapidity and better 
hygiene of the processed products , quality high yielding seeds is distributed for 
improving yield and quality of the processed makhana products. Regular training on 
production, processing, value addition and marketing of Makhana are rendered to 
farmers and entrepreneurs. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of this Report. 
 
Crop Sciences 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 The Committee note that many biofortified, hybrid and high yi elding varieties of 
Field Crops -cereals, oilseeds, pulses, forage, fibre, sugarcane, etc., have been 
developed, released and notified for commercial cultivation by the farmers which lead 
to increase in production and productivity of these crops. The Committee, however, 
are of the opinion  that several of these high yielding varieties of crops have lost 
originality and possess certain drawbacks like short shelf life, tastelessness, high 
consumption of inputs, degradation of soil and water, etc., which needs to be 
addressed on priority. Further, the production of some crops like Urad, Gwar, etc., 
have declined over the years. The Committee, therefore, lay emphasis on developing 
crop varieties having b etter productivity while retaining qualities in terms of taste, 
flavor, shelf life, nutrients, eco friendliness, etc. and also for developing high yielding 
varieties of such crops whose production has declined over the years.   
 
Reply of the Government 
“Crop Science for Food and Nutritional Security” scheme is aimed to harness 
conventional and modern scientific knowledge and modern tools for developing 
location specific improved crop varieties / hybrids and matching protection and 
production technologies; refinement of seed production chain; conservation of 
genetic resources including plants, insects and microorganisms;  and providing the 

28 
 
advisory services and capacity building in the domain areas besides promotion of 
basic, strategic and anticipatory crop science research. The scheme deals with 85 
crops by handling huge genetic resources of plants, microbes and insects, with the 
organizational support of 28 Institutes including one deemed to be university; 20 All-
India Coordinated Research Projects (AICRPs) and 06 All -India Network Projects 
(AINPs) and 09 other projects. Successful efforts made in the past on special trait 
varieties includes:- 
• Development of 152 bio-fortified varieties in field crops (Rice 14; Wheat 53; Maize 
24; Pearl millet 12; Finger millet 08; Little millet 02, Proso millet 02, Foxtail millet 
01, Brown-top millet 01, Linseed 01, Mustard 10, Soybean 07, Groundnut 3, Lentil 
03, Field pea 01, Mung bean 01, Urd bean 01, Chickpea 02, Faba bean 01, Grain 
Amaranth 05). These biofortified varieties assume great significance to achieve 
nutritional security of the country. These cultivars have been improved for essential 
nutrients viz. , iron, zinc, calcium, protein, lysine, tryptophan, pro -vitamin-A, 
anthocyanin, vitamin-C, oleic acid and linoleic acid. The concentration of several 
anti-nutritional factors viz., erucic acid, glucosinolates and trypsin inhibitor has 
been significantly re duced in some of the cultivars. The area under bio -fortified 
varieties has reached to more than 16.0 million ha including wheat (13.0 m ha), 
rice (0.5 m ha), pearl millet (1.5 m ha), lentil (0.50 m ha) and mustard (1.0 m ha).  
• Development of heat tolerant varieties in wheat: To address the challenge of 
terminal heat tolerance in major wheat growing areas of the country, zone -wise 
high yielding heat tolerant varieties of wheat have been developed which occupy 
more than 70% of the wheat area  in the country. Wheat varieties developed with 
heat tolerant traits for different zones includes 29 varieties for North Western 
Plains Zone (NWPZ), 17 of Bread Wheat and 06 of Durum Wheat (06) for Central 
Zone (CZ), 16 for North Eastern Plains Zone (NEPZ), 07 of Bread Wheat and 08 
of Durum Wheat (08) for Peninsular Zone (PZ) 
•  15 varieties with higher input use efficient varieties of rice released and notified 
during 2024:  
• In Shri Anna, the 51 bio -fortified varieties have been developed, viz., 48 of pearl 
millet, 02 of finger millet and 01 of little millet. The 76 Millet based value added 
products developed that are ready to eat foods and ready to cook to improve taste 
and increase consumption of millets viz. biscuits, cake, pasta, vermicelli, halwa 
mix, multi-grain atta, upma mix etc. 
 

29 
 
 
During the last decade (2014 -2024), 2900 varieties of 80 different food, oilseeds, 
fodder, fibre and sugar crops have been released, of which 85% (2661 varieties) are 
climate resilient. Improved crop production and protection technologies along with 
increased av ailability of improved climate resilient varieties and seeds to farmers 
have not only stabilized food grain production but also increased it steadily during the 
last three years (2021 -22 – 315.62 million tonnes (MT), 2022 -23 – 329.69 million 
tonnes, 2023 -24 – 332.30 million tonnes) despite pressures posed by changing 
climate such as drought, floods, unseasonal rains and high temperatures in different 
parts of the country. However, in few crops the production has declined in some years 
due to extreme climati c conditions particularly drought/floods and insect pests and 
diseases, which will be addressed on priority through the various programmes. 
Further, the department have more focused efforts in addressing the issues of better 
productivity while retaining qualities in terms of taste, flavor, shelf life, nutrients, eco 
friendliness etc. and also for developing high yielding varieties of such crops whose 
production has declined over the years on priority through the various programmes 
under the scheme. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(4)/2025-PIM Dated 16th May, 2025] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI 
18 August, 2025  Chairperson 
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

30 
 
Annexure 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, Block -A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA),  New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
3. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
5. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
6. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
7. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
8. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
9. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
10. Shri Murasoli S. 
11. Shri Dharambir Singh 
12. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
14. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
   
Rajya Sabha 
 
  16. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
  17. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
  18. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
  19. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
  20. Shri Madan Rathore 
  21. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
  22. Shri P.P. Suneer 
   
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
   
 

31 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee *xxxxxx. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and 
adoption the following Reports: 
 
(i) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(ii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(iii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(iv) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(v) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(vi)  *xxxxx xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(vii) *xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx; 
(viii) Draft Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 8th Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2025 -26) of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education) presented during 18th Lok Sabha. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any 
modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present 
the Report to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
* Matter not related to this Report 

32 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT (18TH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations  13 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the Government  
Para Nos. 2,4,5,8,9,10 and 12 Total    7 
 Percentage     53.85% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government’s replies  
Para No. NIL Total 00 
 Percentage    0.00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos. 11 and 13 Total 02 
 Percentage 15.38% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
are still awaited 
Para Nos. 1,3,6 and 7 Total 04 
 Percentage  30.77% 
 