24
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.3.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 16.3.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 030
Price : Rs. 83.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2006-2007) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government .......................................................... 28
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ............................................................................ 45
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ...................................................... 46
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ....... 61
APPENDICES
I. State-wise number of DPAP and DDP projects
for which funding has been stopped ................... 71
II. Number of DPAP and DDP projects sanctioned,
completed, funding stopped and projects in
progress from 1995-96 to 2005-06 .......................... 72
III. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 27 February, 2007 ................. 74
IV. Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Nineteenth Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha) ........................................................ 76
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shrimati Susmita Bauri
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri George Fernandes
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
9. Shri Hannan Mollah
10. Shri D. Narbula
11. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
12. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
13. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
16. Shri Sita Ram Singh
17. Shri D.C. Srikantappa *
18. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri D.C. Srikantappa, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Urban Development to Committee on Rural Development vice
the vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Shrichand Kriplani MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Rural Development to Standing Committee on Chemicals
and Fertilizers vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 2847 dated August 31, 2006.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary Grade I
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty-fourth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 May,
2006. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 31 August, 2006.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
27 February, 2007.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee
is given in Appendix IV .
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 March, 2007 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2006-2007)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 May, 2006.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 36 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
 (i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Serial Nos. 2.5, 2.17, 2.18, 2.20, 3.40, 3.43, 3.46, 4.14, 4.24,
4.34, 5.15, 5.16, 5.17, 5.18, 5.25, 5.26 and 5.27.
(ii) Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s reply:
NIL
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Serial Nos. 2.26, 2.27, 3.14, 3.25, 3.26, 3.41, 3.44, 4.33, 5.14
and 5.19.
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 2.19, 2.21, 3.13, 3.27, 3.42, 3.45, 4.15, 4.25 and
5.20.
3. The Committee note that action with regard to the specific
issues raised under the following recommendations has been assured/
being taken by the Department as stated in the respective action
taken replies. The said recommendations have been categorised under
the interim category by the Committee. The Committee would like
the Department to expedite the proposed action and final replies in
this regard should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report. The final replies should
also address to the observations made by the Committee in the
comments (as given in para nos.2.19, 3.13 and 3.42) of the report.

2
(i) Expediting final view on Parthasarthy Committee Report.
(Recommendation Serial No. 4, Para No.2.19)
(ii) Involvement of Private Sector for wastelands development
in consultation with State Governments and local bodies.
(Recommendation Serial No. 6, Para No.2.21)
(iii) Need for convergence of watershed programmes for
wastelands development.
(Recommendation Serial No. 9, Para No.3.13)
(iv) Expediting mechanism for monitoring of watershed projects.
(Recommendation Serial No. 13, Para No.3.27)
(v) Need for coordinating works for watershed development
under National Rural Employment Guarantee Act with those
of existing schemes for wastelands development through
watershed projects.
(Recommendation Serial No. 16, Para No.3.42)
(vi) Finalisation of amendment to Land Revenue Act.
(Recommendation Serial No. 19, Para No.3.45)
(vii) Clarification on increasing gestation period of the watershed
projects from five to eight years.
(Recommendation Serial No. 22, Para No.4.15)
(viii) Need for re-identification of blocks under DPAP/DDP
scheme.
(Recommendation Serial No. 24, Para No.4.25)
(ix) Needs for expediting evaluation studies on Computerisation
of Land Records by LBSNAA and NIRD.
(Recommendation Serial No. 33, Para No.5.20)
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Expediting final view on Parthasarthy Committee Report
Recommendation Serial No. 4 (Para No. 2.19)
5. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee observe that Parthasarthy Committee has
analysed the watershed programmes in detail and given detailed

3
valuable recommendations. The recommendations of the said
Committee should be carefully examined while holding wide-
ranging consultations with all concerned and the Department
should take the desired action to implement the accepted
recommendations of the Committee. The Standing Committee
should also be kept apprised of the status of the implementation
of the major recommendations of the Parthasarthy Committee.”
6. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
 “The Parthasarthy Committee report has been circulated to all
State Governments and various concerned Ministries of
Government of India for their views/comments. The report of
the Committee has also been put on the web site of the
Department (www.dolr.nic.in) for wide consultations. The Ministry
is examining the recommendations of Parthasarathy Committee
in depth. The observations /suggestions made by the Standing
Committee will be duly taken into account and the outcome will
be apprised to the Standing Committee.”
7. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had desired
that they should be kept apprised about the status of implementation
of various recommendations made by the Parthasarthy Committee
on watershed programmes. The Department in the action taken reply
has stated that the Ministry is examining the recommendations in
depth and comments of all State Governments and various concerned
Ministries of the Union Government are being sought. The
Committee recommend to the Department to expedite consultation
with all concerned and implement the accepted recommendations of
the Committee. The Committee should also be kept apprised of the
developments in this regard.
B. Need for streamlining budget exercise for Plan funds and
minimising unspent balances
Recommendation Serial Nos. 7 & 8 (Para Nos. 2.26 and 2.27)
8. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note from the trends of allocation of outlay
during the years 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 that the agreed
allocation is lesser than the proposed allocation. During the year
2006-07, the agreed allocation is Rs. 689 crore lesser than the
proposed outlay. The Committee find it interesting that whereas
the overall allocation for 10th Plan is more than the projections,

4
the allocations under Annual Plans are lesser than the projections.
It is difficult to understand the way the budgeting exercise is
being undertaken where there seems to be no planning. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the basis of making
projections under each of the Annual Plan.
Recommendation (Para No.2.26)
“Whereas the releases from the Centre have been stated to be
almost cent per cent of the allocated outlay, the unspent balances
to the tune of Rs. 1,405 crore with the implementing agencies is
really a matter of concern to the Committee. They are not
convinced with the plea given by the Department whereby the
Department has tried to justify the unspent amount by stating
that the unspent balance do not exceed 10 percent of the project
cost at any point of time. The Department holds the view that
the balance is necessitated to maintain availability of funds at
the implementation level to avoid eventualities of non-payment
of wages as wastelands development projects are labour intensive
projects. However, the Committee wish to point out that Rs. 1,
405 crore is almost equal to the overall allocation of the
Department during the year 2006-07. The Committee feel that
the unspent balances should be seen with reference to the
allocation made during a particular year and not with reference
to the total project cost under different schemes. The projects
may continue even after five to seven years. Roll-on money to
the tune of 10 to 20 per cent of the allocation under a scheme
during a year can be justified on the grounds stated by the
Department. The justification of unspent balance corresponding
to the total project cost can not be understood. The Committee
find that instead of taking stringent measures for keeping the
unspent balances to the minimum, the Department has tried to
justify it which the Committee really disapprove. The Department
should take all the corrective measures and inform the Committee
accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No.2.27)
9. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The overall allocation for 10th Plan is more than the projections
only because of provision of Rs. 1000 crores under ‘New
Initiatives’. In all other schemes (except ‘New Initiatives’) the

5
approved outlay was less than the proposed outlay as can be
seen from the following table:-
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme As proposed As agreed by
by the Planning
Department Commission
1. DPAP 1600 1500
2. DDP 1200 1100
3. IWDP 1900 1800
4. CLR 500 400
5. SRA&ULR 200 200
6. EAP 365 365
7. TDET 100 90
8. IPS, M&E and Communication 100 71
9. New Initiatives Nil 1000
Total 5965 6526
The allocations during Tenth Five Year plan have been utilized
by the Department in respect of all Schemes except ‘New
Initiatives’. The Department makes projections for each of the
Annual Plan based on the overall targets under each scheme,
demands made by the States, trend of utilization of funds and
absorption capacity of the State Governments.”
 Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.26)
“While noting the concern of Hon’ble Standing Committee on
unspent balances, it is submitted that all schemes presently
implemented by the Department are demand driven. The annual
allocations made for different schemes in the Department’s budget
are not released to States or to Programme Implementing Agencies
on allocation basis but on the basis of demand for further
instalments in case of ongoing projects or for sanction of new
projects. For example in DPAP/DDP & IWDP , the releases are
made to ZPs/DRDAs in five installments over a period of five
years as per the prescribed procedure. Successive installments
are released only after 50 per cent of the funds released in the

6
previous installment have been utilized. It is also submitted that
the roll over opening balance figure of a particular year under
these programmes should be compared to the total funds released
to the Programme Implementing Agencies upto the previous year.
As under DDP , an amount of Rs. 1603.44 crore of Central and
State share was released from 1995-96 to 2004-05 and the opening
balance as on 1 April, 2005 was reportedly Rs. 261.41 crore. This
amounts to 15-16 per cent. More or less same position obtains in
the DPAP and IWDP .
Hon’ble Committees’ observations are very relevant for timely
completion of projects so that all the installments are claimed by
Project Implementing Agencies within the project period of five
years in accordance with schedule of activities. A number of
steps e.g. involvement of States in the monitoring activities,
launching of web-based on line monitoring of projects and issue
of notices to PIAs of projects where there is delay in claiming
the second and subsequent installments have been initiated. All
efforts are made to expedite implementation of programmes so
that funds released are utilized quickly minimizing the funds in
hand for ongoing programme at any point of time.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No.2.27)
10. The Committee in their earlier reports had expressed strong
concern over the planning process as well as huge unspent balances
with specific reference to the allocations and expenditure of the
Department of Land Resources during Tenth Plan. The trends of
allocating outlay whereby the overall allocation of the Department
during Tenth Plan was more than the projections and during annual
plans, the allocation was lesser than the proposed outlay were also
pointed out. The Department’s response to the strong observations
of the Committee is not satisfactory. Rs.1,000 crore was allocated
during Tenth Plan for ‘New Initiatives’ without any idea of the new
schemes that were proposed to be launched during Tenth Plan. As
recorded in the Para No. 2.10 of the report, the Secretary had
informed the Committee that the Department had planned a new
programme on Bio-fuel which was still in formulative stage and
was not fully operational. Tenth Plan has already concluded and the
Department is yet to launch the new schemes for which
Rs. 1,000 crore i.e., the substantial allocation was earmarked.
Another surprising fact noticed is that even when the Department
did not propose any allocation for new schemes, the Planning

7
Commission on its own was very generous and allocated Rs. 1,000
crore for ‘New Initiatives’. As regards the allocation being lesser
than the projections during annual plans, the reply of the Department
is quite evasive. It has simply been stated that the projections are
made based on the overall targets under each scheme, demand of
States, trends of utilisation and capacity of State Governments. The
difference between proposed and agreed to allocation i.e.,
Rs. 689 crore during 2006-2007 is quite noticeable keeping in view
the overall allocations of the Department during that year i.e.,
Rs. 1421.70 crore. Another trend noticed by the Committee was huge
unspent balances. Instead of probing the reasons for under utilisation
and taking corrective steps, the Department has tried to justify the
opening balances. While examining the Demands for Grants, the
Department justified 10 per cent of the project cost (refer para no.
2.24 of the report). When the Committee highlighted that opening
balances should be read in connection with the allocation of a
particular year and not with the consolidated allocation of so many
years considered as the project cost, the Department has evolved
another yardstick to justify the opening balances. Now, in the action
taken reply, the Department has stated that 15 to 16 per cent of the
total allocation made during eight years i.e., 1995-96 to 2004-05 under
DDP and so in other schemes is justified as the role-on money is
needed to carry on the ongoing projects.
The Committee deplore the way the planning exercise is being
undertaken. Moreover, the Committee strongly disapprove the way
the Department has tried to justify the trend of allocation and huge
opening balances. The Committee while reiterating their concerns
expressed in the earlier report would like that such mistakes should
not be repeated while making allocations for the Eleventh Plan. The
allocation for proposed scheme(s) should be with regard to the
specific scheme for which substantial planning and homework has
been done. The trend of allocating amount for vague schemes as
‘New Initiatives’ which were never visualized should not be repeated.
Planning Commission/ Ministry of Finance should be apprised of
the concerns of the Committee in this regard. As regards under
utilisation, instead of finding out ways to justify, the stress should
be on locating ways and means to complete the project in time
which would ensure utilisation of the scarce resources.
C. Need for convergence of watershed programmes for wastelands
development
Recommendation Serial No. 9 (Para No. 3.13)
11. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee in their earlier reports have repeatedly been
expressing their concern over the multiplicity of programmes/

8
schemes to tackle the problem of wastelands in the country and
have been emphasizing on the need for convergence of the
programme. While examining the Demands for Grants, it has
repeatedly been brought to the notice of Government but the
issue although agreed to in principle lacks unanimity among the
various Ministries involved in handling the issue of wastelands
development. The Technical Committee in Chapter three of the
report has expressed similar concerns. It has been stated that
serious differences persist among different Ministries regarding
the ownership of the unified programme.
The Committee also note that in the Mid-Term Appraisal
document of the Planning Commission, the formula for bringing
the watershed activities under one umbrella has been suggested
which seems to be not agreeable to the concerned Ministries due
to their reluctance to leave the area of activities related to
watershed management being undertaken by them. The
Committee also note that the proposal has been mooted by the
Ministry of Agriculture for a nodal centralized agency  i.e. Rainfed
Area Authority . Again the issue of conflict is the ownership of
the aforesaid authority. Further the Committee also find that
finally it has been agreed that the said authority would be best
located under the umbrella of the PMO. The Committee feel that
sufficient time has been lost over the issue of taking decision on
the issue of convergence. It is high time to resolve the issue of
convergence at the earliest.”
12. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Cabinet at its meeting held on 10 August, 2006 has approved
the proposal of the Ministry of Agriculture for setting up of the
National Rainfed Areas Authority (NRAA).”
13. The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing the need
for convergence of various programmes/schemes with regard to the
development of wastelands in the country being undertaken by
different Ministries/Departments of the Union Government and
bringing the same under one umbrella. With the continuous
pursuance of the issue, the Government agreed to the
recommendation of the Committee in principle and the formula for
bringing the watershed activities under one umbrella was being
evolved by the Government. While examining the Demands for
Grants of the previous year, when the status of the aforesaid
recommendation was sought from the Department, it was stated that

9
the Ministry of Agriculture had mooted a proposal for a nodal
centralized agency i.e. ‘Rainfed Area Authority’. Considering the
conflict with regard to ownership of aforesaid authority the
Committee were apprised that the said authority would best be
located under the umbrella of PMO. The action taken reply with
regard to the aforesaid issue simply mentions that the Cabinet at its
meeting held on 10 August, 2006 has approved the proposal of
Ministry of Agriculture for setting up of the National Rainfed Area
Authority. There is no mention of the disputed area as to under
which Ministry/Department the aforesaid authority would be set up.
The Committee would like to be informed about the details of the
composition, area of activity, the main controlling Ministry/
Department etc. of the aforesaid centralised agency. Besides the
Committee recommend for early constitution of the authority so as
to address the issue of multiplicity of authorities in this regard.
D. Clarification on the data with regard to wastelands developed
during the current plan period
Recommendation Serial No. 10 (Para No. 3.14)
14. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note the claim of the Department that the extent
of wastelands has come down from 63.85 million hectares to
55.27 million hectares between the period 2000 and 2005. The
Committee find that even with the efforts of the Department of
Land Resources the target for development of wastelands during
five years of Tenth Plan are 18 million hectares. Out of this target,
12.47 hectares of wastelands have already been developed. The
other Ministries/Departments of the Union Government as well
as State Governments involved with the task of development of
wastelands may also be contributing substantially towards the
development of major area of wastelands in the country. In this
scenario, the Committee find that there is some mismatch between
the achievement proclaimed by the Department and the actual
area developed. Although the Department seems very optimistic
by finding that the wastelands area has declined as found by the
updated Atlas, the achievements reflected by the updated Atlas
i.e. development of only 8.58 million hectares of land during five
years period is too meagre even when compared with the targets
of five years i.e. 18 million hectares only of the Department of
Land Resources. If the targets fixed and proclaimed by different
Ministries of Union as well as State Governments are added

10
together, the whole wastelands area would have been developed
by now. In view of this scenario, the Committee feel that the
achievements reflected under schemes may not be true at the
ground level. The Committee would like a clarification of the
Department in this regard so as to enable them to understand
the position in proper perspective”.
15. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Tenth Plan target of 18 million hectares is for sanctioning
of new projects. Achievement of land actually treated would be
reflected after these new projects are completed. Reduction in
the extent of wastelands by 8.58 million hectares would reflect
the development of wastelands under projects sanctioned prior
to Tenth Plan. The total area covered by projects under area
development projects sanctioned prior to Tenth Plan (1995-96 to
2001-02) is as follows:
IWDP  3.27 million hectares
DPAP  6.90 million hectares
DDP  3.36 million hectares
Total 13.53 million hectares
A study titled “Comprehensive Assessment of Watershed
Programmes in India” has been assigned to the International
Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT),
Hyderabad to critically assess the impact of various watershed
development programmes in India, to identify the drivers of
success from the bright spots, to develop suitable institutional
and technical recommendations, policy guidelines and suitable
data base for sustainable and efficient management of the
watershed programmes and to identify the positive factors leading
to reduction of wastelands by about 9 million hectares (2.72 per
cent of geographical area) over a period of five years as indicated
by Wastelands Atlases brought out in 2000 and 2005. The total
project period is for two years. ICRISAT study covers programmes
of all concerned Departments/Ministries. The study is based on
the decision taken in the meeting of National Watershed
Committee and funded jointly by this Department and by the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of
Agriculture.”

11
16. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had desired
the clarification of the Department with regard to the conflicting
data mentioned in respect of the development of wastelands in the
country under different schemes. With the setting up of an exclusive
Department to deal with the issue of wastelands development, the
Department of Land Resources earlier known as the Department of
Wastelands Development has been monitoring the overall scenario
of development of wastelands in the country. The Atlas and the
updated Atlas in this regard have been produced by the Department.
The Committee had noted that the updated Atlas indicated
development of only 8.58 million hectares of land during five years
period which was too meagre even when compared with the targets
of the Department of Land Resources alone. The Department in the
action taken reply instead of furnishing the clarification in this regard
has further indicated another data indicating the projects sanctioned
prior to Tenth Plan. It has been stated that the projects to cover
13.53 million hectares were sanctioned between the period 1995-96
to 2001-02 under the three major schemes of the Department i.e.
IWDP , DPAP and DDP . The main point for consideration as indicated
in the recommendation was to consider the efforts made by various
quarters viz, various Ministries of the Union Government including
the Department of Land Resources and the State Governments while
having the estimates of wastelands and the data of development of
wastelands in a particular period, to which the Department has not
furnished the categorical response. In view of this scenario, the
Committee feel that there is no mechanism to evaluate the overall
position with regard to development of wastelands in the country
on a periodic basis.
The Committee further note that now the Department has taken
initiative for a study titled “Comprehensive Assessment of Watershed
Programmes in India”. The study has been assigned to the
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
(ICRISAT), Hyderabad. The study would cover programmes of all
concerned Departments and Ministries. While noting the aforesaid
mechanism, the Committee strongly recommend to the Department
to also take into consideration the initiatives taken by the State
Governments with regard to the development of wastelands by their
own schemes. Perhaps the best way to know about the status of
wastelands in the country would be updating the information with
regard to wastelands based on the district-wise status in the areas

12
which have large wastelands in the country. Unless the core data in
this regard is obtained indicating the ground position, no study
would give the actual position in this regard. While reiterating the
concerns expressed earlier, the Committee would like to recommend
for a permanent mechanism to periodically update the information
in this regard. The Department should take the desired initiatives in
this regard and apprise the Committee accordingly.
E. Need for incorporating information about foreclosure of projects
in Budget Documents
Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 3.25)
17. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee in their 10th and 16th Reports had expressed
serious concerns over the issue of foreclosure of projects under
the schemes related to wastelands development i.e. Integrated
Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP), Drought Prone
Areas Programme (DPAP), Desert Development Programme (DDP)
and Technology Development, Extension and Training (TDET).
While examining the action taken replies, the Committee had
observed that some of the projects were foreclosed at the last
stage when substantial allocation had been released for the project
thereby wasting national resources. Detailed analysis of the issue
indicate that the system of foreclosure has been given in detail
in the watershed guidelines. It has been stated that at the initial
phase of a project i.e. the first nine to twelve months, if it is
considered that the project cannot be implemented successfully
for certain unavoidable circumstances and reasons the ZP/DRDA
shall recommend for its foreclosure to the State Governments
which will consider such requests on merits and send its
recommendations to the Department of Land Resources. As
reported in 16th Report of the Committee, most of the projects
are being foreclosed even at the last stage. The Committee observe
that the guidelines do not seem to have been followed while
foreclosing projects under different schemes.
The Committee further find from the data furnished by the
Department that for a large number of projects under DPAP and
DDP funding has been stopped. The Committee would like to
be informed about the difference between the funding stopped

13
and foreclosure of the projects since two different data have been
indicated in the Budget documents. The Committee would also
like the Department to furnish information with regard to the
date of sanction, funds earmarked and date of foreclosure/when
funds were stopped in each of the foreclosed project scheme-
wise so as to enable the Committee to analyse the position in
detail. The Committee would also like to recommend that such
information about the foreclosure/funding stopped should
regularly be maintained and indicated in the Budget documents.”
18. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as
under:
“It is submitted that the term ‘foreclosure’ refers to provision of
‘probation period’ in the watershed guidelines, which provides
that when a project fails to even take off during the probation
period (initial 9-12 months) as the required village level
institutions to steer the project implementation are not grounded
due to conflicting interest groups in the project area and the
project can not be implemented successfully , the same may be
recommended by ZP/DRDA for ‘foreclosure’ to the State
Government which will consider such requests on merits and
send its recommendations to Department of Land Resources
(DoLR). The unspent funds should be refunded to DoLR when
the projects are foreclosed. The “funding stopped projects” of
IWDP/DPAP/DDP are those where complete implementation
could not take place in the scheduled project period due to
inordinate delay in implementation of the project. The delayed-
projects are duly considered and given extension of 1-2 years. In
fact, many such projects were completed in extension period but
in those, which still could not be completed, further funding
was stopped. Utilization Certificate (UC) for the funds already
released is obtained and State Government is supposed to fund
the remaining part of the project. If funds released are not
properly utilized recovery is effected. Seven projects under IWDP
were closed for various reasons such as conflict amongst various
groups, cases being sub-judice leading to undue delay etc. In
most cases, such closed projects are followed by fresh projects to
avoid deprivation of benefits to the people of that area. Recovery
of Rs. 72.23 lakh has been effected in one case. Efforts are being
made to recover funds in other cases.

14
The Ministry has initiated action on the following lines to
streamline procedure of foreclosure and extension of projects:
1. Foreclosure
a. In addition to mid-term evaluation by the State Government
a concurrent evaluation of the project in the second year of
the implementation shall be got done to find out whether
the required village level institutions have been grounded
and the necessary institutional mechanism for execution of
project has been established.
b. The evaluation shall also indicate whether the technical
features of the project including physical location, layout
and alignment of the components are prima facie sound and
suggest modifications for recasting, if required.
c. A State level committee shall be constituted for examining
the report and recommending action for foreclosure or
continuance of the project to Department of Land Resources.
d. The committee shall also fix responsibility in all cases of
financial embezzlement or other implementation lapses.
e. The formal closure shall be by Department of Land
Resources and unspent amount has to be returned to the
Department of Land Resources.
2. Extension
A review of all ongoing projects requiring extension shall be
done by a State level Committee. The Committee shall examine
each project on merit and submit a report/recommendation to
Department of Land Resources at least 90 days before expiry of
stipulated period. The State committee may also recommend either
rescheduling of the remaining project activities to be completed
within the originally sanctioned project period or an extended
project period. The report/recommendation of the State
Government on foreclosure and extension of projects shall be
examined by the Project Sanctioning Committee (PSC) in
Department of Land Resources/Ministry of Rural Development
for granting extension or closing the project.
Besides, monitoring of claiming the second instalment by Project
implementing agencies is key to implementation of programmes.
Accordingly, these will be monitored strictly and show cause
notices issued to PIA/State Government wherever there is delay

15
in claiming the second installment (after approval of the project
report, work plan and community mobilization) and the fourth
installment (after Mid-Term Evaluation of the project).
The details of foreclosed / funding-stopped IWDP projects are
as under:
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of the Date of Total Total cost Total Year of Remarks
No. District Sanction Area (Rs. in released foreclosure/
(in lakh) (Rs. in funding
hectares) lakh) stopped
1. Unnao-I 2.1.98 12041 481.64 216.73 1999-2000
2. Rae-Bareli 25.6.98 12100 484.00 172.60 1999-2000
3. Unnao-II 23.3.98 12054 482.16 72.32 1999-2000
4. Kathua-II 20.3.02 5987 481.56 49.39 2003-04
5. Sultanpur 23.3.98 12039 359.22 72.23 2000-01 Money refunded as the
project could not take off
6. E. Sikkim-III 27.3.98 5669 222.76 55.53 2004-05 Un-utilised money
refunded and projects
have been reframed
7. E. Sikkim-IV 24.3.99 11900 476.00 71.40 2004-05
TOTAL 71790 2987.34 661.00
The relevant details of ‘DPAP/DDP funding stopped projects’ are
submitted in Appendix – I & II.”
19. In pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee, the
Department has furnished the information with regard to foreclosure
of projects under various watershed development schemes viz IWDP ,
DPAP and DDP . While analyzing the data in this regard, the
Committee note that under DDP and DPAP , a large number of
projects are being foreclosed. Under DPAP as many as 1,764 projects
were foreclosed. Under DDP 300 projects were foreclosed. Not only
that, the disturbing data indicated in the statement is that many
projects are being foreclosed when as many as six installments were
released under a particular project. Under DPAP , out of 1764 projects,
for 400 projects even the sixth installment was released. Similarly,
CBI case for
misappropriation/
misutilisation of funds by
NGO as PIA







16
under DDP out of 300 projects, for 110 projects, the sixth installment
was released. The Committee do not understand releasing money to
a project for so many years when it is not performing well. There
is an urgent need to evaluate the projects on a regular basis. In this
regard, the Committee in their earlier recommendation had also
recommended that the detailed information of the foreclosed projects
viz the date of sanction, funds earmarked, date of foreclosure when
funds were stopped should invariably be indicated in the Budget
documents. The Department has not responded to the aforesaid
recommendation of the Committee. While reiterating their earlier
recommendation, the Committee would like to emphasize that such
a data should also be indicated invariably at the website of the
Department. This would ensure further transparency and put pressure
on the implementing agency for better performance of the projects.
The Committee hope that the required information would be
indicated in the Budget documents for the year 2007-08.
Further the Committee observe that in respect of IWDP , the
number of projects foreclosed is quite less i.e. seven projects were
foreclosed so far. Besides the data indicated with regard to IWDP
mentions about the steps taken viz the recovery of unutilized amount
in respect of the foreclosed projects. Such information about the
action taken has not been indicated in respect of DDP and DPAP
projects. The Committee would like the Department to indicate
similar position of the action taken with regard to the foreclosed
projects specifically indicating the unspent amount lying with the
specific implementing agency of a project at the time of foreclosed
project and whether it was surrendered or not should also be
indicated. Besides the data with regard to the foreclosed projects
under IWDP vis-a-vis DPAP and DDP should further be analyzed
so as to know about the reasons of a higher number of projects
being foreclosed under DPAP and DDP as compared to IWDP . The
results of such study should be furnished for the information of the
Committee.
F. Pursuing with State Governments to refund the unspent balances
for projects under Employment Assurance Scheme (EAS) merged
with IWDP
Recommendation Serial No. 12 (Para No. 3.26)
20. The Committee had noted as below:
“As regards the projects transferred from erstwhile Employment
Assurance Scheme of the Department of Rural Development to

17
the Department of Land Resources during the year 1999-2000,
the Committee note that the initial committed liability in case of
these projects was Rs. 1,500 crore. As regards the total funds
released to these projects, Rs. 900.68 crore have been released so
far for these projects. The Committee further find that the
Department has no information with regard to the status of
projects and the physical achievements for these projects. Not
only that, simply releasing the outlay with regard to claims made
by States is considered as completion of the project. It has further
been stated that the details of physical and financial achievements
for these projects seem the merger of watershed component of
EAS in IWDP . The Committee deplore the way the monitoring
of the project is being undertaken by the Department. To analyse
the position with regard to EAS projects transferred from the
Department of Rural Development to the Department of Land
Resources, the Committee would like to be apprised about the
number of projects transferred, outlay earmarked, the area
developed in each of the project district-wise so as to enable the
Committee to have a proper analysis.”
21. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“As a part of an exercise aimed at rationalizing the structure of
various schemes, EAS was retained mainly as a Wage
Employment Scheme and sanctioning of new watershed projects
was discontinued w.e.f. 1 April, 1999. Prior to 1 April, 1999,
40 per cent of the EAS funds were earmarked for water and soil
conservation and 20 per cent for minor irrigation works. District
Collectors/Deputy Commissioners of the Districts sanctioned these
projects taking into account block-wise requirement of works for
generation of wage employment. Funds were allocated among
the blocks by District Collector/Deputy Commissioner for the
shelf of projects obtained from Gram Sabhas/Panchayats and the
Departments. The Ministry of Rural Development did not sanction
project-wise funds for watershed nor monitored project-wise
details.
In April, 1999 the Department of Wastelands was renamed as
Department of Land Resources and DDP and DPAP and
watershed component of projects sanctioned prior to 1 April,
1999 under EAS were transferred to the Department of Land
Resources. The Department undertook an exercise to determine
the committed liabilities for only those works which were truly
a watershed under the strict definition of the guidelines issued

18
by this Ministry and where the money was transferred to
watershed committees prior to 1 April, 1999. Thus States
submitted the district-wise requirement of funds to complete the
projects. The total area taken up under EAS period to 31 March,
1999 for completion of watershed development projects was
estimated at 63.50 lakh hectares and the committed liabilities were
worked out to be Rs.1500 crore out of which the Central share
was 75 per cent i.e. Rs. 1125 crore . It was also decided that the
Central share of committed liabilities of the EAS amounting to
Rs.1125 crore will be released by the Department of Land
Resources in six half yearly installments during the next three
years i.e. 1999-2000, 2000-2001, 2001-2002. As the average size of
each project was 500 hectares the number of projects was very
large. The installments were not released project-wise but these
were released to the districts on the basis of consolidated
utilisation certificate and audited statement of accounts submitted
by them. The next instalment was released only when the
unutilized balance with the district was less than 50 per cent of
the last release. As all the States could not claim the due Central
share by 2001-02, it was agreed for continuation of projects upto
March, 2003. An amount of Rs. 900.69 crores was released upto
March, 2004.. The States which could not claim the balance
committed liabilities were asked to complete the projects from
their own resources. The States were asked to submit completion
report and refund the unspent balances. The completion
reports have been received from some States and an amount of
Rs. 902.15 lakhs has been refunded by the States so far. The
Department is pursuing the matter with the States for submission
of remaining completion reports. The data on area developed for
the projects in all the districts is therefore, not available as the
final reports are awaited from the States.”
22. The Committee note that the Employment Assurance Scheme
being implemented by the Department of Rural Development was
discontinued from the year 1999-2000 and the issue of committed
liability with regard to the ongoing projects under the aforesaid
scheme was transferred from the Department of Rural Development
to the Department of Land Resources. Both the Departments are the
sister Departments under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Rural
Development. On the issue of monitoring the projects for which the
committed liability was transferred from the Department of Rural
Development to the Department of Land Resources, the Committee
have consistently been pursuing with the Department in the various
reports. While examining Demands for Grants of the previous year,

19
the Committee had again taken up this issue and directed the
Department to furnish information about the number of projects
transferred, outlay earmarked, the area developed in each of the
project district-wise so that the Committee could analyze the position
in this regard. In spite of the continuous pursuance of the issue, the
action taken replies furnished by the Department are vague. It does
not address issues raised by the Committee. The details of the
committed liability already known to the Committee have been
reproduced in the action taken replies. Besides, the disturbing
information provided by the Department is that the Ministry did
not sanction project-wise funds for watershed projects nor monitor
project-wise details under Employment Assurance Scheme. The
installments were being released to the districts on the basis of the
requests made by the various districts. The Department has also
informed that the completion reports with regard to various projects
being undertaken under Employment Assurance Scheme have been
received from some of the States and an amount of Rs. 902.15 lakhs
has been refunded by the States so far. The Committee note that
there is contradiction in the replies furnished by the Department.
On the one hand, it has been stated that project-wise monitoring is
not being done by them, on the other hand it has been submitted
that the completion reports are being received from States. In the
absence of detailed and focused reply, the Committee are unable to
draw any conclusion with regard to the projects being undertaken
under the erstwhile Employment Assurance Scheme. The Committee
deplore the way the issue of committed liability under Employment
Assurance Scheme is being undertaken and they would like to
reiterate their earlier recommendation to furnish the desired
information with regard to the number of projects transferred, outlay
earmarked, the area developed in each of the project district-wise so
as to enable the Committee to have a proper analysis.
G. Expediting Perspective Plan for wastelands development with
different State Governments
Recommendation Serial No. 15 (Para No. 3.41)
23. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the
Department to get the perspective plans finalised from various
State Governments on the issue of development of wastelands.
They find from the replies that none of the States is ready with
the perspective plan. Only two States i.e. Tamil Nadu and Kerala

20
have submitted the perspective plans in respect of few districts.
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to have a fair
idea of the task in hand and the task to the handled in future
with regard to wastelands development in the country. Further
as observed in the preceding paras of the report there are varying
estimates with regard to the area falling under wastelands as
well as the task of development of wastelands handled by the
Government initiatives. The exact idea of the wastelands area,
work involved can be known when the perspective plans are
ready. Besides perspective plans as submitted by the State
Governments can be a better input to formulate the national
plan. In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend to
pursue further with the State Governments to finalise the
perspective plans so that the same can be used while deciding
the strategy for the Eleventh Five Year Plan”
24. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“As recommended by the Committee, the Department of Land
Resources is pursuing the matter of preparation of perspective
plans by the States so as to formulate a national plan and decide
the strategy of Eleventh Five Year Plan. Some States have
however, expressed financial constraints and have requested for
funds to prepare these plans. The Government is contemplating
to modify the Hariyali guidelines to allow some administrative
funds at State level for Information, Education and
Communication (IEC), monitoring and planning including
preparation of perspective plans .”
25. The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing on the
perspective plans by various State Governments on the issue of
development of wastelands. In response to the recommendation of
the Committee, the Department has pursued the matter with various
State Governments. It has been mentioned in the action taken replies
that some States have expressed financial constraints and requested
for funds to prepare these plans. The Government is contemplating
to modify the Hariyali guidelines to allow some administrative funds
at State level for Information, Education and Communication (IEC),
monitoring and planning including preparation of perspective plans.
The Committee would like the Department to take the final decision
in this regard expeditiously so that the issue of perspective plans by
the States can be addressed which can work as an input for the
Eleventh Plan.

21
H. Need for coordinating works for watershed development under
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act with those of existing
schemes for wastelands development through watershed projects
Recommendation Serial No. 16 (Para No. 3.42)
26. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee further note that as indicated by Technical
Committee Rs. 1,50,000 crore would be required to treat the
estimated land of 125 million hectares. The Technical Committee
has suggested to double the current programme outlay. Further
it has also been stated that the allocation made under ‘National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme’ would supplement the
outlay provided by different Government schemes for the
development of wastelands. The Committee find that the outlay
for National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme has been
separately allocated by the Department of Rural Development.
Rs. 11,300 crore during 2006-2007 have been earmarked for
200 districts which have been covered by the Guarantee Scheme.
Till the scheme is not made applicable nation-wide, it is difficult
to know how far the outlay provided for NREGS could
supplement the Government initiatives taken under different
wastelands programmes. Besides there is an urgent need to have
some sort of coordinating mechanism for the schemes being
undertaken under NREGS related to watershed activities and the
schemes taken under the Department of Rural Development or
some other Ministries of Union Government or State
Governments. The Committee feel that Gram Sabha is the best
mechanism to coordinate the activities related to wastelands
development. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken by the Department in this regard.”
27. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Area Development Programmes under DDP , DPAP and
IWDP are implemented by the Panchayati Raj Institutions under
the Hariyali Guidelines. The NREGS is also implemented by the
PRIs. There is a provision in both to dovetail in order to achieve
greater impact at the implementation level. The mechanism to
coordinate the activities related to wastelands development is
therefore inbuilt in these schemes. However, NREGA is not
applicable country-wide and the NREGS depends on demand
for work, which may be seasonal. As far as the recommendation
of Parthasarathy Committee on this issue is concerned, the same

22
is being examined by the Ministry in depth. The observations/
suggestions made by the Standing Committee will, however, be
duly taken into account and the outcome will be apprised to the
Standing Committee.”
28. On the suggestion of the Technical Committee to double the
current outlay being provided for the development of wastelands in
the country, the Committee in the earlier recommendation had
proposed for some sort of coordinating mechanism with regard to
the works undertaken under the different existing watershed schemes
and the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme keeping in
view the fact that most of the activities being undertaken under the
Guarantee Scheme relate to treatment and development of land. The
Committee had also suggested that Gram Sabhas can be the best
mechanism to coordinate the various activities related to wastelands
development. On this issue, the Department has assured that the
suggestion of the Committee will be taken into account and outcome
will be apprised accordingly. The Committee hope that the
mechanism of coordination as suggested in the earlier
recommendation of the Committee would be evolved expeditiously
and they would like to be kept apprised in this regard.
I. Expeditious finalisation of amendment to outdated Land
Acquisition Act, 1894
Recommendation Serial No. 18 (Para No. 3.44)
29. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee wish to point out that Land Acquisition Act
1894 is an old and outdated enactment which needs considerable
amendments keeping in view the changed circumstances. The
Committee have repeatedly been stressing for bringing
amendments to this Act. The Committee understand that proposal
for the amendment of Land Acquisition Act is under consideration
with the Department for a long time. They find from the
submission made by the Secretary during the course of oral
evidence that much emphasis is not being given to finalise the
proposals for the amendment of the said Act. The Committee are
not convinced by the Statement made by the Secretary that land
is a State subject and the Central Act will not become effective
unless the State accepts it. The Committee note that Central Acts
are the model for the State Governments on which they draft
their policies and laws. State Governments are waiting for the
amendments in Land Acquisition Act. The old and outdated Act

23
has been a hindrance for implementation of various projects where
acquisition of land is required. In view of this, the Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to finalise the proposals
for amendment to the aforesaid Act and bring the same before
the Parliament at the earliest.”
30. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“Some proposals for amendment in the Land Acquisition Act,
1894 are under consideration. The need for amendment of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 has been felt to meet the ever-growing
demand for land because of industrialisation and urbanisation
specially after adoption of New Economic Policy and for ensuring
both higher compensation to landowners as well as for time
bound and effective acquisition of land. Accordingly, a draft of
the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2004 was circulated to
State Governments in 2004 for obtaining their views on some
proposed amendments of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 to make
the acquisition process time bound and effective. However,
responses of all States have not been received. Hence, the
proposals have not been finalized so far.”
31. The Committee find with dismay that amendments to
outdated Land Acquisition Act of 1894 have not been finalised by
the Government so far. Non-receipt of views from different State
Governments has been attributed a reason for non-finalisation of
amendments to the aforesaid Act. The Committee observe that there
is lack of will power on the part of Government to bring about the
necessary amendments even though there is a need for making the
acquisition process time bound and effective in the light of ever
growing demand for land because of industrialisation and
urbanisation specially after adoption of New Economic Policy and
for ensuring higher compensation to land owners. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate that proposed amendments to the aforesaid Act
should be finalised expeditiously paving the way for a new law to
be enacted by Parliament in keeping with the proposed rehabilitation
policy.
J. Studying international experience for wastelands development
Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Para No. 4.33)
32. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Technology Development, Extension and Training (TDET)
Scheme is an important scheme, the foremost objective of which

24
is operationalisation of cost effective and proven technologies and
dissemination of research findings and appropriate technologies
for the development of various categories of wastelands. From
the date furnished by the Department with regard to financial
achievement the Committee find that even the meager outlay  i.e.
Rs. 15 crore during 2004-05 and Rs. 17 crore during 2005-06 could
not be utilized fully. Various reasons like beneficiaries contribution,
delay in the release of State share, delay in submission of progress
reports and non-receipt of fresh proposals have been cited as the
reasons for shortfall in utilisation of funds. The Committee also
note that even the few number of projects undertaken are not
being successfully implemented. Out of 161 projects, as many as
22 projects were foreclosed. The Committee feel exclusive that
there is an urgent need for detailed interaction with the various
research institutes like ICAR, State Agricultural Universities which
are basically involved with the research in this field. Besides
there is an urgent need to motivate these institutions to initiate
more and more projects. There is an urgent need to study the
international experience with regard to wastelands development.
The Committee desire some concrete action in this regard to be
taken by Government.”
33. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“TDET Scheme is being implemented in a project mode on the
basis of proposals received from implementing agencies and
sanctioned by the Project Sanctioning Committee (PSC). The lower
utilisation than the budgetary allocation was only during 2002-03
and 2003-04 due to non-receipt of appropriate fresh proposals,
timely progress report, utilisation certificate beneficiary
contribution and Audited Statement of Accounts under ongoing
projects from various implementing agencies. Nevertheless, efforts
were made during 2004-05 and 2005-06 to monitor progress of
the projects. As a result, funds allocated to the programme during
2004-05 (Rs. 15 crore) and 2005-06 (Rs. 17 crore) were fully utilised.
The ICAR, State Agricultural Universities, IITs and other research
organizations are fully involved in implementation of TDET
Schemes. A senior officer of ICAR (Head Quarters) is a member
of PSC of the Scheme
However, to further strengthen interactions with various research
institutes, Department proposed to organize regional level
workshops involving various research organizations working on
development and dissemination of wastelands development
technologies.”

25
34. The Committee note that the reply of the Government is
silent on the issue of studying international experience for the
purpose of wastelands development. The Committee would like the
categorical response of the Department in this regard.
K. Need for State-specific reasons for under utilization of funds for
maintenance and updation of Land Records
Recommendation Serial No. 27 (Para No. 5.14)
35. The Committee had noted as below:
“Maintenance and updation of land records is an important area
which needs to be addressed urgently. Land records are the basic
document of the property owned by an individual as well as by
the group of people and Government at various levels. The
importance of land records is immense not only for an individual
but also for Government for the future planning. Once the land
records are properly maintained, it will bring transparency and
a mechanism to have an idea of Benami landholdings. The
Committee find that a laudable scheme Computerisation of Land
Records has been initiated by the Union Government with 100
per cent Central assistance since 1988-89. The outlay provided so
far i.e. Rs. 416.06 crore could not be utilized fully by the State
Governments. The utilisation upto 31 January, 2006 is Rs. 256.71
crore. The Committee feel that under-spending of around 40 per
cent of the outlay is a major area of concern. Further the
Committee note that the allocation during the year 2005-06 was
double as compared to previous year. The Committee also find
from the replies that sincere efforts have not been made to find
out the reasons for huge under-spending. It has simply been
stated that the scheme is demand driven. The Committee while
expressing their concern over the under-utilisation of funds would
like the Department to find out specific reasons for under-
spending State-wise and inform the Committee accordingly.”
36. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“Under the scheme of Computerisation of Land Records, different
activities viz. development of suitable software as per the State’s
requirement, undertaking basic data entry work, verification/
validation and backlog of data entry work, site preparation and
setting up of computer centres at tehsil/sub-division level and
porting of data from foxbase to window platform and
operationalisation of the scheme are time consuming. Accordingly,

26
States are taking time in utilization of funds released for
implementation of the scheme. However, in the mean time, the
utilization position has improved from the earlier 60 per cent to
64 per cent.
The implementation of the Scheme was reviewed in the
Conference of Revenue Secretaries held on 7th June, 2006. The
State Governments were requested for expeditious utilization of
funds and for effective implementation of the Scheme so that it
is completed at the earliest and the benefits reached grass root
level. Minister (RD) has also written to the Chief Ministers for
giving priority to the implementation of the Scheme so that it is
completed at the earliest.”
37. The Committee in their earlier recommendation while
expressing concern over the huge under-spending of around 40 per
cent of the outlay during the year 2005-06 under one of the important
100 per cent Centrally Sponsored Programme i.e. Computerization of
Land Records had desired State specific reasons in this regard. The
Department instead of probing the reasons for huge under-spending
has tried to justify the under-spending by stating that different
activities undertaken under the Scheme are time consuming. The
Department has also furnished the updated information with regard
to the utilization of funds according to which the utilization has
improved from 60 per cent to 64 per cent. Even if the latest data is
taken into consideration, 36 per cent of the under–utilization is a
matter of concern. The Committee deplore the way such a serious
issue has been addressed in the action taken reply. They reiterate
their earlier recommendation to know the State specific reasons and
would like the Department to take necessary action and apprise the
Committee accordingly.
L. Funds for imparting computer training to revenue officials in
different States
Recommendation Serial No. 32 (Para No. 5.19)
38. The Committee have noted as below:
“The Committee find that 15 States have been provided funds
for imparting computer awareness training to revenue officials.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the
funds earmarked for training to these States. The Committee
would also like to be informed about the module of training and
the agencies involved for imparting training. They would like to
suggest that similar initiatives should be taken in other States
also.”

27
39. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“Funds are being provided to State Governments under the CLR
Scheme as per demands received for imparting training to revenue
officials. However, earmarking of funds for this purpose is not
made. The training is being organized by the State Units of the
National Informatics Centre (NIC) as per the requirement of the
States.”
40. The Committee while examining Demands for Grants had
been informed that 15 States were provided funds for imparting
computer awareness training to revenue officials. While taking
interest in the aforesaid issue, the Committee had desired the details
of funds earmarked for training to these States, module of training
and the agencies involved in imparting training. Besides, the
Committee also recommended for similar initiatives in other States
also. The action taken reply submitted by the Department is silent
on the issues raised by the Committee. It has simply been stated
that the training is being organized by the State unit of National
Informatic Centre as per the requirement of the States. The
Committee while reiterating the issues raised earlier would like a
categorical and focussed reply in this regard.

28
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation Serial No. 1 (Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that the primary objective of inserting direction
73A in the Directions by the Speaker was to make the Government
more accountable for implementation of the various recommendations
of the Committee. The Committee are concerned to note that even
after lapse of around six months when the statement on Tenth Report
has fallen due and about three months when the Ministry was
requested for making the revised statement in respect of Second Report,
the statements are yet to be made by the Hon’ble Minister. The
Committee find that the Department is taking the desired action to
make the statements in the Second part of the Seventh Session. The
Committee recommend to the Department to ensure that the statements
are made at the earliest during the Second part of the Seventh Session.
The Committee further strongly recommend to the Department to
ensure that the statements on each of the reports are made within the
specified period i.e. six months after the presentation of the Report to
Parliament as per direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker, in
future.
Reply of the Government
Minister’s Statement on Second and Tenth Reports of the Standing
Committee have been made in both Houses of Parliament on the
following dates:
II Report on 12.5.2006 in Lok Sabha
II Report on 17.5.2006 in Rajya Sabha
X Report on 12.5.2006 in Lok Sabha
X Report on 17.5.2006 in Rajya Sabha
Copies of both the Statements have also been sent to the office of
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural Development. The
Committee’s recommendation has been noted for compliance in future.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]

29
Recommendation Serial No. 2 (Para No. 2.17)
The Committee find from the data indicated for 9th and 10th Plan
that there is huge mismatch between the proposed allocation and
agreed to allocation. Whereas during 9th Plan, the allocation as agreed
to is around 40 per cent of the proposed outlay , the agreed to allocation
during 10th Plan is Rs. 561 crore more than the proposed outlay. The
Department has submitted new guidelines as a reason for slow
utilisation and getting lesser allocation during 9th Plan. The reasons
put forth by the Department for getting around 40 per cent of the
proposed allocation during 9th Plan are not convincing. The plea
accorded by the Department for getting more than the proposed
allocation during Tenth Plan is that Rs. 1,000 crore was provided for
‘New Initiatives’ and thus the outlay agreed for Tenth Plan would
come up to Rs. 5,526 crore which is Rs. 439 crore lesser than the
proposed outlay . Even if it is accepted, the projected outlay during
10th Plan was Rs. 580.46 crore lesser than proposed outlay during
9th Plan.
The Committee are surprised to find that the proposed allocation
during 9th Plan was higher when the guidelines were new but during
10th Plan, the projections were reduced, even when the field agencies
had adapted themselves to the new guidelines. The Committee conclude
that the projections are not properly presented to the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance for different plans. Even the Secretary
during the course of the oral evidence has admitted that somewhere
the mistake is there. The Committee strongly recommends that the
Department should take utmost care while making projections for
11th Plan. The perspective plans for wastelands development should
be prepared by the various State Governments after due consultations
with the Implementing Agencies. Not only that district level plans
should be prepared after taking into consideration the total work to
be undertaken keeping in view the area of wastelands in that area,
the capacity of the implementing agencies etc. while holding key
consultations at the grass-root level and at the Panchayat level. With
regard to other schemes for land records also the projections should
be made keeping in view the work completed and the pending work.
The projections should be realistic to the extent possible. Besides, the
outlay, strategy and priorities during 11th Plan should be chalked out
well before the start of the 11th Plan i.e. the year 2007-08, so as to
ensure meaningful utilisation of outlay. The early finalisation of outlay
for the 11th Plan would further enable the State Governments/
implementing agencies to make timely allocations under different
schemes/programmes.

30
Reply of the Government
The Department would make all efforts to finalise projections for
the XI Five Year Plan as per recommendations of the Committee. The
outlays would be finalized well before the beginning of 2007-08, based
on recommendations of the two Working Groups on Rainfed Areas
and Land Relations, and perspective plans of the State Governments.
These Working Groups have been constituted by the Planning
Commission for 11th Five Year Plan to prepare approach paper and
action plan in respect of each Department. The approach paper and
Action Plan for the total Plan Period are discussed and finalized in
the Steering Committee in Planning Commission.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 3 (Para No. 2.18)
The Committee further find from the data of allocation of outlay
that whatever may be the case of placing projections for different
schemes of the Department, it is certain that adequate priority has
been accorded by the Government while finalising the outlay for 10th
Plan. It is very rare when any Ministry/Department has been allocated
resources more than the projections. The Committee also observes that
the focused and balanced development of wastelands is imperative
keeping in view the decline in the availability of land per person over
the years. Further, the facts revealed by the Parthasarthy Committee
establish that there is concentration of poverty in the dry lands of the
country. From the position as indicated above, the Committee find
that more attention needs to be given for the development of
wastelands in the country. The wastelands when developed can be a
major source for fulfilling the need for food and water security . Not
only that it can be a major source for providing employment to the
poorest of poor in the country. The detailed scheme-wise position of
outlay, expenditure and physical achievement has been analysed in
the succeeding chapter of the report. Here the Committee would like
to recommend for adequate outlay for different schemes of wastelands
in the country. Besides recommending for higher outlay, there is an
urgent need for successful implementation of the schemes/programmes
which has been reviewed by the Committee in detail in the succeeding
chapter of the report.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is examining the recommendations of Parthasarathy
Committee in depth. The observations/suggestions made by the

31
Standing Committee will be duly taken into account and the outcome
apprised to the Standing Committee. The Department will propose
enhanced outlays during 11th Plan for the schemes of wasteland
development in accordance with need. All efforts are being made for
successful implementation of various schemes of the department.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 5 (Para No. 2.20)
The Committee further find from the information provided by the
Department that Rs. 1,000 crore was earmarked for new initiatives
during 10th Plan. Even when the 10th Plan is coming to an end no
new initiative could be finalized. The new programme ‘Bio-fuel’
proposed by the Department is still at a nascent stage. The Committee
in their earlier reports on Demands for Grants had repeatedly been
expressing concern over the way new schemes are proposed. The
Committee express strong concern over the way the scarce resources
are being blocked for the new schemes, which are not implemented.
The blocking of resources in this way clearly means depriving the
other schemes/programmes of their due share. The Committee hold
the strong view that the new schemes should be properly planned
and the allocation should be earmarked only when the spadework has
been done and all the paraphernalia to implement the scheme is ready.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2003-04, an amount of Rs. 100 crore was proposed
under “new initiatives” by the Department. Only a token provision of
Rs. 1 crore was agreed to by the Planning Commission. There was no
expenditure against this allocation. Under “New Initiatives”, two new
schemes viz. Pradhan Mantri Grameen Jal Samvardhan Yojana and
Bio-Fuels were proposed during 2004-05 and Rs. 200 crore and
Rs. 10 crore were proposed for the two schemes respectively which
were agreed to by the Planning Commission. These funds could not
be utilized and were reallocated at RE stage.
So far as scheme of Bio-diesel is concerned, approval on Detailed
Project Report on Demonstration phase has been obtained in-principle,
from Planning Commission. Against the proposed amount of
Rs. 200 crore, a budget provision of Rs. 50 crores was made during
2005-06 for the programme. The Departmental EFC approved Jatropha
Nursery Programme at a cost of Rs. 49 crore. Accordingly, Rs. 49.00 crore
has been released to different States for raising Jatropha nurseries.

32
Similarly, against the proposed amount of Rs. 200 crore, the Planning
Commission has allocated Rs. 50 crore for this scheme during the
current financial year (2006-07). The Memorandum for the EFC
amounting to Rs. 1301.00 crore for the Demonstration Phase of National
Mission on Bio-diesel has been circulated on 14.8.2006.
The recommendation of the Committee is noted for future
compliance.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 14 (Para No. 3.40)
The committee note that different data with regard to total
wastelands in the country which need to be developed has been
indicated in the different documents. As per the initial Atlas brought
out by the Department in the year 2000, total wastelands has been
indicated as 63.85 million hectares. Further the Technical Committee in
its report has stated that 45.58 million hectares have been treated so
far since 8th Plan by the initiatives of the Union Government. It has
further been stated that excluding the 46 million hectares as already
treated, the areas remaining to be treated are 125 million hectares.
While appreciating the fact that there are various estimates with regard
to wastelands development and it is difficult to find out the exact
data in this regard, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to
have some data indicating the minimum wastelands area that needs
to be developed so as to enable the Government to prepare an action
plan. The answer to this issue is the perspective plans by the different
State Governments.
Reply of the Government
The area of wastelands indicated in the Atlas brought out by the
Department in 2000 and 2005 is based on scientific study, carried out
by NRSA by using remote sensing technology, and not empirical. The
total extent of wastelands is 55.27 million hectares (as per one time
IRS data of the year 2003). Out of this, 43.15 million hectares is
treatable. During the 10th Plan, 18 million hectares will be treated.
Thus, the area remaining for treatment is 25.15 Million hectares.
The Technical Committee in its report has stated that around
170 million hectares of degraded land needs watershed treatment. This
includes all type of degraded lands including wastelands. The Technical
Committee report also says that 45.58 million hectares land has been

33
treated on watershed basis by various Ministries of Government of
India since the beginning of 8th Plan. Thus, leaving around 125 million
hectares of degraded lands to be treated on watershed basis.
As recommended by the Committee, the Department of Land
Resources is pursuing the matter of preparation of perspective plans
by the States so as to formulate a national plan and decide the strategy
of Eleventh Five Year Plan.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 17 (Para No. 3.43)
The Committee find that some initiatives are being taken for
formulating the National Land Resource Management Policy . The
Committee would like the Government to pursue the matter further
so that there is proper direction in land management.
Reply of the Government
At national level, an apex body under the chairmanship of Prime
Minister namely National Land Use and Wastelands Development
Council (NLWC) was set up in 1985 whose main function was to
serve as a policy, planning, coordination and monitoring agency for
issues concerning management of the country’s land resources. Under
this NLWC, three boards namely (i) National Land Use and
Conservation Board (NLCB) in Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation, (ii) National Wastelands Development Board (NWDB) in
Department of Land Resources and (iii) National Afforestation & Eco-
Development Board (NAEB) in Ministry of Environment & Forests
were set up. The NLWC, in its meeting held in February, 1986,
approved the National Land Use Policy Outlines, having following 19
Action Points :—
1. Lands Use Boards at the State level should be revitalized.
Wherever they do not exist, they must be created.
2. Land Use Policy must be evolved by all users of land within
Government jointly and must be enforced on the basis of
both legislation for enforcing land use as well as their
promotional and preserving methods.
3. Urban Policy must be restructured so as to ensure that
highly productive land is not taken away. Town planning
should also provide for green belts.

34
4. A national campaign should be launched for educating the
farmers and Government Departments about the need to
conform to an integrated land use policy.
5. Cropping pattern should be reviewed specially in drought
prone/desert areas, so that maximum advantage is taken of
improved soil and water management practices.
6. Land and soil surveys should be completed and inventory
of land resources should be prepared in each State so that
resources allocation is based on a reliable data base.
7. Heavy penalties should be imposed against those who
interfere with land resources and its productivity. It must
be recognized that environmental protection cannot succeed
unless this is done.
8. The problems of water logging, salinity and alkalinity must
be brought under control by the use of appropriate
technologies and by the adoption of proper water
management practices.
9. The management of Command Areas should be reviewed,
restructured and revitalized within a specified time so that
water is used efficiently. Necessary investments for treating
the catchments must be met to prevent the collapse of
irrigation system due to premature siltation.
10. Technologies relating to dry farming, land shaping and water
harvesting must be propagated and adopted in the interest
of moisture conservation and optimal use.
11. Special programme of conservation and afforestation in the
desert areas and of reclamation and rehabilitation in the
ravine areas must be launched with greater vigour in order
to prevent wind and water erosion.
12. The practice of shifting cultivation should be controlled in
order to protect valuable forests.
13. Land use planning should be integrated with rural
employment programmes in such a manner that loans and
subsidies are given only for those productive activities which
represent efficient land use.
14. Rights of tribal and poorer sections on common land should
be protected through legal and administrative structures.
15. Stall feeding should be popularized, especially in such areas
where grazing land is already degraded.

35
16. Special fodder Development Programme in selective blocks
should be launched together with a Livestock Development
Programme. The aim should be to limit the Livestock
population to economically productive stock.
17. Plantations for meeting commercial and industrial needs
should preferably be located far away from the habitat.
18. The policy of supply forest raw materials on subsidized
basis to users other than the rural poor should be reviewed
so that raw material is supplied at the prevailing market
price, with a view to induce such users to go in for massive
afforestation programmes, as also to motivate small and
marginal farmers to grow forest based raw material for
industry at remunerative prices.
19. The user of alternative packaging material, such as
corrugated card boards, plastic bags, etc. instead of wooden
packaging, must be explored and encouraged.
The approach towards formulation of a National Land Resources
Management Policy is likely to be finalized as per the directions of
the National Rainfed Area Authority recently constituted by
Government of India under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister.
Further action will be taken in the matter as per the decisions of the
Authority.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 20 (Para No.3.46)
The Committee find that land is the basic constraint in
implementation of some of the major schemes of the Department
specifically Indira Awaas Yojana where it is difficult to extend the
benefit to the landless persons. The possibility of using wastelands for
setting up agricultural universities and for constructing houses under
Government schemes for the landless persons should be discussed
with the various State Governments and the Committee apprised about
the feedback received in this regard.
Reply of the Government
It is accepted policy of the Government that wasteland at the
disposal of government should be distributed among the eligible rural
poor. Accordingly, State Governments have been requested from time

36
to time for distribution of Govt. wastelands by preparation of time-
bound action plans.
The matter was also discussed during the Conference of the
Revenue Secretaries of the States/UTs held on 7th June, 2006 in
New Delhi under the Chairmanship of Minister (Rural Development).
Minister (RD) requested the State Governments for distribution of all
available wastelands to the rural poor. He suggested that degraded
wastelands should be developed under the NREGA Scheme and
distributed to landless. Minister also mentioned about the good practice
followed in some States of distribution of house-sites to poor by
purchasing land. Subsequently, Minister (RD) has requested the Chief
Ministers of the States for taking appropriate action for implementation
of the programme of distribution of Govt. wastelands so that the
number of land less and homestead less families in the country could
be reduced.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 21 (Para No. 4.14)
The Committee note that IWDP is the most important programme
of the Department for the development of wastelands in the country.
The status of financial achievement during 9th and 10th Plan as given
above indicate that there has not been major enhancement in the outlay
under the Scheme. The outlay for Rs. 450 crore during the year
2002-03 has been enhanced to Rs. 565 crore during 2006-07. But the
allocation earmarked has not been fully utilized during each year of
9th and 10th Plan. Under-spending is the recurring feature of this
programme. As regards the physical achievement the data indicate
that almost half of the projects sanctioned are still continuing. The
number of projects taken up during 10th Plan are almost double the
projects undertaken during 9th Plan. Further, there are problems like
unspent balance, non-submission of Utilisation Certificate and
misutilisation of funds as pointed out in C&AG Report for which
certain recoveries were to be made. The Committee conclude that there
are serious problems in implementation of IWDP programme which
needs to be addressed urgently. Taking into consideration the gigantic
task of development of wastelands in the country the Committee
strongly recommend to enhance the allocation under IWDP which is
one of the major schemes of the Department. While recommending for
higher outlay the Committee would also like the Department to ensure
that the allocation earmarked in a year is utilized fully.

37
Reply of the Government
The trend of under utilization of funds under IWDP has been
checked and during 2005-06 the total outlay of Rs.485 crore has been
completely utilized. While demanding budget under IWDP , the
absorption capacity of States is also kept in view. However, the
Department will make all out efforts to utilise the allocation completely,
in future.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 23 (Para No. 4.24)
The Committee find from the information furnished above that
foreclosure and stopping of funds to the projects is a major problem
under DDP and DPAP blocks. The issue has been dealt with in detail
in the preceding paras of the report. Here the Committee may highlight
that the number of projects foreclosed and for which funds have been
stopped is more than in the case of IWDP schemes. As recommended
in the earlier part of the report, the Committee would like the
information about the year of foreclosure, funds allocated at the time
of foreclosure of each project so as to enable the Committee to make
proper analysis.
Reply of the Government
The Department has taken steps to streamline procedure for
foreclosure and extension of projects as indicated in the reply to the
Recommendation at Serial No.11 (para 3.25). The relevant details of
‘DPAP/DDP funding stopped projects’ are submitted in Appendix I&II.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 26 (Para No. 4.34)
Besides initiating research studies one of the objectives of the
programme is dissemination of research findings and appropriate
technologies. The Committee would like to be apprised of the number
of demonstration projects undertaken under the aforesaid schemes.
Besides, the initiatives taken for dissemination of research findings
and technologies by the Department should also be intimated to
the Committee to enable them to analyse the performance of the
scheme.

38
Reply of the Government
The majority of projects sanctioned under the TDET Scheme are
demonstration projects. The DRDAs/State Governments have to
replicate suitable technologies in implementation of watershed
programmes. After successful implementation of the projects, the
Department selects a few best projects for documentation and
dissemination of information. Accordingly, Department has published
following bulletins on wastelands development and circulated to State
Governments:
1. Technical Brochure, DoLR, Rehabilitation of Gullied and Ravine
MoRD—01/2003 Lands
2. Technical Brochure, DoLR, Reclamation and Management of
MoRD—02/2003 Waterlogged Salt Affected Soils
3. Technical Brochure, DoLR, Reclamation of Areas Degraded by
MoRD—03/2003 Mining & Industrial Wastes
4. Technical Brochure, DoLR, Rehabilitation of Wastelands of Arid
MoRD—04/2003 Ecosystem
5. Technical Brochure, DoLR, Making Waterlogged Areas Productive
MoRD—05/2003 through Drainage
6. Technical Brochure, Development Lands Affected by
DoLR, MoRD—06/2003 Shifting Cultivation
7. Technical Brochure, DoLR, Agro forestry Species of Silviculture,
MoRD—07/2003 Horticulture, Pasture and Medicinal
Plants for different Agro-Ecoregions of
India.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 28 (Para No. 5.15)
The Committee further note that States of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu,
Goa and Gujarat have fully operationalised the system and made online
updation through computerised system. Besides many other States such
as Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Sikkim,
Maharashtra, Chattisgarh have also taken necessary steps in this
direction by affecting regular mutation/updation of land records. Few
other States have also completed the basic data entry work and started
regular updation of land records. The worst performing State is
Meghalaya and some Union Territories viz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands

39
and Lakshadweep. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by some
of the States like Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Goa and Gujarat who could
not only fully computerize the land records but also could make
updation possible through computerised system. The Committee would
like the Department to pursue the matter with other States so that the
objectives of the programme can be achieved in these States.
Reply of the Government
State Governments have been requested from time to time for
taking suitable steps for effective implementation of the Scheme. The
progress is also reviewed from time to time at various fora including
the Conferences of Revenue Ministers & Revenue Secretaries of the
States.
The implementation of the Computerisation of Land Records
Scheme was also reviewed during the Conference of Revenue
Secretaries held on 7th June, 2006. Minister (RD) stressed the need for
better implementation of the Scheme in the States where significant
progress has not been made so that they could reach to the level of
better performing States. In the mean time Minister (RD) has also
written to the Chief Ministers of the States for giving priority to the
implementation of the Scheme so that it is completed at the earliest.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 29 (Para No. 5.16)
The Committee further note that some progress has been made
with regard to maintenance of land records in North Eastern States.
As informed by the Department the basic data entry work in the
States of Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and
Tripura have already been started. The work is likely to be completed
in March 2007. The State of Sikkim has already completed the data
entry work. In the case of Meghalaya, the scheme has not yet been
started due to non-availability of proper land records. The Committee
would like the Department to further pursue with these North Eastern
States so that the work relating to computerisation of land records is
completed.
Reply of the Government
The States including North Eastern States have been requested
from time to time for taking suitable steps for effective implementation

40
of the Scheme of Computerisation of Land Records. Further, the
progress was reviewed during the aforesaid Conference of Revenue
Secretaries held on 7th June, 2006 and subsequently Minister (RD) has
also written to the Chief Ministers of all the States for giving priority
to the implementation of the Scheme so that it is completed at the
earliest.
Meghalaya has not so far been covered under the Scheme because
land tenure system in Meghalaya is different in its form and practice
compared to the system prevailing in other parts of the country. The
land is owned and vested with the private individuals and the
community except few plots where the State Govt. exercises its powers.
Accordingly, there are no proper land records in the State. However,
the State Govt. has been requested for taking initiatives to start the
Scheme of CLR with the existing land records data. Further, they have
been requested for taking basic survey by employing modern
technology to create land records by availing assistance under the
Scheme of Strengthening of Revenue Administration & Updating of
Land Records (SRA & ULR). The State Govt. has now indicated their
willingness to take up survey and settlement work in the State.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 30 (Para No. 5.17)
The Committee further note from the replies furnished by the
Department that one of the important tasks for the successful
implementation of programme is to stop issue of manual copies of
Records of Rights and to provide legal sanctity to computerised copies
of RoR by amending the necessary revenue rules/regulations. Whereas
the States of Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal have already amended the necessary revenue rules/
regulations in this regard, the action is pending in other States. Various
reasons like lack of administrative and political will at State level,
waiting for complete stabilization of computerised system etc. have
been indicated as the reasons for not providing legal sanctity to
computerised copies of RoR in these States. The Committee feel that
more interaction through various seminars, conferences is required with
the State Governments to persuade them to amend the revenue rules/
regulations so that the computerised system of land records may be
given legal sanctity. Besides the Committee feel that once the land
records are computerised and the people are made aware of the system,
the other issues related to giving legal sanctity to computerised copies

41
of RoR would automatically be demanded by the public at large. As
such there is an urgent need to first complete the system of
computerisation by the initiatives of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes
and make maintenance as well as updation of land records a reality.
The Committee hope that the Department would take the desired action
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
State Governments have been requested for taking suitable steps
for completion of all the activities under the Scheme of CLR in a
time-bound manner. During the Conference of Revenue Secretaries held
on 7th June, 2006, Minister (RD) emphasized that the aim of the Scheme
is to provide secure access to correct and up-to-date copies of Record
of Rights (RoRs) on demand with least scope of rent seeking. This
would happen by ensuring that the RoRs are certifiable directly by
the computer system and legally acceptable in that form, and available
on demand, may be downloaded by the individual themselves through
a web-based format. Discontinuation of the manual issue of RoRs,
abolition of stamp papers, online and secure access to land-related
information and records, integration of registration and mutation
processes would reduce unnecessary harassment to the common people
in the hands of the revenue functionaries.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 31 (Para No. 5.18)
The Committee further note the laudable idea given by the
Secretary, Department of Land Resources whereby a thought is being
given to link up the land record information with the computers of
the lending bankers so that the farmer does not even need to procure
the copy of land records every time. The bankers can access the land
record directly without any charge. The Committee appreciate the idea
and feel that if it is made possible, it will help the general public
specifically farmers. Not only it will reduce the transaction cost, but
also would be a great relief for the poor persons whose applications
are rejected by the banks due to non-availability of proper copy of
land records. Besides, the assistance under various Centrally Sponsored
Schemes provided through banks like Swarnajyanti Gram Swarozgar
Yojana (SGSY) can easily be made available.
Reply of the Government
One of the main objectives of the CLR Scheme is to ensure that
the landowners get computerized copies of ownership, crop and

42
tenancy and updated copies of Records of Rights (RoRs) on demand.
The issue of easy accessibility to land records data was also discussed
during the Conference of the Revenue Secretaries held on 7.6.2007.
State Governments were requested to provide connectivity and access
to the land data to the financial institutions, particularly the Cooperative
Banks, which will enable them to process credit requests more
efficiently, and will give the needed boost to the rural, agricultural
and cooperative credit operations. Some States like Andhra Pradesh,
Goa, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and Chattisgarh have already
put the data on the website and other States are also likely to put the
same on the website.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 34 (Para No. 5.25)
The Committee find from the data with regard to allocation under
the scheme Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of
Land Records (SRA & ULR) that out of Rs. 311.77 crore provided to
the States/UTs as Central share upto 31 January, 2006, the utilisation
position is Rs. 228.01 crore. Thus around 27 per cent of the funds
could not be utilized. The Committee also note that the inability of
State Governments to provide 50 per cent matching share is the basic
concern for implementation of the programme. The Committee also
note that the matter of reviewing the financial pattern from existing
50:50 to 90:10 was taken up by the Department with the Planning
Commission who have stated that the 12th Finance Commission Report
has provided more resources. The said issue was addressed in detail
by the Committee in their 10th and 16th Report. The Committee had
also observed that there is no specific mention about additional amount
for the purpose of land records in the 12th Finance Commission Report.
In view of this, the Committee would like the Government to take up
the matter again with the Planning Commission in the light of the
observations made by the Committee and impress upon them to change
the funding pattern.
Reply of the Government
The Schemes of SRA & ULR and CLR are inter-related. Accordingly,
with a view to combining the two Schemes, a new Scheme viz.
Comprehensive Modernization of Land Records (CMLR) with 100 per
cent Central assistance is being formulated. The Scheme envisages
integration of computerization of land records with survey & settlement,
carrying out survey, revisional or original survey using modern

43
technology, digitization of cadastral maps and registration. CMLR will
deliver outcomes in terms of updated land records to establish clear
land titles. After obtaining requisite approvals, it is proposed to take
up the scheme on pilot project basis in one district of each State.
The implementation strategy of the new Scheme was also discussed
during the above mentioned Conference of Revenue Secretaries and
commitment of the States was requested for this purpose. Thereafter,
Minister (RD) has requested the Chief Ministers of the States for looking
into the issue so that revenue functionaries are ready to formulate
proposals for seeking Central assistance under the Scheme and for its
execution. After successful implementation of the Scheme in pilot
districts, it will be extended to other Districts. As 100 per cent Central
assistance for implementation of the Scheme, except for computerization
of registration offices, is proposed, the issue of State share would no
longer be relevant.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Recommendation Serial No. 35 (Para No.5.26)
The Committee further note that two schemes SRA & ULR and
Computerisation of Land Records are inter-related. The land records
can be computerised only when the land records are properly available.
Thus availability of land records is the basic issue. In view of this, the
Committee would like to be apprised by the Department how the
coordination between these two schemes is being maintained.
Reply of the Government
The Schemes of SRA & ULR and CLR are inter-related. Accordingly,
with a view to combining the two Schemes, a new Scheme viz.
Comprehensive Modernization of Land Records (CMLR), which will
formalize this inter-relation as well as inter-relation of registration
process and updating of land records has been formulated. The Scheme
envisages integration of computerization of land records with survey
& settlement, carrying out survey, re-visional or original survey using
modern technology, digitization of cadastral maps, computerization of
registration and inter linking registration with record-of-right process.
CMLR will deliver outcomes in terms of updated land records to
establish clear land titles. After obtaining requisite approvals, it is
proposed to take up the scheme on the basis of 100 per cent central
funding except for computerization of registration offices, which is
proposed at 75:25 sharing basis between the Centre and the States.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]

44
Recommendation Serial No. 36 (Para No.5.27)
The Committee find that the system of land records and land
administration prevalent in the rest of the country does not exist in
the hilly and tribal areas of North Eastern States. In most of the areas
even the cadastral survey has not been done and so no land records
exist. With regard to the programme ‘Computerisation of Land Records’,
the Committee have been informed that the basic data entry work in
the States of Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh
and Tripura has already started. The Committee observe that
Computerisation of Land Records is not possible when the basic data
of land records is not available in an area. In this situation the
Committee wonder how the programme of Computerisation of Land
Records is progressing when even the cadastral survey in these States
has not been done and no land records exist. The clarification in this
regard may be furnished to enable the Committee to review the position
of Computerisation of Land Records and SRA & ULR schemes in
North Eastern States.
Reply of the Government
The Schemes of CLR and SRA & ULR are already under
implementation in all the North Eastern States except Meghalaya. As
indicated in reply to recommendation No 5.16, Govt. of Meghalaya
has been requested for taking initiatives to start the Scheme of CLR
with the existing land records data. Further they have been requested
for taking basic survey by employing modern technology to create
land records by availing assistance under the Scheme of Strengthening
of Revenue Administration & Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR).
The State Govt. has now indicated their willingness to take up survey
and settlement work in the State. Further, survey & settlement
operations have been taken up by the States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam and Mizoram in some areas. Keeping in view the wide variety
of tenurial and cultivating arrangements, largely reflecting the
customary laws and practices of different tribes, sub-tribes and clans,
survey/resurvey work in North Eastern States is likely to take time.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]

45
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
—Nil—

46
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation Serial No. 7 (Para No.2.26)
The Committee note from the trends of allocation of outlay during
the years 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 that the agreed allocation is
lesser than the proposed allocation. During the year 2006-07, the agreed
allocation is Rs. 689 crore lesser than the proposed outlay . The
Committee find it interesting that whereas the overall allocation for
10th Plan is more than the projections, the allocations under Annual
Plans are lesser than the projection. It is difficult to understand the
way the budgeting exercise is being undertaken where there seems to
be no planning. The Committee would like to be apprised of the basis
of making projections under each of the Annual Plan.
Reply of the Government
The overall allocations for 10th Plan is more than the projections
only because of provision of Rs. 1000 crores under ‘New Initiatives’.
In all other schemes (except ‘New Initiatives’) the approved outlay
was less than the proposed outlay as can be seen from the following
table:-
(Rs. in crores)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme As proposed As agreed by
by the Deptt. Planning
Commission
1. DPAP 1600 1500
2. DDP 1200 1100
3. IWDP 1900 1800
4. CLR 500 400
5. SRA&ULR 200 200
6. EAP 365 365
7. TDET 100 90
8. IPS, M&E and Communication 100 71
9. New Initiative Nil 1000
Total 5965 6526

47
The allocations during 10th Five Year plan have been utilized by
the Department in respect of all Schemes except ‘New Initiatives’.  The
Department makes projections for each of the Annual Plan based on
the overall targets under each scheme, demands made by the States,
trend of utilization of funds and absorption capacity of the State
Governments.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No.2.27)
Whereas the release from the Centre have been stated to be almost
cent per cent of the allocated outlay, the unspent balances to the tune
of Rs. 1, 405 crore with the implementing agencies is really a matter
of concern to the Committee. They are not convinced with the plea
given by the Department whereby the Department has tried to justify
the unspent amount by stating that the unspent balance do not exceed
10 percent of the project cost at any point of time. The Department
holds the view that the balance is necessitated to maintain availability
of funds at the implementation level to avoid eventualities of non-
payment of wages as wastelands development projects are labour
intensive projects. However, the Committee wish to point out that
Rs. 1, 405 crore is almost equal to the overall allocation of the
Department during the year 2006-07. The Committee feel that the
unspent balances should be seen with reference to the allocation made
during a particular year and not with reference to the total project
cost under different schemes. The projects may continue even after
five to seven years. Roll-on money to the tune of 10 to 20 per cent of
the allocation under a scheme during a year can be justified on the
grounds stated by the Department. The justification of unspent balance
corresponding to the total project cost can not be understood. The
Committee find that instead of taking stringent measures for keeping
the unspent balances to the minimum, the Department has tried to
justify it which the Committee really disapprove. The Department
should take all the corrective measures and inform the Committee
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
While noting the concern of Hon’ble Standing Committee on
unspent balances, it is submitted that all schemes presently

48
implemented by the department are demand driven. The annual
allocations made for different schemes in the Department’s budget are
not released to States or to Programme Implementing Agencies on
allocation basis, but on the basis of demand for further instalments in
case of ongoing projects, or for sanction of new projects. For example,
in DPAP/DDP & IWDP , the releases are made to ZPs/DRDAs in
5 installments over a period of five years as per the prescribed
procedure. Successive installments are released only after 50% of the
funds released in the previous installment have been utilized. It is
also submitted that the roll over opening balance figure of a particular
year under these programmes should be compared to the total funds
released to the Programme Implementing Agencies upto the previous
year. As under DDP , an amount of Rs. 1603.44 crore of central and
state share was released from 1995-96 to 2004-05 and the opening
balance as on 1.4.2005 was reportedly Rs. 261.41 crore. This amounts
to 15-16%. More or less same position obtains in the DPAP and IWDP .
Hon’ble Committees’ observations are very relevant for timely
completion of projects so that all the installments are claimed by Project
Implementing Agencies within the project period of five years, in
accordance with schedule of activities. A number of steps e.g.
involvement of States in the monitoring activities, launching of web-
based on line monitoring of projects and issue of notices to PIAs of
projects where there is delay in claiming the second and subsequent
installments have been initiated. All efforts are made to expedite
implementation of programmes so that funds released are utilized
quickly minimizing the funds in hand for ongoing programme at any
point of time .
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 10 (Para No.3.14)
The Committee further note the claim of the Department that the
extent of wastelands has come down from 63.85 million hectares to
55.27 million hectares between the period 2000 and 2005. The
Committee find that even with the efforts of the Department of Land
Resources the target for development of wastelands during five years

49
of 10th Plan are 18 million hectares. Out of this target, 12.47 hectares
of wastelands have already been developed. The other Ministries/
Departments of the Union Government as well as State Governments
involved with the task of development of wastelands may also be
contributing substantially towards the development of major area of
wastelands in the country. In this scenario, the Committee find that
there is some mismatch between the achievement proclaimed by the
Department and the actual area developed. Although the Department
seems very optimistic by finding that the wastelands area has declined
as found by the updated Atlas, the achievements reflected by the
updated Atlas i.e. development of only 8.58 million hectares of land
during five years period is too meager even when compared with the
targets of five years i.e. 18 million hectares only of the Department of
Land Resources. If the targets fixed and proclaimed by different
Ministries of Union as well as State Governments are added together,
the whole wastelands area would have been developed by now. In
view of this scenario, the Committee feel that the achievements reflected
under schemes may not be true at the ground level. The Committee
would like a clarification of the Department in this regard so as to
enable them to understand the position in proper perspective.
Reply of the Government
The X Plan target of 18 million ha. is for sanctioning of new
projects. Achievement of land actually treated would be reflected after
these new projects are completed. Reduction in the extent of wastelands
by 8.58 million ha. would reflect the development of wasteland under
projects sanctioned prior to X Plan. The total area covered by projects
under area development projects sanctioned prior to 10th Plan
(1995-96 to 2001-02) is as follows:
IWDP  3.27 million ha.
DPAP  6.90 million ha.
DDP  3.36 million ha.
Total 13.53 million ha.
A study titled “Comprehensive Assessment of Watershed
Programmes in India” has been assigned to the International Crops
Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), Hyderabad to
critically assess the impact of various watershed development
programmes in India; to identify the drivers of success from the bright

50
spots; to develop suitable institutional and technical recommendations,
policy guidelines and suitable data base for sustainable and efficient
management of the watershed programmes and to identify the positive
factors leading to reduction of wastelands by about 9 million hectares
(2.72 % of geographical area) over a period of 5 years as indicated by
Wastelands Atlases brought out in 2000 and 2005. The total project
period is for 2 years. ICRISAT study covers programmes of all
concerned Departments/Ministries. The study is based on the decision
taken in the meeting of National Watershed Committee and funded
jointly by this Department and by the Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 3.25)
The Committee in their 10th and 16th Reports had expressed
serious concerns over the issue of foreclosure of projects under the
schemes related to wastelands development i.e. Integrated Wastelands
Development Programme (IWDP), Drought Prone Areas Programme
(DPAP), Desert Development Programme (DDP) and Technology
Development, Extension and Training (TDET). While examining the
action taken replies, the Committee had observed that some of the
projects were foreclosed at the last stage when substantial allocation
had been released for the project thereby wasting national resources.
Detailed analysis of the issue indicate that the system of foreclosure
has been given in detail in the watershed guidelines. It has been stated
that at the initial phase of a project i.e. the first nine to twelve months,
if it is considered that the project cannot be implemented successfully
for certain unavoidable circumstances and reasons the ZP/DRDA shall
recommend for its foreclosure to the State Governments which will
consider such requests on merits and send its recommendations to the
Department of Land Resources. As reported in 16th Report of the
Committee, most of the projects are being foreclosed even at the last
stage. The Committee observe that the guidelines do not seem to have
been followed while foreclosing projects under different schemes.

51
The Committee further find from the data furnished by the
Department that for a large number of projects under DPAP and DDP
funding has been stopped. The Committee would like to be informed
about the difference between the funding stopped and foreclosure of
the projects since two different data have been indicated in the Budget
documents. The Committee would also like the Department to furnish
information with regard to the date of sanction, funds earmarked and
date of foreclosure/when funds were stopped in each of the foreclosed
project scheme-wise so as to enable the Committee to analyse the
position in detail. The Committee would also like to recommend that
such information about the foreclosure/funding stopped should
regularly be maintained and indicated in the Budget documents.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that the term ‘foreclosure’ refers to provision of
‘probation period’ in the watershed guidelines, which provide that
when a project fails to even take off during the probation period
(initial 9-12 months) as the required village level institutions to steer
the project implementation are not grounded due to conflicting interest
groups in the project area and the project can not be implemented
successfully, the same may be recommended by ZP/DRDA for
‘foreclosure’ to the State Government which will consider such requests
on merits and send its recommendations to Department of Land
Resources (DoLR). The unspent funds should be refunded to DoLR
when the projects are foreclosed. The “funding stopped projects” of
IWDP/DPAP/DDP are those where complete implementation could
not take place in the scheduled project period due to inordinate delay
in implementation of the project. The delayed-projects are duly
considered and given extension of 1-2 years. In fact, many such projects
were completed in extension period but in those, which still could not
be completed, further funding was stopped. Utilization Certificate (UC)
for the funds already released is obtained and State Government is
supposed to fund the remaining part of the project. If funds released
are not properly utilized recovery is effected. 7 projects under IWDP
were closed for various reasons such as conflict amongst various
groups, cases being sub-judice leading to undue delay etc. In most
cases, such closed projects are followed by fresh projects to avoid
deprivation of benefits to the people of that area. Recovery of
72.23 lakh has been effected in one case. Efforts are being made to
recover funds in other cases.

52
The Ministry has initiated action on the following lines to
streamline procedure of foreclosure and extension of projects:—
1. Foreclosure
(i) In addition to mid-term evaluation by the State Government
a concurrent evaluation of the project in the second year of
the implementation shall be got done to find out whether
the required village level institutions have been grounded
and the necessary institutional mechanism for execution of
project has been established.
(ii) The evaluation shall also indicate whether the technical
features of the project including physical location, layout
and alignment of the components are prima facie sound and
suggest modifications for recasting, if required.
(iii) A State level committee shall be constituted for examining
the report and recommending action for foreclosure or
continuance of the project to Department of Land Resources.
(iv) The committee shall also fix responsibility in all cases of
financial embezzlement or other implementation lapses.
(v) The formal closure shall be by department of land resources
and unspent amount has to be returned to the Department
of Land Resources.
2. Extension
A review of all ongoing projects requiring extension shall be done
by a State level committee. The committee shall examine each project
on merit and submit a report/recommendation to Department of Land
Resources at least 90 days before expiry of stipulated period. The
State committee may also recommend either rescheduling of the
remaining project activities to be completed within the originally
sanctioned project period or an extended project period. The report/
recommendation of the State Government on foreclosure and extension
of projects shall be examined by the Project Sanctioning Committee
(PSC) in DoLR/MoRD for granting extension or closing the project.
Besides, monitoring of claiming the second instalment by Project
implementing agencies is key to implementation of programmes.
Accordingly, these will be monitored strictly and show cause notices
issued to PIA/ State Government wherever there is delay in claiming

53
the second instalment (after approval of the project report, work plan
and community mobilization) and the fourth instalment (after Mid-
Term Evaluation of the project).
The details of foreclosed/funding-stopped IWDP projects are as
under:—
 (Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of Date of Total Total Total Date of Remarks
No. the District Sanction Area cost releases foreclosure/
(in ha.) funding
stopped
1. Unnao-I 2.1.98 12041 481.64 216.73 1999-2000
2. Raebareli 25.6.98 12100 484.00 172.60 1999-2000
3. Unnao-II 23.3.98 12054 482.16 72.32 1999-2000
4. Kathua-II 20.3.02 5987 481.56 49.39 2003-04
5 Sultanpur 23.3.98 12039 359.22 72.23 2000-01 Money refunded as the
project could not take off
6 E. Sikkim-III 27.3.98 5669 222.76 55.53 2004-05 Un-utilised money
refunded and projects
have been reframed
7 E. Sikkim-IV 24.3.99 11900 476.00 71.40 2004-05
TOTAL 71790 2987.34 661.00
 The relevant details of ‘DPAP/DDP funding stopped projects’ are
submitted in Appendix–I & II.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 12 (Para No. 3.26)
As regards the projects transferred from erstwhile Employment
Assurance Scheme of the Department of Rural Development to the
CBI case for
misappropriation/ mis-
utilisation of funds by
NGO as PIA

54
Department of Land Resources during the year 1999-2000, the
Committee note that the initial committed liability in case of these
projects was Rs. 1500 crore. As regards the total funds released to
these projects, Rs. 900.68 crore have been released so far for these
projects. The Committee further find that the Department has no
information with regard to the status of projects and the physical
achievements for these projects. Not only that, simply releasing the
outlay with regard to claims made by States is considered as completion
of the project. It has further been stated that the details of physical
and financial achievements for these projects seem the merger of
watershed component of EAS in IWDP . The Committee deplore the
way the monitoring of the project is being undertaken by the
Department. To analyse the position with regard to EAS projects
transferred from the Department of Rural Development to the
Department of Land Resources, the Committee would like to be
apprised about the number of projects transferred, outlay earmarked,
the area developed in each of the project district-wise so as to enable
the Committee to have a proper analysis.
Reply of the Government
As a part of an exercise aimed at rationalizing the structure of
various schemes, EAS was retained mainly as a Wage Employment
Scheme and sanctioning of new watershed projects was discontinued
w.e.f. 1.4.99. Prior to 1.4.99, 40% of the EAS funds were earmarked for
water and soil conservation and 20% for minor irrigation works. District
Collectors/Deputy Commissioners of the Districts sanctioned these
projects taking into account block-wise requirement of works for
generation of wage employment. Funds were allocated among the
blocks by District Collector/Deputy Commissioner for the shelf of
projects obtained from Gram Sabhas/Panchayats and the departments.
The Ministry of Rural development did not sanction project-wise funds
for watershed nor monitored project-wise details.
In April, 99 the Department of Wastelands was renamed as
Department of Land Resources and DDP and DPAP and watershed
component of projects sanctioned prior to 1.4.99 under EAS were
transferred to the Department of Land Resources. The department
undertook an exercise to determine the committed liabilities for only
those works which were truly a watershed under the strict definition
of the guidelines issued by this Ministry and where the money was
transferred to watershed committees prior to 1.4.99. Thus States
submitted the district-wise requirement of funds to complete the
projects. The total area taken up under EAS period to 31.03.99 for

55
completion of watershed development projects was estimated at
63.50 lakh ha. and the committed liabilities were worked out to be
1500 crores out of which the Central share was 75% i.e. Rs. 1125.00 crores.
It was also decided that the Central share of committed liabilities of
the EAS amounting to Rs.1125.00 crores will be released by the DoLR
in six half yearly installments during the next three years  i.e. 1999-2000,
2000-01, 2001-02. As the average size of each project was 500 ha. the
number of projects was very large. The installments were not released
project-wise but these were released to the districts on the basis of
consolidated utilisation certificate and audited statement of accounts
submitted by them. The next instalment was released only when the
unutilized balance with the district was less than 50% of the last release.
As all the States could not claim the due Central share by 2001-02, it
was agreed for continuation of projects upto March, 2003. An amount
of Rs. 900.69 crores was released upto March, 2004. The States which
could not claim the balance committed liabilities were asked to
complete the projects from their own resources. The States were asked
to submit completion report and refund the unspent balances. The
completion reports have been received from some States an amount of
Rs. 902.15 lakhs has been refunded by the States so far. The Department
is pursuing the matter with the States for submission of remaining
completion reports. The data on area developed for the projects in all
the districts is therefore, not available as the final reports are awaited
from the States.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 15 (Para No. 3.41)
The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the
Department to get the perspective plans finalised from various State
Governments on the issue of development of wastelands. They find
from the replies that none of the States is ready with the perspective
plan. Only two States i.e. Tamilnadu and Kerala have submitted the
perspective plans in respect of few districts. The Committee feel that
there is an urgent need to have a fair idea of the task in hand and
the task to the handled in future with regard to wastelands
development in the country. Further as observed in the preceding paras
of the report there are varying estimates with regard to the area falling
under wastelands as well as the task of development of wastelands

56
handled by the Government initiatives. The exact idea of the wastelands
area, work involved can be known when the perspective plans are
ready. Besides perspective plans as submitted by the State Governments
can be a better input to formulate the national plan. In view of this,
the Committee strongly recommend to pursue further with the State
Governments to finalise the perspective plans so that the same can be
used while deciding the strategy for the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Reply of the Government
As recommended by the Committee, the Department of Land
Resources is pursuing the matter of preparation of perspective plans
by the States so as to formulate a national plan and decide the strategy
of Eleventh Five Year Plan. Some States have however, expressed
financial constraints and have requested for funds to prepare these
plans. The Government is contemplating to modify the Hariyali
guidelines to allow some administrative funds at State level for
Information, Education and Communication (IEC), monitoring and
planning including preparation of perspective plans.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 18 (Para No. 3.44)
The Committee wish to point out that Land Acquisition Act 1894
is an old and outdated enactment which needs considerable
amendments keeping in view the changed circumstances. The
Committee have repeatedly been stressing for bringing amendments
to this Act. The Committee understand that proposal for the
amendment of Land Acquisition Act is under consideration with the
Department for a long time. They find from the submission made by
the Secretary during the course of oral evidence that much emphasis
is not being given to finalise the proposals for the amendment of the
said Act. The Committee are not convinced by the Statement made by
the Secretary that land is a State subject and the Central Act will not
become effective unless the State accepts it. The Committee note that
Central Acts are the model for the State Governments on which they
draft their policies and laws. State Governments are waiting for the
amendments in Land Acquisition Act. The old and outdated Act has
been a hindrance for implementation of various projects where

57
acquisition of land is required. In view of this, the Committee strongly
recommend to the Department to finalise the proposals for amendment
to the aforesaid Act and being the same before the Parliament at the
earliest.
Reply of the Government
Some proposals for amendment in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
are under consideration. The need for amendment of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 has been felt to meet the ever-growing demand
for land because of industrialisation and urbanisation specially after
adoption of New Economic Policy and for ensuring both higher
compensation to landowners as well as for time bound and effective
acquisition of land. Accordingly, a draft of the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2004 was circulated to State Governments in 2004
for obtaining their views on some proposed amendments of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 to make the acquisition process time bound and
effective. However, responses of all States have not been received.
Hence, the proposals have not been finalized so far.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Para No. 4.33)
The Technology Development, Extension and Training (TDET)
Scheme is an important scheme, the foremost objective of which is
operationalisation of cost effective and proven technologies and
dissemination of research findings and appropriate technologies for
the development of various categories of wastelands. From the date
furnished by the Department with regard to financial achievement the
Committee find that even the meager outlay i.e. Rs. 15 crore during
2004-05 and Rs. 17 crore during 2005-06 could not be utilized fully.
Various reasons like beneficiaries contribution, delay in the release of
State share, delay in submission of progress reports and non-receipt of
fresh proposals have been cited as the reasons for shortfall in utilisation
of funds. The Committee also note that even the few number of projects
undertaken are not being successfully implemented. Out of 161 projects,
as may as 22 projects were foreclosed. The Committee feel that there
is an urgent need for detailed interaction with the various research
institutes like ICAR, State Agricultural Universities which are basically

58
involved with the research in this field. Besides there is an urgent
need to motivate these institutions to initiate more and more projects.
There is an urgent need to study the international experience with
regard to wastelands development. The Committee desire some concrete
action in this regard to be taken by Government.
Reply of the Government
TDET Scheme is being implemented in a project mode on the
basis of proposals received from implementing agencies and sanctioned
by the Project Sanctioning Committee (PSC). The lower utilisation than
the budgetary allocation was only during 2002-03 and 2003-04 due to
non-receipt of appropriate fresh proposals, timely progress report,
utilisation certificate beneficiary contribution and Audited Statement
of Accounts under ongoing projects from various implementing
agencies. Nevertheless, efforts were made during 2004-05 and 2005-06
to monitor progress of the projects. As a result, funds allocated to the
programme during 2004-05 (Rs. 15.00 crores) and 2005-06 (Rs. 17.00
crores) were fully utilised.
The ICAR, State Agricultural Universities, IITs and other research
organizations are fully involved in implementation of TDET Schemes.
A senior officer of ICAR (Head Quarters) is a member of PSC of the
Scheme.
However, to further strengthen interactions with various research
institutes, Department proposed to organize regional level workshops
involving various research organizations working on development and
dissemination of wastelands development technologies.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 34 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 27 (Para No.5.14)
Maintenance and updation of land records is an important area
which needs to be addressed urgently. Land records are the basic
document of the property owned by an individual as well as by the
group of people and Government at various levels. The importance of
land records is immense not only for an individual but also for
Government for the future planning. Once the land records are properly

59
maintained, it will bring transparency and a mechanism to have an
idea of Benami landholdings. The Committee find that a laudable
scheme Computerisation of Land Records has been initiated by the
Union Government with 100 per cent Central assistance since 1988-89.
The outlay provided so far i.e. Rs. 416.06 crore could not be utilized
fully by the State Governments. The utilisation upto 31 January, 2006
is Rs. 256.71 crore. The Committee feel that under-spending of around
40 per cent of the outlay is a major area of concern. Further the
Committee note that the allocation during the year 2005-06 was double
as compared to previous year. The Committee also find from the replies
that sincere efforts have not been made to find out the reasons for
huge under-spending. It has simply been stated that the scheme is
demand driven. The Committee while expressing their concern over
the under-utilisation of funds would like the Department to find out
specific reasons for under-spending State-wise and inform the
Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Under the scheme of Computerisation of Land Records, different
activities viz. development of suitable software as per the State’s
requirement, undertaking basic data entry work, verification/validation
and backlog of data entry work, site preparation and setting up of
computer centres at tehsil/sub-division level and porting of data from
foxbase to window platform and operationalisation of the scheme are
time consuming. Accordingly, States are taking time in utilization of
funds released for implementation of the scheme. However, in the
mean time, the utilization position has improved from the earlier
60 per cent to 64 per cent.
The implementation of the Scheme was reviewed in the Conference
of Revenue Secretaries held on 7th June, 2006. The State Governments
were requested for expeditious utilization of funds and for effective
implementation of the Scheme so that it is completed at the earliest
and the benefits reached the grass root level. Minister (RD) has also
written to the Chief Ministers for giving priority to the implementation
of the Scheme so that it is completed at the earliest.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 37 of Chapter I of the Report)

60
Recommendation Serial No. 32 (Para No. 5.19)
The Committee find that 15 States have been provided funds for
imparting computer awareness training to revenue officials. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the funds
earmarked for training to these States. The Committee would also like
to be informed about the module of training and the agencies involved
for imparting training. They would like to suggest that similar
initiatives should be taken in other States also.
Reply of the Government
Funds are being provided to State Governments under the CLR
Scheme as per demands received for imparting training to revenue
officials. However, earmarking of funds for this purpose is not made.
The training is being organized by the State Units of the National
Informatics Centre (NIC) as per the requirement of the States.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 40 of Chapter-I of the Report)

61
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation Serial No. 4 (Para No. 2.19)
The Committee observe that Parthasarthy Committee has analysed
the watershed programmes in detail and given detailed valuable
recommendations. The recommendations of the said Committee should
be carefully examined while holding wide-ranging consultations with
all concerned and the Department should take the desired action to
implement the accepted recommendations of the Committee. The
Standing Committee should also be kept apprised of the status of the
implementation of the major recommendations of the Parthasarathy
Committee.
Reply of the Government
The Parthasarathy Committee report has been circulated, to all
State Governments and various concerned Ministries of Government
of India, for their views/comments. The report of the Committee has
also been put on the web site of the Department (www.dolr.nic.in) for
wide consultations.  The Ministry is examining the recommendations
of Parthasarathy Committee in depth. The observations/suggestions
made by the Standing Committee will be duly taken into account and
the outcome will be apprised to the Standing Committee.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 6 (Para No. 2.21)
The Committee note that the Planning Commission has constituted
two working groups on Land Relations and Rainfed Areas for Eleventh
Five Year Plan to finalise the strategy for the development of
wastelands. The expected role of private sector in the task of
development of wastelands is also being discussed while chalking out
the strategy for Eleventh Plan. The Committee note that the major

62
apprehension in involving private sector is that the interests of the
local people may not be harmed. They feel that the Government should
carefully consider the issue of involvement of private sector in
consultation with the State Governments and local bodies. The
Committee further recommend that strategy for the Eleventh Plan
should be finalized expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
Planning Commission has constituted a working group of National
Development Council (NDC) on Agriculture and related issues
including Wastelands and watershed development programmes. The
terms of reference of this working group, inter alia , include the
feasibility of public-private partnership and scope for the investment
by private sector in watershed development programmes. The
Department of Land Resources has submitted its comments to the
working group which, inter alia , include:
(i) The landless community which mostly belongs to BPL and
SC/ST has to be provided with sustainable alternative
income generating activities.
(ii) In addition to land resource development the activities
related to rain water conservation, water–harvesting and
afforestation be implemented through people’s participation.
(iii) The concern of the Government for food security, rural
employment and need to protect the environment should
not be neglected in a market oriented approach.
(iv) All corporate interventions should be faithful to the overall
architecture of the Government and principles of people’s
participation, equity and sustainability are adhered to by
all participants.
The report of the Planning Commission’s Working Groups is
awaited.
On Private Sector participation, the Parthasarathy Committee has
suggested the following:—
(i) Corporate should be encouraged to contribute generously
to the National/State NASDORA fund and to WDF at the
micro-watershed level. These donations may be provided
100% tax exemption.
(ii) There is scope for corporate involvement in technical
assistance, capacity building and training besides
implementation of benchmark initiatives in collaboration
with science and technology institutions.

63
(iii) The strength of corporate sector as we perceive it would lie
in developing marketing systems, providing agricultural
extension and other value-added services through IT-enabled
activities, energy resource development and management,
and some commercial initiatives in terms of developing
agricultural plantations which would also return some
benefits to the agricultural community in terms of buy back
guarantees, information enriched services, etc. However, it
needs to be emphasized that all corporate interventions must
be faithful to the overall architecture of the watershed
programme as enunciated in this report. They must adhere
to the principles of people’s participation, equity and
sustainability emphasized by and mandatory for all
practitioners.
The policy for private sector would be finalized expeditiously
keeping in view the above and after wide-ranging consultations with
the States.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 9 (Para No. 3.13)
The Committee in their earlier reports have repeatedly been
expressing their concern over the multiplicity of programmes/schemes
to tackle the problem of wastelands in the country and have been
emphasizing on the need for convergence of the programme. While
examining the Demands for Grants, it has repeatedly been brought to
the notice of Government but the issue although agreed to in principle
lacks unanimity among the various Ministries involved in handling
the issue of wastelands development. The Technical Committee in
Chapter three of the report has expressed similar concerns. It has been
stated that serious differences persist among different Ministries
regarding the ownership of the unified programme.
The Committee also note that in the Mid-Term Appraisal document
of the Planning Commission, the formula for bringing the watershed
activities under one umbrella has been suggested which seems to be
not agreeable to the concerned Ministries due to their reluctance to
leave the area of activities related to watershed management being

64
undertaken by them. The Committee also note that the proposal has
been mooted by the Ministry of Agriculture for a nodal centralized
agency i.e. Rainfed Area Authority. Again the issue of conflict is the
ownership of the aforesaid authority. Further the Committee also find
that finally it has been agreed that the said authority would be best
located under the umbrella of the PMO. The Committee feels that
sufficient time has been lost over the issue of taking decision on the
issue of convergence. It is high time to resolve the issue of convergence
at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Cabinet at its meeting held on 10.8.2006 has approved the
proposal of the Ministry of Agriculture for setting up of the National
Rainfed Areas Authority (NRAA).
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 13 (Para No. 3.27)
The Committee have repeatedly been expressing the concern over
lack of mechanism to analyse the performance of projects being
undertaken under different schemes in their respective reports. The
Committee in their 10th Report had even suggested a mechanism to
evaluate the performance of different projects. While noting that there
is a long gestation period the Committee had suggested to evaluate
the projects at various stages like first stage, second stage and third
stage etc. and benchmarking the projects by indicating poor, satisfactory
or very good. The Committee further find that Hon’ble Prime Minister
has expressed similar concerns over the lack of focus on outcomes. He
in his address to the nation on 15 August, 2005 has expressed the
view that merely utilizing outlays has been the norms under different
schemes. Not only that the Technical Committee has also expressed
similar views and suggested a similar mechanism as suggested by this
Standing Committee to evaluate the performance of projects. Even when
the Standing Committee, Hon’ble Prime Minister and the Technical
Committee of the Department of Rural development have been
expressing their concerns over the sorry state of affairs of monitoring
of projects, it seems from the various Budget documents that least
attention is paid towards the serious concerns expressed from various

65
quarters. From the replies at various places it appears the number of
instalments released has been deemed to be the mechanism to know
that the project has been completed.
The Committee deplore the way the monitoring of the projects is
being undertaken by the Department under the various schemes of
wastelands development. The Committee would like the Department
to pay serious attention to the observations of the Committee as
reported above and furnish a detailed note for the information of the
Committee indicating thereby the steps proposed to be initiated by
the Department to address the concerns as expressed by this Committee
and from various other quarters.
Reply of the Government
The Department monitors physical and financial performance of
IWDP projects on the basis of quarterly progress reports of individual
projects. Mid-Term evaluation of the project by an independent
evaluator is compulsory after release of 45% of project fund. Evaluation
of watershed projects gives the details of physical performance of the
project. The evaluator has to point out shortcomings and suggestions
for improvement of the performance of the project. In case, the
performance of the project is satisfactory, next instalment is released
for the project with directions for mid-course corrections as suggested
by the evaluator. Next instalment of project fund is considered on the
basis of the action taken to comply the suggestions of the evaluator.
After release of all instalments to the project, impact assessment studies
are to be conducted by an independent evaluator before the project is
formally closed.
The Department is putting in place online monitoring of the projects
under area development programmes. The Department has launched a
web-based application for direct entry of the watershed projects related
data at three levels i.e. DoLR, State and Districts. The Quarterly physical
and financial progress reports will be entered by the districts and
entry for release of central share and State share will be done by the
DoLR and State Government. The application will generate periodically
updated data base on the following items.
1. Project details : District, block, villages, watersheds with
codes, area, ownership details, lands of marginal people.
2. Physical Targets and Achievements : No. of mandays,
employment days for SC/ST/women, SHG, UG, trainings,
soil and moisture conservation works (contour bunding,

66
gully plugging, bench terracing etc.), water harvesting
structures (check dams, farm ponds etc.), afforestation,
horticulture etc.
3. Financial targets and achievement on the above items.
Reports shall be generated for individual project, district, State
and country level.
As suggested by the Committee, the Department of Land Resources
has initiated action for grading of projects on the basis of performance.
The suggested mechanism for evaluating the projects at three stages
and benchmarking the projects as poor, satisfactory , good, very good
and excellent was discussed with the State Secretaries during the review
meeting and it was suggested that a minimal measurable and
quantifiable criteria may be fixed for the various activities to be taken
up in three phases by the Government of India and the State
Governments may supplement these with more criteria if found
desirable or prescribe higher performance standards. The suggestion is
under active consideration of the Ministry of Rural Development. The
Parthasarthy Committee has also suggested monitoring of the project
performance after one year, before the release of every new instalment
and at the end of the project.
The observations/suggestions made by the Standing Committee
will be duly taken into account and the outcome will be apprised to
the Standing Committee.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 16 (Para No.3.42)
The Committee further note that as indicated by Technical
Committee Rs. 1,50,000 crore would be required to treat the estimated
land of 125 million hectares. The Technical Committee has suggested
to double the current programme outlay. Further it has also been stated
that the allocation made under National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme would supplement the outlay provided by different
Government schemes for the development of wastelands. The
Committee find that the outlay for National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme has been separately allocated by the Department of

67
Rural Development. Rs. 11,300 crore during 2006-2007 have been
earmarked for 200 districts which have been covered by the Guarantee
Scheme. Till the scheme is not made applicable nationwide, it is difficult
to know how far the outlay provided for NREGS could supplement
the Government initiatives taken under different wastelands
programmes. Besides there is an urgent need to have some sort of
coordinating mechanism for the schemes being undertaken under
NREGS related to watershed activities and the schemes taken under
the Department of Rural Development or some other Ministries of
Union Government or State Governments. The Committee feel that
Gram Sabha is the best mechanism to coordinate the activities related
to wastelands development. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Area Development Programmes under DDP , DPAP and IWDP
are implemented by the Panchayati Raj Institutions under the Hariyali
Guidelines. The NREGS is also implemented by the PRIs. There is a
provision in both to dovetail in order to achieve greater impact at the
implementation level. The mechanism to coordinate the activities related
to wastelands development is therefore inbuilt in these schemes.
However, NREGA is not applicable countrywide and the NREGS
depends on demand for work, which may be seasonal. As far as the
recommendation of Parthasarathy Committee on this issue is concerned,
the same is being examined by the Ministry in depth. The observations/
suggestions made by the Standing Committee will, however, be duly
taken into account and the outcome will be apprised to the Standing
Committee.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 19 (Para No. 3.45)
The Committee further note that some initiatives are being taken
to amend the Land Revenue Act. Consultations are being held with
the interested Ministries. The Committee stress that the proposals
for amendment of the Land Revenue Act should be finalized at the
earliest.

68
Reply of the Government
A new scheme viz. Comprehensive Modernization of Land Records
(CMLR) with 100 per cent Central assistance is being formulated. The
Scheme envisages integration of computerization of land records with
survey & settlement, digitization of cadastral maps and registration.
CMLR will deliver outcomes in terms of updated land records to
establish clear land titles. It is proposed to have a model law for
giving legal back up to various features of CMLR. However, it is
likely to take time.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 22 (Para No. 4.15)
As regards the monitoring of the physical status of the projects
the Committee in the preceding paras of the report have noted that
the common problems with regard to the projects undertaken for
wastelands under different schemes of the Department are foreclosure
of projects, stopping payment to projects etc. The issue has been dealt
with the detail and suggestions made in the preceding part of the
report. As regards the issue of time overrun of the projects being
undertaken under IWDP , the Committee find that the gestation period
of projects is five years whereas almost half of the projects taken up
during 9th Plan are still to be completed. The Committee also note
that the Technical Committee has suggested to increase the gestation
period of projects from five years to eight years. The Committee also
observe that in case the gestation period is increased the average cost
of the projects may also increase. The Committee would further like
the Department to examine the suggestion of the Technical Committee
and furnish their comments so as to enable the Committee to review
the position further.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is examining the recommendations of Parthasarathy
Committee in depth. The observations/suggestions made by the
Standing Committee will be duly taken into account and the outcome
will be apprised to the Standing Committee.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)

69
Recommendation Serial No. 24 (Para No. 4.25)
The Committee further find that DDP and DPAP blocks were
identified more than a decade back. The situation in these blocks may
have changed. Many blocks would have turned greener and need no
assistance under these programmes whereas some other additional
blocks may need assistance. Further, requests from some of the States
are being received by the Department for coverage of additional blocks.
The Committee also note that the Parthasarthy Committee was
supposed to look into the issue of exclusion/inclusion of DDP and
DPAP blocks. Since the said Committee has already submitted the
report, the Committee would like to be informed whether the said
issue has been addressed in the report and if so, the details thereof.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that the exercise of re-identification of blocks under
DPAP and DDP is quite extensive, time consuming and requiring a
huge data for technical and professional analysis. Thus this aspect
could not be covered in the report. However, Ministry has taken up
this matter with the Chairman, Parthasarathy Committee and the expert
institution that is CRIDA, Hyderabad.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 33 (Para No.5.20)
The Committee further find that Lal Bahadur Shastri National
Academy of Administration (LBSNAA) has conducted an evaluation
study on Computerisation of Land Records in the States of Karnataka,
West Bengal and Rajasthan. The evaluation study of Tamil Nadu is
under progress. Further NIRD was also requested to undertake
evaluation study in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat,
Maharashtra and Kerala. The Committee express their unhappiness
that no progress report has been received from NIRD which is a
premier institution for research and is under the administrative control
of the Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the details of the studies completed by LBSNAA.

70
Reply of the Government
The reports of the evaluation studies in respect of the States of
Karnataka, West Bengal and Rajasthan have been received and the
findings have already been sent to the Committee Secretariat. The report
in respect of Tamil Nadu is still awaited from LBSNAA. They have
been requested for submission of the Report expeditiously. During
February, 2005, NIRD was requested for undertaking evaluation of the
scheme of CLR in few States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Orissa.
As per information received from NIRD, they have already completed
studies on the scheme of CLR in 8 States, including Andhra Pradesh
and Gujarat. Formal study report is awaited from NIRD.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2006-GC, Dated: 31 August, 2006]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 March, 2007 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

71
APPENDIX I
(Reference reply to the para no. 3.25 & 4.24)
STATE-WISE NUMBER OF DPAP/DDP PROJECTS FOR WHICH
FUNDING HAS BEEN STOPPED
Sl.No. Name of Total No. Total cost Number of installments Total funds
State of Projects (Rs. in released released
where lakhs)
funding is
stopped
Ist IInd IIIrd IVth Vth VIth (Rs. in
lakhs)
Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP)
1. Andhra Pradesh 60 1200.00 60 390.00
2. Bihar 101 2020.00 22 14 65 540.50
3. Chhatisgarh 112 1680.00 112 896.00
4. Gujarat 27 540.00 20 7 186.00
5. Himachal Pradesh 00 00.00
6. J & K 32 640.00 22 10 233.00
7. Jharkhand 244 4270.00 51 108 69 16 1139.00
8. Karnataka 114 2280.00 21 93 973.50
9. Madhya Pradesh 00 00.00
10. Maharashtra 657 13140.00 8 235 227 187 5046.50
11. Orissa 162 3510.00 12 132 18 1074.00
12. Rajasthan 19 380.00 8 11 151.00
13. Tamil Nadu 40 800.00 8 12 20 296.00
14. Uttaranchal 00 00.00
15. Uttar Pradesh 61 1160.00 61 549.00
16. West Bengal 135 2700.00 8 127 861.50
Total 1764 34320.00 51 38 142 751 382 400 12336.0
Desert Development Programme (DDP)
1. Haryana 50 1235.00 ---- 1 4 3 6 1033.11
2. J & K 85 2125.00 ---- 6 1 2 4 1735.35
3. Karnataka 165 3712.50 - 9 82 - 24 50 1760.01
Total 300 7072.50 - 9 82 - 99 110 4528.47

72
APPENDIX II
(Reference reply to the para no. 3.25 & 4.24)
NUMBER OF PROJECTS SANCTIONED, COMPLETED,
FUNDING STOPPED AND PROJECTS IN PROGRESS
FROM 1995-96 TO 2005-06.
Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP)
State No. of Projects Total cost No. of No. of projects for which No. of
sanctioned from (Rs. in project funding stopped ongoing
1995-96 to crores) Completed projects
2005-06
Since Since Since
1.4.03 1.10.03 1.4.05
Andhra Pradesh 3882 940.05 1904 00 00 60 1918
Bihar 453 125.80 00 101 00 00 352
Chhattisgarh 1020 277.00 122 112 00 00 786
Gujarat 2149 576.80 495 00 22 05 1627
Himachal Pradesh 365 102.40 60 00 00 00 305
Jammu & Kashmir 483 141.70 00 00 10 22 451
Jharkhand 1453 399.70 19 244 00 00 1190
Karnataka 2105 566.10 343 114 00 00 1648
Madhya Pradesh 2934 765.90 1141 00 00 00 1793
Maharashtra 3180 850.30 161 657 00 00 2362
Orissa 1146 328.80 30 162 00 00 954
Rajasthan 987 276.10 210 19 00 00 758
Tamil Nadu 1414 354.30 549 00 00 40 825
Uttar Pradesh 1576 392.50 566 61 00 00 949
Uttranchal 737 200.40 117 00 00 00 620
West Bengal 479 130.20 00 135 00 00 344
Total 24363 6428.05 5717 1605 32 127 16882

73
Desert Development Programme (DDP)
Since Since Since No. of
1.4.03 1.3.04 1.4.05 ongoing
projects
Andhra Pradesh 906 249.15 206 00 00 00 700
Gujarat 2642 748.50 560 00 00 00 2082
Haryana 1030 292.40 188 00 00 50 792
Himachal Pradesh 504 144.80 80 00 00 00 424
Jammu & Kashmir 667 186.35 94 00 85 00 488
Karnataka 1362 387.525 120 65 00 100 1077
Rajasthan 6365 1810.425 1335 00 00 00 5030
Total 13476 3819.150 2583 65 85 150 10593

74
APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDA Y THE 27 FEBRUARY, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. ‘139’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah— In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Zora Singh Mann
4. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
7. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
8. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
9. Shri Sita Ram Singh
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari
13. Shri Jayantilal Barot
14. Dr. Chandan Mitra
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary Grade I
3. Shri A. K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II

75
2. In the absence of Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Hannan
Mollah, M.P . to act as Chairman for the sitting under Rule 258(3) of
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and solicited their cooperation in examination and
finalisation of draft action taken reports on Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) and reports on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of various
Departments/Ministries under the jurisdiction of the Committee.
*** *** ***
4. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 3 regarding draft action taken report on Nineteenth Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development). The Committee after
deliberations adopted the draft report with a slight modification.
5.The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft action taken Reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
6. The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1500 hrs.
onwards on 1 March, 2007 for consideration and adoption of two
draft action taken reports on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in respect
of Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
and Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
***Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

76
APPENDIX IV
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE  RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (14th LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 36
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by 17
the Government
Para Nos. 2.5, 2.17, 2.18, 2.20, 3.40, 3.43, 3.46,
4.14, 4.24, 4.34, 5.15, 5.16, 5.17, 5.18, 5.25,
5.26 and 5.27
Percentage to the total recommendations (47.22%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do Nil
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies
Percentage to total recommendations (Nil)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee 10
Para Nos. 2.26, 2.27, 3.14, 3.25, 3.26, 3.41, 3.44,
4.33, 5.14 and 5.19
Percentage to total recommendations (27.78%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final 9
replies of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos. 2.19, 2.21, 3.13, 3.27, 3.42, 3.45,
4.15, 4.25 and 5.20
Percentage to total recommendations (25%)