CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2007-08)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Thirtieth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 14 May, 2007.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 27 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos.: 2.4, 2.11, 2.15, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.25, 2.26, 2.36,
2.44, 2.47, 2.71, 2.76, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 3.30 and 3.31
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
-Nil-
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos.: 2.35, 2.56 and 2.57
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.: 2.45, 2.46, 2.62, 2.66, 2.70 and 3.35
3. The Committee would like the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to
expedite the actions proposed on the recommendations to which
interim replies have been given and intimate the Committee within
three months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Need for permanent mechanism for training in Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs) functionaries
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.26)
5. The Committee in their original report had recommended as
under:
“The Committee while noting that efforts are being made to work
out a detailed training module observe that the Ministry has not
done much on finding out the quantum of task ahead for the
Ministry in this regard. Even after the passage of full two years
since the Ministry was created, efforts have not been made to
know the data of PRIs and functionaries who could be trained
so far by the efforts being made through Union Government and
the State Governments. Since efforts are being made in this regard
by various quarters as admitted by the Ministry, there is an urgent
need to coordinate with the various agencies involved in the
task of training of PRIs and know how much of PRIs and
functionaries could already be trained and the task ahead so as
to address the issue in a more focused manner. The Committee
would like the Ministry to get the information from the State
Governments in this regard and the Committee be kept apprised.
Since the training of PRIs is a continuous process, the Ministry
should evolve a permanent mechanism so as to have the first
hand knowledge of the status of training of PRIs through the
Ministry’s training scheme and the efforts being made by other
quarters, i.e. the other Ministries of Union Government/State
Government, various training institutions etc.”
6. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken replies
stated as follows:
“The Panchayati Raj model in India supports the world’s biggest
endeavour in grassroots governance which has taken place in
India. The 73rd Constitutional Amendment, adopted in 1992,
established a solid legal base for participation of the rural poor
in local (district, sub-district and village level) Government
institutions. Some 2.38 lakh Panchayats (village councils)
representing about 6.00 lakh villages have been constituted and
about three million rural people, a third of whom, by law have
to be women, elected to Panchayat bodies. The Ministry of
Panchayati Raj has provided assistance to State Governments and

3
Union Territories for capacity building of Panchayati Raj
Institutions.
The assistance is provided for imparting training to newly elected
Panchayat members, the majority of them semi or even illiterate
and unprepared for the responsibility of local governance.
Preparing the Panchayat members, especially the women among
them, for their new roles as local decision-makers, calls for
education and training on a massive scale, for which adopted
training methods and tools are needed. During the financial year
2006-07, the grant of Rs. 24.50 crore was released to twelve State
Governments/UTs and Rs. 2.11 crore for four North Eastern States
for training of elected representatives and Rural Development
Functionaries of Panchayati Raj Institutions. The total number of
18.57 lakh participants were proposed for training during the
year 2006-07 by all the States. The letters have been sent to State
Governments and State Institute of Rural Development (SIRD)
for the submission of Progress cum Financial Report of training
of elected representatives of PRIs.”
7. The Committee have persistently been emphasizing on training
of elected representatives and functionaries of Panchayati Raj
Institutions in the respective Reports and in the present
recommendation had desired the data with regard to number of such
PRI representatives and functionaries who could be trained and the
task ahead, so as to make a proper planning in this regard. The
Committee had also recommended evolution of permanent
mechanism for the training of these representatives and functionaries.
Instead of taking action as suggested by the Committee, the Ministry
has furnished data with regard to PRIs and the grants released to
States. The information does not address the issue raised in the
recommendation. The Committee disapprove the way the Ministry
has reacted to the recommendation.
The Committee again emphasize that training is the basic input
for capacity building of Panchayati Raj Institutions. Proper planning
for time bound training to PRIs cannot be made without having the
present status of training. Besides, there is an urgent need to have
some regular mechanism for training keeping in view the fact that
the representatives keep changing after each election. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry
to take the desired action and apprise the Committee accordingly.

4
B. Ensuring centrality of Panchayats in implementation of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.35)
8. The Committee in their original report had recommended as
under:
“The Committee while reviewing the efforts being made by the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj in ensuring the centrality of Panchayats
in various Centrally Sponsored Schemes run by different
Ministries/Departments of Union Government had observed (refer
para 7 of 26th Report) that not much progress has been made in
this regard. While examining the Demands for Grants of the
current year, the Ministry has furnished the details of the
initiatives taken by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee
find that a Group of Ministers for strengthening of Panchayati
Raj Institutions was constituted by the Cabinet Secretariat vide its
order dated 6 May , 2005. As per the decision taken by the
Government, all the prioritised Ministries were required to
undertake Activity Mapping to pursue the aforesaid agenda of
the Ministry. A workshop was also held on 24 April, 2006. In
spite of best of the efforts made by the Ministry, not much has
been done in this regard. Only five Ministries viz. (i) Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare (ii) Ministry of Agriculture
(iii) Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (iv) Department
of Food and Public Distribution (v) Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports have completed the exercise of activity mapping. The
Ministry is pursuing with the remaining Ministries to undertake
Activity Mapping. The resistance from various Ministries/
Departments has been cited as one of the reasons for the slow
progress. The Committee find that the major concern of the
various Ministries as stated by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
itself is general lack of confidence in the ability of Panchayats to
manage their own affairs in an efficient manner. The Committee
observes that the challenge of making various Ministries/
Departments agreeable in this regard is great for the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj. The Committee feel that perhaps the lack of
confidence in the ability of PRIs in handling the various Centrally
Sponsored Schemes for which crores of rupees are annually being
spent for Social Sector Schemes of the various Ministries/
Departments of Union Government is due to the various issues
related to capacity building of Panchayats. With the existing
position where the Panchayats has hardly any staff and technical

5
expertise, the concerns of the Ministries are somewhat genuine.
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj should first of all endeavour to
empower PRIs through the various components of Gram Swaraj
Scheme, the analysis of which has been done in the subsequent
part of the report. The adequate allocation for the aforesaid
programme should be provided by the Planning Commission.
Besides, the Ministry has to prove the qualitative impact in the
schemes run by PRIs. For example under National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme, 50 percent of the projects shall
be implemented by PRIs. The effectiveness of PRIs in handling
the part of NREGA can prove the ability of PRIs in handling
these schemes. If there are qualitative differences between the
projects run by PRIs and other implementing agencies, the
Ministry has the reason enough to convince the Central Ministries
to transfer these schemes.”
9. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken replies
stated as follows:
“The persistent efforts of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj with
Central Ministries have not resulted in commensurate success in
the modifications of Centrally Sponsored Scheme guidelines, with
the exception of a few schemes such as the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Programme. In order to ensure that the
matter is taken up at the highest level, on the request of the
Ministry, a Committee, with Secretary (Panchayati Raj) and
Secretary (Coordination), Cabinet Secretariat as co-chairs, has been
constituted on the direction of the Cabinet Secretary to review
the major Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the different Ministries
of Government of India with a view to according centrality to
the Panchayats in the implementation of these schemes. Ministry-
wise discussions are under way by the Committee. The Committee
has so far discussed the schemes of the Ministries of Women
and Child Development, Human Resource Development
(Department of School Education and Literacy), Social Justice and
Empowerment, Agriculture (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation and Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries), Food and Public Distribution, Water Resources,
Environment & Forests and Rural Development (Department of
Rural Development and Department of Land Resources). At the
third meeting of the Council of Ministers of Panchayati Raj
convened on 17-18 August, 2007 at Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala,
under the Chairmanship of the Union Minister of Panchayati
Raj, the Council in its conclusions, stated as follows:

6
“The Council of Ministers resolves that since Ministry of
Panchayati Raj has been meticulously mapping the progress
achieved across States, inclusive of the impediments they are
encountering in moving ahead, and there is now an enormous
amount of State specific data compiled, and further since the
dialogue with Central Ministries in respect of Centrally Sponsored
Schemes is nearing completion through a Committee lodged in
the Cabinet Secretariat, it would be appropriate that Chairman
and Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission be requested
to convene a meeting of the National Development Council,
chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister on Panchayati Raj and
Decentralized Planning”.
Further, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is making all out sincere
efforts towards capacity building of the elected representatives
and other functionaries of PRIs for enhancing effectiveness of
their participation in implementation of the various schemes.”
10. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had reviewed
the position with regard to ensuring the centrality of Panchayats in
various Centrally sponsored Schemes run by different Ministries/
Departments of Union Government in tune with Article 243G read
with the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. The Committee while
noting the resistance of various Ministries in transferring the
implementation of various schemes to Panchayati Raj Institutions,
had emphatically stated that the onus in this regard lies with the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The Ministry has intimated that the
matter has been taken up at the highest level and a Committee has
been constituted on the direction of the Cabinet Secretary to review
the major Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the different Ministries
of Government of India.
The Committee while noting the initiatives being taken at the
highest level would again like to reiterate their earlier observation.
The Ministry has to focus on effective implementation of the schemes
actually being implemented by Panchayati Raj Institutions. If there
is any qualitative difference between the projects run by PRIs and
other implementing agencies, there is no reason for not transferring
projects to PRIs by various Ministries. The Committee would like
the Ministry to take the desired action in this regard and inform the
Committee accordingly.

7
C. Slow progress of devolution of Functions, functionaries and
finances
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 3 & 4,
Para Nos. 2.44 & 2.47)
11. The Committee in their original report had recommended as
under:
“The Committee find that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj was
created to give focused attention to the implementation of Part
IX of the Constitution the main component of which is effective
devolution of the 3Fs i.e. functions, functionaries and finances.
Further, the enactment of the Seventy third Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 1992 was aimed at providing Constitutional
status to local self-governments i.e. Panchayats. In this regard
Article 243 G explicitly states that the State Governments may
by law endow the Panchayats with such powers so as to enable
them to function as institutions of self-Government.
The Committee note that the need for empowerment at grass
root level in rural areas is the reason for creation of an exclusive
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. In this context devolution of functions,
functionaries and finances should have been accorded primacy
by the Ministry and efforts made to that effect. However, the
perusal of the comparative progress of devolution over the past
two years ( i.e. since June, 2005) as indicated in the Appendices
II and III reveal that status quo has been maintained. Only in the
States of Gujarat and Haryana there has been improvement in
the number of subjects devolved. However, this is the status of
transfer of subjects through legislation. The Ministry has not
provided the information regarding the actual devolution of
functions, functionaries and finances to Panchayats as has been
requested by the Committee repeatedly in their earlier reports.
The information that the Ministry has provided is incomplete
and a true picture of devolution does not emerge from it. The
Committee observe that simply transferring subjects to Panchayats
will not result in real empowerment unless concomitant funds
and functionaries are also made available to Panchayats. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the aforesaid information be
furnished by the Ministry to enable the Committee to analyse
the position of devolution and comment further.”
Recommendation (Para No.2.44)

8
“The Committee note that Activity Mapping has been undertaken
by the Ministry to identify subjects to be devolved to the
appropriate tier of the Panchayats. The Committee, further, note
that only four States viz. Kerala, Karnataka, Sikkim and West
Bengal have completed this exercise. Haryana and Orissa have
undertaken Activity Mapping for a limited number of subjects.
The Ministry has set a deadline of 31 May, 2007 to States for
completion of this exercise.
The Committee are concerned at the slow progress of Activity
Mapping. It is a matter of great concern that only 6 States have
managed to achieve some degree of progress in respect of Activity
Mapping. The Committee are disheartened to find that the large
majority of States have not yet completed this exercise. The
deadline for completion of Activity Mapping which was set for
1 April, 2006 has now been extended to 31 May , 2007. The
Committee note that since only the successful completion of
Activity Mapping will ensure true devolution this exercise needs
to be undertaken much more seriously by States and emphasized
by the Central Ministry. The Committee hope that the Ministry
will ensure that Activity Mapping in respect of all States would
be completed within the designated deadline. The Committee
urge the Ministry to take appropriate steps to that effect and
inform them accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.47)
12. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken replies
stated as follows:
Devolution of Functions
“The status on devolution of functions as derived from the State
Panchayati Raj Acts and Activity Mapping or as reported by
States is given at Appendix-I. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is
undertaking an exercise on the analysis of State Legislations
vis-a-vis activity mapping where undertaken, to ascertain whether
there has been substantive devolution or is merely a lip service
to the Panchayati Raj.
Devolution of Finances
Devolution of functions needs to be followed by effective
devolution of finances and financial powers. The next step in
getting an effective financial system going is to ensure that

9
financial devolution matches the activity mapping. The financial
devolution to Panchayats has the following aspects:
(i) Creation of Panchayat Sector in the Budget Window
In order to ensure that there is clarity in the determination of
fund flows to Panchayats, it is essential that a Panchayat Sector
Budget Window be created in the budget of State Governments.
This requirement can be met in two ways—first, each Department
could create separate line items in their budgets for Panchayats,
earmarking allocations pertaining to responsibilities devolved and
schemes entrusted to Panchayats. Departments can thus directly
send their funds to Panchayats in accordance with these ear-
marked budget line items. Alternatively all such earmarked funds
pertaining to different Departments could be consolidated by the
Finance Departments and sent to Panchayats in regular
instalments. The system of creating a Panchayat Sector Window
in the budgets of States has been adopted by several States,
namely, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Gujarat, M.P .,
Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan. However, the efficacy of the system
varies differently from State-to-State. The current status of States
in respect of having a separate Panchayat sector window for
channelising funds to Panchayats is given below. States can be
divided into four categories based on the extent of mismatch
between functional and fiscal devolution as follows:
Category 1:  The States having a separate budget window for
Panchayats, with funds devolved to Panchayats with relatively
less mismatch (Also, these are relatively better investigated States)
are Kerala and Karnataka.
Category 2:  The States of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat are having a separate budget
window for Panchayats, but with degrees of mismatch between
functional and financial devolution. In these States, activity
mapping, as defined by the Ministry has also not happened,
even though there are orders and legislative provisions devolving
functions to Panchayats:
Category 3: States with no budget window for Panchayats. Funds
are mostly devolved only in the budget of the Department of
Panchayati Raj. Though other Departments might give money to
the Panchayats, there is no budgetary classification system under

10
which all such funds are placed in one document. Category 3
States may be divided into four sub-categories, as follows:
Category 3(a): The States of West Bengal, Haryana, Orissa, Sikkim,
Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Assam have expressed
keenness to undertake a separation of Panchayat allocations into
a separate budget window, including through the Statements of
conclusions signed between the Union Minister for Panchayati
Raj and the Chief Minister of the State concerned.
Category 3(b):  The States of Bihar, Uttarakhand, Tripura, Goa,
Manipur, Arunanchal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh
and Jharkhand are yet to take action in this regard:
(ii) Devolution of untied funds:
The key to effective performance by Panchayats also lies in the
devolution of adequate untied funds to them, so that they can perform
their assigned public services. The main sources of untied funds to
Panchayats are:
(a) Tax and non-tax revenues raised from the sources assigned
to them; and
(b) Block unconditional transfers provided by the States and
Central Government by way of share in taxes or through
block grants.
(a) Own Revenue of Panchayats
An essential trigger for strengthening Panchayats is to enable and
empower them to enhance their own revenues. Requiring Panchayats
to mobilise their own revenues strengthens the link between revenue
and expenditure decisions of Panchayats, which is extremely important
to promote both efficiency and accountability in the provision of
services by them. For ensuring effective revenue mobilization by
Panchayats, there is a need to re-orient the legal and policy regime
with a view to giving Panchayats more tax handles to widen their
revenue base, as also ensure that the taxation powers currently given
are effectively operationalized. Meeting the challenge of accelerating
revenue mobilization by Panchayats will require effective and close
coordination between the Panchayats and the State Government as
taxation powers of Panchayats are governed by the State Panchayati
Raj Act and the Rules made thereunder.
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj organized a National Seminar on
Panchayat Level Resource Mobilization and Efficient Fiscal Transfer on

11
6-7 July 2007. The important recommendations emerging from the
seminar which have been referred to the State Governments for follow-
up action are as follows:
(b) Grants of the Twelfth Finance Commission
The Twelfth Finance Commission has recommended a transfer of
Rs. 20,000 crore to Panchayats from the Central Government for the
period 2005-10 (Rs. 4000 crore per year). The Ministry of Panchayati
Raj has worked out special arrangements with the Ministry of Finance
to ensure close monitoring of the transfer of these grants to Panchayats.
The guidelines issued by the Finance Ministry stipulate that the amount
shall be transferred to the Panchayats within 15 days of their release
to the State Governments. States are to pay the Panchayats interest at
the RBI rate in case of delays, for the delayed period.
There is a need to considerably increase the absolute amounts
devolved to the Panchayats by the Central Finance Commission as
also to retain its primarily untied character. The Ministry of Panchayati
Raj aims to ensure that the 13th Finance Commission carries forward
the process of devolution of untied non-plan grants and is taking
preparatory steps in this regard. In pursuance of a decision taken in
the third meeting of the Council of Ministers held in August 2007 at
Thiruvananthapuram, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is taking steps to
constitute a separate sub-Committee of State Ministers, chaired by the
Finance Minister of Kerala, Professor Thomas Isaac, to prepare detailed
recommendations in this regard that could be placed before the
13th Finance Commission when it is constituted.
(iii) T ransfer of Centrally Sponsored Scheme allocations to
Panchayats:
Central funds constitute the bulk of the funding through Centrally
Sponsored Schemes and for that reason, there is scope for the Central
Government to influence the process of strengthening of Panchayats.
Several steps have been taken in this regard since the Ministry was
created.
Central Ministries/Departments and the Planning Commission have
been engaged in an exercise to rationalize policies in Centrally
Sponsored Schemes dealing with matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule
of the Constitution. Ministry of Panchayati Raj have also reviewed
CSS pertaining to subjects mentioned in the Eleventh Schedule of the
Constitution and to other social and economic development policies
with a view to ensuring that the modifications made or proposed to
be made in Scheme guidelines conform to the letter and spirit of

12
Part IX of the Constitution. Twenty Ministries were prioritized by
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. It was decided that since the bulk of CSS
funding was in Ministries of Human Resource Development, Rural
Development, Health and Family Welfare, Agriculture, Power and
Environment and Forests, each of these Ministries be requested to
undertake an activity mapping delineating what was to be done at the
Central, State and Panchayat levels. Ministry of Panchayati Raj has
been corresponding with all the Ministries. Though replies have been
received from 14 Ministries/Departments, only Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Social Justice and Empowerment and Youth Affairs &
Sports have done some level of activity mapping. The exercise of
ensuring the centrality of Panchayats in the implementation of Bharat
Nirman has also been pursued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
As intimated against the reply of Para 2.35, a Committee of the
Cabinet Secretariat has been constituted to review the major Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the different Ministries of Government of India
with a view to affording centrality to the Panchayats in the
implementation of these schemes.
Devolution of Functionaries
Effective Panchayati Raj requires that functionaries of Government
work are placed under the elected leadership. During the Round Table
Conferences it was agreed that the devolution of functionaries to
Panchayats would be based on the mapping of activities related to the
devolved functions. The progress in this aspect varies from State to
State and cannot be considered as satisfactory at this stage. The States
of Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal and Maharashtra have given
considerable control to Panchayats over the functionaries. In some of
the States, devolution of functionaries is prescribed in Government
notifications, activity mapping orders, etc. Some of the States have
placed State Government officials under the Panchayats on deputation.
These functionaries have limited tenure under the Panchayats and for
disciplinary and other service matters are accountable to their superiors
in the State Departments.
The status of devolution of functionaries as reported by different
States is as follows:
Sl. No. State Devolution of Functionaries
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh Only General staff given, departmental
staff answer to departments

13
12 3
2. Assam Activity Mapping Notification issued by
the State provides for devolution of
functionaries matching to the
devolution of functions to Panchayats
3. Arunachal Pradesh Only skeleton staff given
4. Bihar Only General staff given, departmental
staff answer to departments
5. Chhattisgarh Sahayak Gram Panchayat Adhikari,
Gram Panchayat Adhikari, Clerical and
Class IV cadres of Education Tribal
Health and 7-8 other departments
declared as dying cadres and new
recruitment to these cadres is
undertaken directly by the Panchayats.
Chhattisgarh has been particularly
successful in recruitment of new
Shiksha Karmis at the level of the
Janpad Panchayats. More than 30,000
teachers have been so recruited into
local level cadres
6. Goa Village Panchayats can appoint
employees other than Secretary or
Gram Sevak using Panchayat funds. In
ZPs, CEO and Adhyaksha of ZP have
full control over ZP staff
7. Gujarat 2.2 lakh employees devolved to
Panchayats, mainly on deputation from
State Government to Panchayat level
post, covering 11 Departments.
8. Haryana Activity mapping of Feb 2006 devolves
staff through deemed deputation in
respect of 3 Departments
9. Himachal Pradesh Staff is with State Government
Panchayats are appointing authority for
6 types of employees of group C&D
category. In addition, Panchayats can
report on physical attendance in respect
of 2 categories of people

14
12 3
10. Jharkhand No elections held to Panchayats
11. Karnataka Staff of all Departments for which
functional devolution undertaken,
devolved to Panchayats on deputation.
GPs can appoint Panchayat staff, except
Panchayat secretary. All transfers within
the district done by committee headed
by CEO of ZP
12. Kerala Staff of 14 Departments transferred to
Panchayats, with disciplinary control
and career review (through CRs)
transferred to them
13. Madhya Pradesh All Class III village level functionaries
converted into dying cadres and fresh
recruitments undertaken by Panchayats.
These include Panchayat secretaries,
primary school teachers, anganwadi
workers etc.
14. Maharashtra All Group III and IV Panchayat level
functionaries to be appointed by Zilla
Panchayats. New amendment in 2003
brings all village level officials under
the Village Panchayats
15. Manipur Staff of the Government are posted to
Panchayats and continue under the
control and superintendence of the
Government
16. Orissa Officials of Departments are to report
to Panchayats in respect of transferred
schemes. Panchayats do not make any
appointments of their own
17. Punjab Seven Departments propose to delegate
powers of supervision to Panchayats.
In Health Department, the powers of
outsourcing the running of PHCs has
been devolved to Panchayats. Recently.
In education department, powers of

15
12 3
recruitment of teachers has been given
to Panchayats
18. Rajasthan Officials of 8 Departments placed with
each Panchayat through deputation
from Government
19. Sikkim Staff on deputation from the
Government. Panchayat secretary
elected by the members. Draft
Panchayati Raj service rules prepared
by the State and are under examination
by line Departments.
20. Tamil Nadu At GP level, part-time clerks can be
appointed by the Panchayat President.
ZPs and Block Panchayats have no
control over line Department staff
21. Tripura Staff in respect of 21 Departments
deputed to Panchayats from the
Government, with Panchayats exercising
powers of payment of salaries, grant
of leave, writing of CRs and
disciplinary action
22. Uttar Pradesh GPs have power of verification of
attendance of all village level workers.
Village level functionaries of some
Departments were transferred to Gram
Panchayats in 1999, but they were
subsequently withdrawn.
23. Uttaranchal In January 2005, executive orders were
issued transferring powers of seeking
information and supervision over
employees of 14 Departments to
Panchayats.
24. West Bengal EO of the ZP made appointing
authority for all posts except group D
posts at GP level, for which EO of
Panchayat samiti is the appointing
authority. This has been done by the
WB Panchayat amendment Act 2006.
Each GP has 6 sanctioned posts.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)

16
“As per the information available with the Ministry, eight States,
namely Karnataka, Kerala, Sikkim, West Bengal, Haryana, Orissa,
Assam and Tripura have done the Activity Mapping. In seven
States, namely, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand have completed the
basic ground level work but final approval to Activity Mapping
is awaited. The Panchayati Raj Legislations of Maharashtra,
Gujarat and Goa have provisions for devolution to Panchayats.
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and
will be taken up with the States appropriately.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.47)
13. Pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee to indicate
the exact status of devolution of funds, functions and functionaries
to Panchayati Raj Institutions in various States and Union territory
Administrations, the Ministry has furnished a detailed information
whereby the overall position in this regard has been indicated. A
statement indicating the transfer of subjects through legislation as
well as subjects covered under activity mapping has also been
furnished. The Committee note from the aforesaid statement that in
case of Arunachal Pradesh nothing has been indicated about the
transfer of subjects whereas three subjects have been said to be
covered under activity mapping. In Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh,
no information has been furnished about the activity mapping.
Besides, the aforesaid information has been furnished for twenty-
four States. The Committee would like that the remaining
information in case of the States where the information has been
partially furnished should be obtained. Besides, in case of four States
where no information of transfer of subjects and activity mapping
has been given should also be collected from the States and furnished
for the information of the Committee. Similar information
with regard to UT Administrations should also be collected and
furnished.
The Committee further would like the Ministry to have a clear
status of number of subjects transferred as well as the corresponding
number of functions and functionaries transferred from the
various States and UT Administrations. The aforesaid information
can be reviewed on an yearly basis so as to have up-to-date
information about the status of implementation of Part IX of the
Constitution.

17
D. Reversal of subjects
Recommendation Serial No. 5 (Para No. 2.45)
14. The Committee in their original report had recommended as
under:
“The Committee find that in addition to the slow progress with
respect to devolution there is also the negative trend of reversal
of subjects devolved. In the States of Madhya Pradesh (from 25
to 23 subjects) and in Maharashtra (from 19 to 18 subjects) there
has been reversal of subjects. Further, the Ministry has informed
that State Governments effect reversals by issuing notifications
withdrawing these subjects. The Committee find that under Article
243G State Governments transfer subjects to Panchayats by law.
The subjects are being transferred in pursuance of Article 243G
of the Constitution. However, the States withdraw these subjects
using only notifications. This is a serious offence and the
Committee has taken strong exception to such activities being
carried out by the State Governments, which are not in the true
spirit of the Constitution. The Committee, therefore, recommend
to the Government that suitable corrective steps should be taken
so that States are not allowed to by-pass the Constitutional
provisions. The Committee would like to be informed of the
action taken in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.45)
15. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken replies
stated as follows:
“The Ministry in the past has taken serious note to all the
instances that came to notice regarding the reversal of subjects
or any adverse impact on devolution in any aspect. The Ministry
has time and again taken up such issues at appropriate levels of
governance for neutralization of impacts of such negative moves.
In an attempt to amend the State Panchayati Raj Act, the
Karnataka Legislature recently passed an Amendment Bill with
the move of curtaining the powers of the Gram Sabha (in selection
of beneficiaries in some schemes). The Ministry on getting notice
of such move of the State Government took the matter at the
highest level of governance in the State and the Centre at the
level of the Cabinet Secretariat and the Prime Minister’s Office.
Following persistent efforts of the Central Government, Civil
Society Organisations and the elected representatives of the PRIs,

18
etc., the State Government had to withdraw the Amendment Bill
without it getting assent of the Governor.
As far as the States of Madhya Pradesh is concerned, different
orders issued by the State Government from time to time provide
for devolution of functions pertaining to 25 matters of the
Eleventh Schedule. Out of these 25 matters, pertaining to 22
Departments, funds and functionaries have also been devolved
to Panchayats in respect of 19 matters. In Maharashtra the State
Panchayati Raj Act provides for transfer of 18 subjects and the
State orders also affected devolution of 18 functions to Panchayats.
The recommendations of the Committee regarding treating
reversal of subjects of devolution as by passing the Constitutional
provisions have been noted and will be taken up with the States
at appropriate platforms.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.45)
16. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had expressed
serious concern over the trend of reversal of subjects devolved to
Panchayati Raj Institutions by some of the States. The Ministry has
assured that they will take up the matter with the States at
appropriate platform. The Committee would like to be informed
about the concrete action taken as well as the response of the State
Governments in this regard.
E. Incorrect data regarding devolution
Recommendation Serial No. 6 (Para No. 2.46)
17. The Committee in their original report had recommended as
under:
“Further, the Committee find that States often resort to reporting
of incorrect data regarding devolution. When requested, they
simply inform the Central Ministry of the number of subjects
devolved through legislation while withholding information about
the actual devolution of functions, functionaries and finances to
Panchayats. This prevents the true picture from emerging. The
Committee strongly object to such practice by the State
Governments and recommend that the Union Ministry take urgent
and strong steps to impress upon States not to resort to such
practices as it confuses the true picture of devolution.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.46)

19
18. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken replies
stated as follows:
“As stated earlier the Ministry has started a comprehensive
exercise of analyzing devolution of functions, funds and
functionaries undertaken by them in the Panchayati Raj
legislations, executive orders, rules, etc. issued by the States. The
State specific reports of devolution prepared in this manner is
proposed to be forwarded to the States for comments and for
ensuring factual accuracy of data collected. At the time of
forwarding the reports, the points raised by the Committee shall
be placed before the respective State Governments. The Committee
will be kept apprised of this development.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.46)
19. The Committee find that their concerns with regard to
incorrect data regarding devolution being furnished by some of the
State Governments are being addressed by getting the factual
accuracy of data collected from various State Governments. The
Committee would like the Ministry to pursue further with the State
Governments and inform the Committee about the exact position in
this regard.
F. Constitution of District Planning Committees (DPCs)
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 7 and 8,
Para Nos. 2.56 and 2.57)
20. The Committee in their original report had recommended as
under:
“The Committee note that progress on constitution of District
Planning Committees (DPCs) in different States is far from
satisfactory even though it is one of the mandatory provisions
given under Part IX of the Constitution of India by enactment of
Seventy-third Constitution Amendment Act, 1992. The Committee
find that Constitution enjoins that DPCs are to be constituted in
all States and Union territories (except Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, J&K the hill areas of Manipur, the hill areas of the
district of Darjeeling for which Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council
exists, the NCT of Delhi and six scheduled areas) with a view to
consolidate plans prepared by Panchayats into draft development
plans for the districts. The Committee note with dismay
that only in 14 States viz. Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa,

20
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur,
Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal and 4
Union territories of Andaman & Nicobar, Dadra & Nagar Haveli,
Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep DPCs have been constituted in
all districts. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has further informed
that constitution of DPCs in Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat are at various stages.
The district-wise position of constitution of DPCs in the remaining
States have not been made available to the Committee. The
Ministry has informed that details are being obtained from States
about the precise details when DPCs were first constituted in
each of the States after the enactment of the Seventy-third
Constitution Amendment Act. The Committee feel that the year-
wise status of constitution of DPCs need to be maintained by
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to have an idea of the status of
implementation of various provisions of the Constitution
particularly the mandatory ones, of which constitution of DPCs
is one. The Committee may be informed of the position as
received from the various States/UTs.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.56)
“The Committee have been expressing strong concern over the
non-constitution of DPCs in their various reports. During the
course of examination of Demands for Grants (2007-08), the
Committee have been informed that certain strong decisions have
been taken by the Ministry to put pressure on the States/UTs to
constitute DPCs expeditiously. In this regard, Backward Region
Grant Fund (BRGF) guidelines stipulates that the release of funds
would be contingent upon States constituting DPCs and the
district plan being applied by the DPCs. The Committee are
pleased to note that as a result of this, at least four States, Bihar,
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana and Punjab have taken concrete steps
to establish DPCs. The Committee hope that DPCs would be
constituted in all the districts of every State with the firm resolve
of the Ministry and adopting certain harsh measures mechanism
so as to achieve the objectives of preparing real and effective
plans with a bottom up approach which reflect the reality of
grassroot level.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.57)

21
21. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken replies
stated as follows:
“The DPCs have been constituted in 14 States. Details are given
below:
1. Chhattisgarh
2. Himachal Pradesh
3. Karnataka
4. Kerala
5. Madhya Pradesh
6. Manipur
7. Rajasthan
8. Sikkim
9. Tamil Nadu
10. West Bengal
11. Assam
12. Orissa
13. Goa
14. Bihar
Andhra Pradesh and Haryana have completed elections to the
DPCs from amongst the members of ZPs and Municipalities.
However, formal constitution is still pending as nominated members
are to be appointed.
The directions of the Committee have been noted. All the States
have been requested to send district wise constitution of DPCs.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.56)
“The Ministry has so far strictly enforced the precondition of
constitution of DPCs and approval/consolidation of the district
plans by the DPC for releasing Developmental Grants to the
States. Even the State of Jharkhand (where Panchayats are not in
existence) has been pursued for constitution of DPCs with the
members of Municipalities in order to be eligible for
Developmental Grant under the BRGF.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.57)

22
22. The Committee are disappointed to note that there is no
progress with regard to constitution of DPCs in various States/Union
Territory Administrations even after resorting to strict measures by
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, whereby grants under Backward
Region Grant Fund (BRGF) had been made contingent upon States
constituting DPCs. The information provided by the Ministry
indicates that only in fourteen States, DPCs have been constituted.
Further it has not been clarified whether DPCs have been constituted
in all the districts of the aforesaid States.
The Committee while examining Demands for Grants had been
informed that with the strict measures taken by the Ministry, the
constitution of DPCs in Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat was at various stages. Even after the
passage of more than eight months, the DPCs could not be
constituted in the aforesaid States. While expressing concern over
the sorry state of affairs with regard to constitution of DPCs in
various States, the Committee strongly recommend to the Ministry
to pursue further with the States and Union Territory Administrations
so that DPCs are constituted within a stipulated timeframe. Besides
the Committee would also like that the district-wise information
with regard to constitution of DPCs should be collected from the
States and the Committee be informed accordingly.
G. Implementation of PESA by State Governments
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.62)
23. The Committee in their original report had recommended as
under:
“Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Area Act (PESA), 1996 is being
implemented in areas falling under the Fifth Schedule of the
Constitution. Fifth Schedule areas are in nine States viz. Andhra
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh,
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Rajasthan. The
Committee find from the information provided by the Ministry
that all States have enacted the requisite compliance legislation
by amending their respective Panchayati Raj Acts. However
certain gaps continue to exist. Most States are also yet to amend
the subject laws like those relating to money lending, forest, excise
etc. In this connection the Ministry has entrusted the task of
formulation of appropriate amendments in the concerned State
Laws to the Indian Law Institute, Delhi. The amendments to the

23
State laws as proposed by the Indian Law Institute which run
into hundreds, have been sent to the respective State
Governments. As regards the achievements, only Gujarat has been
able to amend a local Statute relating to agriculture. The
Committee strongly recommend to the Ministry to follow up
vigorously with the various State Governments to carry on the
amendments to the various local laws expeditiously so as to
enable the implementation of amended Acts/Laws in letter and
spirit.”
24. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in their action taken replies
stated as follows:
“The Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
has identified four Central Acts where modifications are to be
carried out to bring them in consonance with PESA. They have
been requested to intimate action taken and progress made by
the Department of Legal Affairs in this regard.
During the Third Round Table of Ministers of Panchayati Raj at
Raipur on 23-24 September, 2004 with respect to PESA, it was
inter-alia decided to take steps to implement in a time-bound
framework of the provisions of PESA in respect of the rights of
the Gram Sabhas in the Fifth Schedule Areas. In a subsequent
consultation with the PESA States, Secretary, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj decided to constitute three sub- Committees for
suggesting remedial action, wherever required on various issues
related to the PESA Act. Therefore, Ministry of Panchayati Raj
had constituted three sub-Committees, namely one chaired by
Shri. B.D. Sharma, on ‘Model guidelines to vest Gram Sabhas
with powers as envisaged in PESA’, Shri Raghav Chandra on
‘Land Alienation, Displacement, Rehabilitation & Relief’ and
Shri A.K. Sharma on ‘Minor Forest Produce’ to look into these
issues. The three sub-Committees had submitted their reports and
recommendations. The same have been forwarded to the PESA
States for perusal and comments. Meanwhile, the
recommendations of the above said sub-Committees are being
examined in the Ministry. The Himachal Pradesh Government
has furnished its comments on the Shri Raghav Chandra
Committee report. The State Governments were reminded at the
highest level for seeking State’s comments.
Most PESA States are also yet to amend the subject laws, such
as those relating to money lending, the ownership of minor forest

24
produce, planning and management of minor water bodies,
prevention of alienation of tribal lands etc. Therefore, there is
need to enact the conformity provisions in the States laws for
effective implementation of PESA Act in the States. The exercise
of drafting conformity legislation for all State specific subject laws
was entrusted to the Indian Law Institute (ILI), to undertake a
study of local laws of the Scheduled States to bring them in
conformity with the provisions of PESA, 1996. The Indian Law
Institute had submitted its report on 19 April, 2006. The same
had been forwarded to the PESA States on 8 May, 2006
for perusal/comments. The Government of Rajasthan and
Madhya Pradesh had intimated the action taken by them with
regard to the ILI recommendations. Meanwhile, separate letters
have been issued to Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Gujarat
Governments to expedite the process with respect to the
remaining laws. The rest of the PESA States have also been
reminded at the highest levels of Ministry of Panchayati Raj to
expedite the process.
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is mandated to dialogue with
States on all issues relating to the Panchayats (Extension to the
Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA)-1996. In this regard, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj had forwarded a detailed questionnaire seeking
the field level status of the PESA implementation in all the PESA
States and also seeking information about problems being faced
by the States in implementing the PESA Act. All the States except,
Maharashtra and Orissa have submitted their reports.
A letter regarding holding a Needs Assessment Consultation
Workshop along with a concept note had been forwarded to all
the PESA States on 1 February, 2007. The Ministry of Panchayati
Raj is in the process of finalising the dates in the States.”
25. The Committee appreciate the efforts being made by the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the effective implementation of the
provisions made under Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Area Act
(PESA), 1996 in Fifth Schedule States. To expedite compliance
legislation by various Fifth Schedule States, the Ministry has
entrusted the task of formulation of appropriate amendments in the
concerned State laws to the Indian Law Institute, Delhi. The
Committee note the further progress made in this regard from the
action taken reply. It has been stated that the Ministry of Law and
Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) has identified four Central Acts
where modifications are to be carried out to bring them in
consonance with PESA. The Committee would like to be apprised

25
about the name of the legislations which need amendments in this
regard.
Further, the exercise of drafting confirmatory legislation for all
State specific laws was entrusted to the Indian Law Institute. The
Committee note that Indian Law Institute has already submitted the
report and the same has been forwarded to PESA States for perusal
and comments. The Government of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh
have intimated the action taken by them with regard to the Indian
Law Institute recommendations. The Committee would like the
Ministry to pursue further with the remaining States so that concrete
action with regard to bringing confirmatory laws is taken
expeditiously. The Committee may be kept apprised about the follow-
up action in this regard.
In addition to what has been stated above, the Committee note
that the Ministry has constituted three sub-Committees for suggesting
remedial action wherever required on various issues related to PESA
Act. The aforesaid Committees have already submitted the reports.
The Committee would like to be informed about the details of the
recommendations made by these Committees as well as the status
of implementation of the recommendations.

26
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.4)
The Committee wish to point out that the primary objective of
inserting direction 73A in the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ was to make
the Government more accountable for implementation of various
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee are constrained to
note that even after lapse of around five months when the statement
on Twenty-First Report had fallen due, the statement is yet to be
made by the Hon’ble Minister. The Ministry proposes to lay the
statement during the current session of Parliament. The Committee
recommend to the Ministry to ensure that the statement is made at
the earliest during the second part of the Budget Session of Parliament
commencing from 26 April, 2007. The Committee, further, strongly
recommend to the Ministry to ensure that the statements in respect of
each of the report are made within the specified period i.e., six months
after the presentation of the Report to Parliament as per Direction 73A
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, in future.
Reply of the Government
The Hon’ble Minister of Panchayati Raj had given a notice for
6.9.2007 and 13.9.2007 for making statement to the Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha respectively . The Hon’ble Minister made a statement in
Rajya Sabha on 6.9.2007. However, the Minister could not make
statement in the Lok Sabha on 13.9.2007 due to adjournment of the
House.
It is again proposed to make statement in the Lok Sabha during
the Winter Session—2007 of Parliament.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No. G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note that although the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
was created as far back as 2004-2005, yet adequate allocation was

27
made available to the Ministry only from 2006-2007 onwards to carry
out its functions for meaningful achievement during Tenth Plan (2002-
2007) period. For instance the Budget allocations of the Ministry during
2004-2005, 2005-2006 were Rs. 30.60 crore and Rs. 50 crore respectively.
The Budget Estimates for 2006-2007 were significantly enhanced to
Rs. 3,825 crore. However the Committee are constrained to note that
whatever Budget allocations were made available to the Ministry were
drastically reduced at Revised Estimates stage during annual plans of
2004-2005 and 2006-2007 of Tenth Plan period. For instance the Budget
Estimates of Rs. 30.60 crore and Rs. 3,825 crore during 2004-2005 and
2006-2007 were drastically reduced to the level of Rs. 10.60 crore and
Rs. 2,000 crore respectively. Even the reduced allocation of Rs. 10.60 crore
during 2004-05 could not be utilised fully by the Ministry and resulted
in underspending of Rs. 1.15 crore i.e. around 15 per cent of the
allocated outlay. Delay in creation of posts and accommodation for the
Ministry based on the recommendations of Group of Ministers has
been attributed to be the reason for under-utilisation of Budget
allocation during 2004-2005 and delay in transfer of the scheme of
‘Backward Regions Grants Fund’ to Ministry of Panchayati Raj has led
to the reduction in Budget Estimates of Rs. 3,825 crore to the level of
Rs. 2,000 crore at Revised Estimates stage during 2006-2007. While
appreciating the fact that the year 2004-2005 was the first year of the
working of the newly constituted Ministry and the year 2006-07 was
the year when bulk of the outlay of the Ministry was allocated for
Backward Region Grant Fund (BRFG), the scheme which was
transferred from the Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj in August, 2006, the Committee observe that reduction in outlay
at Revised Estimates stage retards the overall performance of the
Ministry during a plan period particularly when there is a challenging
task of strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and training
of over 14 lakh PRI functionaries is yet to be accomplished. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that all out efforts should be made
to ensure that the allocations made during a year are fully utilised.
Since the cut at Revised Estimates stage during the aforesaid two
years was because of gross underspending due to the reasons as
explained above, the Ministry has to work hard to convince the
Planning Commission not to resort to cut at Revised Estimates stage.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The
reduction in Plan allocations during 2006-07 was mainly due to the
outstanding unspent balance lying with the States in the Rashtriya
Sam Vikas Yojana. Due to this reason, the bulk of Plan allocations

28
under BRGF could not be released to the States. The Ministry is fully
geared towards utilizing its Plan allocations during the current financial
year, especially under the Backward Regions Grant Fund. Towards
this end, the Ministry had organized four workshops in different
regions for groups of States to assist them in formulation of capacity
building plans. The response has been very encouraging. However,
the major constraint in the releases under BRGF is timely utilization
of the funds by the State Governments/Districts Authorities which is
the limiting condition for further releases to be made.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.15)
The Committee appreciate the concerns of the Planning Commission
as highlighted in the Approach Paper to the Eleventh Plan (2007-2012)
regarding need to empower Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). In this
context the Committee also appreciate that though some headway has
been made in this regard, yet the task ahead is very challenging before
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj during the Eleventh Plan period. The
Committee find that the focused areas during the Eleventh Plan would
be implementation of programmes like Panchayat Mahila Shakti
Abhiyan and Panchayat Yuva Khel Abhhiyan, Centrally Sponsored
Schemes routed through Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), Devolutions
of Functions, Functionaries and Finances and capacity building of
Panchayats through the schemes ‘Gram Swaraj and Backward Region
Grant Fund’. Besides, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has proposed a
legislation, Nyaya Panchayat Bill which will further enhance the
activities of the Panchayats. The detailed analysis of the proposed
legislation has been made in the succeeding part of the Report.
The Committee, however, feel that although the main focus areas
have been identified by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the Eleventh
Plan Period, the trends of allocation of outlay to the Ministry during
Tenth Plan and the first year of the Eleventh Plan raise doubts about
the practicability and execution of these objectives. The Ministry has
been allocated far lesser than the proposed allocation during the last
two years of the Tenth Plan, which were the first two years of the
newly created Ministry. During 2005-06, the allocation provided i.e.,
Rs. 50 crore was less than half of the projected outlay i.e., Rs. 105 crore.
Later, during 2006-07 the Ministry was allocated only Rs. 75 crore
against the proposed allocation of Rs. 2,000 crore. However, in the
later half of the year Rs. 3750 crore were allocated to the Ministry by

29
way of transfer of BRGF from the Ministry of Finance to Ministry of
Panchayati Raj 2007-08 is the first year of Eleventh Plan and the trends
of allocation to different Ministries would indicate the thrust of the
Government on different programmes and the set priorities. In this
context, the Ministry had proposed the outlay of Rs. 15,789 crore which
include Rs. 5,789 crore for Gram Swaraj, Rs. 5,000 crore each for
Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme and
Backward Regions Grant Fund. Against the aforesaid proposed
allocation, the outlay earmarked is just Rs. 4,770 crore. The substantial
part of the allocation i.e., Rs. 4,670 crore  is for Backward Regions
Grant Fund, thus leaving only Rs. 100 crore for the various activities
of the Ministry relating to the capacity building of the Panchayats.
Reply of the Government
The comments of the Committee being in the nature of statement
of facts, no reply is called for.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee find that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has bold
objectives of ensuring centrality of Panchayats in various Centrally
Sponsored Schemes run by various Ministries/Departments of the
Union Government along with the mandate of decentralization. The
proposed Nyaya Panchayat Legislation would further enhance the
responsibilities of Panchayats to a great extent. All these objectives can
be achieved only when each Panchayat has a Secretariat to assist the
Panchayat members in handling these responsibilities. Besides, the
financial capacity is another area to be taken care of. The Ministry’s
Gram Swaraj Scheme intends to achieve the objective of capacity
building of Panchayats but with the meagre outlay, the bold objectives
cannot be realised. The Committee are of the firm opinion that adequate
resources should be allocated to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj so that
the Panchayats can shoulder the enhanced responsibilities which the
Constitution has bestowed upon them which the Ministry is rightfully
trying to transfer to Panchayats. The Eleventh Plan allocation should
be made keeping in view the task ahead of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj. Keeping in view the aforesaid observation, the allocation for the
year 2007-08 should be enhanced specifically when the first year of
the Eleventh Plan would set the priority of the Government.

30
While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee strongly
recommend to the Ministry to ensure that the allocation is meaningfully
utilised and does not result in huge underspending or unspent balances
with the implementing agencies. The utilisation capacity need to be
enhanced to effectively utilise the higher allocation.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The
Ministry has forwarded its proposals for the Eleventh Plan period to
the Planning Commission requesting for enhanced allocations to equip
Panchayats to shoulder the enhanced responsibilities bestowed by the
Constitution upon them. The allocations are yet to be finalised by the
Planning Commission. The comments of the Committee would be
conveyed to the Planning Commission for suitable action.
The recommendations of the Committee regarding meaningful
utilization of the outlays has also been noted. All out efforts are being
made by the Ministry to utilize the Plan allocations during the current
year especially under the Backward Regions Grant Fund. Towards this
end, the Ministry had organised four workshops in different regions
for groups of States to assist them in formulation of capacity building
plans. The response has been very encouraging. However, the major
constraint in the releases under BRGF is timely utilization of the funds
by the State Governments/District Authorities which is the limiting
condition for further releases to be made.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C ,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.17)
The Committee further find that at present different schemes
relating to the subjects enshrined under Eleventh Schedule of the
Constitution are being implemented by the various Ministries/
Departments of Union Government. The annual allocations for these
schemes are approximately between Rs. 55,000 crore to Rs. 72,000 crore.
The Panchayats can play an important role in effective implementation
of these schemes. Besides, Panchayats can help in the realistic planning
process as envisaged in the Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan. The
Government can think of allocating a small fraction of the outlay of
these schemes say one percent or so for empowerment of Panchayats.
The Committee would like that the concerns of the Committee in this
regard should be duly communicated to the Ministry of Finance/
Planning Commission.

31
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. These
will be duly communicated to the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission for further suitable action.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.18)
The Committee further feel that though much is being planned by
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to endow Panchayats with the
responsibilities in the true spirit of article 243G of the Constitution, it
is high time to have some mechanism to fix accountability on the
respective three tiers of Panchayats. The Committee recommend to the
Ministry to evolve some mechanism in this regard so that the maximum
outlay meant for the poorest of the poor reaches the intended
beneficiaries and there are least chances of corruption and malpractices.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj since the First Round Table
Conference of July, 2004, has constantly persuaded the States to establish
and strengthen Gram Sabhas, in pursuance of Article 243 A, and Sabhas
below the Gram level (such as Ward Sabhas, Mahila Sabhas, etc.).
Gram Sabhas are important institutions that can conduct social audit
and thereby ensure accountability of Gram Panchayats. The States are
being taken up at regular intervals for ensuring empowerment of the
Gram Sabhas by according them powers related to:
(i) Approval of plans and programmes for economic
development and social justice.
(ii) Identification of beneficiaries.
(iii) Authorization regarding issuance of utilization certificates
of funds allocated for the plans programmes of the
Panchayat.
Regarding the Backward Regions Grant Fund Programme of the
Ministry, as per the Guidelines, the Panchayats are required to take
the following steps for ensuring accountability towards utilization of
funds received under the Programme:
(i) Panchayats and Municipalities are responsible for
maintenance of accounts of the funds. The accounts are

32
consolidated by the District Panchayats and presented to
audit. The States are required to develop capacities of
Panchayats for handling this kind of accounting work by
providing adequate manpower and resources.
(ii) Regular physical and financial audit of the works under
the programme is required to be carried out. The audit
report along with the action taken report on the audit paras
are required to be submitted along with the proposal for
release of second installments of funds.
(iii) There will be a review Committee, constituted by DPC, for
reviewing progress under the scheme.
(iv) There will be quality-monitoring system, instituted for
carrying out inspection of works.
(v) The states are required to issue guidelines on social audit
by Gram or Ward Sabhas.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C ,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.25)
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is working hard on evolving a
National Training Framework for providing training to PRIs and
functionaries. The National Training Design prepared by NIRD was
deliberated upon with a group of NGOs and others who were involved
at grass-root level development and the Ministry is working towards
the National Capability Building Framework that was aimed at building
effective and sustainable capabilities of all stakeholders in Panchayati
Raj, particularly, elected representatives, office bearers, Chairpersons of
Standing Committees and officials connected with subjects devolved
to Panchayats under State legislations.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has prepared a National Capability
Building Framework (NCBF) for Panchayati Raj Elected Representatives
and Functionaries to be adopted as a national policy document. The
Ministry requested suggestions and feedback on various aspects of the
Framework from members of Decentralization and other Communities
of Solution Exchange.
The document evoked widespread interest and members responded
with great enthusiasm. They organized workshops inviting elected

33
representatives of PRIs, academic institutions, social activists and other
stakeholders for wider consultation to provide valuable inputs towards
improving the NCBF to serve the interest of decentralization. They
opined that the NCBF provides a healthy environment for undertaking
capacity building and training of various stakeholders associated with
Panchayati Raj.
Members saw the document as a unique and challenging attempt
to encompass various aspects of training so far not given adequate
thrust while making the PRIs as Local Governments in the absolute
sense. Pointing out that the NCBF will have to be tailored to local
conditions depending on the conditions in the state, they labeled the
NCBF draft as a realistic, genuine, radical attempt made towards
capacity building of PR functionaries. Respondents acknowledged that
the document’s strength was in its design format, which blended the
philosophical outlook with a pragmatic programme for capacity
building. They offered suggestions and comments to further strengthen
and fine-tune the National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) for
Panchayati Raj Elected Representatives and Functionaries.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.26)
The Committee while noting that efforts are being made to work
out a detailed training module observes that the Ministry has not
done much on finding out the quantum of task ahead for the Ministry
in this regard. Even after the passage of full two years since the
Ministry was created, efforts have not been made to know the data of
PRIs and functionaries who could be trained so far by the efforts
being made through Union Government and the State Governments.
Since efforts are being made in this regard by various quarters as
admitted by the Ministry, there is an urgent need to coordinate with
the various agencies involved in task of training of PRIs and know
how much of PRIs and functionaries could already be trained and the
task ahead so as to address the issue in a more focused manner. The
Committee would like the Ministry to get the information from the
State Governments in this regard and the Committee be kept apprised.
Since the training of PRIs is a continuous process, the Ministry should
evolve a permanent mechanism so as to have the first hand knowledge
of the status of training of PRIs through the Ministry’s training scheme
and the efforts being made by other quarters, i.e. the other Ministries
of Union Government/State Government, various training institutions
etc.

34
Reply of the Government
The Panchayati Raj model in India supports the world’s biggest
endeavor in grassroots governance which has taken place in India.
The 73rd Constitutional Amendment, adopted in 1992, established a
solid legal base for participation of the rural poor in local (district,
sub-district and village level) government institutions. Some 2.38 lakh
Panchayats (village councils) representing about 6.00 lakh villages have
been constituted and about three million rural people, a third of whom,
by law have to be women, elected to Panchayat bodies. The Ministry
of Panchayati Raj has provided assistance to State Governments and
Union Territories for capacity building of Panchayati Raj Institutions.
The assistance is provided for imparting training to newly elected
Panchayat members, the majority of them semi- or even illiterate and
unprepared for the responsibility of local governance. Preparing the
Panchayat members, especially the women among them, for their new
roles as local decision-makers, calls for education and training on a
massive scale, for which adopted training methods and tools are
needed.
During the financial year 2006-2007, the grant of Rs.24.50 crore
was released to twelve State Governments/UTs and Rs.2.11 crore for
four North Eastern States for training of elected representatives and
Rural Development Functionaries of Panchayati Raj Institutions. The
total numbers of 18.65 lakh participants were proposed for training
during the year 2006-07 by all the States.
The letters has been sent to State Governments and State Institute
of Rural Development (SIRD) for the submission of Progress cum
Financial Report of training of elected representatives of PRIs.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.36)
The Committee further note that the position of PRIs may vary
from State to State. In some States the PRIs may be strong and able
to discharge the great responsibility entrusted to these institutions. In
such States, PRIs should be encouraged to take on these added

35
responsibilities. However, in some States, PRIs may not be empowered
enough to take the challenges envisaged under the Constitution. In
such States, the Ministry should ensure that the Panchayats are
empowered to such a level that they would be in a position to
discharge the various responsibilities efficiently. Besides, all the desired
initiatives should be taken to address the concerns of the Committee
as expressed above. The Committee should also be kept apprised in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance. The Committee would be apprised of the developments
in this regard in future.
However, the Ministry has been giving emphasis on the capacity
building of the elected representatives by giving support to the State
Governments for training of the elected representatives. The Ministry
has a Scheme titled Panchayat Accountability Empowerment and
Incentive Scheme to encourage and incentivise states to effect
devolution to the PRIs.Moreover, the Ministry has established a system
for continuous consultation and  dialogue with the State Governments
through forums such as the Council of Ministers, Committee of Chief
Secretaries and Secretaries (Panchayati Raj) of the State Governments
and regular video conferencing with the State Governments.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.44)
The Committee find that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj was created
to give focused attention to the implementation of Part IX of the
Constitution the main component of which is effective devolution of
the 3Fs i.e. functions, functionaries and finances. Further, the enactment
of the Seventy third Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992 was aimed
at providing Constitutional status to local self-governments i.e.
Panchayats. In this regard Article 243 G explicitly states that the State
Governments may by law endow the Panchayats with such powers so
as to enable them to function as institutions of self-Government.
The Committee note that the need for empowerment at grass root
level in rural areas is the reason for creation of an exclusive Ministry
of Panchayati Raj. In this context devolution of functions, functionaries
and finances should have been accorded primacy by the Ministry and

36
efforts made to that effect. However, the perusal of the comparative
progress of devolution over the past two years ( i.e. since June, 2005)
as indicated in the Appendices II and III reveal that status quo has
been maintained. Only in the States of Gujarat and Haryana there has
been improvement in the number of subjects devolved. However, this
is the status of transfer of subjects through legislation. The Ministry
has not provided the information regarding the actual devolution of
functions, functionaries and finances to Panchayats as has been
requested by the Committee repeatedly in their earlier reports. The
information that the Ministry has provided is incomplete and a true
picture of devolution does not emerge from it. The Committee observe
that simply transferring subjects to Panchayats will not result in real
empowerment unless concomitant funds and functionaries are also
made available to Panchayats. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the aforesaid information be furnished by the Ministry to enable the
Committee to analyse the position of devolution and comment further.
Reply of the Government
Devolution of Functions
The status on devolution of functions as derived from the State
Panchayati Raj Acts and Activity Mapping or as reported by States is
given at Annexe-I. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is undertaking an
exercise on the analysis of State Legislations vis-a-vis activity mapping
where undertaken, to ascertain whether there has been substantive
devolution or is merely a lip service to the Panchayati Raj.
Devolution of Finances
Devolution of functions needs to be followed by effective
devolution of finances and financial powers. The next step in getting
an effective financial system going is to ensure that financial devolution
matches the Activity Mapping. The financial devolution to Panchayats
has the following aspects:
(i) Creation of Panchayat Sector in the Budget Window
In order to ensure that there is clarity in the determination of
fund flows to Panchayats, it is essential that a Panchayat Sector budget
Window be created in the budget of State Governments. This
requirement can be met in two ways – first, each Department could
create separate line items in their budgets for Panchayats, earmarking
allocations pertaining to responsibilities devolved and schemes entrusted
to Panchayats. Departments can thus directly send their funds to

37
Panchayats in accordance with these ear-marked budget line items.
Alternatively all such earmarked funds pertaining to different
departments could be consolidated by the Finance Departments and
sent to Panchayats in regular installments. The system of creating a
Panchayat Sector window in the budgets of States has been adopted
by several States, namely, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Gujarat, M.P .,
Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan. However, the efficacy of the system varies
differently from State to State. The current status of States in respect
of having a separate Panchayat sector window for channelising funds
to Panchayats is given below. States can be divided into 4 categories
based on the extent of mismatch between functional and fiscal
devolution as follows :
Category 1:  The States having a separate budget window for
Panchayats, with funds devolved to Panchayats with relatively less
mismatch (Also, these are relatively better investigated States) are
Kerala and Karnataka.
Category 2:  The States of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat are having a separate budget window
for Panchayats, but with degrees of mismatch between functional
and financial devolution. In these States, Activity Mapping, as
defined by the Ministry has also not happened, even though there
are orders and legislative provisions devolving functions to
Panchayats:
Category 3: States with no budget window for Panchayats. Funds
are mostly devolved only in the budget of the Department of
Panchayati Raj. Though other departments might give money to
the Panchayats, there is no budgetary classification system under
which all such funds are placed in one document. Category 3
States may be divided into four sub-categories, as follows:
Category 3(a):  The States of West Bengal, Haryana, Orissa, Sikkim,
Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Assam have expressed
keenness to undertake a separation of Panchayat allocations into a
separate budget window, including through the Statements of
conclusions signed between the Union Minister for Panchayati Raj
and the Chief Minister of the State concerned.
Category 3(b):  The States of Bihar, Uttarakhand, Tripura, Goa,
Manipur, Arunanchal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh
and Jharkhand are yet to take action in this regard:
(ii) Devolution of untied funds:
The key to effective performance by Panchayats also lies in the
devolution of adequate untied funds to them, so that they can perform

38
their assigned public services. The main sources of untied funds to
Panchayats are:
(c) Tax and non-tax revenues raised from the sources assigned
to them; and
(d) Block unconditional transfers provided by the States and
Central Government by way of share in taxes or through
block grants.
(a) Own Revenue of Panchayats
An essential trigger for strengthening Panchayats is to enable and
empower them to enhance their own revenues. Requiring Panchayats
to mobilise their own revenues strengthens the link between revenue
and expenditure decisions of Panchayats, which is extremely important
to promote both efficiency and accountability in the provision of
services by them. For ensuring effective revenue mobilization by
Panchayats, there is a need to re-orient the legal and policy regime
with a view to giving Panchayats more tax handles to widen their
revenue base, as also ensure that the taxation powers currently given
are effectively operationalized. Meeting the challenge of accelerating
revenue mobilization by Panchayats will require effective and close
coordination between the Panchayats and the State Government as
taxation powers of Panchayats are governed by the State Panchayati
Raj Act and the Rules made thereunder.
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj organized a National Seminar on
Panchayat Level Resource Mobilization and Efficient Fiscal Transfer on
6-7 July 2007. The important recommendations emerging from the
seminar are as follows: The recommendations of the National Seminar
have been referred to the State Governments for follow-up action.
(b) Grants of the Twelfth Finance Commission
The Twelfth Finance Commission has recommended a transfer of
Rs. 20,000 crore to Panchayats from the Central Government for the
period 2005-10 (Rs. 4000 crore per year). The Ministry of Panchayati
Raj has worked out special arrangements with the Ministry of Finance
to ensure close monitoring of the transfer of these grants to Panchayats.
The guidelines issued by the Finance Ministry stipulate that the amount
shall be transferred to the Panchayats within 15 days of their release
to the State Governments. States are to pay the Panchayats interest at
the RBI rate in case of delays, for the delayed period.

39
There is a need to considerably increase the absolute amounts
devolved to the Panchayats by the Central Finance Commission as
also to retain its primarily untied character. The Ministry of Panchayati
Raj aims to ensure that the 13th Finance Commission carries forward
the process of devolution of untied non-plan grants and is taking
preparatory steps in this regard. In pursuance of a decision taken in
the Third meeting of the Council of Ministers held in August 2007 at
Thiruvananthapuram, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is taking steps to
constitute a separate sub-Committee of State Ministers, chaired by the
Finance Minister of Kerala, Professor Thomas Isaac, to prepare detailed
recommendations in this regard that could be placed before the
13th Finance Commission when it is constituted.
(iii) T ransfer of Centrally Sponsored Scheme allocations to
Panchayats:
Central funds constitute the bulk of the funding through Centrally
Sponsored Schemes and for that reason, there is scope for the Central
Government to influence the process of strengthening of Panchayats.
Several steps have been taken in this regard since the Ministry was
created.
Central Ministries/Departments and the Planning Commission have
been engaged in an exercise to rationalize policies in Centrally
Sponsored Schemes dealing with matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule
of the Constitution. Ministry of Panchayati Raj have also reviewed
CSS pertaining to subjects mentioned in the Eleventh Schedule of the
Constitution and to other social and economic development policies
with a view to ensuring that the modifications made or proposed to
be made in Scheme guidelines conform to the letter and spirit of
Part IX of the Constitution. Twenty Ministries were prioritized by
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. It was decided that since the bulk of CSS
funding was in Ministries of Human Resource Development, Rural
Development, Health and Family Welfare, Agriculture, Power and
Environment and Forests, each of these Ministries be requested to
undertake an Activity Mapping delineating what was to be done at
the Central, State and Panchayat levels. Ministry of Panchayati Raj has
been corresponding with all the Ministries. Though replies have been
received from 14 Ministries/departments, only Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Social Justice and Empowerment and Youth Affairs &
Sports have done some level of activity mapping. The exercise of
ensuring the centrality of Panchayats in the implementation of Bharat
Nirman has also been pursued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.

40
As intimated against the reply of Para 2.35, a Committee of the
Cabinet Secretariat has been constituted to review the major Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the different Ministries of Government of India
with a view to affording centrality to the Panchayats in the
implementation of these schemes.
Devolution of Functionaries
Effective Panchayati Raj requires that functionaries of government
work are placed under the elected leadership. During the Round Table
Conferences it was agreed that the devolution of functionaries to
Panchayats would be based on the mapping of activities related to the
devolved functions. The progress in this aspect varies from State to
State and cannot be considered as satisfactory at this stage. The States
of Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal and Maharashtra have given
considerable control to Panchayats over the functionaries. In some of
the States, devolution of functionaries is prescribed in Govt.
notifications, activity mapping orders, etc., Some of the States have
placed State Govt. officials under the Panchayats on deputation. These
functionaries have limited tenure under the Panchayats and for
disciplinary and other service matters are accountable to their superiors
in the State Departments.
The status of devolution of functionaries as reported by different
States is as follows:
Sl.No. State Devolution of Functionaries
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh Only General staff given, departmental
staff answer to departments.
2. Assam Activity Mapping Notification issued by
the State provides for devolution of
functionaries matching to the
devolution of functions to Panchayats.
3. Arunachal Pradesh Only skeleton staff given.
4. Bihar Only General staff given, departmental
staff answer to departments.
5. Chhattisgarh Sahayak Gram Panchayat Adhikari,
Gram Panchayat Adhikari, Clerical and
Class IV cadres of Education Tribal

41
12 3
Health and 7-8 other departments
declared as dying cadres and new
recruitment to these cadres is
undertaken directly by the Panchayats.
Chhattisgarh has been particularly
successful in recruitment of new
Shiksha Karmis at the level of the
Janpad Panchayats. More than 30,000
teachers have been so recruited into
local level cadres.
 6. Goa Village Panchayats can appoint
employees other than Secretary or
Gram Sevak using Panchayat funds. In
ZPs, CEO and Adhyaksha of ZP have
full control over ZP staff.
 7. Gujarat 2.2 lakh employees devolved to
Panchayats, mainly on deputation from
State Govt. to Panchayat level post,
covering 11 departments.
 8. Haryana Activity mapping of Feb. 2006 devolves
staff through deemed deputation in
respect of 3 departments.
 9. Himachal Pradesh Staff is with State Govt. Panchayats are
appointing authority for 6 types of
employees of group C&D category. In
addition, Panchayats can report on
physical attendance in respect of
2 categories of people.
10. Jharkhand No elections held to Panchayats.
11. Karnataka Staff of all departments for which
functional devolution undertaken,
devolved to Panchayats on deputation.
GPs can appoint Panchayat staff, except
Panchayat Secretary. All transfers within
the district done by Committee headed
by CEO of ZP .

42
12 3
12. Kerala Staff of 14 departments transferred to
Panchayats, with disciplinary control
and career review (through CRs)
transferred to them.
13. Madhya Pradesh All Class III village level functionaries
converted into dying cadres and fresh
recruitments undertaken by Panchayats.
These include Panchayat Secretaries,
primary school teachers, anganwadi
workers etc.
14. Maharashtra All Group III and IV Panchayat level
functionaries to be appointed by Zila
Panchayats. New amendment in 2003
brings all village level officials under
the Village Panchayats.
15. Manipur Staff of the Government are posted to
Panchayats and continue under the
control and superintendence of the
Government.
16. Orissa Officials of departments are to report
to Panchayats in respect of transferred
schemes. Panchayats do not make any
appointments of their own.
17. Punjab Seven departments propose to delegate
powers of supervision to Panchayats.
In Health Department, the powers of
outsourcing the running of PHCs has
been devolved to Panchayats. Recently.
In Education Department, powers of
recruitment of teachers has been given
to Panchayats.
18. Rajasthan Officials of 8 Departments placed with
each Panchayat through deputation
from Government.
19. Sikkim Staff on deputation from the
Government. Panchayat Secretary
elected by the members. Draft

43
12 3
Panchayati Raj service rules prepared
by the State and is under examination
by line departments.
20. Tamil Nadu At GP level, part-time clerks can be
appointed by the Panchayat president.
ZPs and Block Panchayats have no
control over line department staff.
21. Tripura Staff in respect of 21 departm ents
deputed to Panchayats from the
Government, with Panchayats exercising
powers of payment of salaries, grant
of leave, writing of CRs and
disciplinary action.
22. Uttar Pradesh GPs have power of verification of
attendance of all village level workers.
Village level functionaries of some
departments were transferred to Gram
Panchayats in 1999, but they were
subsequently withdrawn.
23. Uttaranchal In January 2005, executive orders were
issued transferring powers of seeking
information and supervision over
employees of 14 departments to
Panchayats.
24. West Bengal EO of the ZP made appointing
authority for all posts except group D
posts at GP level, for which EO of
Panchayat samiti is the appointing
authority. This has been done by the
WB Panchayat amendment Act 2006.
Each GP has 6 sanctioned posts.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

44
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.47)
The Committee note that Activity Mapping has been undertaken
by the Ministry to identify subjects to be devolved to the appropriate
tier of the Panchayats. The Committee, further, note that only four
States viz. Kerala, Karnataka, Sikkim and West Bengal have completed
this exercise. Haryana and Orissa have undertaken Activity Mapping
for a limited number of subjects. The Ministry has set a deadline of
31 May, 2007 to States for completion of this exercise.
The Committee are concerned at the slow progress of Activity
Mapping. It is a matter of great concern that only 6 States have
managed to achieve some degree of progress in respect of Activity
Mapping. The Committee are disheartened to find that the large
majority of States have not yet completed this exercise. The deadline
for completion of Activity Mapping which was set for 1 April, 2006
has now been extended to 31 May, 2007. The Committee note that
since only the successful completion of Activity Mapping will ensure
true devolution this exercise needs to be undertaken much more
seriously by States and emphasized by the Central Ministry. The
Committee hope that the Ministry will ensure that Activity Mapping
in respect of all States would be completed within the designated
deadline. The Committee urge the Ministry to take appropriate steps
to that effect and inform them accordingly.
Reply of the Government
As per the information available with the Ministry, eight States,
namely Karnataka, Kerala, Sikkim, West Bengal, Haryana, Orissa, Assam
and Tripura have done the Activity Mapping. In seven states, namely,
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Punjab,
Rajasthan and Uttarakhand have completed the basic ground level
work but final approval to Activity Mapping is awaited. The Panchayati
Raj Legislations of Maharashtra, Gujarat and Goa have provisions for
devolution to Panchayats. The recommendations of the Committee have
been noted and will be taken up with the States appropriately .
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

45
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 2.71)
From the figures of allocation vis.-a-vis.  releases of 1st and
2nd installment of Twelfth Finance Commission of Grants to PRIs in
different States during 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, the Committee find
that many States have not even received their second installment during
2005-2006. The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Sikkim and
Tripura have not been released the second instalment during 2005-06.
As regards, the status of allocation during 2006-07, the Committee
note that first installment has not been allocated to five States viz.
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh. With regard
to releases as many as eleven States have not furnished the information
with regard to releases made to PRIs. The Committee would like the
specific reasons with regard to the installments not being released
during the year 2005-06 and 2006-07 and the States not reporting about
the releases to PRIs. The Committee would also like that the position
of expenditure out of the released amount to PRIs also needs to be
monitored. The Committee would like to be informed about the
utilisation position in this regard so as to analyse the position and
comment further.
Reply of the Government
As per guidelines, issued by Ministry of Finance the local bodies
grants are to be released in two equal installments in July and January
every year. The States have to mandatorily transfer the grants released
by the Centre to the PRIs within 15 days of the same being credited
to the States Account. The State Governments are required to submit
the following documents for release of the next installment of TFC
grants:-
• Certificate from State Finance Secretary of the State
Government certifying that the TFC grants has been released
to PRIs within 15 days of the same being credited in the
Account of State Government.
• Allocation details upto Gram Panchayat level alongwith soft
copy.
•A  detailed report along with dates and amount released to
each PRIs.
• State Finance Secretary would also be required to provide
a certificate every year of the percentage of grants spent on
schemes of water supply and sanitation by the PRIs.
•F rom 2nd installment of 2006-07, Utilization Certificate of
previous installments.

46
The release of 2nd installment of TFC grants during the year
2005-06 could not be made to Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Tripura
due to non-submission of required information.
In case of Goa, the second installment of Rs. 77 lakhs for the year
2006-07 has been released adjusting the 2nd installment for the year
2005-06 and 1st and 2nd installments for the year 2006-07 against the
unspent grants of Eleventh Finance Commission of Rs. 463 lakhs
available with State.
In case of Sikkim, the installments have not been released, as there
has been substantial delay in releasing the grants to PRIs. The State
Government has agreed to pay the penal interest but at a lower rate.
As the issue is yet to be settled, no further releases have been made.
In case of Assam, 2nd installment of TFC grants for the year
2005-06 and Ist installment for the year 2006-07 have been released on
22/6/2007.
 Seventeen States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karanatka, Kerla, Madhya Pradesh,
Mizoram, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal,
Goa, Manipur & West Bengal have secured both the installments of
TFC grants during the year 2006-07 and seven States i.e. Bihar, Jammu
& Kashmir, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab & Assam have
secured 1st installment during the year 2006-07. Himachal Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh have also secured 1st installment
during the year 2007-08.
The position about utilization of the grants is also being monitored
by the Review Committee in the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 2.76)
The Committee find that the concept of Rural Business Hubs
(RBHs) was mooted by Hon’ble Prime Minister in June, 2004 as an
initiative towards increasing rural income through the platform of
public-private-Panchayat-partnership. As regards the progress during
the year 2006-07, 14 States have set up RBH councils. An RBH Executive
Committee co-chaired by Secretary, Panchayati Raj and Ms. Laxmi
Ventaktesh, Chairperson of Bhartiya Yuva Shakti Trust has been
constituted to chalk out action plans. The Committee strongly

47
recommend to the Ministry to initiate all the desired actions so that
the idea of establishing Rural Business Hubs can be translated into
reality.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Panchayati Raj had been working with Confederation
of Indian Industry (CII) and has already succeeded in facilitating the
signing of around 100 MoUs between Panchayats and Private
Companies covering various industries viz. agro-food processing, bio-
diesel, decentralized power generation and distribution, textiles, carpet
weaving, blue pottery, dairy farming, brick-making, rural IT centres
etc.
Recently, the RBH Centre Sector Scheme has been approved by
the Government with an allocation of Rs. 24.90 crore for the period
2007 to 2012 and Rs. 2 crore for the present financial year. The first
meeting of the Empowered Committee on RBH has been held to select
a few RBHs that are to be directly funded by the Ministry in addition
to this, the Ministry has also written to all the State Governments to
access the Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) in 250 districts for
professional facilitators to held plan and implement RBHs, held in
capacity building for sectorally focused training programmes and also
for filling critical minor gaps in infrastructure which could help facilitate
the development of the RBH.
It is hoped that these new and focused interventions of the last
few months would further accelerate the initiatives already taken and
result in visible and quantifiable results in the RBH programme.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 2.76)
The Committee note that Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana, a scheme
meant for the upliftment of backward districts was approved in the
year 2004-2005 and was actually implemented during the year 2005-2006.
The scheme was under the administrative control of Planning
Commission. Rs. 5,000 crore were allocated for RSVY during the
year 2005-2006. In August, 2006 RSVY was subsumed into Backward
Region Grant Fund and transferred to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
While transferring the aforesaid scheme, the Planning Commission
retained Rs. 1,250 crore meant for the special plans for Bihar and KBK
districts of Orissa to be handled separately by the Planning

48
Commission. The Standing Committee expressed concern over the
fragmented approach in implementation of the programme and desired
further details of the two segments of the erstwhile RSVY.
The Ministry during the course of oral evidence of Demands for
Grants 2007-2008 has submitted that the objective of the special plan
for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa are to provide initial infrastructure
at the regional level and are not limited to a single district. It is the
considered view of the Planning Commission that these special plans
are regional plans with inter-districts schemes and need to be discussed
and approved as part of the Annual Plans of these States and needs
to be handled by the Planning Commission. The Committee find from
the information furnished by the Ministry that views of the Planning
Commission for retaining the part of the scheme for Bihar and KBK
districts of Orissa have been furnished. However the Ministry has not
furnished its own views keeping in view the comments of the
Committee in their earlier report. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the comments of the Ministry on the formula of dividing
the scheme in the light of the specific reasons furnished by the Planning
Commission alongwith the details of the component of the two
schemes, RSVY and Backward Regions Grant Fund so as to review
the position and comment in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Backward Regions Grant Fund Programme (BRGF) was
approved in the financial year 2006-07. The Programme has three
components, namely, Special Plan for Bihar, Special Plan for the KBK
districts of Orissa and the district component covered by the Backward
Districts Initiative of the Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY) subsumed
into the Backward Regions Grant Fund Programme from 2006-07.
Special plans for Bihar and the KBK districts of Orissa are handled by
the Planning Commission. The district component is the responsibility
of this Ministry.
The Special Plans for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa were funded
under the RSVY @ Rs. 1000 crore per annum and Rs. 250 crore per
annum. During the Eleventh Plan period, from the BRGF allocations
Rs. 1000 crore per annum will continue to be made available for the
Special Plan for Bihar. For the KBK districts, the total allocation of
Rs. 250 crore will be protected during the Eleventh Plan from the
BRGF allocations. For the KBK districts of Orissa, Rs. 130 crore will be
released as Special Plan by the Planning Commission and Rs. 120 crore
will be provided by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj as developmental
grant under the district component of the BRGF.

49
The allocation under the district component of BRGF consists of
three funding windows (a) Balance amount of RSVY entitlements to
districts, (b) funds for capacity building of Panchayati Raj Institutions,
and (c) an untied developmental grant. Total entitlements of
147 districts under the district component of the RSVY were
Rs. 6624.30 crore @ Rs. 45 crore per district (Rs. 9.30 crore was the
entitlement of NABARD). According to the extant policy, the districts
covered under the Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana are allowed to complete
their allocation of Rs. 45 crore per district under the BRGF as the
RSVY Component. The allocations for the capacity building has been
Rs. 250 crore per annum during 2006-07 and 2007-08 @ Rs. 1.0 crore
per annum. The outlay for the developmental grant under the BRGF
during 2006-07 was Rs. 3750 crore and the same is Rs. 4670 crore for
2007-08.
Regarding the fragmented approach, the Ministry opines that the
objective of the special plan for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa has
been to provide initial infrastructure at the regional level having inter
district ramifications, e.g., the Million Shallow Tube well Programme,
renovation and modernization of Barauni and Muzaffarpur Thermal
Stations, Development of State Highways, development of horticulture,
etc. in Bihar and programmes of drought proofing, livelihood support,
connectivity, health, education, etc. in KBK districts of Orissa. Because
of their regional nature, these plans need to be discussed and approved
as part of the Annual Plans of the concerned States and handled by
the Planning Commission.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 3.15)
The Committee find that a laudable scheme of Backward Regions
Grant Fund (BRGF) has been transferred to Ministry of Panchayati Raj
to address regional imbalances in development by way of inflow of
funds for supplementing and converging existing developmental inflows
into identified 250 most backward districts across the country. The
Committee find that the scheme has been in operation since 2006-07
with a budget allocation of Rs. 3,750 crore subsequently revised to the
level of Rs. 1,925 crore at the Revised Estimates stage. The Committee’s
examination has revealed that since there was an unspent balance of
over Rs. 1,000 crore till December, 2006 under Rashtriya Sam Vikas
Yojana (RSVY) with different State Governments the budget estimates
were drastically reduced at revised estimate. In the Committee’s view

50
the reduction of budget outlay reflects failure on the part of different
State Governments to utilise available funds under RSVY a scheme
that was merged to the existing scheme. Thus the Committee feel that
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj also on their part had not interacted
with different State Governments to impress upon them the need to
utilise the funds available under RSVY. In the Committee’s opinion
revising the budget outlay on the ground that considerable amount
was left with the State Governments under previous scheme does not
augur well with over all utilisation of funds on the part of the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj. The Committee therefore recommend the Ministry
to make all out efforts to ensure that the budget outlays are not reduced
at revised estimates level particularly when the task before the Ministry
during the Eleventh Plan period is huge. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to monitor the BRGF effectively with
the various mechanism so as to ensure the meaningful utilization of
the resources allocated to different backward districts under BRGF.
Reply of the Government
The transfer of the programme from the Planning Commission to
this Ministry was approved by the Cabinet on 10.8.2006. The subsequent
procedural formalities led the actual transfer of the programme in the
month of September, 2006. The BRGF was launched by the
Prime Minister at Barpeta, Assam, on 18.1.2007.
Releases to districts under RSVY are made in fixed installments of
Rs. 7.5 crore each. A total of Rs. 45 crore in six installments must be
released to each district. Districts claiming a new installment must
submit documents indicating the following status:—
1. Should have spent 60% of the last installment.
2. Should have spent all earlier installments.
3. Utilisation Certificate(s) for amounts released a year back.
The developmental grant can be released only against the
participative district plan consolidated/approved by the DPCs and
approved by the State level High Power Committee. A RSVY district
is eligible to developmental grant only when it completes all of its
RSVY installments.
The aforesaid constraints resulted in the States submitting a limited
proposals to the Ministry for release of funds under the BRGF and the
Ministry fore sighting this recommended for reduction of the BRGF
allocations to Rs. 1925 crore at RE stage. The Ministry following
constant persuasion of and interaction with the States was able to

51
utilize almost the entire allocations of Rs. 1925 crore under the
programme in 2006-07.
The Ministry is making sincere efforts for ensuring that the amount
of Rs. 4670 crore allocated in 2007-08 is utilized completely and
effectively.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 3.16)
The Committee find that the scheme of Backward Regions Grant
Fund envisages disbursement of funds of fixed amount of Rs. 10 crore
per annum to every district. 50 per cent of the balance allocation will
be on the basis of share of population of the districts in total population
of all backward districts and remaining 50 per cent on the basis of
area of the district in total area of all backward districts. The Committee
have been informed that programmes under this scheme will be
selected through people’s participation particularly through Gram
Sabhas by way of preparation of participatory plans to be prepared in
each Panchayat which will take into account flow of funds from all
sources like Centrally Sponsored Schemes, National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme etc.
The Committee further find that BRGF funds will primarily be
used to build capacity in planning, implementation, monitoring,
accounting and improving accountability and transparency and could
also include arrangements for contracting and outsourcing. Besides
substantial untied grants would be allocated under BRGF to Panchayats
to address critically gaps in integrated development. The Committee
while noting the laudable objectives of the scheme emphasize on strict
monitoring of the programme particularly when the programme has
various components. The expenditure position for the capability
building funds to Panchayats and to local bodies and untied grants
should be monitored separately. Further the Committee feel that in
order to have judicious utilization of the funds, there is a need for
proper monitoring by an independent agency outside the jurisdiction
of concerned District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) and State
Governments. The Committee would like that their concerns should
be adequately addressed by the Ministry and strategies evolved for
proper implementation of the programme so as to achieve the set
objectives. The Committee further recommend that the position of
expenditure in different districts alongwith the position of physical

52
achievements should be reflected in the Outcome Budget of next year
i.e. 2008-09 so as to make an assessment of the performance of the
scheme in various districts. The Committee further note that the type
of work to be undertaken in various backward districts under the
aforesaid schemes include rural electrification, type of appropriate
technology options by Panchayats for drinking water supply in hilly
and tribal areas, augmenting Indira Awaas Yojana etc. The Committee
find that the aforesaid works are being undertaken by the respective
Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Union Government. Besides there
may be State schemes to address the aforesaid issues. The Committee
feel that there is an urgent need for proper co-ordination with the
respective schemes of Union Government and State Governments. The
Ministry should evolve a mechanism to address to the aforesaid
observation of the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Regarding the monitoring mechanism under the BRGF and
reflection of physical achievements against the expenditure in the
Outcome Budget 2008-09, the Ministry has noted the recommendations
of the Committee.
One of the objectives of the BRGF is aimed at fulfillment of
infrastructural gaps for ensuring effective utilization of funds canalized
through the CSSs and the schemes of the State Governments. The
Ministry has well recognized the need of ensuring proper alignment
of BRGF with the CSSs of different Central Ministries and the schemes
of the State Governments. The Ministry has attempted to build
networking with the senior officials of the level of Joint Secretary and
above in the Central Ministries and sensitizing them with the objectives
of the BRGF and effective coordination between different schemes. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Ministry recently had invited senior
officials of the key Central Ministries to attend the National Workshop
on BRGF, held on 13-14 October, 2007.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 3.30)
The Committee find that Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) is
the largest scheme being implemented by the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj in terms of components it addresses, issues like training and
capacity building of elected representatives and officials of Panchayats,
e-governance for all the Panchayats, improving infrastructure at

53
Panchayat level, Rural Business Hubs etc. However the Committee
note with constraint that a total of Rs. 50.50 crore were allocated for
this large scheme during 2006-07 which rose to Rs. 67.90 crore during
2007-08. In view of the extent of the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana, in
Committee’s opinion there is a need to increase the allocations under
the scheme for carrying out its functions in revised estimates level of
the current year itself and also during remaining four years of the
Eleventh Plan. The Committee also desire that for this proposals for
Eleventh Plan be worked out expeditiously by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj.
Reply of Government
Suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The
recommendations would be duly conveyed to the Planning Commission
for suitable action. In the meanwhile, the Eleventh Plan proposal for
the scheme has been sent to the Planning Commission but the allocation
is yet to be finalized.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 3.31)
The Gram Swaraj Scheme is intended to achieve the vital objective
of capacity building of Panchayats. However, the Committee are of
the opinion that to enable the Ministry effectively shoulder this
immense task the allocation should be adequate. Therefore, the
allocation of the Eleventh Plan has to be made keeping in view the
task ahead of the Ministry. The component-wise analysis of the scheme
is given below:—
(i) The Committee are constrained to note that under the
‘Capacity Building’ component under RGSY a small amount
of Rs. 30 crore was provided during 2006-07 which was
reduced to Rs. 24.50 crore at Revised estimates level and
the same has been fully utilised. Against this allocation
around 3 lakh elected representatives and officials of PRIs
have been trained. The Committee find that during 2007-08
an allocation of Rs. 33 crore has been made. In view of the
foregoing the Committee recommend that in the light of
huge number of around 14 lakh PRIs functionaries and
officials yet to be trained the allocation under Training and
Capacity Building be suitably enhanced.

54
(ii) The Committee also find that during the last four years viz.
2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 a total of 20.68 lakh
elected representatives of PRI and their officials were
imparted training. The Committee are unable to comprehend
that if 20.68 lakh have been actually trained so far then the
only 10 lakhs are yet to be trained. The Committee urge
that State-wise data of number of trained and untrained
PRI functionaries State-wise be indicated in Outcome Budget
of the Ministry so that Committee can arrive at meaningful
conclusion and have a clear picture on the issue.
(iii) The Committee are glad to note that Ministry of Panchayati
Raj has come forward with a ‘National Capacity Building
Framework’ (NCBF) with the objectives like enabling elected
PRIs functionaries to update their knowledge, orienting key
officials associated with devolved functions to function in a
better way as technical advisors and trainers, improving
the functioning of Gram Sabhas etc. The Committee also
find that aforesaid NCBF also addresses the issue of Capacity
Building of PRIs before handing over the responsibilities of
subjects to be devolved to them. Here the Committee would
suggest that on this issue there is a need for devolution of
subjects to PRIs in States where these are already strong
enough to shoulder the responsibilities like Kerala and West
Bengal, whereas in States like Uttar Pradesh, where PRIs
are very weak there is a need to build up their capacity
first. The Committee feel that this issue should be examined
in detail.
(iv)  The Committee find that another component of ‘Rashtriya
Gram Swaraj Yojana’ (RGSY) of infrastructure development
envisaging assistance to States for construction of ‘Panchayat
Ghars’ to enable Gram Panchayats to function in a better
way has also not been given sufficient allocation. In
Committee’s opinion there are lakhs of Gram Panchayats
across different States in the country requiring such
assistance. However the Committee find that a meagre
amount of Rs. 10 crore has been allocated for this component
during 2006-07 and 2007-08. In view of the foregoing, in
Committee’s opinion the allocation under this component
has to be enhanced after obtaining estimates from different
States. Further, the Committee desire that the information
with regard to physical performance of the scheme be
furnished to the Committee.

55
(v) The Committee note with dismay that like other components
of ‘Training Capacity Building’ and ‘Infrastructure
Developments’, of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana the
component of Information Technology is also fund starved.
In this connection the Committee find that a meagre amount
of Rs. 8 crore during 2006-07 and Rs. 10 crore during
2007-08 has been given for this component. In view of the
proposed requirement of Information Technology of Gram
Panchayats across the country in Committee’s opinion funds
should be suitably enhanced.
(vi) As r egards two components of ‘Research Studies’ and ‘Media
Publicity and Advocacy’ under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana the Committee are constrained to note that allocation
under both the components has not been fully utilised
during 2006-07. In this connection the Committee find that
against allocation of Rs. 2 crore on Research Studies the
utilisation was only Rs. 0.86 crore. Similarly on media
publicity and advocacy against the allocation of Rs. 3 crore
utilisation was only Rs. 2.65 crore. The Committee however
find that during 2007-08 equal amount has been restored for
Research Studies whereas higher allocation of Rs. 6.90 crore
has been made for Media Publicity and Advocacy. The
Committee desire that the higher allocation made be
meaningfully utilized by the Ministry.
The action taken reply addressing each of the issues indicated
above separately should be furnished to the Committee.
Reply of Government
(i) Suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The
recommendations would be duly conveyed to the Planning
Commission for suitable action. In the meanwhile, the
Eleventh Plan proposal for the scheme has been sent to the
Planning Commission but the allocation is yet to be
finalized.
(ii) The recommendations of the Committee have been noted
for compliance.
(iii) The recommendations of the Committee have been noted
for compliance.
(iv) The recommendations of the Committee have been noted
for compliance. The Ministry is in the process of compiling

56
information from all the States based on which a
comprehensive scheme would be formulated.
(v) The recommendations of the Committee have been noted
for compliance.
(vi) The recommendations of the Committee have been noted
for compliance. It may, however, be clarified that during
2006-7, the expenditure under “Research Studies” was to
the tune of Rs. 1.64 crore which was 82% and in “Media,
Publicity & Advocacy”, expenditure was Rs. 2.41 crore which
was 80.33%.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]

57
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

58
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.35)
The Committee while reviewing the efforts being made by the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj in ensuring the centrality of Panchayats in
various Centrally Sponsored Schemes run by different Ministries/
Departments of Union Government had observed (refer para 7 of
26th report) that not much progress has been made in this regard.
While examining the Demands for Grants of the current year, the
Ministry has furnished the details of the initiatives taken by the
Ministry in this regard. The Committee find that a Group of Ministers
for strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions was constituted by the
Cabinet Secretariat vide its order dated 6 May, 2005. As per the decision
taken by the Government, all the prioritised Ministries were required
to undertake Activity Mapping to pursue the aforesaid agenda of the
Ministry. A workshop was also held on 24 April, 2006. In spite of best
of the efforts made by the Ministry, not much has been done in this
regard. Only five Ministries viz. (i) Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, (ii) Ministry of Agriculture, (iii) Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment, (iv) Department of Food and Public Distribution,
(v) Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports have completed the exercise
of activity mapping. The Ministry is pursuing with the remaining
Ministries to undertake Activity Mapping. The resistance from various
Ministries/Departments has been cited as one of the reasons for the
slow progress. The Committee find that the major concern of the
various Ministries as stated by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj itself is
general lack of confidence in the ability of Panchayats to manage their
own affairs in an efficient manner. The Committee observes that the
challenge of making various Ministries/Departments agreeable in this
regard is great for the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The Committee feel
that perhaps the lack of confidence in the ability of PRIs in handling
the various Centrally Sponsored Scheme for which crores of rupees
are annually being spent for Social Sector Schemes of the various
Ministries/Departments of Union Government is due to the various
issues related to capacity building of Panchayats. With the existing
position where the Panchayats has hardly any staff and technical

59
expertise, the concerns of the Ministries are somewhat genuine. The
Ministry of Panchayati Raj should first of all endeavour to empower
PRIs through the various components of Gram Swaraj Scheme, the
analysis of which has been done in the subsequent part of the report.
The adequate allocation for the aforesaid programme should be
provided by the Planning Commission. Besides, the Ministry has to
prove the qualitative impact in the schemes run by PRIs. For example
under National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, 50 per cent of
the projects shall be implemented by PRIs. The effectiveness of PRIs
in handling the part of NREGA can prove the ability of PRIs in
handling these schemes. If there are qualitative differences between
the projects run by PRIs and other implementing agencies, the Ministry
has the reason enough to convince the Central Ministries to transfer
these schemes.
Reply of the Government
The persistent efforts of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj with central
ministries have not resulted in commensurate success in the
modifications of Centrally Sponsored Scheme guidelines, with the
exception of a few schemes such as the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Programme. In order to ensure that the matter is taken up
at the highest level, on the request of the Ministry, a Committee, with
Secretary (Panchayati Raj) and Secretary (Coordination), Cabinet
Secretariat as co-chairs, has been constituted on the direction of the
Cabinet Secretary to review the major Centrally Sponsored Schemes of
the different Ministries of Government of India with a view to affording
centrality to the Panchayats in the implementation of these schemes.
Ministry-wise discussions are under way by the Committee. The
Committee has so far discussed the schemes of the Ministries of Women
and Child Development, Human Resource Development (Department
of School Education and Literacy), Social Justice and Empowerment,
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries), Food and Public
Distribution, Water Resources, Environment & Forests and Rural
Development (Department of Rural Development and Department of
Land Resources). At the third meeting of the Council of Ministers of
Panchayati Raj convened on 17-18 August, 2007 at Thiruvananthapuram,
Kerala, under the Chairmanship of the Union Minister of Panchayati
Raj, the Council in its conclusions, stated as follows:
“The Council of Ministers resolves that since Ministry of
Panchayati Raj has been meticulously mapping the progress
achieved across States, inclusive of the impediments they are

60
encountering in moving ahead, and there is now an enormous
amount of state specific data compiled, and further since the
dialogue with central ministries in respect of Centrally Sponsored
Schemes is nearing completion through a Committee lodged in
the Cabinet Secretariat, it would be appropriate that Chairman
and Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission be requested
to convene a meeting of the National Development Council,
chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister on Panchayati Raj and
Decentralized Planning”.
Further, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is making all out sincere
efforts towards capacity building of the elected representatives
and other functionaries of PRIs for enhancing effectiveness of
their participation in implementation of the various schemes.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.56)
The Committee note that progress on constitution of District
Planning Committees (DPCs) in different States is far from satisfactory
even though it is one of the mandatory provisions given under Part
IX of the Constitution of India by enactment of Seventy-Third
Constitution Amendment Act, 1992. The Committee find that
Constitution enjoins that DPCs are to be constituted in all States and
Union territories (except Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, J&K, the hill
areas of Manipur, the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling for which
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists, the NCT of Delhi and six
scheduled areas) with a view to consolidate plans prepared by
Panchayats into draft development plans for the districts. The
Committee note with dismay that only in 14 States viz. Assam,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and
West Bengal and 4 Union territories of Andaman & Nicobar, Dadra &
Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep DPCs have been
constituted in all districts. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has further
informed that constitution of DPCs in Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat are at various stages. The
district-wise position of constitution of DPCs in the remaining States
have not been made available to the Committee. The Ministry has

61
informed that details are being obtained from States about the precise
details when DPCs were first constituted in each of the States after
the enactment of the Seventy-third Constitution Amendment Act. The
Committee feel that the year-wise status of constitution of DPCs need
to be maintained by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to have an idea of
the status of implementation of various provisions of the Constitution
particularly the mandatory ones, of which constitution of DPCs is one.
The Committee may be informed of the position as received from the
various States/UTs.
Reply of the Government
The DPCs have been constituted in 14 States. Details are given
below:
1. Chhattisgarh
2. Himachal Pradesh
3. Karnataka
4. Kerala
5. Madhya Pradesh
6. Manipur
7. Rajasthan
8. Sikkim
9. Tamil Nadu
10. West Bengal
11. Assam
12. Orissa
13. Goa
14. Bihar
Andhra Pradesh and Haryana have completed elections to the
DPCs from amongst the members of ZPs and Municipalities. However,
formal constitution is still pending as nominated members are to be
appointed.
The directions of the Committee have been noted. All the States
have been requested to send district-wise constitution of DPCs.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No. G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]

62
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.16, Para No. 2.57)
The Committee have been expressing strong concern over the non-
constitution of DPCs in their various reports. During the course of
examination of Demands for Grants (2007-08), the Committee have
been informed that certain strong decisions have been taken by the
Ministry to put pressure on the States/UTs to constitute DPCs
expeditiously. In this regard, Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF)
guidelines stipulates that the release of funds would be contingent
upon States constituting DPCs and the district plan being applied by
the DPCs. The Committee are pleased to note that as a result of this,
at least four States, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana and Punjab have
taken concrete steps to establish DPCs. The Committee hope that DPCs
would be constituted in all the districts of every State with the firm
resolve of the Ministry and adopting certain harsh measures mechanism
so as to achieve the objectives of preparing real and effective plans
with a bottom up approach which reflect the reality of grassroot level.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has so far strictly enforced the precondition of
constitution of DPCs and approval/consolidation of the district plans
by the DPC for releasing Developmental Grants to the States. Even
the State of Jharkhand (where Panchayats are not in existence) has
been pursued for constitution of DPCs with the members of
Municipalities in order to be eligible for Developmental Grant under
the BRGF.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)

63
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.45)
The Committee find that in addition to the slow progress with
respect to devolution there is also the negative trend of reversal of
subjects devolved. In the States of Madhya Pradesh (from 25 to
23 subjects) and in Maharashtra (from 19 to 18 subjects) there has
been reversal of subjects. Further, the Ministry has informed that
State Governments effect reversals by issuing notifications withdrawing
these subjects. The Committee find that under Article 243G
State Governments transfer subjects to Panchayats by law. The subjects
are being transferred in pursuance of article 243G of the Constitution.
However, the States withdraw these subjects using only notifications.
This is a serious offence and the Committee has taken strong exception
to such activities being carried out by the State Governments which
are not in the true spirit of the Constitution. The Committee, therefore,
recommend to the Government that suitable corrective steps should
be taken so that States are not allowed to by-pass the Constitutional
provisions. The Committee would like to be informed of the action
taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry in the past has taken serious note to all the instances
that came to notice regarding the reversal of subjects or any adverse
impact on devolution in any aspect. The Ministry has time and again
taken up such issues at appropriate levels of governance for
neutralization of impacts of such negative moves. In an attempt to
amend the State Panchayati Raj Act, the Karnataka Legislature recently
passed an Amendment Bill with the motive of curtailing the powers
of the Gram Sabha (in selection of beneficiaries in some schemes). The
Ministry on getting notice of such move of the State Government took
the matter at the highest level of governance in the State and the
Centre at the level of the Cabinet Secretariat and the Prime Minister’s
Office. Following persistent efforts of the Central Government, civil
society organizations and the elected representatives of the PRIs, etc.,
the State Government had to withdraw the Amendment Bill without
it getting assent of the Governor.

64
As far as the States of Madhya Pradesh is concerned, different
orders issued by the State Government time to time provide for
devolution of functions pertaining to 25 matters of the Eleventh
Schedule. Out of these 25 matters, pertaining to 22 Departments, funds
and functionaries have also been devolved to Panchayats in respect of
19 matters. In Maharashtra the State Panchayati Raj Act provides for
transfer of 18 subjects and the State orders also affected devolution of
18 functions to Panchayats. The recommendations of the Committee
regarding treating reversal of subjects of devolution as by passing the
constitutional provisions have been noted and will be taken up with
the States at appropriate platforms.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.13, Para No. 2.46)
Further, the Committee find that States often resort to reporting of
incorrect data regarding devolution. When requested, they simply
inform the Central Ministry of the number of subjects devolved through
legislation while withholding information about the actual devolution
of functions, functionaries and finances to Panchayats. This prevents
the true picture from emerging. The Committee strongly object to such
practice by the State Governments and recommend that the
Union Ministry take urgent and strong steps to impress upon States
not to resort to such practices as it confuses the true picture of
devolution.
Reply of the Government
As stated earlier the Ministry has started a comprehensive exercise
of analyzing devolution of functions, funds and functionaries
undertaken by them in the Panchayati Raj legislations, executive orders,
rules, etc. issued by the States. The state specific reports of devolution
prepared in this manner is proposed to be forwarded to the States for
comments and for ensuring factual accuracy of data collected. At the
time of forwarding the reports, the points raised by the Committee
shall be placed before the respective State Governments. The Committee
will be kept apprised of this development.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.-G-20012/2/2007-P&C
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]

65
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.62)
Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Area Act (PESA), 1996 is being
implemented in areas falling under the Fifth Schedule of the
Constitution. Fifth Schedule areas are in nine States viz. Andhra Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Rajasthan. The Committee find from
the information provided by the Ministry that all States have enacted
the requisite compliance legislation by amending their respective
Panchayati Raj Acts. However certain gaps continue to exist. Most
States are also yet to amend the subject laws like those relating to
money lending, forest, excise etc. In this connection the Ministry has
entrusted the task of formulation of appropriate amendments in the
concerned State Laws to the Indian Law Institute, Delhi. The
amendments to the State laws as proposed by the Indian Law Institute
which run into hundreds, have been sent to the respective
State Governments. As regards the achievements, only Gujarat has been
able to amend a local Statute relating to agriculture. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Ministry to follow up vigorously with the
various State Governments to carry on the amendments to the various
local laws expeditiously so as to enable the implementation of amended
Acts/Laws in letter and spirit.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Law & Justice, Department of Legal Affairs have
identified 4 Central Acts where modifications are to be carried out to
bring them in consonance with PESA. They have been requested to
intimate action taken and progress made by the Department of
Legal Affairs in this regard.
During the Third Round Table of Ministers of Panchayati Raj at
Raipur on 23-24 September, 2004 with respect to PESA, it was inter-
alia decided to take steps to implement in a time-bound framework of
the provisions of PESA in respect of the rights of the Gram Sabhas in
the Schedule V Areas. In a subsequent consultation with the PESA
States, Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj decided to constitute three
Sub- Committees for suggesting remedial action, wherever required on
various issues related to the PESA Act. Therefore, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj had constituted three sub-committees, namely one
chaired by Shri. B D Sharma, on ‘Model Guidelines to vest Gram

66
Sabhas with Powers as Envisaged in PESA’; Shri Raghav Chandra on
‘Land Alienation, Displacement, Rehabilitation & Relief’ and Shri A.K
Sharma on ‘Minor Forest Produce’ to look into these issues. The three
Sub-Committees had submitted their reports and recommendations.
The same have been forwarded to the PESA States for perusal and
comments. Meanwhile, the recommendations of the above said sub-
committees are being examined in the Ministry. The Himachal Pradesh
Government has furnished its comments on the Shri Raghav Chandra
Committee report. The State Govts. were reminded at the highest level
for seeking State’s comments.
Most PESA States are also yet to amend the subject laws, such as
those relating to money lending, the ownership of minor forest produce,
planning and management of minor water bodies, prevention of
alienation of tribal lands etc. Therefore, there is need to enact the
conformity provisions in the States laws for effective implementation
of PESA Act in the States. The exercise of drafting conformity legislation
for all State specific subject laws was entrusted to the Indian Law
Institute (ILI), to undertake a study of local laws of the Scheduled
States to bring them in conformity with the provisions of PESA, 1996.
The Indian Law Institute had submitted its report on 19/04/06. The
same had been forwarded to the PESA States on 08/05/06 for perusal/
comments. The Governments of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh had
intimated the action taken by them with regard to the ILI
recommendations. Meanwhile, separate letters have been issued to the
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Gujarat Governments to expedite the
process with respect to the remaining laws. The rest of the PESA
States have also been reminded by the highest levels of Ministry of
Panchayti Raj to expedite the process.
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is mandated to dialogue with states
on all issues relating to the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled
Areas) Act (PESA)-1996. In this regard, Ministry of Panchayati Raj had
forwarded a detailed questionnaire seeking the field level status of the
PESA implementation in all the PESA States and also seeking
information about problems being faced by the States in implementing
the PESA Act. All the States except, Maharashtra and Orissa have
submitted their reports.
A letter regarding holding a Needs Assessment Consultation
Workshop along with a concept note had been forwarded to all the
PESA States on 01/02/2007. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is in the
process of finalising the dates in the States.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]

67
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.18, Para No. 2.66)
The Committee find that for the purpose of establishing an informal
system of justice, conciliation and dispute redressal at Panchayat level
a draft Nyaya Panchayat Bill has been prepared based on the
recommendations of Drafting Committee headed by the eminent jurist
Prof. Upendra Baxi. The aforesaid draft Bill has been referred to all
States and Union Ministries for their comments and 13 States and 21
Central Ministries have furnished the comments. Most of the Union
Ministries are in favour of the legislation. However a few Ministries
like the Ministry of Law and Justice are against the draft Bill. The
Committee find that in order to arrive at consensus on the draft Bill
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is making efforts.
The Committee find that at present the district courts are first
level of judicial redressal. By providing the proper equivalent of courts
the Panchayats may help to lessen the burden of district courts
specifically when these courts are over burdened. There is considerable
delay in settlement of cases which one or the other way denies justice
to the petitioner. However, the Committee are aware of the fact that
the proposal of Nyaya Panchayat, if implemented would add to the
existing powers and responsibilities of Panchayats which at present
are not adequately equipped with the required judicial acumen. With
the existing scenario of empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions
even after passage of around 14 years of enactment of the Constitution
73rd Amendment Act, the analysis of which has been done in the
preceding part of the report, the idea of Nyaya Panchayat need to be
handled carefully by the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommend to the Ministry to have wider consultations with the State
Governments and all the interest groups. Besides, consultation of
experts and public at large is also required. The objections from various
quarters need to be addressed carefully before taking final decision in
this regard so as to avoid any unavoidable confrontation and resistance
from any of the quarters.
Reply of the Government
The Draft Cabinet Note annexing the Draft Nyaya Panchayats Bill
was circulated to Central Ministries on November 22, 2006 and the
Draft Nyaya Panchayats Bill was circulated to the Chief Secretaries of
the States on 14th December, 2006 for their comments/ suggestions.

68
The comments have been received from 22 Central Ministries/
Departments and 20 States/UTs. Based on the comments received from
different quarters, the Cabinet Note as well as the Draft Nyaya
Panchayats Bill have been recast. Both the documents are ready for re-
circulation. The recommendations of the Standing Committee have been
noted down and a final decision on the Bill will be taken following
redressal of objections received from various quarters.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.19, Para No. 2.70)
The Committee note that as per recommendations of Twelfth
Finance Commission a huge amount of Rs. 20,000 crore is to be made
available to State Governments during the period 2005-2010 to augment
the Consolidated Fund of State level to facilitate supplementing the
financial resources of PRIs. In this connection the Committee are glad
to note that for the purpose of speedy flow of funds from State
Governments to PRIs the Ministry of Finance has formulated stringent
guidelines in consultation with Ministry of Panchayati Raj stipulating
that these funds should be transferred from State Governments to PRIs
within 15 days of being credited in State Consolidated Fund, otherwise
State Governments would have to pay interest thereon on RBI rates.
In this connection the Committee have been informed that as many
as nine States which included Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil
Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka have already been penalised for delay
in transfer of Twelfth Finance Commission grants from State
Governments to PRIs. Further the Committee have been informed that
for the purpose of monitoring of funds a Committee headed by
Secretary, Panchayati Raj has already met twice in August, 2006 and
January, 2007. The Committee hope that aforesaid guidelines being
implemented by the Ministry of Finance will go long way in making
available in time the TFCs grants to PRIs across the country.
The Committee also note that Ministry of Panchayati Raj has
already prepared a software to maintain data base of Bank accounts of
all 2.4 lakh PRIs across the country to facilitate transfer of funds under
Twelfth Finance Commission to PRIs. The Committee however find
that Bank transfer mechanism is yet to be institutionalised by the Banks.
The Committee desire that Ministry of Panchayati Raj should take up
the matter with Ministry of Finance to impress upon Banks to utilise
software prepared by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.

69
Reply of the Government
The advice of the Committee has been noted. It is clarified that
the grants are released by the Ministry of Finance to various States
and, thereafter, are sent by the State Governments to the three tiers of
PRIs. It is, therefore, for the State Governments to take a decision
regarding sending grants to PRIs through banking channels. Banks
can only facilitate the transfer of grants. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
has been pressing the State Governments to utilize the banking channels
as also the Fund Transfer Monitoring Software (FTMS) which will aid
the quick transfer of grants and its monitoring.
Altogether 14 States have agreed to adopt the FTMS and other
States are also expressing keenness for the same and are taking steps
in this direction. Karnataka, Rajasthan and Haryana have already started
using banking channel for transfer of the TFC grants to PRIs.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov., 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 3.35)
The Committee find that Panchayat Empowerment and
Accountability Scheme is very noble Scheme that can work as a tool
for much needed work on implementing part IX of the Constitution
like constitution of District Planning Committee’s, undertaking the
exercising of activity mapping, transferring of funds functionaries and
finances etc. However the Committee find that the basis of
implementation of this scheme has been changed from time to time.
In this connection the Committee have noticed that after commencement
of the scheme in 2005-2006 the basis for rewarding State Governments
for undertaking necessary reform in the field of empowering PRIs was
seven reform areas like activity mapping for possible devolution,
transfer of funds, functionaries and finances from State Governments
to PRIs etc. In second year of implementation of the scheme the basis
was changed to devolution index. Moreover the Committee find that
Ministry is managing with interim devolution index for this scheme
as the Devolution Index is not yet ready.
The Committee have observed seven reform areas in their previous
report and the major quantifiable deliverables under the current interim
devolution index. The Committee feel that by and large the issues in
both the documents are identical. In this connection the Ministry has
stated that the current basis is more scientific and capable of use
across different schemes. On the other side the Committee have also

70
been apprised that no physical progress can be linked to grants for
work done on empowering PRIs under this scheme. Since the details
of the interim devolution index are not available with the Committee,
the Committee would be unable to comment on the issue. The
Committee however feel that changing the basis of implementation of
the Scheme on yearly basis would lead to more and more
communication gap between different State Governments, field agencies
and also with PRI functionaries and should be discouraged and
whenever any such change is contemplated it should be properly
discussed among different State Governments.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. In this
regard, a brief background of the formulation of Devolution Index
and introduction of the Panchayat Empowerment & Accountability
Incentive Scheme is given below for information of the Committee.
In the fifth Round Table at Srinagar held on 28-29 October 2004
the issue of Annual Reports on the State of the Panchayats, including
preparation of a Devolution Index was considered. The resolution
passed on the subject is reproduced below:
“It was agreed that a Devolution Index, in the format indicated
in the annexe, might be incorporated in the Annual State of the
Panchayat Reports. It was emphasized that the Devolution Index
will be prepared by the States themselves on the basis of self-
assessment but would be available for further evaluation and
assessment by academic bodies. In so far as the Union
Government or the Planning Commission undertakes any
reassessment of any State’s Devolution Index, this must be done
in consultation with the State concerned. In any system of
incentives or rewards which draws upon the Devolution Index,
it should be clearly understood that the Index is at best an
approximation which cannot, by its nature, capture many of the
qualitative aspects of Panchayati Raj. It should also be recognised
that any Devolution Index would be more indicative of the
institutional environment within which Panchayati Raj is being
implemented rather than be capable of capturing outcomes. The
Devolution Index should, therefore, be regarded as at best an
illustrative guide to be interpreted in terms of the Annual Report
as a whole and not as a definitive ranking of either States or
performance on specific parameters or for making inter-State
comparisons.”

71
During the fifth Round Table at Srinagar, a Devolution Index was
presented to the participants, which was based on a concept paper
prepared and finalized by Professor V .N. Alok and Shri L. Bhandari.
The Index as envisaged then was to be incorporated in the Annual
State of the Panchayat Reports of the State Governments and was to
be prepared by the States themselves. However, the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj has taken the lead in this regard and in November
2006, published a first ever State of the Panchayats Report for the
country as a whole. It also took the lead in formulating a Devolution
Index for ranking States/UTs on the institutional environment for
Panchayati Raj Institutions.
The Panchayat Empowerment Incentive Scheme was introduced
and implemented by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj during the year
2005-06, at the Revised Estimates stage, with an allocation of Rs. 5
crores. This scheme aimed to provide incentives to the States to devolve
powers upon Panchayats in accordance with the recommendations of
the seven Round Tables and for Panchayats empowered by such
reforms to effectively assume the responsibilities devolved upon them.
Release of funds under the Scheme were made in accordance with the
progress achieved by States against milestones and bench marks in
the reform aspects identified.
During the year 2006-07, the Panchayat Empowerment &
Accountability Incentive Scheme had an allocation of Rs. 10 crore. The
scheme was appraised by the Standing Finance Committee chaired by
Secretary (PR) in its meeting held on 5.10.2006. It was decided that
the incentive funds would be released to the States on the basis of the
Devolution Index prepared by the National Council of Applied
Economic Research, Delhi. The Index prepared by Alok and Bhandari
in 2004 was passed on for refinement to the NCAER, which presented
an interim Devolution Index to the Ministry in August 2006. Thereafter,
based on the data available with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and
as obtained from different States/other sources, NCAER measured the
assessing environment for Panchayati Raj Institutions in different States
and assigned scores and rankings to all the States/UTs under Part IX
of the Constitution. Based on the rankings of States/UTs, Rs. 8 crores
were released to the first 10 States and Rs. 2 crores were released to
the 6 UTs, in accordance with their rankings.

72
The Index prepared last year is now sought to be further refined
and nuanced to measure the progress on Devolution over time. Towards
this end, a concept paper has been prepared by NCAER giving details
of the construction of the DI, information or data needs and the
application of the Index. This comprehensive index is proposed to be
utilized for implementation of the Panchayat Empowerment &
Accountability Incentive Scheme during the current year. This
comprehensive Index is a substantial improvement on the Index
formulated last year. The previous index measured the States on three
broad indicators viz. Devolution of funds, functions and functionaries.
The present index has included a distinct ‘Framework’ sub Index which
will take into account the mandatory provisions of the Constitution
contained in Part IX. The Index, as and when finalized would be
submitted before the Committee.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj, O.M. No.G-20012/2/2007-P&C,
Dated 16 Nov. 2007]
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
 4 March, 2008 Chairman,
14 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

73
APPENDIX I
DEVOLUTION OF FUNCTIONS
Sl.No. State Transfer of Subjects Comments
Subjects Covered
through under
Legislation Activity
Mapping
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh 17 9 Activity mapping is under
finalisation
2. Assam 29 22 Activity mapping has been
completed
3. Arunachal Pradesh 3 Activity mapping not done
4. Bihar 25 25 Committee looking at activity
mapping
5. Chhattisgarh 29 27 Activity mapping under
preparation, yet to be
notified
6. Goa 21 18 The Act itself extensively lists
out the powers given to the
Panchayats. In a sense, this
itself constitutes activity
mapping, though a separate
exercise is also under way.
7. Gujarat 15 14 Activity mapping being
worked out, but not
completed and notified
8. Haryana 28 10 In 1995 detailed executive
orders were issued for
devolution, in respect of
16 departments, but
remained largely on paper. In
Feb 2006, Activity mapping
was freshly issued for
10 departments

74
12 3 4 5
9. Himachal Pradesh 29 26 General notification on
devolution of functions
issued for 15 departments in
July, 1996. However, only 8
of these have further issued
notifications.
10. Jharkhand No elections held to Panchayats
11. Karnataka 29 29 Activity Mapping completed
in accordance with the
recommendations of the GOI
task force, in August 2003.
12. Kerala 26 26 Responsibility mapping
undertaken is now being
revisited, 18 departments are
covered
13. Madhya Pradesh 23 25 Fr esh activity mapping
completed by an NGO is
under the consideration of
the government
14. Maharashtra 18 18 Activities devolved to
Panchayats are listed in the
acti itself
15. Manipur 22 22 So far only departments of
RD&PR, C&I, Fisheries and
Art and Culture have issued
departmental notifications for
devolving funds and
functionaries to Panchayats.
16. Orissa 27 18 In October 2005, orders were
issued on activity mapping
in 9 departments. It is now
reported that 10 individual
government departments
have issued orders in
furtherance of the same.
17. Punjab 7 6 Devolution orders were
issued in respect of

75
12 3 4 5
6 departments in October
2003. Now activity mapping
has been completed for
29 matters and awaits
government approval.
18. Rajasthan 29 12 Activity mapping, based on
the powers sanctioned to the
Panchayats under the law is
ready, pending approval of
the Government
19. Sikkim 28 28 Activity mapping completed
and notified by the
Govenrment in November
2006
20. Tamil Nadu 29 Activity mapping to be
undertaken. A high level
committee under
Chairpersonship of the
Minister for Rural
Development and local
administration set up
21. Tripura 29 21 Government orders
devolving functions to
Panchayats ready for 12
departments
22. Uttar Pradesh 12 Functions relating to
12 departments have been
transferred to Panchayats.
Activity mapping is still
under the consideration of
the Government
23. Uttarakhand 14 9 Activity mapping was issued
in September 2006, but
departments have not issued
their notifications yet.
24. West Bengal 29 18 Activity mapping completed
in November 2005

76
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Shri D. Narbula
5. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
6. Shri Sita Ram Singh
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Balihari Babu
9. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
10. Dr. Ram Prakash
11. Shri P .R. Rajan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K.Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption

77
of two draft action taken reports on Demands for Grants (2007-2008)
of the Department of Rural Development and Ministry of Panchayati
Raj.
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration
Memoranda No. 4 and 5 regarding draft action taken reports on
Twenty-ninth report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) and Thirtieth report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj respectively. The
Committee after deliberations adopted the aforesaid draft reports
without any modification
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
aforesaid draft action taken reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

78
APPENDIX III
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTIETH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (14th LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 27
II. Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government
Para Nos.: 2.4, 2.11, 2.15, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.25,
2.26, 2.36, 2.44, 2.47, 2.71, 2.76, 3.14, 3.15,
3.16, 3.30 and 3.31 18
Percentage to the total recommendations (66.67%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies
NIL
Percentage to total recommendations (-)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos.: 2.35, 2.56 and 2.57 3
Percentage to total recommendations (11.11%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos.: 2.45, 2.46, 2.62, 2.66, 2.70 and 3.35 6
Percentage to total recommendations (22.22 %)

THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 040
Price : Rs. 86.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2007-08) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government .................................................. 26
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 57
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 58
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 63
APPENDICES
I. Devolution of Functions ......................................... 7 3
II. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 25 February, 2008................ 76
III. Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in
the Thirtieth Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 78
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri George Fernandes
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari*
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
12. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
17. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
18. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar#
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari, MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 30 August, 2007, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4022
dated August 30, 2007.
#Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri Tarit Baran Topdar, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Energy to Standing Committee on Rural Development w.e.f.
12 December, 2007 as intimated  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4366 dated
12 December, 2007.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Dr. Ram Prakash
28. Shri P .R. Rajan
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
31. Shrimati Kanimozhi@
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
@Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha nominated Shrimati Kanimozhi, MP , (RS) to Standing
Committee on Rural Development  w.e.f. 15 September, 2007  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin
Part-II, Para No. 4096, dated 19 September, 2007.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2007-2008), having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf present the Thirty-fourth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
2. The Thirtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 14 May,
2007. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 16 November, 2007.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
25 February, 2008.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-III.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
 4 March, 2008 Chairman,
14 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

34
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI