30
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
THIRTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

THIRTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.5.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 10.5.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 036
Price : Rs. 158.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory.................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Over all analysis of Demands for Grants
(2007-2008) of Ministry of Panchayati Raj ........... 3
A. Status of Implementation of recommendations
made by the Committee in their Twenty-first
Report under Direction 73A of the Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
B. Scenario during Tenth Plan (2002-2007) ...... 4
(i) Allocation and Utilisation ........................ 4
(ii) Strategy for Eleventh Plan (2007-2012) ... 7
C. Imparting Training to elected PRIs
functionaries—the overall scenario ............... 11
D. Implementation of Central/Centrally
Sponsored Schemes relating to 29 subjects
enlisted in Eleventh Schedule of the
Constitution through Panchayati Raj
Institutions ........................................................... 14
E. Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and
Finances by State Governments/Union
territories to Panchayati Raj Institutions and
reversal of subjects already devolved .......... 20
F. Progress on constitution of District
Planning Committees (DPCs) ......................... 26
G. Implementation of Panchayats Extension
to Scheduled Areas Act (PESA), 1996 ......... 30
(i)

H. Nyaya Panchayat Bill ....................................... 32
I. Twelfth Finance Commission Grants ............ 34
J. Public Private Panchayat Partnership .......... 39
SCHEME-WISE ANALYSIS
I. Backward Region Grant Fund ..................... 41
II. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana..................... 48
III. Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability
Incentive Scheme ............................................. 56
APPENDICES
I. Scheme-wise position of allocation and utilisation
of BE during 2006-2007 ....................................................... 59
II. Progress of devolution and activity mapping as on
29 March, 2007....................................................................... 60
III. Progress of devolution and activity mapping as on
29 June, 2005 .......................................................................... 66
IV . Reasons for delay in undertaking activity mapping—
State-wise information .......................................................... 69
V. The Jurisdiction, Powers and Procedure of the
Nyaya Panchayat ................................................................... 71
VI. List of districts falling under Backward Regions
Grant Fund ............................................................................. 73
VII. National Capability Building Framework for
Panchayati Raj elected Representatives and
functionaries ............................................................................ 82
VIII. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
29 March, 2007....................................................................... 118
IX. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
24 April, 2007 ......................................................................... 121
X.  Statements of observations/recommendations ............. 123
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shrimati Susmita Bauri
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri George Fernandes
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
9. Shri Hannan Mollah
10. Shri D. Narbula
11. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
12. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
13. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
16. Shri Sita Ram Singh
*17. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
18. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri D.C. Srikantappa, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Urban Development to Committee on Rural Development vice
the vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Shrichand Kriplani MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Rural Development to Standing Committee on Chemicals
and Fertilizers vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 2847 dated August 31, 2006.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
*27. Dr. Ram Prakash
28. Shri P .R. Rajan
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
*Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has nominated Dr. Ram Prakash MP (RS) to be a
member of the Committee w.e.f. 27 April, 2007 vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin
Part II, Para No. 44033 dated April 30, 2007 and also as notified vide Lok Sabha Bulletin
Part-II, Para No. 3580 dated 1 May, 2007.

ABBREVIATIONS
BE  — Budget Estimates
BRGF  — Backward Regions Grants Fund
CII  — Confederation of Indian Industries
DPC  — District Planning Committee
IEC  — Information, Education and Communication
NIRD  — National Institute of Rural Development
NGO  — Non-Governmental Organisation
PD & T  — Panchayat Development and Training Scheme
PESA  — Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996
PRIs  — Panchayati Raj Institutions
RBH  — Rural Business Hubs
RE  — Revised Estimates
SFC  — State Finance Commissions
SIRD  — State Institute of Rural Development
TFC  — Tenth Finance Commission
UNFPA  — United Nations Population Fund
UTs  — Union Territories
(v)

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2006-2007) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Thirtieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
2. Demands for Grants have been examined by the Committee
under Rule 331E (1) (a) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj on 29 March, 2007.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 24 April, 2007.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for placing before them the requisite
material and their considered views in connection with the examination
of the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them
by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
9 May, 2007 Chairman,
19 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj came into existence on 27 May,
2004 after being carved out of the Ministry of Rural Development.
The major functions of the Ministry are to oversee the implementation
of Part-IX of the Constitution, inserted by the Constitution Seventy-
third (Amendment) Act, 1992, the provisions of the Panchayats
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 and Article 243ZD of Part
IX-A relating to the District Planning Committees read with the
Eleventh Schedule which illustratively sets out a list of 29 matters,
which might be considered by the State Legislatures for devolution to
the Panchayats in respect of the Planning of economic development
and social justice as well as the implementation of entrusted schemes
of economic and social development in such a manner as to ensure
that they function as ‘units of self-government’.
1.2 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj during 2007-08 has been
entrusted with the administration of the following schemes:
(a) Backward Region Grant Fund.
(b) Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana.
(c) Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme.
Besides, this Ministry would also be administering projects assisted
by UN Agencies and contribution to International Bodies of Local
Government besides the mandatory allocation for the North-Eastern
Region.
1.3 The overall Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj for 2007-2008 crore is for Rs. 4770.50 crore.
1.4 The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
have been presented to Parliament under Demand No. 67. The detailed
Demands for Grants of the Ministry were laid in Lok Sabha on
20 March, 2007.

2
1.5 In the present Report the Committee have analysed the basic
performance of the Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) ‘Rashtriya
Gram Swaraj Yojana (RGSY)’ and Panchayat Empowerment and
Accountability Incentive Scheme. Besides, the Committee have analysed
the implementation of Part-IX of the Constitution viz. devolution of
functions, functions, functionaries and finances, District Planning
Committees (DPCs), allocation of funds to Panchayats under the Twelfth
Finance Commission and review of the performance of the Ministry
over the last 3 years i.e. since its creation in May, 2004 with special
emphasis on its performance during the last financial year i.e. 2006-07.
Further, the Committee would be reviewing the status of
implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes through panchayats
and also the issues relating to the Nyaya Panchayat Bill.

3
CHAPTER II
OVERALL ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) OF
THE MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
A. Status of Implementation of recommendations made by the
Committee in their Twenty-first Report under direction 73A of
the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
2.1 As per direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha, the Minister concerned shall make once in six months a
statement in the House regarding the status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Report of Departmentally Related
Standing Committees of Lok Sabha with regard to his Ministry.
2.2 The Twenty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj was presented to Parliament on 18 May, 2006. The
statement with regard to this Report had fallen due in November,
2006. Ministry of Panchayati Raj was requested to take the necessary
action for tabling the said statement vide Lok Sabha Secretariat O.M.
dated 9 March, 2007. However, the statement in respect of the Twenty-
first Report is yet to be made by the Hon’ble Minister.
2.3 When asked about the reasons for delay in making the
statement in respect of the Twenty-first Report, the Ministry has
submitted that the delay in making the statement on the status of the
implementation of the recommendations of the Committee has taken
place as the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is in the process of gathering
information from the State Governments. The Ministry of Panchayati
Raj is planning to lay a statement on the status of the implementation
of the recommendations of the Committee during the current session
of the Parliament and in future, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj will
ensure that directions given by the Hon’ble Committee are complied
with.
2.4 The Committee wish to point out that the primary objective
of inserting direction 73A in the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ was to
make the Government more accountable for implementation of
various recommendations of the Committee. The Committee are
constrained to note that even after lapse of around five months when
the Statement on Twenty-First Report had fallen due, the Statement

4
is yet to be made by the Hon’ble Minister. The Ministry proposes
to lay the Statement during the current session of Parliament. The
Committee recommend to the Ministry to ensure that the Statement
is made at the earliest during the second part of the Budget Session
of Parliament commencing from 26 April, 2007. The Committee,
further, strongly recommend to the Ministry to ensure that the
statements in respect of each of the report are made within the
specified period i.e., six months after the presentation of the Report
to Parliament as per direction 73 A of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha, in future.
B. Scenario during Tenth Plan (2002-2007)
(i) Allocation vis-a-vis Utilisation
2.5 Ministry of Panchayati Raj was created on 27 May, 2004. The
details of allocations vis-a-vis utilisation made since the creation of the
Ministry are follows:
 (Rs. in crore)
Year Budget Revised Actual Percentage
Estimates Estimates Utilisation
2004-05 30.60 10.60 8.45 84.50
2005-06 50.00 50.00 48.70 97.40
2006-07 3825.00 2000.00 1998.33 99.86
2007-08 4770.00 — — —
2.6 Explaining the mismatch between BE, RE and actual
expenditure during the aforesaid years, the Ministry has stated that
although the Ministry was created on 27 May, 2004, its accounts became
functional only in November, 2004. The Group of Ministers formed for
considering the creation of posts and accommodation for the Ministry
could only meet in December, 2004 and based on their
recommendations, a Cabinet Note was submitted to the Cabinet
Secretariat in February, 2005. Due to these reasons, the funds for the
year 2004-05 could not be utilized fully. Further, the scheme of training
being demand driven where assistance is provided to Training Institutes
in States for carrying out training of elected representatives and officials
of PRIs, physical targets were not fixed.
2.7 The Ministry has further stated that till 2005-2006 the Ministry
was administrating only one scheme i.e. Panchayat Development and

5
Training including Research, Conference, Awards, Information
Technology and IEC and the entire allocation was made under this
head. For 2006-2007 the total allocation of Rs. 3,825.73 crore included
an allocation of Rs. 3,750 crore under the additional Central Assistance
to State Plan being implemented through the Backward Regions Grant
Fund and Rs. 75 crore for the Central Plan being implemented through
3 schemes namely:
(Rs. in crore)
Name of Scheme Allocation
(a) Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana Rs. 50.50
(b) Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Rs. 10.00
(c) Scheme for Media Publicity and Advocacy Rs. 3.00
Besides, there was the mandatory allocation for the North-Eastern
States to the tune of Rs. 7.50 crore as well as Secretarial expenses of
Rs. 4 crore.
2.8 The scheme-wise position of allocation and utilisation during
2006-2007 is given in the Appendix-I.
2.9 The scheme of Backward Regions Grant Fund, which had an
allocation of Rs. 3,750 crore during the year, was approved by the
Cabinet only in August, 2006. Thereafter the scheme was transferred
to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The erstwhile scheme of Rashtriya
Sam Vikas Yojana has been merged with the scheme. It was decided
that the funds yet to be released under the RSVY would be released
by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Due to the delay in transfer of the
scheme, the pace of expenditure under the scheme was initially slow.
Further, there was an unspent balance of more than 1,000 crore with
the States to whom funds had been released earlier by the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance. Keeping these factors in view, the
allocation of the Ministry was reduced to Rs. 2,000 crore at RE stage.
During the course of evidence the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati
Raj also stated as under:
“…..For the current financial year, we as on date have spent
99.86 per cent of our budget and as on 29 March, 2007, there are
still releases being made, as you can appreciate. That is something
that we would be very pleased to share with you that we have
spent 100 per cent of the budget on the Backward Regions Grant

6
Fund which at RE stage is Rs. 1,925 crore. So, we have spent
100 per cent of that budget and 99.86 per cent is our overall
expenditure.”
Sharp reduction in Budget Outlay
2.10 During the course of examination it also came out before the
Committee that over the years the Ministry got far lesser allocation
than that proposed to the Planning Commission. In this connection
the Ministry in a written note giving details about proposed and agreed
outlay during 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 has informed that for the year
2005-2006 an amount of Rs. 105.40 crore was proposed by the Ministry,
the actual amount allocated by the Planning Commission was
Rs. 50 crore. During 2006-2007, as against the proposed outlay
Rs. 2000 crore, an allocation of Rs. 75 crore only was provided.
However, during the later part of the year, in August, 2006, the scheme
of Backward Regions Grants Fund with an allocation of Rs. 3,750 crore
was transferred to the Ministry.
2.11 The Committee note that although the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj was created as far back as 2004-2005, yet adequate
allocation was made available to the Ministry only from 2006-2007
onwards to carry out its functions for meaningful achievement during
Tenth Plan (2002-2007) period. For instance the Budget allocations of
the Ministry during 2004-2005, 2005-2006 were Rs. 30.60 crore and
Rs. 50 crore respectively. The Budget Estimates for 2006-2007 were
significantly enhanced to Rs. 3,825 crore. However, the Committee
are constrained to note that whatever Budget allocations were made
available to the Ministry were drastically reduced at Revised
Estimates stage during annual plans of 2004-2005 and 2006-2007 of
Tenth Plan period. For instance the Budget Estimates of Rs. 30.60
crore and Rs. 3,825 crore during 2004-2005 and 2006-2007 were
drastically reduced to the level of Rs. 10.60 crore and Rs. 2,000 crore
respectively. Even the reduced allocation of Rs. 10.60 crore during
2004-05 could not be utilised fully by the Ministry and resulted in
underspending of Rs. 1.15 crore i.e. around 15 per cent of the
allocated outlay. Delay in creation of posts and accommodation for
the Ministry based on the recommendations of Group of Ministers
has been attributed to be the reason for under-utilisation of Budget
allocation during 2004-2005 and delay in transfer of the scheme of
‘Backward Regions Grants Fund’ to Ministry of Panchayati Raj has
led to the reduction in Budget Estimates of Rs. 3,825 crore to the
level of Rs. 2,000 crore at Revised Estimates stage during 2006-2007.
While appreciating the fact that the year 2004-2005 was the first year

7
of the working of the newly constituted Ministry and the year
2006-07 was the year when bulk of the outlay of the Ministry was
allocated for Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRFG), the scheme
which was transferred from the Ministry of Finance to the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj in August, 2006, the Committee observe that
reduction in outlay at Revised Estimates stage retards the overall
performance of the Ministry during a plan period particularly when
there is a challenging task of strengthening of Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs) and training of over 14 lakh PRI functionaries is
yet to be accomplished. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
all out efforts should be made to ensure that the allocations made
during a year are fully utilised. Since the cut at Revised Estimates
stage during the aforesaid two years was because of gross
underspending due to the reasons as explained above, the Ministry
has to work hard to convince the Planning Commission not to resort
to cut at Revised Estimates stage.
(ii) Strategy for Eleventh Plan (2007-2012)
2.12 The Approach Paper to the Eleventh Plan of the Planning
Commission recognises the need to empower PRIs and admits that
though much efforts have been made yet much remains to be done.
In the light of this, for the Eleventh Plan (2007-2012) the Ministry has
informed that their main focus areas would be:
(i) Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyan & Panchayat Yuva Khel
Abhiyans
(ii) Centrally Sponsored Schemes would be routed through
Panchayati Raj Institutions
(iii) Nyaya Panchayat Bill
(iv) Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas Act (PESA)
(v) Decentralised Planning
(vi) Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and Finances
(vii) Computerization and Internet connectivity of all the three
tiers of the PRIs.
2.13 When further asked about the major changes that have been
brought about in Eleventh Plan that have a bearing on them, the
Ministry has stated as under:
“Gram Swaraj was launched in the last year of the Tenth Five
Year Plan and will continue during the Eleventh Five Year Plan,

8
which include component such as (a) Capacity Building and
Training of PRI representatives (b) Infrastructure of the PRIs
(c) E-Governance and (d) Action research studies. During the
Eleventh Five Year Plan the scope of the Gram Swaraj Scheme
has increased by merging the components of Mahila Shakti
Abhiyan,Yuva Shakti Abhiyan , Rural Business Hub and Media,
Publicity and Advocacy.”
BRGF
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been entrusted the
implementation of the Backward Regions Grant Fund in 2006-07 and
for the period of the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Backward Regions
Grant Fund (BRGF) has been conceived as the successor to the earlier
Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY) and is targeted at reducing the
bane of regional inequalities. As BRGF grants are untied, Panchayats
are expected to use these grants for “gap filling” in existing
development programmes to build up the development infrastructure
in such a manner as to promote the closing of the gap between
backward and non-backward districts. The programme covers
250 Districts. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is to administer the District
sector part of the scheme particularly because of the centrality
envisaged of the Panchayats and Municipalities in the planning and
implementation of the BRGF programme.. Effective district
planning in backward regions will also facilitate similar effective district
planning in non-BRGF districts in accordance with Planning
Commission guidelines to serve as the foundation of the Eleventh
Five Year Plan.
2.14 The Ministry has informed that proposed allocation of the
Ministry for Eleventh Plan is under preparation. For 2007-2008 the
Ministry had proposed an outlay of Rs. 15,789 crore (Rs. 5,789 crore
for Gram Swaraj and Rs. 5000 crore each for Panchayat Empowerment
& Accountability Incentive Scheme and ‘Backward Region Grant Fund’
(BRGF). However the allocation for Annual Plan 2007-2008 has been
Rs. 4,770 crore. The scheme-wise break-up is as under:
Allocation for the Annual Plan 2007-2008
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Programmes Amount
12 3
1. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana 67.90
2. Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability 10.00
Incentive Scheme

9
12 3
3. Backward Region Grant Fund 4670.00
4. Grant for North-East Region 10.00
5. Management Cell 7.00
6. Project assisted by UN Agencies 5.00
7. Contribution to Commonwealth Local 0.10
Government Fund
Total 4770
2.15 The Committee appreciate the concerns of the Planning
Commission as highlighted in the Approach Paper to the Eleventh
Plan (2007-2012) regarding need to empower Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs). In this context the Committee also appreciate
that though some headway has been made in this regard, yet the
task ahead is very challenging before the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj during the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee find that the
focused areas during the Eleventh Plan would be implementation of
programmes like Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyan and Panchayat
Yuva Khel Abhhiyan, Centrally Sponsored Schemes routed through
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), Devolutions of Functions,
Functionaries and Finances and capacity building of Panchayats
through the schemes ‘Gram Swaraj and Backward Regions Grant
Fund’. Besides, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has proposed a
legislation, Nyaya Panchayat Bill which will further enhance the
activities of the Panchayats. The detailed analysis of the proposed
legislation has been made in the succeeding part of the Report.
The Committee, however, feel that although the main focus areas
have been identified by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the
Eleventh Plan Period, the trends of allocation of outlay to the
Ministry during Tenth Plan and the first year of the Eleventh Plan
raise doubts about the practicability and execution of these objectives.
The Ministry has been allocated far lesser than the proposed
allocation during the last two years of the Tenth Plan which were
the first two years of the newly created Ministry. During 2005-06,
the allocation provided i.e., Rs. 50 crore was less than half of the
projected outlay i.e., Rs. 105 crore. Later, during 2006-07 the Ministry
was allocated only Rs. 75 crore against the proposed allocation of
Rs. 2,000 crore. However, in the later half of the year Rs. 3750 crore
were allocated to the Ministry by way of transfer of BRGF from the

10
Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Panchayati Raj 2007-08 is the
first year of Eleventh Plan and the trends of allocation to different
Ministries would indicate the thrust of the Government on different
programmes and the set priorities. In this context, the Ministry had
proposed the outlay of Rs. 15,789 crore which include Rs. 5,789 crore
for Gram Swaraj, Rs. 5,000 crore each for Panchayat Empowerment
and Accountability Incentive Scheme and Backward Regions Grant
Fund. Against the aforesaid proposed allocation, the outlay earmarked
is just Rs. 4,770 crore. The substantial part of the allocation i.e.,
Rs. 4,670 crore  is for Backward Regions Grant Fund, thus leaving
only Rs. 100 crore for the various activities of the Ministry relating
to the capacity building of the Panchayats.
2.16 The Committee find that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
has bold objectives of ensuring centrality of Panchayats in various
Centrally Sponsored Schemes run by various Ministries/Departments
of the Union Government along with the mandate of decentralization.
The proposed Nyaya Panchayat Legislation would further enhance
the responsibilities of Panchayats to a great extent. All these
objectives can be achieved only when each Panchayat has a
Secretariat to assist the Panchayat members in handling these
responsibilities. Besides, the financial capacity is another area to be
taken care of. The Ministry’s Gram Swaraj Scheme intends to achieve
the objective of capacity building of Panchayats but with the meagre
outlay, the bold objectives cannot be realised. The Committee are of
the firm opinion that adequate resources should be allocated to the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj so that the Panchayats can shoulder the
enhanced responsibilities which the Constitution has bestowed upon
them which the Ministry is rightfully trying to transfer to Panchayats.
The Eleventh Plan allocation should be made keeping in view the
task ahead of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Keeping in view the
aforesaid observation, the allocation for the year 2007-08 should be
enhanced specifically when the first year of the Eleventh Plan would
set the priority of the Government.
While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee strongly
recommend to the Ministry to ensure that the allocation is
meaningfully utilised and does not result in huge underspending or
unspent balances with the implementing agencies. The utilisation
capacity need to be enhanced to effectively utilise the higher
allocation.
2.17 The C ommittee further find that at present different schemes
relating to the subjects enshrined under Eleventh Schedule of the

11
Constitution are being implemented by the various Ministries/
Departments of Union Government. The annual allocations for these
schemes are approximately between Rs. 55,000 crore to Rs. 72,000
crore. The Panchayats can play an important role in effective
implementation of these schemes. Besides, Panchayats can help in
the realistic planning process as envisaged in the Approach Paper to
Eleventh Plan. The Government can think of allocating a small
fraction of the outlay of these schemes say one percent or so for
empowerment of Panchayats. The Committee would like that the
concerns of the Committee in this regard should be duly
communicated to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission.
2.18 The Committee further feel that though much is being
planned by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to endow Panchayats
with the responsibilities in the true spirit of article 243G of the
Constitution, it is high time to have some mechanism to fix
accountability on the respective three tiers of Panchayats. The
Committee recommend to the Ministry to evolve some mechanism
in this regard so that the maximum outlay meant for the poorest of
the poor reaches the intended beneficiaries and there are least chances
of corruption and malpractices.
C. Imparting training to elected PRI functionaries overall scenario
2.19 There ar e around 30 lakh functionaries of PRIs in India.
Training of elected representatives is basic input for effective and
successful working of PRIs. With the enactment of Seventy Third
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992, Panchayats have been given a
wide range of powers which makes training and capacity building
crucial for governance.
2.20 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is assisting States in imparting
training to all elected representatives and official functionaries in an
effective, time-bound and economical fashion. Training of Panchayati
Raj elected representatives has two parts, namely (a) provision of
training infrastructure, such as satellite training studios and receiving
stations and Training Centres at the district level and (b) supporting
actual training of elected representatives and official of PRIs.
2.21 Elaborating achievement of the Ministry during Tenth Plan
period the Ministry has stated with the enactment of the
73rd Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992 a new challenge to impart

12
training to both elected representatives and official functionaries had
emerged. The range of functions and powers that the Panchayats are
to exercise in accordance with the constitutional scheme made it
imperative that an organized effort was needed to build up the
necessary administrative and infrastructural support so that the
Panchayats would be able to perform their functions efficiently. The
objective of the efforts towards capacity building and training of
Panchayati Raj Institutions/Representatives has been to assist States in
this regard.
2.22 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has initiated the preparation
of a detailed National Training design for all elected Panchayat
members and officials. The training design was proposed to be
interactive and continuous, aimed at achieving its objectives through
a composite of various interventions. It would use traditional and
technology supported approaches that work in tandem for maximum
effect.
2.23 There has been significant progress in the training efforts of
the Ministry. Around 4 lakh elected members and officials in Haryana,
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra,
West Bengal, Uttaranchal and Gujarat have been trained during
2005-06 and another 3 lakh representatives have been given training
till February , 2007. On being asked as to whether a total of 7 lakh PRI
functionaries is too less particularly when a great number of elected
PRI functionaries are yet to be covered, the Ministry has stated that
the details of elected representatives and officials of PRIs trained, earlier
was only with reference to the States to whom financial assistance
was provided by the Ministry under the scheme of ‘Training and
Capacity Building of elected representatives’ since 2005-2006. The details
of representatives and officials trained in other States is being obtained
and only thereafter the full picture would be clear. However, the
Ministry is aware of the limitations of the current efforts at providing
training and capacity building to elected representatives and officials
of the Panchayati Raj Institutions across the country.
2.24 The 7 lakh PRI elected representatives are ones in respect of
whom the funds have been released by the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj. The training of the elected representatives is also conducted by

13
the State Governments from their own resources. Further, elaborating
on the National Perspective Plan for training of PRIs, the Secretary
during the course of oral evidence has stated as under:
“An important recommendation of the Seventh Round Table was
that there should be a national perspective plan on decentralised
training and capacity building for all PRI functionaries with
specific objectives, timeframe and resources.
The National Capability Building Framework looks at a much
larger approach to capability building than training. This
Framework is aimed at building effective and sustainable
capability of all stakeholders in Panchayati Raj, particularly elected
representatives, office bearers, Chairpersons of Standing
Committees and officials connected with subjects developed to
Panchayats under State legislations.”
2.25 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is working hard on evolving
a National Training Framework for providing training to PRIs and
functionaries. The National Training Design prepared by NIRD was
deliberated upon with a group of NGOs and others who were
involved at grass-root level development and the Ministry is working
towards the National Capability Building Framework that was aimed
at building effective and sustainable capabilities of all stakeholders
in Panchayati Raj, particularly, elected representatives, office bearers,
Chairpersons of Standing Committees and officials connected with
subjects devolved to Panchayats under State legislations.
2.26 The Committee while noting that efforts are being made to
work out a detailed training module observe that the Ministry has
not done much on finding out the quantum of task ahead for the
Ministry in this regard. Even after the passage of full two years
since the Ministry was created, efforts have not been made to know
the data of PRIs and functionaries who could be trained so far by
the efforts being made through Union Government and the State
Governments. Since efforts are being made in this regard by various
quarters as admitted by the Ministry, there is an urgent need to
coordinate with the various agencies involved in task of training of
PRIs and know how much of PRIs and functionaries could already
be trained and the task ahead so as to address the issue in a more
focused manner. The Committee would like the Ministry to get the
information from the State Governments in this regard and the
Committee be kept apprised. Since the training of PRIs is a
continuous process, the Ministry should evolve a permanent
mechanism so as to have the first hand knowledge of the status of
training of PRIs through the Ministry’s training scheme and the

14
efforts being made by other quarters, i.e. the other Ministries of
Union Government/State Government, various training institutions
etc.
D. Implementation of Central/Centrally Sponsored Schemes relating
to 29 subjects enlisted in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution
through Panchayati Raj Institutions
2.27 The Ministry in their Outcome Budget document (2007-2008)
has informed that at an operational level, the largest inflow of resources
to State Governments is through Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS).
These CSSs largely cover sectors (like primary education, public health,
drinking water, sanitation) identified in the Eleventh Schedule, for
devolution to Panchayats. Accordingly, the design and implementation
of the CSSs need to be compatible in letter and spirit with the Seventy
Third Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992. The Ministry of Panchayati
Raj is concerned that unless the CSSs accord centrality to Panchayats
in their planning and implementation and recognize the principle of
subsidiarity that must inform programme design (that is, whatever
can be done best at a lower level must necessarily be done at that
level and not at any higher level while whatever cannot be done at a
lower level must go to a higher level), centrally sponsored schemes
will not be cost-effective, nor would they optimize fiscal transfers or
appropriate utilisation.
2.28 This subject matter was taken up by the Committee in their
Twenty-sixth report wherein it was observed by the Committee that
there is not much progress made in this regard. Some sort of centrality
on the role of Panchayats could be ensured in three programmes viz.
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana, the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (NREGA) and Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan. In other schemes
like Mid-Day Meal, National Rural Health Mission etc., efforts are
being made by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to ensure centrality of
Panchayati Raj Institutions.
2.29 The Committee wanted to know the progress made in this
regard the Ministry in a written note has stated that as per directive
of the Cabinet Secretary vide DO dated 8th November 2004 and the
recommendations of the Standing Committee of Parliament, all new
Centrally Sponsored Schemes would have to be vetted by the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj so as to ensure that they are in conformity with the
letter and spirit of the Constitutional Provisions relating to Panchayats.
All the Ministries were requested to review existing Centrally Sponsored
Schemes with reference to the constitutionally envisage roles for
Panchayats.

15
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj have forwarded the comments in
respect of various Centrally Sponsored Schemes as under:—
Ministry/Department Name of Scheme
Department of Consumer Affairs Suggestions for running PDS and
suggestions for role of PRI.
Department of Food and Public Targeted Public Distribution  System
Distribution (TPDS)
Village Grain Bank Scheme
Ministry of Social Justice and i. Construction of Hostels for SC
Empowerment students.
ii. Construction of Hostels for OBC
students.
iii. Pr e-matric Scholarship to the
children of chose engaged in
unclean occupation.
iv.P re-matric Scholarship for OBC
students.
v. Scheme of Assistance to
Scheduled Caste Development
Corporations (SCDCs).
National Policy for Persons with
Disabilities.
Scheme for Assistance to Schedule
Caste Development Corporations.
Department of Women & Child ICDS
Welfare Offences Against Child Bill
Swayamsidha Yojana
Balika Samridhi Yojana
Department of Elementary Education Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
Right to Education Bill
Mid day Meal Scheme
National Literacy Mission
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports National Service Scheme
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare National Rural Health Mission
Ministry of Labour & Employment National Child Labour Project
Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour
Ministry of Tribal Af fairs Construction of Girls and Boys hostels
for Scheduled Tribes.
Establishment of Ashram Schools in
Tribal Sub-Plan Areas
Forest Right Bill

16
2.30 The Ministry has also mentioned in the Outcome Budget that
a Group of Ministers for strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions was
constituted by the Cabinet Secretariat vide its order dated 4 May, 2005.
The Terms of Reference of the GoM were as follows:
(i) Implementing the recommendations pertaining to Financial
Devolution;
(ii) Accountability and Performance of Panchayats;
(iii) Implementation of the Provisions of the Panchayats
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996;
(iv) Gender Empowerment through Panchayats;
(v) Extensive use of simple ITS interventions for Transparency
and Easier Access to Information and Services; and
(vi) Empowering of the Gram Sabhas and institutional linkage
with Use Committees.
2.31 The GoM held its meeting on 24 August, 2005. The decision
of the GoM were circulated to all Central Ministries for suitable action.
A key action point approved by the GoM related to activity mapping
by Central Ministries. All the prioritised Ministries were requested to
undertake activity mapping to pursue the matter. A workshop of
activity mapping was also conducted on 24 April, 2006. It has also
been mentioned that not much progress could be made in the matter
as several Ministries have not undertaken activity mapping. The
Ministry has stated that all the Ministries have been requested to
undertake activity mapping keeping in view the Centrality of
Panchayati Raj Institutions in implementation of the Schemes. The
details of prioritised Ministries which have carried out activity mapping
in respect of the CSS being handled by them are given below:
Sl.No.  Name of Ministry Position as intimated by the Ministry
12 3
1. Ministry of Health Activity Mapping done in respect of key
& Family Welfare programmes and details enclosed.
2. Ministry of A note indicating the involvement of PRIs
Agriculture in the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the
Department of Agriculture has been enclosed
after an Activity Mapping exercise was carried
out.

17
12 3
3. Ministry of Social Activity Mapping undertaken. Responsibilities at
Justice & Central, State and Panchayat level given in the
Empowerment schemes being administered.
4. Department of Food Activity Mapping for PDS done.
& Public Distribution
5. Ministry of Youth Ministry has only one CSS i.e. National Service
Affairs & Sports Scheme (NSS) Activity Mapping has been done.
In addition to this, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been in
interaction with various Ministries for change in their Programme
Guidelines for providing centrality to Panchayats.
2.32 The Ministry has furnished the following possible reasons for
not undertaking the activity mapping by different Ministries:
(a) There is a general lack of confidence in the ability of
Panchayats to manage their own affairs in an efficient
manner;
(b) There is a feeling that devolving activities to the Panchayats
would not bring the desired effects or changes; and
(c) The will to change the status quo is lacking.
The Ministry has also informed that concerned Ministries have
been requested to expedite the progress and activity mapping.
2.33 When further asked how the Ministry would address the
various issues related to activity mapping which would ensure that
implementation of various schemes are entrusted to Panchayati Raj
Institutions as per the mandate of Ministry of Panchayati Raj, the
Ministry has informed that there are many Centrally Sponsored
Schemes in which PRI have a centrality. Under the  National Rural
Health Mission (NRHM), the following roles have been assigned to
the Panchayat:
• Under NRHM, the chairperson of the Zilla Parishad has
been made the chairperson of the District Health Mission.
• The representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) have
been made member of the District Health Society. The
Society will draw up the health plan and implement it in
the district.

18
• Rogi Kalyan Samiti, the Hospital Management Committee
has been set up at the District level in which the
Chairperson of the Zilla Parishad has been made as a
member.
• The Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) in each village
has been made accountable to Gram Panchayat.
• The Chairperson of Gram Panchayat has been made a joint
bank account holder for the use of untied funds of
Rs. 10000 for each sub center annually.
Under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development, the Panchayats are involved in the planning,
monitoring and implementation of SSA. Under the new approach, the
Village Education Committees or School Management & Development
Committees are constituted as sub-committees of the Gram Panchayats
or the Gram Sabhas. The following institutional arrangements have
been made to bring in the centrality of PRIs in the implementation of
SSA.
• There should be a Standing Committee or sub-committee
responsible for education under the Gram Panchayat, which
would be the nodal body for all matters relating to
elementary education;
• The school wise or village wise committees responsible for
elementary education./SSA should be linked with the Sub-
Committee of the GP-in-charge of Education, as in the above,
so that the overall supervision of PRIs is there over the
elementary education/SSA programmes;
• And that all tiers of PRIs (village, block, district) should be
given roles of supervision over the elementary education
programmes/SSA. The State Governments can do this by
defining the roles of the Sub-Committee on education of
the GP , the Block Level Education Committee and the
Education Sub-Committee of the Zilla Parishad.
In other Schemes like Mid Day Meal Scheme, Swamsidhha (WCD),
NSS (Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports) PRIs has been given a
prominent role.
2.34 The Committee also wanted to know how the Ministry is
going to address various issues related with activity mapping which
would ensure that implementation of various schemes are entrusted to
PRIs the Ministry has informed that they are aware of the resistance

19
to the status quo from established quarters. However, the matter is
being pursued vigorously at an official level with all the major
Ministries dealing with CSSs Centrally Sponsored Schemes with
substantial funding going to the rural areas. The Ministry has been
impressing upon various Ministries and Departments to ensure that
PRIs are central in the implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
Efforts are being made to convince them of the constitutional
requirement enshrined in Article 243G of the Constitution.
2.35 The Committee while reviewing the efforts being made by
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in ensuring the centrality of
Panchayats in various Centrally Sponsored Schemes run by different
Ministries/Departments of Union Government had observed (refer
para 7 of 26th report)  that not much progress has been made in this
regard. While examining the Demands for Grants of the current year,
the Ministry has furnished the details of the initiatives taken by the
Ministry in this regard. The Committee find that a Group of
Ministers for strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions was
constituted by the Cabinet Secretariat vide its order dated 6 May,
2005. As per the decision taken by the Government, all the prioritised
Ministries were required to undertake Activity Mapping to pursue
the aforesaid agenda of the Ministry. A workshop was also held on
24 April, 2006. In spite of best of the efforts made by the Ministry,
not much has been done in this regard. Only five Ministries viz. (i)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (ii) Ministry of Agriculture
(iii) Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (iv) Department of
Food and Public Distribution (v) Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
have completed the exercise of activity mapping. The Ministry is
pursuing with the remaining Ministries to undertake Activity
Mapping. The resistance from various Ministries/Departments has
been cited as one of the reasons for the slow progress. The
Committee find that the major concern of the various Ministries as
stated by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj itself is general lack of
confidence in the ability of Panchayats to manage their own affairs
in an efficient manner. The Committee observe that the challenge of
making various Ministries/Departments agreeable in this regard is
great for the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The Committee feel that
perhaps the lack of confidence in the ability of PRIs in handling
the various Centrally Sponsored Schemes for which crores of rupees
are annually being spent for Social Sector Schemes of the various
Ministries/Departments of Union Government is due to the various
issues related to capacity building of Panchayats. With the existing
position where the Panchayats have hardly any staff and technical
expertise, the concerns of the Ministries are somewhat genuine. The

20
Ministry of Panchayati Raj should first of all endeavour to empower
PRIs through the various components of Gram Swaraj Scheme, the
analysis of which has been done in the subsequent part of the report.
The adequate allocation for the aforesaid programme should be
provided by the Planning Commission. Besides, the Ministry has to
prove the qualitative impact in the schemes run by PRIs. For example
under National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, 50 percent of
the projects shall be implemented by PRIs. The effectiveness of PRIs
in handling the part of NREGA can prove the ability of PRIs in
handling these schemes. If there are qualitative differences between
the projects run by PRIs and other implementing agencies, the
Ministry has the reason enough to convince the Central Ministries
to transfer these schemes.
2.36 The Committee further note that the position of PRIs may
vary from State to State. In some States the PRIs may be strong and
able to discharge the great responsibility entrusted to these
institutions. In such States, PRIs should be encouraged to take on
these added responsibilities. However, in some States, PRIs may not
be empowered enough to take the challenges envisaged under the
Constitution. In such States, the Ministry should ensure that the
Panchayats are empowered to such a level that they would be in a
position to discharge the various responsibilities efficiently. Besides,
all the desired initiatives should be taken to address the concerns of
the Committee as expressed above. The Committee should also be
kept apprised in this regard.
E. Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and Finances by State
Governments/Union Territories to Panchayati Raj Institutions and
reversal of subjects already devolved
2.37 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj was created to give focussed
attention to the implementation of Part IX of the Constitution. One of
the main components of Part IX is the devolution of functions,
functionaries and finances. In this regard Article 243G of the
Constitution provides as under :
Article 243G—Powers, authority and responsibilities of
Panchayats
“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of
a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers
and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as
institutions of self-government and such law may contain

21
provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as
may be specified therein, with respect to—
(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and
social justice;
(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development
and social justice as may be entrusted to them including
those in relation to the matters listed in the Eleventh
Schedule.”
2.38 The Eleventh Schedule illustratively sets out a list of 29
matters to be considered by State Legislature for devolution to the
Panchayats, so that Panchayats function as units of self-government.
The 29 subjects for which the process of devolution to Panchayati Raj
Institutions in terms of functions, functionaries and finances is to be
undertaken by different States are as under:
1. Agriculture, including agricultural extension
2. Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land
consolidation and soil conservation
3. Minor irrigation, water management and watershed
development
4. Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry
5. Fisheries
6. Social forestry and farm forestry
7. Minor forest produce
8. Small scale industries, including food processing industries
9. Khadi, village and cottage industries
10. Rural housing
11. Drinking water
12. Fuel and fodder
13. Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means
of communication
14. Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity
15. Non-conventional energy sources
16. Poverty alleviation programme

22
17. Education, including primary and secondary schools
18. Technical training and vocational education
19. Adult and non-formal education
20. Libraries
21. Cultural activities
22. Markets and fairs
23. Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health
Centres and dispensaries
24. Family welfare
25. Women and child development
26. Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and
mentally retarded
27. Welfare of the weaker sections and in particular of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
28. Public distribution system
29. Maintenance of community assets
Progress made on devolution
2.39 The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development in the Thirty-seventh Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of
the erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development had dwelt
at length on the issue of devolution and its tardy progress. Though
many States have transferred a large number of subjects of Panchayats,
yet it was not supported by transfer of functionaries and finances,
thus rendering it meaningless.
2.40 The Ministry was asked to furnish the latest status of
devolution with respect of functions, functionaries and finances
separately, they have provided a reply which is narrative in nature
and does not address the primary concern of the Committee. The
Ministry has simply provided a table showing the number of subjects
transferred by States to PRIs. This information is at Appendix II.
2.41 In order to examine the progress of devolution by different
States the Committee has made a comparative study of the position of
devolution during 2005-06 and during 2007-08. The position of
devolution during 2005-06 is at Appendix-III. The current position of
devolution is at Appendix-II.

23
2.42 The Committee during the course of evidence, while analysing
the position of devolution over a period of two years from 2005-2006
to 2007-2008 pointed out that status-quo is prevailing and there has
been reversal of subjects in the States of Madhya Pradesh (from 25 to
23 subjects) and Maharashtra (from 19 to 18 subjects), the Secretary,
Panchayati Raj informed as under:
“…..The reversal or the stymieing of Panchayati Raj happens in
various nuances and in various ways in different States. On a
general scale, most of the Panchayat Raj Acts of States are quite
powerful. In fact, it will not be wrong to say that the Panchayat
Raj Acts of States which are not very strong on Panchayat rights
are sometimes more powerful than the Acts of those States which
have given only minimum number of functions, which are doing
well. This is within the public knowledge. This is what States
report to us officially. In fact way back in 2001, the then Rural
Development Ministry actually collected details which were in a
single table as to how much of devolution had taken place. Most
of the States gave only those details pertaining to the legislative
devolution and it gave a misleading but rosy picture of the actual
devolution. It has been our endeavour as a Ministry to penetrate
this smokescreen and to see actually what is happening on the
ground.
I would not venture to say that the States are lying but certainly
there is differential concealment of the unpleasant reality because
it is also very difficult for a State to officially confess that what
is declared in their law is not being performed in practice. So,
the task of our Ministry is in a sense a lot of detective work
because we have to go behind the official reports of the State to
understand what exactly is happening…..”
He further added:
“…..One of the means that is being practiced by the State
Governments in preventing Panchayats from exercising their
powers given by law is to issue notifications withdrawing these
powers or withdrawing the staff…..”
2.43 The Ministry has informed that for the purpose of subjects to
be devolved by different State Governments to Panchayats the Ministry
has undertaken the exercise of Activity Mapping. The current status of
activity mapping as well as subjects transferred through legislation in
different States/Uts is at Appendix-II.

24
The Ministry has also informed that States of Kerala, Karnataka,
West Bengal, Sikkim have completed the exercises of activity mapping.
Haryana has undertaken the exercise in a limited way whereas Orissa
has not undertaken it as yet. Asked about the reasons for delay in
undertaking the exercise the Ministry has given the information in
Appendix-IV .
2.44 The Committee find that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
was created to give focused attention to the implementation of Part
IX of the Constitution the main component of which is effective
devolution of the 3Fs i.e. functions, functionaries and finances.
Further, the enactment of the Seventy third Constitution (Amendment)
Act, 1992 was aimed at providing Constitutional status to local self-
governments i.e. Panchayats. In this regard Article 243 G explicitly
states that the State Governments may by law endow the Panchayats
with such powers so as to enable them to function as institutions of
self-Government.
The Committee note that the need for empowerment at grass
root level in rural areas is the reason for creation of an exclusive
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. In this context devolution of functions,
functionaries and finances should have been accorded primacy by
the Ministry and efforts made to that effect. However, the perusal of
the comparative progress of devolution over the past two years ( i.e.
since June, 2005) as indicated in the Appendices II and III reveal that
status quo has been maintained. Only in the States of Gujarat and
Haryana there has been improvement in the number of subjects
devolved. However, this is the status of transfer of subjects through
legislation. The Ministry has not provided the information regarding
the actual devolution of functions, functionaries and finances to
Panchayats as has been requested by the Committee repeatedly in
their earlier reports. The information that the Ministry has provided
is incomplete and a true picture of devolution does not emerge from
it. The Committee observe that simply transferring subjects to
Panchayats will not result in real empowerment unless concomitant
funds and functionaries are also made available to Panchayats. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the aforesaid information be
furnished by the Ministry to enable the Committee to analyse the
position of devolution and comment further.
2.45 The Committee find that in addition to the slow progress
with respect to devolution there is also the negative trend of reversal
of subjects devolved. In the States of Madhya Pradesh (from 25 to
23 subjects) and in Maharashtra (from 19 to 18 subjects) there has

25
been reversal of subjects. Further, the Ministry has informed that
State Governments effect reversals by issuing notifications
withdrawing these subjects. The Committee find that under Article
243G State Governments transfer subjects to Panchayats by law i.e.
the subjects are being transferred in pursuance of article 243G of
the Constitution. However, the States withdraw these subjects using
only notifications. This is a serious offence and the Committee has
taken strong exception to such activities being carried out by the
State Governments which are not in the true spirit of the
Constitution. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the
Government that suitable corrective steps should be taken so that
States are not allowed to by-pass the Constitutional provisions. The
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard.
2.46 Further, the Committee find that States often resort to
reporting of incorrect data regarding devolution. When requested,
they simply inform the Central Ministry of the number of subjects
devolved through legislation while withholding information about
the actual devolution of functions, functionaries and finances to
Panchayats. This prevents the true picture from emerging. The
Committee strongly object to such practice by the State Governments
and recommend that the Union Ministry take urgent and strong
steps to impress upon States not to resort to such practices as it
confuses the true picture of devolution.
2.47 The Committee note that Activity Mapping has been
undertaken by the Ministry to identify subjects to be devolved to
the appropriate tier of the Panchayats. The Committee, further, note
that only four States viz. Kerala, Karnataka, Sikkim and West Bengal
have completed this exercise. Haryana and Orissa have undertaken
Activity Mapping for a limited number of subjects. The Ministry
has set a deadline of 31 May, 2007 to States for completion of this
exercise.
The Committee are concerned at the slow progress of Activity
Mapping. It is a matter of great concern that only 6 States have
managed to achieve some degree of progress in respect of Activity
Mapping. The Committee are disheartened to find that the large
majority of States have not yet completed this exercise. The deadline
for completion of Activity Mapping which was set for 1 April, 2006
has now been extended to 31 May, 2007. The Committee note that
since only the successful completion of Activity Mapping will ensure
true devolution, this exercise needs to be undertaken much more
seriously by States and emphasized by the Central Ministry. The

26
Committee hope that the Ministry will ensure that Activity Mapping
in respect of all States would be completed within the designated
deadline. The Committee urge the Ministry to take appropriate steps
to that effect and inform them accordingly.
F. Progress on constitution of District Planning Committees (DPCs)
2.48 One of the key objectives of Panchayati Raj is to ensure that
the process of planning for development in the country follows a
bottom-up approach and commences at the grassroots level. The core
approach is that the village Panchayat level plans prepared with
peoples’ participation, are joined by plans prepared by the Intermediate
and District Panchayats and then these are consolidated by the District
Planning Committee (DPC) along with Municipal Plans into the Draft
District Development Plan, in accordance with Article 243 ZD of the
Constitution. The State Annual Plan is an integration of all the Draft
District Development Plans.
2.49 In the Second Round Table of State Ministers of Panchayati
Raj held at Mysore in August 2006, it was resolved that the Planning
Commission be requested to ensurethat the Annual Plan discussions
for the Eleventh Planare based on District Plans prepared inaccordance
withtheprovisionsof Parts-IX and IXA  of the Constitution. The
Planning Commission has embarked on a re-alignment of the planning
process, which happily has coincided with the commencement of the
Eleventh Plan in 2007.
2.50 The Constitution enjoins that all States and Union territories
(except Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, J&K, the hill areas of the State
of Manipur, the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling for which
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists, the NCT of Delhi and sixth
schedule areas), are required to set up DPCs in order to consolidate
the plans prepared by Panchayats into the draft development plans
for the district. The importance of constituting DPCs where these are
yet to be set up in conformity with Constitutional provisions has been
reviewed at several recent meetings such as the National Workshop
on Decentralised Planning (8-9 May, 2006), the Empowered Sub-
Committee of the National Development Council (12 June, 2006), and
the Council of State Ministers of Panchayati Raj at Bhubaneshwar
(15-16 June, 2006). There was consensus in all the meetings that DPCs
need to be constituted quickly. Moreover the Ministry in their Outcome
Budget has also stated that Planning Commission circulars have made
it clear that constitution of the DPCs is indispensable to the Eleventh
Plan exercise.

27
2.51 The Planning Commission in their Approach Paper to the
Eleventh Plan have stressed on the need to have DPCs to consolidate
plans at the district level. Further the Ministry have stressed as under:
“Over a period of four decades since the beginning of planned
development, there have been several suggestions and attempts
at decentralized planning. The conditions required have also been
outlined and repeated. However, the increase in the number of
Ministries, Departments and para-statals at the Centre and in the
States and the vertical planning, preparation of programmes and
methods of funding stood in the way of decentralized planning
becoming a reality. Though it is now nearly 14 years since the
enactment of the 73rd amendment was made, the concept of
development planning from below has still not taken root, even
in the few States in which there is relatively larger devolution of
powers and provision of untied funds to local Governments.
Therefore, the mandate of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj during
the Eleventh Plan would be to ensure that the Eleventh Plan
begins with and is founded on District Plans prepared in
accordance with Parts-IX and IXA of the Constitution. It would
be the endeavour of the Ministry to ensure that each level of
Panchayat and Municipalities prepares their perspective Five Year
Plan and Annual Plans which would be consolidated by the DPC
as provided in the Constitution, into the development plan of
the district.”
2.52 Moreover in the Backward Regions Grant Fund the DPCs
have become sine-quo-non  Funds under BRGF are not released to
districts till actually DPCs are set up.
In the following States and Union Territories the DPCs have been
constituted in all districts:
Sl. No. States
12
1. Assam
2. Bihar
3. Chhattisgarh
4. Goa
5. Himachal Pradesh

28
12
6. Karnataka
7. Kerala
8. Madhya Pradesh
9. Manipur
10. Orissa**
11. Rajasthan
12. Sikkim
13. Tamil Nadu*
14. West Bengal
Union territories
1. Andaman & Nicobar
2. Dadra & Nagar Haveli
3. Daman & Diu
4. Lakshadweep
*In the case of Tamil Nadu, notification for the constitution of DPCs have been issued
after fresh elections to the Panchayats.
**In the case of Orissa, DPCs stand constituted but since the Panchayat elections have
just been completed, the State plans to conduct fresh elections to the DPCs within
2 months.
2.53 Details are being obtained from States as to the precise dates
when the DPCs were first constituted in each of them, after the
enactment of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act.
2.54 The sub-Committee II of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development undertook study visit to various backward districts of
Uttar Pradesh and have been informed that DPCs were yet to be
constituted in the State. Besides, Uttar Pradesh, in Haryana, Andhra
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Gujarat and Punjab, constitution of DPCs are at
various stages.
2.55 However the Ministry has submitted that the pace of
constitution of DPCs has been brisk in recent past owing to the fact
that allocations under BRGF are tied up to the constitution of DPCs
and States are now taking steps to that effect.

29
2.56 The Committee note that progress on constitution of District
Planning Committees (DPCs) in different States is far from
satisfactory even though it is one of the mandatory provisions given
under Part IX of the Constitution of India by enactment of Seventy-
Third Constitution Amendment Act, 1992. The Committee find that
Constitution enjoins that DPCs are to be constituted in all States
and Union territories (except Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, J&K
the hill areas of Manipur, the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling
for which Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists, the NCT of Delhi
and six scheduled areas) with a view to consolidate plans prepared
by Panchayats into draft development plans for the districts. The
Committee note with dismay that only in 14 States viz. Assam, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Manipur, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal and 4 Union territories of Andaman & Nicobar, Dadra &
Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep DPCs have been
constituted in all districts. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has further
informed that constitution of DPCs in Haryana, Punjab, Uttar
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat are at various
stages. The district-wise position of constitution of DPCs in the
remaining States have not been made available to the Committee.
The Ministry has informed that details are being obtained from States
about the precise details when DPCs were first constituted in each
of the States after the enactment of the Seventy-third Constitution
Amendment Act. The Committee feel that the year-wise status of
constitution of DPCs need to be maintained by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj to have an idea of the status of implementation of
various provisions of the Constitution particularly the mandatory
ones, of which constitution of DPCs is one. The Committee may be
informed of the position as received from the various States/UTs.
2.57 The Committee have been expressing strong concern over
the non-constitution of DPCs in their various reports. During the
course of examination of Demands for Grants (2007-08), the
Committee have been informed that certain strong decisions have
been taken by the Ministry to put pressure on the States/UTs to
constitute DPCs expeditiously. In this regard, Backward Region Grant
Fund (BRGF) guidelines stipulates that the release of funds would
be contingent upon States constituting DPCs and the district plan
being applied by the DPCs. The Committee are pleased to note that
as a result of this, at least four States, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh,
Haryana and Punjab have taken concrete steps to establish DPCs.
The Committee hope that DPCs would be constituted in all the
districts of every State with the firm resolve of the Ministry and

30
adopting certain harsh measures mechanism so as to achieve the
objectives of preparing real and effective plans with a bottom up
approach which reflect the reality of grassroot level.
G. Implementation of the Panchayats Extension to Scheduled Areas
Act (PESA), 1996
2.58 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is also responsible for
implementation of Panchayats Extension to Scheduled Areas Act
(PESA), 1996. PESA is being implemented in following Fifth Schedule
States:
(i) Andhra Pradesh
(ii) Chhattisgarh
(iii) Gujarat
(iv) Himachal Pradesh
(v) Jharkhand
(vi) Madhya Pradesh
(vii) Maharashtra
(viii) Orissa and
(ix) Rajasthan
2.59 Though the PESA casts responsibility on the State Legislatures,
yet a duty is also cast upon Central Government to see that its
provisions are followed. When asked about the specific achievement
in implementation of PESA, the Committee has been informed that
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is mandated to dialogue with States on
all issues relating to the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas)
Act (PESA)1996. While the actual policies and programmes in respect
of PESA are conceived and implemented by the States, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj provides broad direction and back up support on policy
issues, capacity building and training of Government agencies and
staff.
2.60 As regards progress on changing of State Panchayat Laws to
be in tune with provisions of PESA, the Ministry has stated that it has
made efforts to make the State Panchayat Laws consonant with the
provisions of PESA as a result of which all States have enacted the
requisite compliance legislations by amending their respective
Panchayati Raj Acts. However, certain gaps continue to exist. Most
States are also yet to amend the subject laws, like those relating to

31
money lending, forest, excise, etc. A questionnaire was forwarded to
all the nine States with a view to assess the status of the
implementation of PESA. Reports have been received from the six
PESA States and the remaining three States have been reminded to
send their status reports to the Ministry. Reports as received from the
States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and Jharkhand have been compiled.
2.61 On the issue of efforts made to ensure that the State and
Central Laws are consonant with PESA, the Ministry has stated that
the matter has been discussed repeatedly at the meetings of Secretaries
of Panchayati Raj. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj had also entrusted
to the Indian Law Institute, Delhi, the task of formulation of appropriate
amendments in the concerned State laws. This has been a major exercise
wherein amendments have been drafted for all the State laws (minor
and major) that impinge upon the subjects relating to PESA. Many
hundreds of State laws of the PESA States have been thoroughly
examined, and amendments forwarded to the States. Gujarat, for
example has amended a local statute relating to agriculture, while
other State Governments are carrying out the exercise in consultation
with their respective Departments of Law and the Line Departments.
There is an urgent need to expedite the process of changing these
laws by the States. Reminders have also been issued to these States on
21.8.2006, 27.9.2006 and 15.1.2007. Gujarat Government has forwarded
the report to concerned Departments for effecting appropriate
amendments in the relevant Acts.
2.62 The Panchayat’s Extension to Scheduled Areas Act (PESA),
1996 is being implemented in areas falling under the Fifth Schedule
of the Constitution. Fifth Schedule areas are in nine States viz.
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Himachal
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. The Committee
find from the information provided by the Ministry that all States
have enacted the requisite compliance legislation by amending their
respective Panchayati Raj Acts. However certain gaps continue to
exist. Most States are also yet to amend the subject laws like those
relating to money lending, forest, excise etc. In this connection the
Ministry has entrusted the task of formulation of appropriate
amendments in the concerned State Laws to the Indian Law Institute,
Delhi. The amendments to the State laws as proposed by the Indian
Law Institute which run into hundreds, have been sent to the
respective State Governments. As regards the achievements, only
Gujarat has been able to amend a local Statute relating to agriculture.
The Committee strongly recommend to the Ministry to follow up

32
vigorously with the various State Governments to carry on the
amendments to the various local laws expeditiously so as to enable
the implementation of amended Acts/Laws in letter and spirit.
H. Nyaya Panchayats Bill
Objective
2.63 With a view to establishing an informal system of justice,
conciliation and dispute redressal at the Panchayat level, as envisaged
by former Prime Minster Rajiv Gandhi, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
constituted a Drafting Committee chaired by the eminent jurist,
Prof. Upendra Baxi, to draft the Nyaya Panchayat Bill. The Drafting
Committee has completed its task and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
is examining the Draft Bill. The Committee has recommended
institutionalization of Nyaya Panchayats as the necessary adjunct to
the regular Panchayats to deliver expeditious and inexpensive justice
to the people. It favours the establishment of an informal dispute
redressal mechanism at village level.
Composition
2.64 The Ministry has informed that as per the Draft Bill there
shall be a Nyaya Panchayat for every Panchayat Area or a group of
Panchayat Areas. The Nyaya Panchayat shall be comprised of 5 Panchs
who shall be elected by the people residing in the Panchayat area
along with the election of members of Gram Panchayats as per the
relevant law of the State. The Nyaya Panchs will be assisted by Nyaya
Sahayak in the Nyaya Panchayat by providing legal information
regarding the dispute or controversy and providing every assistance
to the Nyaya Panchayat in the settlement of disputes, making of the
orders, cause lists and maintaining of records. The Nyaya Panchs and
Nyaya Sahayaks will be given adequate training in handling the cases
and running of Nyaya Panchayats. It is expected that the Nyaya
Panchayat will be able to handle the cases brought before them.
Jurisdiction
(1) The Nyaya Panchayats shall follow persuasion, conciliation,
mediation as means to resolve disputes in such manner
which is fair to all parties.
(2) The Nyaya Panchyat shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear
and deal with cases, claims, issues, offences and proceedings
arising within their geographical territory.

33
The jurisdiction of Nyaya Panchayat shall extend to both civil and
criminal cases. The complete list with respect of jurisdiction of Nyaya
Panchayat is at Appendix-V .
Progress on draft Bill
2.65 During course of evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj the Committee enquired whether the
Ministry is serious on the issue of bringing the aforesaid Bill in
Parliament. The representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj have
informed the Committee that the draft Bill has been circulated to all
States/Uts and all Central Ministries. The Ministry have received
comments from 13 States and 21 Central Ministries and majority are
in favour of this Bill. However consensus is being arrived on the issue
by the Ministry. Some Ministries like Ministry of Law and Justice are
against this draft Bill.
2.66 The Committee find that for the purpose of establishing an
informal system of justice, conciliation and dispute redressal at
Panchayat level a draft Nyaya Panchayat Bill has been prepared
based on the recommendations of Drafting Committee headed by
the eminent jurist Prof. Upendra Baxi. The aforesaid draft Bill has
been referred to all States and Union Ministries for their comments
and 13 States and 21 Central Ministries have furnished the comments.
Most of the Union Ministries are in favour of the legislation.
However a few Ministries like the Ministry of Law and Justice are
against the draft Bill. The Committee find that in order to arrive at
consensus on the draft Bill the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is making
efforts.
The Committee find that at present the district courts are first
level of judicial redressal. By providing the proper equivalent of
courts, the Panchayats may help to lessen the burden of district
courts specifically when these courts are over burdened. There is
considerable delay in settlement of cases which one or the other
way denies justice to the petitioner. However, the Committee are
aware of the fact that the proposal of Nyaya Panchayat, if
implemented would add to the existing powers and responsibilities
of Panchayats which at present are not adequately equipped with
the required judicial acumen. With the existing scenario of
empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions even after passage of
around 14 years of enactment of the Constitution 73rd Amendment
Act, the analysis of which has been done in the preceding part of
the report, the idea of Nyaya Panchayat need to be handled carefully

34
by the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend to
the Ministry to have wider consultations with the State Governments
and all the interest groups. Besides, consultation of experts and public
at large is also required. The objections from various quarters need
to be addressed carefully before taking final decision in this regard
so as to avoid any unavoidable confrontation and resistance from
any of the quarters.
I. Twelfth Finance Commission Grants
2.67 The Twelfth Finance Commission has recommended that a
sum of Rs. 20,000 crore be made available as grants to State
Governments during the period 2005-10 to augment the Consolidated
Fund at State levels to facilitate the supplementing of the financial
resources placed at the disposal of the Panchayats. This is a substantial
increase over the Eleventh Finance Commission recommendations for
an addition in grant money of Rs. 8,000 crore over five years (2000-
2005).
2.68 In a significant advance in current policy and practice, the
Ministry of Finance, after close consultation with the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, has mandated through its guidelines that these funds
must invariably be transferred to Panchayats within 15 days of their
being credited to State Consolidated Funds. The guidelines of the
Ministry of Finance for the release and utilisation of Grants
recommended by the Twelfth Finance Commission stipulate that:
(a) Grants will not be released to a State (if covered under
Part-IX of the Constitution) where elections to these
Panchayats have not been held and for the period for which
there were no elected Panchayats as per the provisions;
(b) Each State Finance Secretary would be required to provide
a certificate within 15 days of the release of each installment
by Government of India under his signature certifying the
dates and amounts of local grants received by the State
from the Government of India and the dates and amounts
of grants released by the State to the PRIs;
(c) In the case of delayed transfer to PRIs from the State, an
amount of interest at the rate equal to the RBI Bank rate
should be additionally paid by the State Government to the
PRIs, for the period of delay;
(d) State Governments shall give details of allocations of funds
to PRIs before States become eligible to receive funds; and

35
(e) A Committee headed by the Secretary, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj Government of India, would monitor the
releases of grant money by State Governments to Panchayats.
The position of State-wise allocation and expenditure of TFC funds
during the year 2005-2006 is given below:
State Name Installment I Installment II
Allocation Release Allocation Release
(amount (amount (amount (amount
in Lakhs) in Lakhs) in Lakhs) in Lakhs)
12 3 4 5
Andhra Pradesh 15870 15870 15870 15870
Arunachal Pradesh 680 680 Not Yet Released —
Assam 5260 4877.6 Not Yet Released —
Bihar 16240 16240 16240 16240
Chhattisgarh 6150 6150 6150 6150
Goa 180 180 Not Yet Released —
Gujarat 9310 9310 9310 9310
Haryana 3880 3880 3880 3880
Himachal Pradesh 1470 1470 1470 1470
Karnataka 8880 7936 8880 8880
Kerala 9850 9850 9850 9850
Madhya Pradesh 16630 16630 16630 16630
Maharashtra 19830 19830 19830 19788.08
Manipur 212 211.60 212 212
Orissa 8030 8030 8030 8030
Punjab 3240 3240 3240 3240
Rajasthan 12300 292.8 12300 292.8
Sikkim 130 130 Not Yet Released —
Tamil Nadu 8700 8700 8700 8700

36
12 3 4 5
Tripura 570 570 Not Yet Released —
Uttar Pradesh 29280 29280 29280 29280
Uttaranchal 1620 1620 1620 1620
West Bengal 12710 12710 12710 12710
Position of State-wise allocations and releases of TFF funds during
2006-07 is as given below:
State Name Installment I Installment II
Allocation Release Allocation Release
(amount (amount (amount (amount
in Lakhs) in Lakhs) in Lakhs) in Lakhs)
12 3 4 5
Andhra Pradesh 15870 Information not Not Yet —
furnished by the Released
State
Arunachal Pradesh Not Yet — Not Yet —
Released Released
Assam Not Yet — Not Yet —
Released Released
Bihar 16240 Information Not Yet —
not furnished Released
by the State
Chhattisgarh 6150 — Not Yet —
Released
Goa Not Yet — Not Yet —
Released Released
Gujarat 9310 Information Not Yet —
not furnished Released
by the State
Haryana 3880 3880 3880 Information
not furnished
by the State
Himachal Pradesh 1470 1470 Not Yet —
Released

37
12 3 4 5
Karnataka 8880 Information Not Yet —
not furnished Released
by the State
Kerala 9850 Information Not Yet —
not furnished Released
by the State
Madhya Pradesh 16630 54935.57 Not Yet —
Released
Maharashtra 19830 18824.16 Not Yet --
Released
Manipur 212 Information not Not Yet —
furnished by Released
the State
Orissa 8030 145.76 Not Yet —
Released
Punjab 3240 Information not Not Yet —
furnished by Released
the State
Rajasthan 12300 12300 Not Yet —
Released
Sikkim Not Yet — Not Yet —
Released Released
Tamil Nadu 8700 Information not Not Yet —
furnished by Released
the State
Tripura Not Yet — Not Yet —
Released Released
Uttar Pradesh 29280 Information not Not Yet —
furnished by Released
the State
Uttaranchal 1620 Information not Not Yet —
furnished by Released
the State
West Bengal 12710 Information not Not Yet —
furnished by Released
the State

38
2.69 As regards the monitoring of funds allocated under TFC the
Ministry has informed that a Committee headed by the Secretary,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj would monitor the releases of grant money
by State Governments to Panchayats. This Committee has already met
twice, in August, 2006 and January, 2007. Further during the course of
evidence the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has informed the
Committee that in response to the TFC, the Ministry of Finance has
put in place a set of very stringent guidelines and safeguards for the
grants which stipulate that the grants fund as released by the Finance
Ministry would be released directly to the Consolidated Fund of the
State only and the Consolidated Fund of the State is duty bound to
release the money within 15 days otherwise they would have to pay
interest at RBI rates. She further elaborated that already about nine
States have been recommended for this penalty with some of the larger
States like Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh
and Karnataka among others. Another facet to this is that the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj has already prepared a software to maintain data
base of the Bank accounts of all 2,40,000 Panchayati Raj Institutions to
facilitate transfer of funds under TFC therefore an additional advantage
is that once the bank transfer mechanism is institutionalised it could
be utilised by State Governments to transfer all funds to PRIs including
those assigned through Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
2.70 The Committee note that as per recommendations of Twelfth
Finance Commission a huge amount of Rs. 20,000 crore is to be
made available to State Governments during the period 2005-2010 to
augment the Consolidated Fund of State level to facilitate
supplementing the financial resources of PRIs. In this connection
the Committee are glad to note that for the purpose of speedy flow
of funds from State Governments to PRIs the Ministry of Finance
has formulated stringent guidelines in consultation with Ministry of
Panchayati Raj stipulating that these funds should be transferred
from State Governments to PRIs within 15 days of being credited in
State Consolidated Fund, otherwise State Governments would have
to pay interest thereon on RBI rates.
In this connection the Committee have been informed that as
many as nine States which included Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal,
Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka have already been penalised
for delay in transfer of Twelfth Finance Commission grants from
State Governments to PRIs. Further the Committee have been
informed that for the purpose of monitoring of funds a Committee
headed by Secretary, Panchayati Raj has already met twice in
August, 2006 and January, 2007. The Committee hope that aforesaid

39
guidelines being implemented by the Ministry of Finance will go
long way in making available in time the TFCs grants to PRIs across
the country.
The Committee also note that Ministry of Panchayati Raj has
already prepared a software to maintain data base of Bank accounts
of all 2.4 lakh PRIs across the country to facilitate transfer of funds
under Twelfth Finance Commission to PRIs. The Committee however
find that Bank transfer mechanism is yet to be institutionalised by
the Banks. The Committee desire that Ministry of Panchayati Raj
should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance to impress upon
Banks to utilise software prepared by the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj.
2.71 From the figures of allocation vis-a-vis releases of 1st and
2nd installment of Twelfth Finance Commission of Grants to PRIs
in different States during 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, the Committee
find that many States have not even received their second installment
during 2005-2006. The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa,
Sikkim and Tripura have not been released the second instalment
during 2005-06. As regards, the status of allocation during 2006-07,
the Committee note that first installment has not been allocated to
five States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Sikkim and Uttar
Pradesh. With regard to releases as many as eleven States have not
furnished the information with regard to releases made to PRIs. The
Committee would like the specific reasons with regard to the
installments not being released during the year 2005-06 and 2006-07
and the States not reporting about the releases to PRIs. The
Committee would also like that the position of expenditure out of
the released amount to PRIs also needs to be monitored. The
Committee would like to be informed about the utilisation position
in this regard so as to analyse the position and comment further.
J. Public Private Partnership [Rural Business Hubs (RBHS)]
2.72 Prime Minister of India introduced the concept of Rural
Business Hubs (RBHS) in June 2004 as an initiative towards increasing
rural incomes through the platform of 4 Ps: Public-Private-Panchayat
Partnership. RBH is an initiative of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in
partnership with Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) to establish
direct linkages between rural produce, product upgradation and
marketing channels. The allocation for 2007-2008 for Rural Business
Hubs is Rs. 2 crore.
2.73 A National RBH Council has been set up .The National RBH
Council is co-chaired by the Minister for Panchayati Raj and Shri Sunil

40
Kant Munjal, ex President and Chairman of the CII Mission for
inclusive growth to oversee the RBH initiative.
2.74 Further the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has informed that an
RBH Executive Committee, co-chaired by the Secretary, Panchayati Raj
and Ms. Laxmi Venkatesh, Chairperson of Bharatiya Yuva Shakti Trust
has been constituted to chalk out action plans and attend to the details
of establishing RBHs. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Goa,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal have set up
State RBH Councils. Discussions with Krishak Bharati Cooperative
Limited (KRIBHCO), Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC),
Directorate of Small Scale Industries, Handicraft Promotion Council
etc. are in an advanced stage.
2.75 When the Committee wanted to know what would be the
impact of RBHs on the rural economy the Ministry have stated that
the full impact of RBHs on the rural economy will be felt after a few
years of establishment of working RBHs and not immediately. Its
immediate impact could be in the form of livelihood for those engaged
in some sectors like agriculture, handloom etc. It is envisaged that the
rural economy would gain as a whole through providing promotional
and facilitatory support in terms of job creation, particularly for skilled
and semi-skilled young people by giving market linkages to the rural
products and giving sustainable employment and livelihood. Rural skills
could also be upgraded through partnerships with industry and the
rural people will be able to compete with their urban counterparts.
2.76 The Committee find that the concept of Rural Business Hubs
(RBHs) was mooted by Hon’ble Prime Minister in June, 2004 as an
initiative towards increasing rural income through the platform of
public-private-panchayat-partnership. As regards the progress during
the year 2006-07, 14 States have set up RBH councils. An RBH
Executive Committee co-chaired by Secretary, Panchayati Raj and
Ms. Laxmi Ventaktesh, Chairperson of Bhartiya Yuva Shakti Trust
has been constituted to chalk out action plans. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Ministry to initiate all the desired actions
so that the idea of establishing Rural Business Hubs can be translated
into reality.

41
SCHEME-WISE ANALYSIS
I. Backward Regions Grant Fund
Objectives and Coverage
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has informed that the BRGF has
two agendas — a development agenda and institutional strengthening
agenda. The developmental agenda is to reduce the backwardness in
these districts and the institutional agenda is to strengthen local bodies
as it is only through local bodies that development can be made
equitable and sustainable.
3.2 The Backward Regions Grant Fund is designed to redress
regional imbalances in development. The fund will provide financial
resources for supplementing and converging existing developmental
inflows into identified districts, so as to :
(a) Bridge critical gaps in local infrastructure and other
development requirements that are not being adequately met
through existing inflows;
(b) Strengthen, to this end Panchayat and Municipality level
governance with more appropriate capacity building, to
facilitate participatory planning, decision making,
implementation and monitoring, to reflect local felt needs;
(c) Provide professional support to local bodies for planning,
implementation and monitoring their plans; and
(d) Improve the performance and delivery of critical functions
assigned to Panchayats, and counter possible efficiency and
equity losses on account of inadequate local capacity.
3.3 The BRGF guidelines as applicable to States and districts fall
within the purview of Part IX of the Constitution. BRGF is being
implemented in 250 districts of the country. The list of districts covered
under BRGF is annexed at Appendix-VI.
Availability and Utilisation of Funds
3.4 During Budget Speech 2006-07 the Finance Minister had
announced the establishment of a Backward Regions Grants Fund with
an initial allocation of Rs. 5,000 crore out of which Rs. 1,250 crore was
meant for the special plans for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa to be
handled separately by the Planning Commission. The Ministry of
Panchayati Raj was entrusted with the administration of this scheme
in the rest of the country and had been provided a BE of Rs. 3,750
crore. Subsequently the allocation was revised to Rs. 1,925 crore at the
RE stage which has been fully utilized by the Ministry.

42
3.5 When the Committee inquired the reasons for reduction of
almost 50 per cent at RE stage, the Ministry have stated that the
reduction at the RE stage was primarily due to the fact that till
31 December, 2006, there was a substantial unspent balance of over
Rs. 1,000 crore with the State Governments under the Rashtriya Sam
Vikas Yojana. The scheme of Backward Regions Grants Fund was
transferred to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj after the Cabinet approval
in August, 2006. The Ministry then prepared the guidelines of the
scheme and after intensive consultations with the State Governments,
the same were finalised and circulated in January, 2007. Funds under
the BRGF have been released only thereafter. As RSVY has been merged
with the BRGF, the Ministry was required to release the backlog of
the funds due to the 147 RSVY districts @ Rs. 45 crore per district.
Keeping in view the large unspent balance lying with the States, it
was considered by the Ministry of Finance to restrict the overall Plan
allocation of the Ministry to Rs. 2,000 crore.
Mechanism of implementation
3.6 The plan of implementation of BRGF by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj is to integrate multiple programmes that are in operation
in the district concerned and therefore address backwardness through
a combination of resources that flow to the district. This will be done
without giving any schematic overlay to BRGF that would be
subversive of the principle of local prioritization in planning.
Programmes identified for implementation under the fund will be
selected through peoples’ participation, particularly through Gram and
Ward Sabhas in the rural areas and Area Sabhas and Ward Committees
in the urban areas. Participatory plans will be prepared in each
Panchayat and Municipality, which would take into account all
resources being spent in the area of the Panchayat, which would cover
the following:
(a) Sectoral and district segments of the State Plan,
(b) Centrally Sponsored Schemes (particularly Flagship
programmes),
(c) Fund inflows on account of the National Employment
Guarantee programme,
(d) Tied and untied grants from Central and State Finance
Commission, and
(e) Fund inflows on account of the Bharat Nirman programme.
The BRGF would be implemented by the Panchayats and DPCs
constituted in accordance with Part IX of the Constitution who would
undertake the management of the programme. The implementation of
the works should be by the Panchayats at the appropriate level, in

43
accordance with the respective activity mapping exercise undertaken.
The principle of financial subsidiarity will need to be followed, by
which even if a higher level of Panchayat, such as a District or
Intermediate Panchayat sanctions a work of a value less than a
prescribed floor limit, it transfers the money allocated for that work to
the Gram Panchayat concerned for implementation. In case the works
are outside the domain of the Panchayats, the DPC may decide the
implementing department/agency and get the works executed through
them with clear powers of monitoring and supervision with the
Panchayat(s) concerned. No special bodies would be set up for
implementation of this scheme. The main types of works to be
undertaken under this scheme are:
(a) Gap filling in local infrastructure linked to flagship
programmes;
(b) Rural electrification, where intensive electrification of a
village may be beyond what is proposed to be done from
investment at the national level at present;
(c) Adoption of appropriate technology options by Panchayats
for drinking water supply in hilly and tribal areas, where
conventional pump and pipe water supply is not able to
deliver; and
(d) Augmenting Indira Awas Yojana, where the Bharat Nirman
only meets a portion of the backlog in provision of new
housing.
Funding Pattern
3.7 The BRGF consists of:
(a) Capability Building Fund:
These funds will be used primarily to build capacity in planning,
implementation, monitoring, accounting and improving accountability
and transparency. This could include arrangements for contracting and
outsourcing.
(b) Substantially untied grant:
The allocation of these funds by Panchayats will be guided by
transparent norms and they will use these funds to address critical
gaps in integrated development, identified through the participative
planning processes cited in these guidelines.

44
Criteria for disbursement
3.8 The criteria for disbursement of funds between districts would
be:
(a) Every district will receive a fixed minimum amount of
Rs. 10 crore per annum;
(b) 50 per cent of the balance allocation under the Scheme will
be allocated on the basis of the share of the population of
the district in the total population of all backward districts;
and
(c) The remaining 50 per cent will be distributed on the basis
of the share of the area of the district in the total area of
all backward districts.
When asked about the manner in which funds would be disbursed
under BRGF the Ministry has stated in reply as under:
“All funds under BRGF will be transferred to the Consolidated
Funds of State Governments. Those funds that are to be
transferred to Panchayats and Municipalities by the State
Governments will be transferred to their Bank accounts, following
the same stipulations as prescribed for the devolution of
12th Finance Commission Grants, namely, within 15 days of the
release of funds to the Consolidated Fund. From the State level,
the funds will be directly deposited into the bank accounts of
the Panchayat or Municipality concerned, using the mechanism
of Bank transfers suggested by the Task Force of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj to study the feasibility of rapid transfer of funds
through Banks to Panchayats. Bank account details of all
Panchayats would be furnished by State Governments concerned
as sought for already by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
Fragmented Approach
3.9 The Committee had desired the specific reasons for part
implementation of RSVY by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj whereas
the special plan for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa are to be handled
by the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry have submitted that the two
components of BRGF, namely, the Districts component covering
250 districts and Special Plans for Bihar and the KBK districts of Orissa
address different priorities and are differently operationalised. Under
the Districts Component which covers 250 districts including the
backward districts of Bihar and Orissa (including all the eight KBK

45
districts), district plans are to be prepared on a participatory basis by
implementation of programmes selected through peoples participation.
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) from the village upto the district
level are to be the authorities for planning and implementation in
keeping with the letter and spirit of Article 243 G of the Constitution.
3.10 The objectives of the Special Plans for Bihar and the KBK
districts of Orissa are to provide critical infrastructure at the regional
level and are not limited to a single district. Therefore, it is the
considered view of the Planning Commission that these Special Plans
are regional plans with inter-district schemes and need to be discussed
and approved as part of the Annual Plans of these States and need to
be handled by the Planning Commission.
Monitoring
3.11 The Ministry has drawn up extensive plans for monitoring of
the scheme. The Ministry has informed that it has prepared a detailed
programme of monitoring BRGF. The salient features of the same are
as follows:
Monitoring of BRGF will be taken up district-wise. States will
be also monitoring through summations of district wise
implementation progress. A system of ranking districts and States
in implementation of BRGF will be put in place. Monitoring of
progress will be done quarterly. All monitoring reports and
proformae will be put in the public domain and placed on the
website for the programme:  http://panchayat.gov.in/brgf.
3.12 BRGF monitoring will cover five focus areas, as follows:
(a) Implementation of RSVY:
(b) Process of planning and implementation of BRGF:
(c) Panchayat and ULB strengthening and capacity building:
(d) Collection of essential data relating to BRGF districts:
(e) Outputs and Outcomes of BRGF (This will be readily
apparent only after implementation of the programme is
under way for some time. Therefore, it will be more relevant
for monitoring from 2008-09 onwards)
3.13 After the first quarter of 2007-08, there will be a ranking of
districts, and their classification into poor, medium and high
performance districts. While the un-reached milestones will continue

46
to be monitored in respect of poorly performing districts, in other
districts, fresh milestones that are some way down the process of
planning and implementation will be identified and monitored.
Checklists for the monitoring of the above aspects listed at (a) to
(d) have already been prepared.
3.14 The Committee note that Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana, a
scheme meant for the upliftment of backward districts was approved
in the year 2004-2005 and was actually implemented during the year
2005-2006. The scheme was under the administrative control of
Planning Commission. Rs. 5,000 crore were allocated for RSVY during
the year 2005-2006. In August, 2006 RSVY was subsumed into
Backward Region Grant Fund and transferred to the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj. While transferring the aforesaid scheme, the Planning
Commission retained Rs. 1,250 crore meant for the special plans for
Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa to be handled separately by the
Planning Commission. The Standing Committee expressed concern
over the fragmented approach in implementation of the programme
and desired further details of the two segments of the erstwhile
RSVY.
The Ministry during the course of oral evidence of Demands for
Grants 2007-2008 has submitted that the objective of the special plan
for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa are to provide initial
infrastructure at the regional level and are not limited to a single
district. It is the considered view of the Planning Commission that
these special plans are regional plans with inter-districts schemes
and need to be discussed and approved as part of the Annual Plans
of these States and needs to be handled by the Planning Commission.
The Committee find from the information furnished by the Ministry
that views of the Planning Commission for retaining the part of the
scheme for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa have been furnished.
However the Ministry has not furnished its own views keeping in
view the comments of the Committee in their earlier report. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the comments of the
Ministry on the formula of dividing the scheme in the light of the
specific reasons furnished by the Planning Commission alongwith
the details of the component of the two schemes, RSVY and
Backward Region Grant Fund so as to review the position and
comment in this regard.
3.15 The Committee find that a laudable scheme of Backward
Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) has been transferred to Ministry of

47
Panchayati Raj to address regional imbalances in development by
way of inflow of funds for supplementing and converging existing
developmental inflows into identified 250 most backward districts
across the country. The Committee find that the scheme has been in
operation since 2006-2007 with a budget allocation of Rs. 3,750 crore
subsequently revised to the level of Rs. 1,925 crore at the Revised
Estimates stage. The Committee’s examination has revealed that since
there was an unspent balance of over Rs. 1,000 crore till December,
2006 under Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY) with different State
Governments the budget estimates were drastically reduced at revised
estimate. In the Committee’s view the reduction of budget outlay
reflects failure on the part of different State Governments to utilise
available funds under RSVY a scheme that was merged to the
existing scheme. Thus the Committee feel that the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj also on their part had not interacted with different
State Governments to impress upon them the need to utilise the
funds available under RSVY. In the Committee’s opinion revising
the budget outlay on the ground that considerable amount was left
with the State Governments under previous scheme does not augur
well with over all utilisation of funds on the part of the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj. The Committee therefore recommend the Ministry
to make all out efforts to ensure that the budget outlays are not
reduced at revised estimates level particularly when the task before
the Ministry during the Eleventh Plan period is huge.  The Committee
strongly recommend to the Government to monitor the BRGF
effectively with the various mechanism so as to ensure the
meaningful utilization of the resources allocated to different
backward districts under BRGF.
3.16 The Committee find that the scheme of Backward Region
Grant Fund envisages disbursement of funds of fixed amount of
Rs. 10 crore per annum to every district. 50 per cent of the balance
allocation will be on the basis of share of population of the districts
in total population of all backward districts and remaining 50 per
cent on the basis of area of the district in total area of all backward
districts. The Committee have been informed that programmes under
this scheme will be selected through people’s participation
particularly through Gram Sabhas by way of preparation of
participatory plans to be prepared in each Panchayat which will
take into account flow of funds from all sources like Centrally
Sponsored Schemes, National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
etc.
The Committee further find that BRGF funds will primarily be
used to build capacity in planning, implementation, monitoring,

48
accounting and improving accountability and transparency and could
also include arrangements for contracting and outsourcing. Besides
substantial untied grants would be allocated under BRGF to
Panchayats to address critically gaps in integrated development. The
Committee while noting the laudable objectives of the scheme
emphasize on strict monitoring of the programme particularly when
the programme has various components. The expenditure position
for the capability building funds to Panchayats and to local bodies
and untied grants should be monitored separately. Further the
Committee feel that in order to have judicious utilization of the
funds, there is a need for proper monitoring by an independent
agency outside the jurisdiction of concerned District Rural
Development Agency (DRDA) and State Governments. The
Committee would like that their concerns should be adequately
addressed by the Ministry and strategies evolved for proper
implementation of the programme so as to achieve the set objectives.
The Committee further recommend that the position of expenditure
in different districts along with the position of physical achievements
should be reflected in the Outcome Budget of next year i.e. 2008-09
so as to make an assessment of the performance of the scheme in
various districts. The Committee further note that the type of work
to be undertaken in various backward districts under the aforesaid
schemes include rural electrification, adoption of appropriate
technology options by Panchayats for drinking water supply in hilly
and tribal areas, augmenting Indira Awaas Yojana etc. The Committee
find that the aforesaid works are being undertaken by the respective
Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Union Government. Besides
there may be State schemes to address the aforesaid issues. The
Committee feel that there is an urgent need for proper co-ordination
with the respective schemes of Union Government and State
Governments. The Ministry should evolve a mechanism to address
to the aforesaid observation of the Committee.
II. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
3.17 The Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana is a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme with 75 per cent of the funding for the Scheme provided by
the Central Government and 25 per cent by the State Governments.
The objective of the scheme of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana is to
assist States to improve the capacity of Panchayats and provide the
necessary administrative and infrastructure support to them so that
they can effectively perform the functions devolved and the schemes
entrusted to them. This is proposed to be accomplished through action
in four vital areas viz.:
(i) Training and Capacity building of elected representatives
and staff of Panchayats;

49
(ii) e-Governance for all Panchayats;
(iii) Improving infrastructure at Panchayat level; and
(iv) Action Research & Evaluation.
From 2007-2008 the components of Rural Business Hubs, Media,
Publicity and advocacy, Panchayat Yuva Shakti Abhiyan and Panchayat
Mahila Shakti Abhiyan have been merged with this scheme.
3.18 The proposed allocation and utilisation under the different
components of this scheme for 2006-2007 and B.E. during 2007-2008
given as under:
Components of the Yojana                 Financial Performance
Targets (Rs. in crore) Achievements Percentage BE
(Rs in crore) Acheivement 2007-08
BE RE
(2006-07) (2006-07) (2006-07) (2006-07)
(a) Training & Capacity Building 30.00 24.50 24.50 100 33.00
(b) Infrastructure Development 10.50 10.50 10.50 100 10.00
(c) Information Technology 8.00 8.00 8.00 100 10.00
(d) Research Studies 2.0 2.0 0.86 43 2.00
Total 50.50 45.45 43.86 96.5 67.90*
*Includes allocations for the following four new components merged with the Yojana as
detailed below:
(Rupees in crore)
Allocations
(a) Media, Publicity and advocacy; 6.90
(b) Rural Business Hubs; 2.00
(c) Panchayat Yuva Shakti Abhiyan; and 2.00
(d) Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyan 2.00
3.19 During 2007-2008 Rs. 67.90 crore have been allocated under
the scheme indicating an increase of over Rs. 17.40 crore over budget
estimates of previous year.
When the Ministry was asked the reason for less than cent per
cent utilization of funds under this scheme they have stated that since
the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana was a new scheme it required the
‘in-principle’ approval of the Planning Commission and thereafter an
appraisal by the Department Expenditure Finance Committee. This
process took some time and financial releases could be effected only

50
from December, 2006. Further it is stated that there is less than cent
per cent utilisation only in the component of research studies and this
was due to non-receipt of good proposals.
Component-wise analysis
3.20 The component-wise analysis of the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana is detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.
(i) Training and capacity building
Training is an on-going exercise, being undertaken by the State
Institutes of Rural Development round the year. During 2003-2004,
6.03 lakhs of people were imparted training by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj under the erstwhile ‘Panchayat Development and
Training’. During 2004-2005, 6 lakhs were imparted training with the
efforts of the Ministry, for 2005-2006 the corresponding figure was 5.65
lakh. The Ministry had intended to train 5.37 lakh representatives
during 2006-07. The Ministry has reported that around 3 lakh elected
representatives and officials have been given training till February,
2007. Thus so far 20.68 functionaries have been trained since 2003-04.
The Centre allocation of the Ministry under this component was
utilised.
Further the Ministry has informed that they have formulated a
National Capability Building Framework (NCBF) for Panchayati Raj
elected representatives and functionaries. A copy of the same is
enclosed at Appendix-VII . The NCBF addresses the basic question
whether capacity building should precede devolution of functions,
functionaries and finances or whether devolution of the same would
lead to capacity building. It is the opinion of the Ministry that effective
implementation of Part IX of the Constitution would require capacity
building of Panchayats encompassing training, provision of adequate
functionaries, and technical and other support to Panchayats.
The basic objective of the NCBF are:
(a) enabling Panchayat elected representatives to upgrade their
knowledge and skills to better perform their responsibilities,
such as implementing programmes equitably, enabling them
to think in terms of concrete actions they can take or
facilitate and equipping them with the skills required for
day-to-day performance of executive duties;
(b) orienting key officials associated with the devolved functions
to (i) better function as technical advisors and trainers and
(ii) be more receptive and learn from the ground level
experience of elected Panchayat representatives;

51
(c) improving the Gram Sabha functioning, particularly for the
poor, to assert their demands through participative planning,
monitor plan implementation and to hold their Panchayat
to account through invoking Right to Information and social
audit; and
(d) sensitizing the media, political parties, representatives in the
legislatures, civil society organizations and citizens to
accepting and promoting Panchayati Raj as an effective level
of local government.
3.21 The basic principles underlying the framework include among
others implementation of the Framework is an all round continuous
and sustained basis aiming at long-term transformation and
development. Further also the focus of training under the Framework
is not upon information alone, but on inter-learning between trainers
and participants.
The Framework is targeted to reach:
(a) elected representatives of Panchayats;
(b) officials working with Panchayats;
(c) pressure groups within Gram Sabha such as SHGs; and
(d) elected representatives and officials of higher levels of
Government.
3.22 The courses have been designed such as to build the right
mindset for implementation of Panchayati Raj as well as basic skill
building for planning and implementation. Further the course would
also attempt to consolidate PRIs through interaction and networking.
The duration of these courses are between 4 to 6 days.
(ii) Infrastructure Development
3.23 The infrastructure development component is intended to
assist the States in building infrastructure such as Panchayat Ghars  for
Gram Panchayats. The proposal of the Ministry during 2006-2007 was
to build 4200 Panchayat Ghars at a cost of Rs. 25,000 each. The rationale
of the Ministry was that with their own building, Gram Panchayats
will be able to manage their affairs in a better manner, hold regular
meetings and in the long run enhance financial independence and
functional efficiency .

52
Under this component the Ministry had an allocation of Rs. 10.50
crore during 2006-2007 which was fully utilised during that period.
However since the releases were made only in December the Ministry
could not provide the report of physical progress. During 2005-2008
Rs. 10 crore has been allocated for this component.
(iii) Information Technology
3.24 Under this component the aim of the Ministry is to bring
about transparency in the implementation of various developmental
programmes by effective monitoring of flow of funds to PRIs as well
as physical implementation of various programmes. Under this
component initiatives to create data base on Panchayats through the
National Panchayat Portal would be supported. Out of the total
allocation of Rs. 8 crore for 2006-2007, Rs. 4 crore would be released
for software training and Rs. 4 crore for innovative infrastructure.
3.25 The Ministry has managed to achieve cent per cent utilisation
of the outlay of Rs. 8 crore for this scheme. However since the releases
were made only in December the Ministry could not provide the report
of physical progress.
(iv) Research Studies
3.26 During 2006-2007 Rs. 2 crore was allocated under research
studies of which the Ministry has utilised Rs. 0.86 crore which amounts
to 43 per cent of the outlay. The same amount has been allocated for
2007-2008. The aim of research studies is to make Panchayati Raj
Institutions more effective in implementation of various developmental
programmes by making use of the findings of such research and action
research studies. The mechanism of the scheme is that grants would
be given to organisations including NGOs for carrying out research
concerning the role of PRIs in local self-governance and implementation
of programmes of economic and social justice. The Ministry has
informed that the Training and Research Advisory Committee approves
the proposals received. So far, the aforesaid Committee has met thrice
and has approved 12 new proposals. Moreover 5 studies have already
been completed.
(v) Scheme for Media Publicity and Advocacy
3.27 The scheme for Media, Publicity and Advocacy was introduced
during 2006-2007 with an allocation of Rs. 3 crore both at BE and RE
level. The Ministry has reported a utilisation of Rs. 2.65 crore which
is about 88 per cent of the total. Further the Ministry has clarified that

53
expenditure under this scheme has been less as the holding of
conferences/meetings are need based only. The allocation under this
component for 2007-2008 is Rs. 6.90 crore.
3.28 With a view to minimize schemes, the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj has decided to subsume this scheme into the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana and hence forth would appear as a component of this scheme.
3.29 The Ministry plans to increase expenditure publications,
advertisements, publicity through print and visual media on different
aspects of Panchayati Raj as well as for organising conferences,
seminars, workshops etc. with Panchayat members, Panchayati Raj
Departments of State Government and Ministries of Central
Government dealing with social sectors like education health etc.
Ministry also planned to organize conferences with bodies of industries
like CII for presentation of Rural Business Hubs.
Under this scheme the Ministry has undertaken the following
activities:
(a) Meeting of the Council of State members of Panchayati Raj
held on 15-16 June, 2006 at Bhubaneshwar;
(b) Meeting of Chief Secretaries of States and State Panchayati
Raj Secretaries on 13-14 June, 2006 at Bhubaneshwar;
(c) Meeting of Chief Secretaries of States and State Panchayati
Raj Secretaries held three meetings in April, June and
September 2006 at Bhubaneshwar; and
(d) Conference of writers and thinkers held on 23-25 June, 2006
in New Delhi.
3.30 The Committee find that Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
(RGSY) is the largest scheme being implemented by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj in terms of components it addresses, issues like
training and capacity building of elected representatives and officials
of Panchayats, e-governance for all the Panchayats, improving
infrastructure at Panchayat level, Rural Business Hubs etc. However
the Committee note with constraint that a total of Rs. 50.50 crore
were allocated for this large scheme during 2006-2007 which rose to
Rs. 67.90 crore during 2007-2008. In view of the extent of the
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana, in Committee’s opinion there is a
need to increase the allocations under the scheme for carrying out
its functions in revised estimates level of the current year itself and
also during remaining four years of the Eleventh Plan. The

54
Committee also desire that for this proposals for Eleventh Plan be
worked out expeditiously by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
3.31 The Gram Swaraj Scheme is intended to achieve the vital
objective of capacity building of Panchayats. However, the Committee
are of the opinion that to enable the Ministry to effectively shoulder
this immense task the allocation should be adequate. Therefore, the
allocation of the Eleventh Plan has to be made keeping in view the
task ahead of the Ministry. The component-wise analysis of the
scheme is given below:—
(i) The Committee are constrained to note that under the
‘Capacity Building’ component under RGSY a small
amount of Rs. 30 crore was provided during 2006-2007
which was reduced to Rs. 24.50 crore at Revised Estimates
level and the same has been fully utilised. Against this
allocation around 3 lakh elected representatives and
officials of PRIs have been trained. The Committee find
that during 2007-2008 an allocation of Rs. 33 crore has
been made. In view of the foregoing the Committee
recommend that in the light of huge number of around
14 lakh PRIs functionaries and officials yet to be trained
the allocation under Training and Capacity Building be
suitably enhanced.
(ii) The Committee also find that during the last four years
viz. 2003-2004, 2004-2005, 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 a total
of 20.68 lakh elected representatives of PRI and their
officials were imparted training. The Committee are unable
to comprehend that if 20.68 lakh have been actually trained
so far then the only 10 lakhs are yet to be trained. The
Committee urge that State-wise data of number of trained
and untrained PRI functionaries State-wise be indicated
in Outcome Budget of the Ministry so that Committee
can arrive at meaningful conclusion and have a clear
picture on the issue.
(iii)  The Committee are glad to note that Ministry of
Panchayati Raj has come forward with a National Capacity
Building Framework (NCBF) with the objectives like
enabling elected PRIs functionaries to update their
knowledge, orienting key officials associated with
devolved functions to function in a better way as technical
advisors and trainers, improving the functioning of Gram
Sabhas etc. The Committee also find that aforesaid NCBF

55
also addresses the issue of Capacity Building of PRIs
before handing over the responsibilities of subjects to be
devolved to them. Here the Committee would suggest that
on this issue there is a need for devolution of subjects to
PRIs in States where these are already strong enough to
shoulder the responsibilities like Kerala and West Bengal,
whereas in States like Uttar Pradesh, where PRIs are very
weak there is a need to build up their capacity first. The
Committee feel that this issue should be examined in
detail.
(iv)  The Committee find that another component of ‘Rashtriya
Gram Swaraj Yojana’ (RGSY) of infrastructure development
envisaging assistance to States for construction of
‘Panchayat Ghars’  to enable Gram Panchayats to function
in a better way has also not been given sufficient
allocation. In Committee’s opinion there are lakhs of Gram
Panchayats across different States in the country requiring
such assistance. However the Committee find that a meagre
amount of Rs. 10 crore has been allocated for this
component during 2006-2007 and 2007-2008. In view of the
foregoing, in Committee’s opinion the allocation under this
component has to be enhanced after obtaining estimates
from different States. Further, the Committee desire that
the information with regard to physical performance of
the scheme be furnished to the Committee.
(v) The Committee note with dismay that like other
components of ‘Training Capacity Building’ and
‘Infrastructure Developments’, of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana the component of Information Technology is also
fund starved. In this connection the Committee find that
a meagre amount of Rs. 8 crore during 2006-2007 and Rs.
10 crore during 2007-2008 has been given for this
component. In view of the proposed requirement of
Information Technology of Gram Panchayats across the
country in Committee’s opinion funds should be suitably
enhanced.
(vi) As regards two components of ‘Research Studies’ and
‘Media Publicity and Advocacy’ under Rashtriya Gram
Swaraj Yojana the Committee are constrained to note that
allocation under both the components has not been fully
utilised during 2006-2007. In this connection the Committee
find that against allocation of Rs. 2 crore on Research

56
Studies the utilisation was only Rs. 0.86 crore. Similarly
on media publicity and advocacy against the allocation of
Rs. 3 crore utilisation was only Rs. 2.65 crore. The
Committee however find that during 2007-2008 equal
amount has been restored for Research Studies whereas
higher allocation of Rs. 6.90 crore has been made for
Media Publicity and Advocacy. The Committee desire that
the higher allocation made be meaningfully utilized by
the Ministry.
The action taken reply addressing each of the issues indicated
above separately should be furnished to the Committee.
III. Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme
3.32 The Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme was started during 2005-2006 with an allocation of Rs. 5 crore
with the objective of giving incentive to State Governments to perform
better on the areas of implementation of Part IX of the Constitution in
seven areas like undertaking the exercise of activity mapping,
transferring functions, functionaries and finances by different State
Governments/Union territory Administrations to PRIs etc. These reform
areas were recommended by the Seven Round Table Conferences.
However from 2006-2007 the basis of giving incentives to State
Governments was changed from seven reform areas to ‘Devolution
Index’ under formulation by National Council of Applied Economic
Research (NCAER). The allocation for this Scheme during 2006-2007
was Rs. 10 crore and was fully utilised. During 2007-2008 same amount
has been allocated for this scheme.
3.33 When asked about how the Ministry is moving ahead in the
absence of a devolution index the Committee have been informed that
pending final devolution index an interim devolution index is under
implementation. The Ministry has also informed that simultaneously
comprehensive nation wide devolution index is also underway based
on major resolutions of Seven Round Table Conferences. Under the
new system of giving incentives to State to work better for
implementing Part IX of the Constitution the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj has stated that the major quantifiable deliverables would be:
(i) Completion of Activity Mapping of functions to be devolved
to Panchayats and issue of Government orders for the
transfer of funds in accordance with devolved functions;
(ii) Deputing functionaries to the administrative control of
Panchayats, so as to enable them to carry out the functions
assigned to them through Activity Mapping;

57
(iii) Issuing orders that subsequent recruitment and
administrative control of employees will be by the
Panchayats; and
(iv) Putting in place a financial accountability system, which,
inter-alia, addresses the following issues.
(a) Transferring funds in the State budget directly to the
Panchayat accounts for the functions devolved to them and
putting in place a transparent mechanism to transfer funds,
monitor their use and make public, information on funds
allotted to Panchayats;
(b) Ensure prompt accounting, audit and public disclosure of
accounts in accordance with prescribed standards;
(c) Creating a Fiscal Cell and operating it as a Secretariat for
the State Finance Commission, when constituted;
(d) Assigning taxing powers to Panchayats along with a
mechanism to empower collection of taxes due; and
(e) Appointing DPC’s and activating them as per Article 243ZD
of the Constitution.
3.34 Further the Ministry has stated that since this scheme is in
the nature of providing incentives to State Governments for overall
empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions no physical progress can
be linked to the grants.
3.35 The Committee find that Panchayat Empowerment and
Accountability Incentive Scheme is very noble Scheme that can work
as a tool for much needed work of implementing Part IX of the
Constitution like constitution of District Planning Committee’s,
undertaking the exercising of activity mapping, transferring of funds,
functionaries and finances etc. However the Committee find that the
basis of implementation of this scheme has been changed from time-
to-time. In this connection the Committee have noticed that after
commencement of the scheme in 2005-2006 the basis for rewarding
State Governments for undertaking necessary reform in the field of
empowering PRIs was seven reform areas like activity mapping for
possible devolution, transfer of funds, functionaries and finances
from State Governments to PRIs etc. In second year of
implementation of the scheme the basis was changed to devolution
index. Moreover the Committee find that Ministry is managing with
interim devolution index for this scheme as the Devolution Index is
not yet ready.

58
The Committee have observed seven reform areas in their
previous report and the major quantifiable deliverables under the
current interim devolution index. The Committee feel that by and
large the issues in both the documents are identical. In this
connection the Ministry has stated that the current basis is more
scientific and capable of use across different schemes. On the other
side the Committee have also been apprised that no physical progress
can be linked to grants for work done on empowering PRIs under
this scheme. Since the details of the interim devolution index are
not available with the Committee, the Committee would be unable
to comment on the issue. The Committee however feel that changing
the basis of implementation of the Scheme on yearly basis would
lead to more and more communication gap between different State
Governments, field agencies and also with PRI functionaries and
should be discouraged and whenever any such change is
contemplated it should be properly discussed among different State
Governments.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
9 May, 2007 Chairman,
19 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

59
APPENDIX I
SCHEME-WISE POSITION OF ALLOCATION AND
UTILISATION DURING 2006-2007
Sl. Name of the Programme           Financial
No.              Targets (Rs. in crs.) Achievements Percentage
BE RE (Rs. in crs.) Achievement
(upto 29th
March 2007)
1. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
(a) Training & Capacity Building 30.00 24.50 24.50 100
(b) Infrastructure Development 10.50 10.50 10.50 100
(c) Information Technology 8.00 8.00 8.00 100
(d) Research Studies 2.0 2.0 0.86 43
Total 50.50 45.45 43.86 96.5
2. Media, Publicity & Advocacy 3.00 3.00 2.65# 88.33
3. Panchayat Empowerment 10.00 10.00 10.00 100
& Accountability Incentive
Scheme
4. Management Cell 4.00 4.45* 4.27 95
5. Allocation for North Eastern 7.50 7.50 7.50 100
region including Sikkim
6. Projects assisted by UN Agencies 0.00 5.00 5.00 100
7. Contribution to Commonwealth 0.00 0.05 0.05 100
Local Government Forum
8. Backward Regions Grant Fund 3750 1925 1925 100
Grand Total 3825 2000 1998.33 99.86
#Expenditure under the scheme has been less than required as the holding of
conferences/meetings was only based.
*Rs. 45 lakhs has been reappropriated from the Training Component of Rashtriya Gram
Swaraj Yojana.

60
APPENDIX II
PROGRESS OF ACTIVITY MAPPING AS ON 29 MARCH 2007
State Transfer of Subjects Latest Position
Subjects Covered
through under
Legislation Activity
Mapping
12 3 4
Andhra Pradesh 17 subjects 9 subjects A Task Force constituted under
the Special Chief Secretary for
Activity Mapping has prepared
detailed formulations. Draft
Government Orders incorporating
activity mapping in accordance
with the recommendations of the
Committee are under the
consideration of a Group of
Ministers for finalisation. After the
completion of these discussions.
Departments have been directed
to finalise the Government orders
for issue.
Assam 29 subjects 29 subjects Assam claims that it has done
activity-mapping more than 3
years back. However, individual
Departments have not
operationalised this order through
executive orders transferring
funds and functionaries. After the
recent visit of the Minister,
Panchayati Raj to Assam, the State
has renewed its efforts at activity
mapping. It has now set out a
road map for undertaking activity
mapping in the current year and
matching it with fiscal devolution
by the time of the supplementary

61
12 3 4
estimates to the States’ budget for
2007-08.
Arunachal Pradesh 3 subjects The State Government has
engaged one of its officers to
carry out activity mapping with
assistance from the NGO, PRIs.
This Officer has submitted his
report on Activity Mapping to the
State Government in May 2006. It
has now promised that work on
Activity Mapping will be
expedited. Currently, only
selection of beneficiaries in respect
of RD, Agriculture and
Horticulture programmes have
been devolved to the Panchayats.
Bihar 25 subjects 25 subjects Bihar had earlier undertaken
activity mapping in 2001.
However, these orders were not
operationalised. Therefore, the
State has again undertaken a
detailed exercise in Activity
Mapping with the assistance of an
NGO, PRIA. Currently, a
Committee chaired by the
Commissioner and Principal
Secretary, Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj is undertaking a
detailed exercise on Activity
Mapping. This exercise will also
include devolution of finances and
functionaries also. In respect of
finances, a separate Committee
headed by the Finance
Commissioner has been
constituted to address the
modalities on creation of a
Panchayat Sector Window in the
budget.

62
12 3 4
Chhattisgarh 29 subjects 27 subjects, Although activity mapping has
i.e. all been completed for 27 subjects,
subjects the requisite executive orders have
except not been issued so far.
forests and
drinking
water supply
Goa 6 subjects 18 subjects 18 functions have been devolved
to village Panchayats and to 6
ZPs. Goa needs to follow up with
fiscal devolution.
Gujarat 15 subjects 14 subjects Activity mapping has been done
for 14 subjects. 5 subjects have
been partially devolved. Activities
are yet to be devolved with
respsect to 10 functions. A matrix
for Activity Mapping has been
prepared by the State.
Haryana 29 subjects 10 subjects Activity mapping in respect of 10
subjects was released on 17.2.2006
in the joint presence of the Chief
Minister, Haryana and the Union
Minister for Panchayati Raj.
Himachal Pradesh 26 subjects (—) 15 Departments had issued orders
delegating powers to Panchayats.
But no activity-mapping has been
attempted in the formal model
matrix as suggested by MoPR.
Karnataka 29 subjects 29 subjects Activity mapping has been
completed in respect of all 29
items in August 2003, followed by
devolution of funds through the
State Budget in October 2004.
Kerala 26 subjects 26 subjects Activity mapping was completed
in the form of a responsibility
mapping. Now the State is
revisiting this responsibility
mapping by preparing a new

63
12 3 4
activity mapping matrix that also
covers Municipalities. Untied
funds are also being devolved to
Panchayats for the devolved
functions.
Madhya Pradesh 23 subjects 23 subjects Activity mapping is undertaken in
two stages—first, 7 subjects were
covered, with assistance from an
NGO, Samarthan. This NGO has
now completed Activity Mapping
for the remaining 16 more matters
that have been devolved. These
are under discussions with the
Line Departments concerned.
Maharashtra 18 subjects (—) There has not been much progress
on activity mapping in the State.
The State has recently decided to
review the progress in this regard.
Manipur 22 functions 22 subjects Earlier, Activity mapping of 22
subjects were said to have been
completed. However, since these
were not operationalised, the State
has reviewed matters once again
and issued a notification for
activity mapping for 16 subjects
in January 2006. This is now being
operationalised.
Orissa 25 subjects 7 Subjects Activity mapping in progress in
respect of 9 subjects has been
issued in the joint presence of the
Union Minister for Panchayati Raj
and the Chief Minister. The State
is now undertaking fiscal
devolution to the Panchayats and
aims to complete the same by the
next financial year.
Punjab 7 subjects Draft activity mapping has been
prepared for all Departments in a

64
12 3 4
detailed fashion. Significant work
is being undertaken in certain
sectors such as Health and
Education. The matrix has been
discussed with the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj and is ready for
notification.
Rajasthan 29 subjects 12 subjects The activity-mapping exercise was
started for 18 Departments and
has now been completed for 12.
A Cabinet sub-Committee was
constituted in August 2004 to
recommend measures to
strengthen PRIs. Its report
recommends full devolution by
2007, when the Eleventh Plan
starts.
Sikkim 28 functions Activity mapping has started and
is expected to be announced in
October 2006.
Tamil Nadu 29 subjects Tamil Nadu claims to have issued
instructions for devolving all
subjects to Panchayati Raj but
these remain on paper. Subjects
relating to rural roads, water
supply , sanitation and rural
housing schemes are now being
taken up for discussion in respect
of activity mapping.
Tripura 29 subjects 21 subjects In 1994 orders were issued for
devolving 21 subjects. With
respect to 8 subjects, orders are
awaited because of operational
problems related to the 6th
Schedule. The activity mapping
exercise is underway.
Uttar Pradesh 12 subjects Activity mapping was completed
in respect of 32 Departments as

65
12 3 4
part of the recommendations of a
Committee (Bholanath Tiwari
report). However, this report has
not been implemented.
Uttarakhand 14 subjects 9 subjects Activity mapping in respect of 9
Departments has been completed
and is under consideration of the
Government.
West Bengal 29 subjects 15 subjects Activity mapping has been
completed and orders issued in
respect of 15 subjects on 7.11.2005.
The status with regard to the UTs is as given below:
Sl.No. UT Status
1. Dadra and Nagar Haveli Activity mapping has been completed.
They have devolved all 29 functions.
2. Daman and Diu Activity mapping has been completed.
They have devolved 16 functions out
of 29.
3. A&N Islands Activity mapping has been finalized
and forwarded to MHA for necessary
action. They have devolved 28 out of
29 functions to the PRIs.
4. Lakshadweep Activity mapping has been completed.
Ministry of Home Affairs has been
requested to ratify the same for
implementations. They have devolved
29 functions out of 29.
5. Pondicherry 21 subjects have been devolved and 8
subjects are yet to be devolved upon
Panchayats. Activity mapping is in
progress.
6. Chandigarh Activity mapping is in progress.

66
APPENDIX III
PROGRESS OF DEVOLUTION AND ACTIVITY MAPPING
AS ON 29 JUNE, 2005
State Subjects Activity Latest position
transferred mapping (29.6.2005)
through undertaken
legislation
12 3 4
Andhra Pradesh 17 Subjects 9 subjects Committee constituted under
Special Chief Secretary has yet
to meet to consider activity
mapping.
Assam 29 subjects 29 Subjects on Activity mapping not
26.7.2002 operationalised through
executive orders and funds
transfer.
Arunachal Pradesh Nil 6 Subjects —
Bihar 25 Subjects 20 Subjects —
Chhattisgarh 29 Subjects 6 Subjects Activity mapping for six
completed and the remaining
to be completed by October,
2005.
Goa 6 Subjects 18 Subjects —
Gujarat 14 Subjects 14 Departments Activity in respect of 5
subjects have been devolved
partially. With respect to 10
functions, activities are yet to
be devolved.
Haryana 16 Subjects 16 Subjects Draft Activity mapping
prepared. Final decision of
Government of Haryana
awaited.
Himachal Pradesh 26 Subjects — P reliminary discussions held
draft activity mapping.

67
12 3 4
Jammu & Kashmir — — —
Jharkhand — — —
Karnataka 29 Subjects 29 Subjects Devolution of funds
pertaining to 26 subjects
completed with effect from
2005-06.
Kerala 26 Subjects 26 Subjects United funds devolved in
repsect of devolved functions.
Maharashtra 19 Subjects 9 Departments —
Madhya Pradesh 25 Subjects 7 Subjects Draft Acitvity Mapping under
consideration of Government.
Manipur 22 Subjects 22  Subjects Activity Mapping of 22
subjects completed.
Orissa 25 Subjects 8 Subjects Meeting of 11 Departments
have been called and activity
mapping of 8 Departments are
in progress.
Pondicherry — — —
Punjab 7 Subjects 6 Subjects Draft Activity Mapping
prepared. Final decision of
Government awaited.
Rajasthan 29 Subjects 18 Subjects Activity Mapping is in
transferred progress.
Sikkim — — —
Tamil Nadu — — —
Tripura — — —
Uttar Pradesh 12 Subjects 10 Subjects Activity Mapping is in
progress.
Uttarakhand 14 Subjects 14 Subjects Activity Mapping in respect of
9 Departments completed and
under consideration of the
Government GOs for
devolution of 3 Departments
issued.

68
12 3 4
West Bengal 29 Subjects 29 Subjects Activity Mapping is
completed, awaiting approval
of Cabinet.
Dadar & Nagar 29 Subjects 29 Subjects Activity Mapping is
Haveli completed.
Daman & Diu 29 Subjects 29 Subjects Activity Mapping is
completed.
Andaman & Nicobar — — —
Islands
Lakshadweep — — —
Chandigarh UT — — —

69
APPENDIX IV
REASONS FOR DELAY IN UNDERTAKING ACTIVITY
MAPPING—STATE-WISE INFORMATION
State Latest Position
12
Andhra Pradesh Draft Government Orders on activity mapping are
under the consideration of a Group of Ministers for
finalization. Departments have been directed to
finalize the Government orders for issue.
Assam A fresh activity-mapping matrix has been prepared
and is being now discussed at the level of the Chief
Secretary of the State.
Arunachal Pradesh An Activity Mapping matrix has been prepared,
which is under the consideration of the Government.
Bihar A detailed exercise in Activity Mapping has been
undertaken with the assistance of an NGO, PRIA,
which is under the consideration of an official
committee.
Chhattisgarh Although activity mapping has been completed for
27 subjects, the requisite executive orders have not
been issued so far.
Goa 18 functions have been devolved to village
Panchayats and to 6 ZP in the Goa Panchayati Raj
legislation itself. Goa is examining the steps required
for fiscal devolution.
Gujarat Activity mapping has been done for 14 subjects.
5 subjects have been partially devolved, through
legislation. A matrix for Activity Mapping has been
prepared by the State.
Haryana Activity mapping in respect of 10 subjects was
released on 17.2.2006. It is now being operationalised.
Himachal Pradesh 15 departments had issued orders delegating powers
to Panchayats. But no activity-mapping has been
attempted in the formal model matrix as suggested
by MoPR.

70
12
Madhya Pradesh Activity mapping matrix is ready for 23 matters,
which are being discussed with line departments in
the State.
Maharashtra The State legislation gives details of devolution of
functions to Panchayats.
Manipur The state has reviewed the Activity Mapping matrix
issued earlier and issued a notification for activity
mapping for 16 subjects in January 2006. This is now
being operationalised.
Orissa Activity mapping in progress in respect of 9 subjects
has been issued in the joint presence of the Union
Minister for Panchayati Raj and the Chief Minister.
The state is now undertaking fiscal devolution to
the Panchayats and aims to complete the same by
the next financial year.
Punjab Draft activity mapping has been prepared for all
departments in a detailed fashion. Notifications have
been delayed due to State elections.
Rajasthan The activity-mapping exercise was started for
18 departments and has now been completed for
12. A Cabinet sub-Committee has submitted
recommendations in this regard, which are under
consideration at the highest level.
Tamil Nadu It is reported that subjects relating to rural roads,
water supply, sanitation and rural housing schemes
are now being taken up for discussion in respect of
activity mapping.
Tripura In 1994 orders wer e issued for devolving 21 subjects.
With respect to 8 subjects, orders are awaited because
of operational problems related to the 6th Schedule.
The activity mapping exercise is underway.
Uttar Pradesh A draft activity mapping is ready , which is under
the consideration of the Government.
Uttaranchal The Activity mapping matrix in respect of
9 departments has been completed and is under
consideration of the Government.

71
APPENDIX V
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND PROCEDURE
OF NYAYA PANCHAYAT
Jurisdiction of the Nyaya Panchayat—
(1) The Nyaya Panchayats shall follow persuasion, conciliation,
mediation as means to resolve disputes in such manner which is fair
to all parties.
(2) The Nyaya Panchayat shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear
and deal with cases, claims, issues, offences and proceedings arising
within their geographical territory and shall have exclusive jurisdiction
over the following civil and criminal matters.
Civil jurisdiction
(i) claims relating to recovery of debts and contractual monies
not exceeding rupees twenty five thousand, and all
proceedings arising with respect thereto, provided that the
parties may agree in writing to waive the bar on the
maximum value of a suit;
(ii) disputes relating to ownership of property and physical
boundaries, except those involving issues of law or title to
land or any other right or interest in any immovable
property or mortgages;
(iii) claims for damages relating to cattle grazing or Trespass;
(iv) claims for recovery of moveable property or for its value,
including those where separate criminal proceedings have
been instituted;
(v) claims for compensation for wrongfully taking or damaging
moveable property, including those where separate criminal
proceedings have been instituted;
(vi) disputes relating to custody and maintenance of children
and dependants, including divorced wives;
(vii) any other matter covered by or falling under Schedule 11
of the Constitution;

72
(viii) claims for rent of immovable property;
(ix) disputes relating to environmental pollution and causing
public nuisance:
Provided that unless otherwise provided in any law for the time
being in force the right to bring a claim in respect of any of the above
instances shall have accrued within three years prior to the claim being
referred to the Nyaya Panchayat.
Criminal Jurisdiction
(i) compoundable offences (in which permission of court is not
necessary) in terms of sub-section (1) of section 320 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, name, sections 298, 323,
334, 341, 342, 352, 355, 358, 426, 427, 447, 448, 491, 497, 498,
500, 501, 502, 504, 506 and 508 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860;
(ii) offences alleged to have been committed under sections 160,
172, 174, 175, 178 to 180, 267, 277, 279, 283, 285, 289, 290,
294, 324, 336, 357, 374, 379, 403, 411, 428, 430, 431, 509 and
510 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (No. XLV of 1860);
(iii) offences under the Cattle Tr espass Act, 1871, (No. 1 of 1871);
(iv) offences under the Public Gambling Act, 1867 (No. III of
1867);
(v) offences relating to treatment of women and children,
including domestic violence, sexual harassment, humiliation
and child labour under the relevant laws;
(vi) any offence under this Act or any rule made hereunder;
(vii) any other offence which the Government may from time to
time declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, as
cognizable by a Nyaya Panchayat; and
(3) Additional jurisdiction: (a) The Nyaya Panchayat may consider
the issues of misuse of any public office in the Panchayat area, on its
on cognizance ( suo moto ) or upon information duly received by it, and
record its observations thereon and refer it to the court of competent
jurisdiction for taking appropriate action, if any, in the matter.
(b) The Nyaya Panchayat shall have preventive jurisdiction in
matters of public disharmony or causing communal tension.
(4) No Nyaya Panchayat shall inflict a sentence of imprisonment
whether substantively or in default of payment of fine.

73
APPENDIX VI
BRGF—LIST OF DISTRICTS
Andhra Pradesh
1. Adilabad
2. Anantpur
3. Chittoor
4. Cudappah
5. Karimnagar
6. Khammam
7. Mahbubnagar
8. Medak
9. Nalgondad
10. Nizamabd
11. Rangareddy
12. Vizianagram
13. Warangal
Arunachal Pradesh
1. Upper Subansiri
Assam
1. Barpeta
2. Bongaigaon
3. Cachar
4. Dhemaji
5. Golpara
6. Hailakandi
7. Karbi Anglong
8. Kokrajhar
9. Marigaon
10. North Lakhimpur (Laksha)
11. North Cachar Hills

74
Bihar
1. Araria
2. Aurangabad
3. Banka
4. Begusarai
5. Bhagalpur
6. Bhojpur
7. Buxur
8. Darbhanga
9. Gaya
10. Gopalganj
11. Jamui
12. Jehanabad
13. Kaimur/Bhabua
14. Katihar
15. Kishanganj
16. Khagaria
17. Lakhisarai
18. Madhepura
19. Madhubani
20. Munger
21. Muzaffarpur
22. Nalanda
23. Nawadah
24. Patna
25. Pashchim Champaran
26. Purba Champaran
27. Purnia
28. Rohtas
29. Saharsa
30. Samastipur
31. Saran

75
32. Sheikhpura
33. Sheohar
34. Sitamarhi
35. Supaul
36. Vaishali
Chhattisgarh
1. Bastar
2. Bilaspur
3. Dantewada
4. Dhamtari
5. Jashpur
6. Kankar
7. Kawardha
8. Korba
9. Koriya
10. Mahasamund
11. Raigarh
12. Rajnandgaon
13. Sarguja
Gujarat
1. Banas Kantha
2. Dangs
3. Dahod Dantewada
4. Narmada
5. Panch Mahals
6. Sabarkantha
Haryana
1. Mohindergarh
2. Sirsa
Himachal Pradesh
1. Chamba
2. Sirmaur

76
Jammu & Kashmir
1. Doda
2. Kupwara
3. Poonch
Jharkhand
1. Bokaro
2. Chatra
3. Deoghar
4. Dhanbad
5. Dumka
6. Garhwa
7. Giridih
8. Godda
9. Gumla
10 Hazaribagh
11. Jamtara
12. Kodarma
13. Latehar
14. Lohardagga
15. Pachhimi Singhbhum
16. Pakaur
17. Palamu
18. Ranchi
19. Sahibganj
20. Saraikela
21. Simdega
Karnataka
1. Bidar
2. Chitradurga
3. Davangere
4. Gulbarga
5. Raichur

77
Kerala
1. Palakkad
2. Wynad
Madhya Pradesh
1. Balaghat
2. Barwani
3. Betul
4. Chhattarpur
5. Damoh
6. Dhar
7. Dindori
8. Guna
9. Jhabua
10. Katni
11. Khandwa
12. Mandla
13. Panna
14. Rajgarh
15. Rewa
16. Satna
17. Seoni
18. Shahdol
19. Sheopur
20. Shivpuri
21. Siddhi
22. Tikamgarh
23. Umaria
24. West Nimar
Maharashtra
1. Ahmedanagar
2. Amravati
3. Aurangabad

78
4. Bhandara
5. Chandrapur
6. Dhule
7. Gadchiroli
8. Gondia
9. Hingoli
10. Nanded
11. Nandurbar
12. Yavatmal
Manipur
1. Chandel
2. Churchandrapur
3. Tamenlong
Meghalaya
1. Ri Bhoi
2. South Garo Hills
3. West Garo Hills
Mizoram
1. Lawngtlai
2. Siaha
Nagaland
1. Mon
2. Tuensang
3. Workha
Orissa
1. Bolangir
2. Boudh
3. Debagarh
4. Dhenkanal
5. Gajapati
6. Ganjam
7. Jharsuguda

79
8. Kalahandi
9. Keonjhar
10. Koraput
11. Malkangiri
12. Mayurbhanj
13. Nabrangpur
14. Nuapada
15. Phulbani
16. Rayagada
17. Sambalpur
18. Sonapur
19. Sundargarh
Punjab
1. Hoshiarpur
Rajasthan
1. Banswara
2. Barmer
3. Chittaurgarh
4. Dungarpur
5. Jaisalmer
6. Jalor
7. Jhalawar
8. Karoli
9. Sawai Madhopur
10. Sirohi
11. T onk
12. Udaipur
Sikkim
1. Sikkim North
Tamil Nadu
1. Cuddalore
2. Dindigul

80
3. Nagapattinam
4. Sivagangai
5. Tiruvannamalai
6. Villupuram
Tripura
1. Dhalai
Uttar Pradesh
1. Ambedkar Nagar
2. Azamgarh
3. Bahraich
4. Balrampur
5. Banda
6. Barabanki
7. Basti
8. Budaun
9. Chandauli
10. Chitrakoot
11. Etah
12. Farrukhabad
13. Fatehpur
14. Gonda
15. Gorakhpur
16. Hamirpur
17. Hardoi
18. Jalaun
19. Jaunpur
20. Kaushambi
21. Kushinagar
22. Lakhimpur Kheri
23. Lalitpur
24. Maharajganj
25. Mahoba

81
26. Mirzapur
27. Pratapgarh
28. Raebareli
29. Sant Kabir Nagar
30. Shravasti
31. Siddharthnagar
32. Sitapur
33. Sonebhadra
34. Unnao
Uttarakhand
1. Chamoli
2. Champawat
3. Tehri Garhwal
West Bengal
1. Bankura
2. Birhum
3. Dakshin Dinajpur
4. Jalpaiguri
5. Maldah
6. Medinipur East
7. Medinipur West
8. Murshidabad
9. Purulia
10. South 24 Parganas
11. Uttar Dinajpur

82
APPENDIX VII
NCB FRAMEWORK
NATIONAL CAPABILITY BUILDING FRAMEWORK FOR
PANCHAYATI RAJ ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES AND
FUNCTIONARIES
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
CONTENTS
Chapter 1: Introduction and Basic Principles Underlying the
Framework Design
Chapter 2: Components and logistics of the Framework
Chapter 3: Resource persons for implementing the framework
Chapter 4: Development of Material for the Framework
Chapter 5: Pr ogramme management, evaluation and
documentation
Chapter 6: Estimation of costs of implementing the framework
1.5 Basic principles underlying the Framework:
The Framework is grounded on the following basic principles:
(a) First, implementation of the Framework is an all round
continuous and sustained process aimed at long-term
transformation and development,
(b) Second, the focus of training under the Framework is not
upon information alone, but on inter-learning between
trainers and participants.
(c) Third, training cannot provide readymade answers to all
problems, but should provide space and time for trainees
to reflect on and analyze their situation and seek solutions
to their problems.
(d) Fourth, mutual learning, assimilation and retention happens
best in a multimodal and non-hierarchical training
environment.
(e) Fifth, All participants bring with them well honed
knowledge which must be respected. SCs, STs and Women
should be given special attention in training.

83
(f) sixth, training programmes must ensure participation of all
members—not just a talkative and domineering few.
(g) Seventh, The training team should be objective and non-
judgmental in outlook, and function as facilitators, friends
and counsellors, who can evoke and stimulate thinking
among trainees.
(h) Eighth, The processes and logistics of the framework must
be convenient and relevant to the ground reality of elected
representatives.
(i) Ninth, the programme must aim at maximum initial
coverage within a limited period of time, so that all
stakeholders can quickly settle down in to playing their
roles and commence their work.
(j) Tenth, training for PESA areas should be designed in
keeping with the cultural traditions and special needs of
tribal people.
(k) Eleventh, the framework has to constantly develop and
evolve on the basis of regular impact assessment.
1.6 The Stakeholders
The Framework is targeted to reach the following:
(a) Elected Panchayat Representatives:
These comprise of Ward Members and Territorial Constituency
members, Presidents (Sarpanchs, Mukhiyas, Adhyakshas), vice-
Presidents (up-Sarpanchs, up-Mukhiyas, Upadhyakshas) and
Chairpersons of Standing Committees.
(b) Officials working with Panchayats:—
The main categories of such officials are as follows:
(i) Panchayat Secretaries,
(ii) Junior Engineers,
(iii) Anganwadi workers,
(iv) Primary Health Workers,
(v) Public Health Workers,
(vi) Panchayats own employees such as bill collectors and clerks,

84
(vii) Agricultural Extension Officials,
(viii) Teachers and Education Administration Workers.
(c) Pressure groups within the Gram Sabha such as SHGs and CBOs
(d) Elected representatives and officials of higher levels of
Government.
Officials and Elected representatives of Professional cadres such as
engineers, doctors and engineers need to be sensitized to become
facilitators of Panchayatis. There is also a strong need to sensitise
policy makers such as MLAs, MPs, political leaders and media to
ensure that they provide a nurturing environment for the growth of
Panchayats.
CHAPTER 2
CONTENT OF THE FRAMEWORK
2.1 Introduction
The training content and phasing of the training programme is
detailed in Table 1 below:
TABLE-1
Theme Description Area covered, Category Duration Time line for
of the in brief covered completion
manner of
interaction
123 45 6
Part I Building Course Overview of Elected 4 days, in Within 20
the right 1(a): Panchayati Panchayat toto weeks of
mindset for Foundation Raj representatives: election
implementation Course about 22 lakh
of Panchayati Panchayati Raj
Raj and Officials: about
learning 8 lakh
basic
functions
Course Internal Elected leaders 4 days Within 20
1(b): basic Housekeeping, of Panchayats weeks of
Functional including at all levels and election.
Course understanding Chairpersons of (Including

85
123 45 6
of accounts, Standing foudational
Social Audit, Committees (5 course, each
Right to per Panchayat): office bearer
information, About 10 lakh: would
Panchayat undergo 8
revenues Panchayati Raj days of
Officials, about training)
5 lakh
Course Give those who Illiterate of One month, 6 months
1(c): need to an semi-literate or as
Functional exposure to elected required,
Literacy functional representatives preferably at
Course literacy (about 8 lakh the village
people) level itself
Part II Basic skill Course Coverage of Elected At least 6 Within 40
building for II(a): core functions Panchayat days (2 weeks of
planning Sectorally of Panchayats representatives: phases of 3 election
and focused aimed at about 22 lakh days each)
implementation training improving
programme capacities to Officials
deliver services associated with
and Panchayati Raj:
development about 8 lakh
programmes
Course Training in At least 2 At least 6 Within 52
II(b): basic computer persons per days, with weeks
Computer skills and Panchayat: local
Training selected about 5 lakh handholding
software for from the
Panchayat level resource
training centre
Part III Consolidation III(a): Awareness Gram Sabhas, At least 3 Coverage of
on through Gram creation NGOs, SHGs days a week all Gram
interaction Sabha level and CBOs Panchayats
Campaigns atleast once
a year
III(b): People at large At least 3 All-India
Panchayati days a week coverage
Raj TV channel
and radio
programmes

86
123 45 6
III(c): Panchayati Raj Once a All
Panchayati members and month Panchayats
Raj individual
Newsletter subscribers
III(d): Experience Elected Within the
Formation sharing Panchayat first year
of networks representatives: after
of about 22 lakh election
Panchayat
elected
representatives
III(e): Elected At least 4 Once a year
Yearly Panchayat days for
refresher representatives: remaining
course about 22 lakh 4 years
III(f): Visits On the site At least 10 lakh At least one At lease two
to identified training elected leaders full day exposure
‘beacon’ of Panchayats each, visits every
Panchayats excluding year
travel
III(g): Daily Elected Every To
Intermediate assistance to Panchayat working Day commence
Panchayat support representatives: 16 hours a by 20
level Panchayat level about 22 lakh day, every weeks,
Resource planning and working day when
Centres implementation members
have
finished
Part I
training
III(h):
Helplines
III(i): More intensive Interested 6 month For about
Certificate and academic stakeholders course 100 persons
courses study per State
2.2 Part I: Description of courses comprising Part 1 of the framework:
Part I aims to give each participant a basic grounding in Panchayati
Raj and skills required to get started. Part I is also the primer for

87
Part II. The details of the courses that comprise Part I are as
follows:
2.21. Course I (a):
Basic foundation course: Building the right mindset for
implementation of Panchayati Raj:
Course I(a) is aimed at building the right mindset in all concerned
on the aims and objectives of implementing Panchayati Raj and its
broad spirit. Course (a) will be designed to enable participants to
reflect on and understand the strengths and weaknesses in
implementing Panchayati Raj. The overall approach is that through
discussion and critical analysis participants gain a sense of optimism
and confidence in Panchayats as change agents.
2.22 Course 1(b): Basic Functional Course; equipping all Panchayat
Office bearers and officials with basic ‘start-up’ skills:
This intensive special training is for elected leaders of Panchayats
at all levels and Chairpersons of Standing Committees, who can
separately attend these courses, apart from the foundational course.
The emphasis will be on the nitty gritty of functioning, such as
sanctioning of works, signing of bills, maintenance of accounts and
other executive level skills necessary for office bearers. The course will
also cover the functional and operational aspects of conducting Gram
and Ward Subhas, decentralized planning, reviewing of implementation
and preparation and forwarding of utilization certificates.
2.22 Course I(c): Functional Literacy Course:
For those Panchayat members who need it, a functional literacy
course shall be undertaken immediately after the elections, locally
available literate people can be coopted as resource persons to conduct
functional literacy classes for Panchayat members. This can be a focus
activity of the Yuva Shakti Abhiyan.
2.23 Responsibilities in designing of the detailed curriculum for
Part I:
(a) The curriculum for Part 1 will cover the constitutional position,
State-relevant variations and locally relevant nuances of implementation
of Panchayati Raj. The state level curriculum, will particularly
concentrating on the features of the State concerned such as the extent
of devolution of functions to Panchayats. The district level curriculum
may cover the particular characteristics and concerns of the district
concerned,
An activity mapping, giving the details of the responsibilities of
the Central Government, State Governments, District Training Team

88
(including NGOs and CBOs) in preparing the curriculum, in respect
of Part I is given in Table 2:
TABLE 2
Central Government State Government District Training
Team
123
Central I(a) & I(b) (Foundation Course and Basic Functional Course)
(a) Preparation of basic material
covering the nationally
common aspects of
Panchayati Raj, namely,
(i) Constitutional provisions
regarding Panchayati Raj
and the current position,
particularly with
reference to the RT
Action points,
(ii) Principles of secularism,
equity and human rights
emanating from the
Constitution of India,
(iii) General awareness of
gender equity and social
justice,
(iv) Status of human
development,
(v) Poverty alleviation,
(vi) Participatory planning,
(vii) Implementation and
monitoring,
(viii) Right to information and
transparency and Social
Audit,
(ix) Importance of regular
conduct of Gram Sabha.
(b) Comparative position of
States in the implementation
of Panchayati Raj.
(c) Basic awareness of the funds
that are destined to go to
Panchayats from the
Government of India,
Salient features of the State
Panchayati Raj Act and rules and
regulations covering Panchayati
Raj,
Overview of the status of human
development in the State, inter-alia,
covering Gender equity and social
justice and poverty alleviation,
State specific details regarding
participatory planning, particularly
the broad approach to district level
planning and consolidation of
plans into the district level plan.
Elements of Implementation and
monitoring of programmes,
Overview of States approach to
right to information, transparency
and Social Audit,
State specific provisions relating to
Panchayat level maintenance of
accounts,
State specific details of own
resource management and
accounting
Details of the implementation of
Panchayati Raj within the district
(such as the number of members,
their qualifications, etc.),
Answering district specific queries
relating to planning and
implementation,
Overview of sectoral
implementation of programmes in
the context of the district.
Role of Panchayats in promoting
equity.
Micro Planning at the level of each
Panchayat, in the building up of
the district plan.

89
123
(d) Basic overview of Panchayat
level financial management,
including maintenance of
accounts.
(e) Awareness of the importance
of own revenues of
Panchayats and the need to
collect them.
(f) Awareness of the provisions
of PESA.
Basic materials on literacy , as
designed for the National Literacy
Mission.
Designs etc. prepared by the
Nehru Yuvak Kendra
Course I(c): Functional Literacy Course
District level materials prepared for
the literacy programme.2.25 Training methodologies of Part I and logistics for
implementation:
2.25 All trainees for Part I would need to be covered within 6
months at the most (20 weeks for Courses I (a) & 1(b) and 26 weeks
for Course 1(c), the logistics dictate (a) a mechanism of large scale
rollout, such as satellite or distance training (b) intensive local support
and facilitation, through face-to-face participatory training. Combining
a distance mode, based on common films and presentation alternated
with local discussions, interactive sessions and followed by question
and answer sessions over satellite is preferred as:
(a) It allows broad standardization of content, at the state
specific level,
(b) It allows for wide dissemination and rapid coverage,
(c) Local interaction can adapt the message conveyed over the
introductory satellite based sessions into locally relevant
lessons and exercises.
(d) Sharing of problems through the interactive mode builds a
feeling of community among participants even though they
are not face-to-face.
(e) With satellite training costs  are also kept low, as Panchayat
members do not have to travel very far to the site of
training.
State specific details of relevant
rules such as delegation orders,
PWD code, rules of
countersignature, treasury code etc.
State specific material on literacy.

90
The details are as follows:
2.25 Interactive satellite training:
Interactive Satellite based training uses a dedicated satellite channel
(provided by the ISRO) for beaming programmes to specified centers
for being viewed by trainees. Each reception centre is also equipped
with a talk back facility (either through telephone connection or on
the satellite channel itself), which enables trainees to ask questions to
resource persons located at the central studio. Replies given by such
studio-based resource persons can be heard over the entire network.
Satellite transmission, when combined with face-to-face participatory
training methodology provides a intermixed programme combining the
triggers provided by a central audio-visual programme, with facilitation
provided by appropriately oriented resource persons at the local
training centers. Large numbers of trainees can be rapidly and
effectively covered through this composite approach. Training can also
be locally focused according to the group’s needs. Sessions can be
interesting and retain attention, with inclusion of games, exercises
pictures related to day-to-day life of the Panchayats, and elsewhere in
related fields, so as to make it more interesting and with a more
enduring impact. Keeping in mind these advantages, the Framework
aims to cover all States with the infrastructure required for Satellite
training, which essentially would comprise of Satellite Studios, reception
centers (televisions, satellite dishes, telephones, uninterrupted power
supply systems and miscellaneous civil works).
2.25 Local Face to face training:
All basic training for Gram Panchayat elected representatives and
officials ought to be held, as far as possible, within the same Block/
Intermediate Panchayat area in which the Gram Panchayat is located.
Such training could make use of the existing network of Extension
Training Centres within the Block, as already provided by government.
Local infrastructure such as school buildings or community centers
could be used for holding training.
The local face-to-face training would be through resource persons
specially oriented for the purpose. In order to ensure complete
participation and attention, it is proposed to engage 5 resource persons
for every training session. Each classroom session may be limited to
20 participants at a time. Details are given in Chapter 3.

91
2.254 Combining Satellite and Face-to-Face training:
A suggested pattern of combining distance satellite transmission
with local training facilitated by local resource persons is described
below in the Table 3:
TABLE 3:
Activity Agency Responsibilities of authorities
concerned
12 3
Introduction Resource Resource Persons at the Training
to the film Persons Centres make a brief introductory
at the statement about the film, or conduct an
training introductory activity without pre-empting
centers what is in the film.
Screening Satellite The film is screened through the Satellite
the film transmission Centre. Resource Persons at Training
Centres ensure that the TV set is switched
on 5 minutes before satellite transmission
for viewing the film.
General Resource The first 5-10 minutes after the film is
Responses Persons scr eened is for participants’ general
at the responses. Resource Persons at the
training Training Centre can invite participants to
centers individually identify 3-5 of the most
significant statements or scenes from the
film and share these in a small group.
This can be followed by a plenary,
wherein participants would discuss
themes identified by them. This provides
an opportunity for participants to turn
over the film in their minds, to let it sink
in and take root.
Facilitated Resource Each film comes with a training package
discussion/ Person including a set of topics or activities to
activities at the be facilitated by resource persons to
training encourage the participants to go beyond
centers the film and to think of steps they might
take in their own circumstances. Resource

92
12 3
persons are also given techniques to
nudge discussion in certain directions.
Games and activities can be taken up to
retain interest.
Question Satellite Participants can ask the panelists at the
Answer transmission SA TCOM studio questions or discuss
session ideas that may have emerged during the
general responses and facilitated
discussions. Panelists could also initiate
discussion on 2-3 issues.
2.256 Training in mixed groups:
With adequate care taken to ensure full participation, training
different stakeholders together builds relationships between them in a
non-threatening and informal atmosphere and can dispel pre-conceived
notions that each have about the other. It is envisaged that both Courses
1 (a) and 1 (b) will be of mixed groups of elected representatives and
officials. Other mixed groups could also be created for combined
training, as follows:
(a) Second term members and members of beacon Panchayats:
Panchayat members elected for a second tenure, and those from
Panchayats which have a track record of efficient functioning will be
identified for this programme. The overall objectives of is to enable
(a) sharing of experiences and good practices and (b) facilitate
networking. Such training could also include field visits.
(b) Joint training of GP Sarpanches, and Secretaries:
GP Sarpanches are usually responsible for (a) passing bills before
payments are made, (b) check measuring any public work before the
measurement is accepted for payment, (c) accord administrative
sanctions for development works (d) ensure proper executive and
financial management of the Gram Panchayat and (3) signing cheques
jointly with the Secretary for fund withdrawal. Gram Panchayat
Secretaries are responsible for (a) proper custody of records and
properties, (b) clearing audit objections, (c) preparing and placing
budget, (d) supervising the work of the GP staff. Joint training for GP
Office bearers and Secretaries will enable them to understand their
mutual responsibilities better.

93
(c) Members of different levels of Panchayats:
This programme will put together members of the District,
Intermediate and Gram Panchayats, so that they can better understand
each others’ roles in Panchayati Raj and the need for close coordination.
Variations on the same theme could include training of members and
Chairpersons of Standing Committees of Panchayats at various levels
together.
(d) Training of staff drawn from different levels:
This training is to create a sense of team-spirit and belief in the
system amongst staff involved in Panchayati Raj. It aims at creating a
different work culture and ethic suited to Panchayati Raj. This
programme will also provide a forum for exchange and dissemination
of good practices facilitated in different districts by individual officers.
(e) Engineering, Auditing and Accounting staff:
This is aimed at fostering a better understanding among
engineering, accounting and auditing staff of the social, economic and
human effects of ‘projects’. This training will familiarize participants
with the enhanced powers of Panchayats in planning and
implementation of various programmes. It will focus on the importance
of transparency and certification by the Gram Sabha before
measurement is processed for payment. Training will also familiarize
participants with the documentation involved in the implementation
of works.
2.3 Part II: Description of courses comprising Part II of the
framework:
2.31 Course (II) (a): Sectorally focused training programme:
2.311 Part II focuses on Sectoral Training covering several aspects
of programme planning and implementation, with an added emphasis
on service delivery. The role of Panchayats as local self-governments
central to planning and implementation would be a cross-cutting theme.
While all matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule can be ideally
included, it is proposed to prioritise major sectors and Centrally
Sponsored schemes pertaining to the core functions undertaken by

94
Panchayats. An initial listing of these Schemes and the sectors that
could be covered in Part II are given in Table 4 below:
TABLE 4
Sector Scheme Central Ministry/
Department
Elementary 1. Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan Department of
Education 2. Mid-day Meal Scheme Elementary Education
Adult Education 3. Total Literacy Campaign
Public Health 4. Drinking Water Mission Department of
5. Total Sanitation Campaign Drinking Water Supply
Health 6. National Rural Health Mission Ministry of Health
Child 7. Integrated Child Development Ministry of HRD,
Welfare Services Department of Women
and Child Welfare
Poverty 8. National Rural Employment Ministry of Rural
Alleviation Guarantee Scheme (including Development
SGRY)
9. Swarnajayanti Grameen
Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
Rural Housing 10. Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)
Rural Roads 11. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY)
Rural 12. Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Ministry of Power
Electrification Vidyutikaran Yojana
13. Remote Village Electrification Ministry of Non
Programme Conventional Energy
Tribal 14. Tribal Sub-Plan Ministry of Tribal
Development Welfare
Natural 15. Haryali Ministry of Rural
Resource Development
Management 16. Watershed Schemes of Ministry of Agriculture
Agriculture Ministry
Industry & 17. Various Schemes Ministry of Food
Rural Business processing
Hubs Ministry of Textiles
SSI and Agro & Rural
Industries
Disaster Management

95
Planning, implementation, supervision and monitoring, disclosure and
accounting will be explained with reference to service delivery. The
need for PRIs to function to concert for efficient implementation of
schemes will also be explained.
2.312 Curriculum for Course II (a):
Training under Course II(a) is envisaged to be through a series of
interactive exercises that guide Panchayats and their staff through the
step-by-step modalities of implementation. The core curriculum could
be developed in workshop mode, by SIRDs & NGOs with a proven
track record. This would cover the following aspects in respect of each
sector or schemes covered, as given in Table 5 below:
TABLE 5
5(a) Planning
1. Broad overview of scheme guidelines or legislation
concerned
2. Preparing a participative plan for the service concerned
3. Prioritising list of projects at Panchayat level
4. Scrutiny of the Panchayat plan and obtaining of approvals
5. Examples of how to coverage different programmes
6. Preparation and updating a shelf of works
7. Consolidation of Panchayat level Plans into the district level
plans
5(b): Implementation
1. Beneficiary selection
2. Muster roll maintenance
3. Payment of wages
5(c): Supervision and monitoring
1. Measurement of Work
2. Quality control
3. Certification of work undertaken
4. Preparation of Annual Reports

96
5(d): Disclosure
1. Meeting obligations under Right to Information
2. Public display of details of works
3. Conduct of social audit
4. Grievance Redressal
5(e): Accounting
1. Overview of Panchayat accounting
2. Maintenance of Statutory registers
3. Management of Panchayat funds
4. Treasury procedures
5. Bank procedures
6. Conduct of audit
2.313 Responsibilities in designing of the detailed curriculum for
Course II(a):
An activity mapping, giving the details of the responsibilities of
the Central Government, State Governments and the District Training
Team in preparing the curriculum, in respect of Course II(a) is indicated
below in Table 6:
Table 6:
2.314 Training methodologies of Course II(a) and logistics for
implementation:
Emphasis on engaging District and sub-district line department Staff
as resource persons:
The investments and resource persons in rolling out Part I can
also be used for Part II. However, for sector specific programmes field
level line department staff with the right attitude and aptitude can be
inducted as trainers for Course II(a), as they have an intimate
Central Government
Details of important
programmes being
implemented by
Panchayats obtained from
the Central Ministries
concerned and summarized
into core content for
Panchayat members.
State Government
State specific priority areas
pertaining to the Sector
concerned, which need to
be addressed by all
Panchayats in planning
and implementation.
District Training Team
District level nuances,
concerning planning and
implementation of these
sectoral programmes in
Panchayats in the district.

97
knowledge of local situations and the grassroot level reality concerning
their sector and if properly motivated, they can bring in creative and
useful inputs.
Course II(a) training would be led by departmental field staff,
already selected into the district training teams. District and sub-district
level functionaries shall be entrusted the responsibility of undertaking
such hands-on training for members of the Standing Committees in
short term courses. Such programmes could be arranged in courses of
one day or half day, so as to ensure a balance between regular duties
and additional ones of training.
2.315 Duration of Course II(a):
The programme for implementation of Course II(a) can be split
into two phases as described below in Table 7:
TABLE 7
Sl.No. Phase Duration Content Remarks
1. Phase 1 3 days Crosscutting aspects of For all participants,
sectoral programmes, such as indicated in
as Accounting, fund Table 1
management, disclosure,
social audit etc.
2. Phase 2 3 days Sector specific and scheme Participants will be
specific training segregated into
groups, based on the
Standing Committees
that they belong to
and attend the
appropriate sessions.
Depending on the scope and ambit of empowerment of Panchayats,
States can adopt variations on this basic pattern.
2.316 Course II(b): Building ICT Skills:
Through Course II(b), at least two people per Panchayat will be
equipped with computing skills.
2.317 Curriculum for Course II(b):
Training content would be aimed towards awareness generation
and skill development is software proposed to be deployed at the

98
Panchayat level. The curriculum for Course II(b) would consist of the
operational aspects of the Panchayat Suite and other back end solution
software applications from NIC. Special emphasis would be given to
familiarization with the National Panchayat Portal (NPP , http://
panchayat.gov.in). Training for selected persons would include software
operation and data entry skills.
2.318 Responsibilities in designing of the detailed curriculum for
Course II(b):
An activity mapping, giving the details of the responsibilities of
the Central Government, State Governments and the District Training
Team in preparing the curriculum, in respect of Course II(b) is indicated
below in Table 8:
TABLE 8
2.319 Training methodologies of Course II(b) and logistics for
implementation:
Training for ICT skills is best done in cascade mode. Care may be
taken to ensure that sufficient resource persons selected for
implementing the framework are skilled in IT. Training of trainers at
the State level can be organized in a collaborative manner between
the SIRD and the State Information Officer.
2.4 Part III: Strengthening the consolidation of capability through
interaction and networking:
2.41 In each State, the first year after elections would be devoted
to the rollout of Part I and Part II of the Framework. However, so as
to retain the momentum after Panchayat members and officials go
back to work, there is a need for continuous interaction and providing
them additional support when they are confronted with issues and
decisions at the ground level. Several activities (not necessarily in the
Central Government
NIC to provide
software and basic
manuals.
State
Government
State specific manuals
to be created in
association with State
Informatics Officers of
the NIC.
District Training
Team
Local selection of
resource persons for
training.

99
nature of courses) together comprise Part-III of the Framework, as
follows:
2.42 III(a): Campaigns at the Gram Sabha level
The training of Panchayat members and Staff shall be
complemented by a large scale community mobilization programme
aimed at motivating people to improve the functioning of Gram Sabhas.
NGOs and CBOs would be involved in a big way both in spreading
the message of participation as also in Gram Sabha level interactions
such as beneficiary selection, social audit etc. Within the general
campaign, there would be particular focus on motivating Self-Help
Groups, Groups such as Mahila and Youth Mandals and other activity
based groups to participate in Gram Sabhas and act as more assertive
pressure groups within it. Such campaigns would also aim at
motivating people to serve in various Panchayat Standing Committees
and participate more actively in planning and implementation of
sectoral programmes.
Campaigns at the Gram Sabha level could also focus on important
common concerns of the people and Panchayats, such as alcohilism,
literacy, girls’ education, domestic violence, dowry , water and soil
conservation, organic farming etc. through the performance of kala
jatha nataks and evocative songs, with the objective of triggering
collaboration and common action between Panchayats and the people
on a daily basis, instead of only at the time of conduct of the Gram
Sabha.
2.43 III(B): Panchayati Raj TV Channel
2.431 TV Channels offer the advantage of wide coverage with the
lowest possible lead time and therefore fit in well in first efforts at
widespred spreading of the message of Panchayati Raj. There are a
large number of television channels, both private State owned, that
have wide coverage While it may not be possible to use them for
structured training and capability building, they can be used in
campaigns for awareness.
2.432 Radio: Dedicated airtime on commercial radio for Panchayati
Raj based programmes would be useful in building the general
awareness of people regarding Panchayati Raj.
2.45 III(C): Formation of networks of Panchayat elected
representatives:
Formation of networks and associations of Panchayat elected
representatives so as to facilitate more outspoken Panchayati Raj, share

100
experiences and access material from each other will be promoted
under the Framework. This will be particularly encouraged as envisaged
in the Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyan and Panchayat Yuva Shakti
Abhiyan. Some of the specific initiatives that will be encouraged as
self-learning processes through networking will be as follows:
(a) Use of IT:
(b) Community Radio:
Community Radio is an emerging area that could provide support
to small local networks of Panchayati Raj members. As an adjunct to
the block level resource centres (described) elsewhere in this framework,
community radio would provide the connectivity and continuation of
the effects of training.
2.44 III(e): Yearly Refresher Course:
It is proposed to have a once-yearly refresher course for all
Panchayat members. This will be undertaken in similar fashion as
Course I (a), namely, in satellite assisted face-to-face mode. The overall
objective of this training shall be to provide a forum for Panchayat
representatives to (a) share their experiences of good practices as weel
as learn from their failures and (b) network with each other. Each
training programme can be of 4 days duration and may be combined
with experience sharing and field visits.
2.46 III(f) Visits to identified ‘beacon’ Panchayats:
Beacon Panchayats can be identified through a transparent and
independent process so that the work that they have done can be
showcased. Study visits of other Panchayats to these beacon Panchayats
can be organized, so as to promote exposure to best practices and
replicate models of development and good governance.
2.45 III(g): Intermediate Panchayat level Extension and Resource
Centres:
2.461 At least one extension centre at the level of each Intermediate
Panchayat may be set up, so as to cater to the training requirements
of all Panchayats within the Intermediate Panchayat area. Each
Extension Training Centre would provide a space for training activities,
hosting Field Resource Persons and for Panchayat members to conduct
mutual consultations and networking. The Satellite training reception
facility can be physically located at the Extension Resource Centre.

101
Panchayat members would be facilitated for congregating at these
resource centres for smaller level meetings and mutual support.
2.462 Each Extension Centre would be staffed with a few resource
persons who would provide technical support to the Panchayats, as
follows:
(a) An engineer to technically review Panchayat level
infrastructure construction projects and provide support for
preparation of estimates, procure tenders and monitor
quality.
(b) An accountant to assist Gram Panchayats to follow
prescribed financial guidelines, to provide assistance where
needed, and to collate Panchayat accounts at the block level
for transfer to the district.
(c) A social specialist, to assist Panchayats in conducting
decentralized participatory processes for planning, mobilize
the poorest and vulnerable groups to attend Gram Sabhas
and Ward Sabhas.
2.463 Running to resource centres could be organized either through
(a) the district or Intermediate Panchayat (b) the SIRD, supported by
the district or intermediate Panchayat (c) a collective of the Panchayat
members themselves, wherever such networks have been created and
are strong (d) an NGO, associated with the Panchayat member network
or Panchayat representatives. These arrangements would ensure that
the O&M requirements are met through appropriate agreements.
Whatever the model adopted, Panchayat members will be fully
associated with the governing arrangements for the running of the
resource centres.
2.47 III(h): Helplines:
Telephone helplines can be set up to provide a speedy channel of
clarification and information, to trained persons and link help seekers
with providers Important points concerning setting up telephone
helplines are summarized in Table 9 below:
TABLE 9
Location: Can be at the State level to start with, but district
level would be ideal.
Minimum facilities: At least one telephone line and one independent
fax line is essential for each helpline.

102
Training: Staff should be specially trained to take calls and
answer them. They should have pleasing manners,
must be helpful and fully conversant with all aspects
of Panchayati Raj. The beast Field level resource
persons could be given helpline duties on a rotation
basis.
Timings: The helpline could be run for 16 hours, every day,
in two 8-hour shifts. This is because persons seeking
clarifications on phone often wait for STD rates to
be low when making calls.
Publicity: W ide publicity should be given to the helpline
telephone numbers in all communications of the
Government. They should also be widely publicized
in the press.
Availability of The State will need to provide all material such as
materials for copies of legislations, rules, regulations, activity
clarifications: mapping, orders and circulars to the helpline. All
information including those related to Right to
Information should be available at the Helplines. The
helpline could also provide assistance by way of
quick clarification, in preparation of estimates,
reference to Schedule of Rates etc.
Faxing of It is possible that from Gram Panchayats etc. details
instructions would be sought over phones in public STD booths,
from the where there may also be fax availability. Therefore
Helplines: the helpline should be in a position to readily send
faxes to those requiring it.
Logging of Calls to helplines will provide invaluable feedback
calls and on the implementation of Panchayati Raj. Therefore,
replies: systems for lodging calls will need to be put in. On
a daily basis, the gist of calls will need to be
recorded in writing in special logbooks for the
purpose.
Grievance It is quite possible that helplines are also used by
redressal: people to complain and record their grievances.
Arrangements will need to be made to send the
complaints received to the authorities concerned for
redressal and to provide replies to the persons
concerned.

103
Debriefing: Wherever a State decides to have more than one
helpline, a monthly debriefing of helpline staff may
be conducted so as to get information on field
activities. This will also provide an opportunity for
staff to learn form each others’ experiences. The logs
can also be registered in a common repository during
the debriefing, from where they can be used to
prepare replies to frequently asked questions.
2.48 III(i): Formal Certification courses in Panchayati Raj:
A more formal training system to provide formal certification of
courses for training can be set up. Training programmes shall be
designed especially for the secretarial and technical staff working with
Panchayats through institutions such as IGNOU. Other stakeholders,
including interested Panchayat elected representatives will also be
assisted to undertake this course. Such training programmes will lead
to formal certification on achieving prescribed standards of learning.
CHAPTER 3
RESOURCE PERSONS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE FRAMEWORK
3.1 The predominant mode of rolling out Parts I & II of the
framework is through combining satellite and face-to-face training.
Cascade training is aimed at creating pools of resource persons at
each level, from the National to the Block level, who are a lasting
investment in the training chain. Since training is not envisaged as a
one time effort, resource persons also cannot be selected on that basis
that they will be required intermittently. This pool of resource persons
will be created through a three step cascading process, comprising of
national Resource Persons, State level Resource Persons and District
and sub district level resource persons. In the case of IT training
[Course II(b)] it is envisaged that only a two level cascading process
will be adopted, namely, of State and District level resource persons.
3.2 Details of Resource Persons required for the programme:
3.21 Master Resource Persons:
Master trainers are key role players and should have the right
attitude and aptitude for imparting skills concerning key development
programmes. Variations in skills required would depend on the content,
mode of roll-out and logistics of the programme. The basic
qualifications for master trainers would need to be spelt out in advance

104
and they would vary depending on the kind of design. At the National
level and the State level, trainers are expected to train State level
master trainers who would come to the training programme carrying
significant experience both in training as well as implementation of
government schemes. The approach at the National level would
encompass communicating both the ethos of Panchayati Raj, as well
as the processes involved. This would largely be the approach of State
Master Trainers also.
3.22 Resource Persons at the District level:
Most individuals selected as Resource persons at the District levels
would also be stakeholders and participants in Panchayati Raj. Trainers
may also double up working in resource centres.
3.23 Numbers of Resource persons required:
The kinds of resource persons required for implementation of the
programme are given below in Table 10.
Sl.No. Category of Number Basis for Broad work Responsibility of
resource required calculation of chart undertaking
person numbers including training
required Course
concerned
1 234 5 6
Central Level:
1. Satellite 96 (100) At least 4 To anchor Ministry of Panchayati
training per State State satellite Raj to provide basic
anchors transmissions orientation, through a
and for Parts I & II pr ogramme operated at
presenters of the a designated SIRD that
programme is already using the system
2. National 150 Given in To undertake State to select persons,
Resource Table TOTs for MoPR to provide basic
Persons below State level orientation course
master thr ough a programme
trainers, for operated at a
courses in designated SIRD
Parts I & II
of the
Framework
Total 250

105
1 234 5 6
State Level
1. State 1850 Given in To undertake State to select and train
level Table below TOTs for in programme at SIRDs
Master District level
Resource master
Persons trainers in
Parts I & II
of the
Framework
2. District 27500 Given in State Master Resource
level Table below persons to undertake
Resource training at district level
Persons
3. State 100 At least 4 To undertake To be selected by NIC in
level per State TOTs for consultation with State
Master District level
Resource resource
Persons persons
for IT
4. District 1800 At the rate State to selected and train
level of 3 per in consultation with NIC.
Resource district
Persons
Total 31250
Grand Total 31500
The calculations in respect of the requirement of resource persons
are detailed below in Table 11:
TABLE 11
No of elected 2200000
representatives to
be trained
No. of persons per batch 20 It is envisaged that training batches will
not be larger than 20 persons at a time,
so as to ensure meaningful participation
of all.
No. of training batches (a/b) 110000 On the basis of 20 persons per batch,
more than 110000 batches will require
to be trained.

106
No. of weeks in which each 20 It is envisaged that each round of
round of training is to be training (whether foundation, sectoral
competed or refresher) should not take more than
20 weeks to complete. In other words,
in every State, each round of training
will need to be completed in 20 weeks.
No. of training batches per 5500 If 20 weeks is taken as the basis for
week (c/d) completion of training, then each week,
550 batches will require to be trained.
No. of field resource persons 5 It is envisaged that for optimum results
per batch and interactivity, each batch will need
to be assisted by at least 5 resource
persons on site. It is envisaged that of
these resource persons, at least 3 will
be from full time trainers drawn from
NGOs, ex-Panchayat or sitting
Panchayat members, retired
Government officials etc. At least two
will be from line departments working
at the district and the block levels.
Total number of field 27500 The total requirement of resource
resource persons required persons for Panchayat level training.
(eXf)
No. of field resource persons 15 It is envisaged that each State Master
per State master trainer Trainer would handle 15 field resource
persons.
No. of State master trainers 1833
required (g/h)
No. of National Master 15 It is envisaged that National Master
trainers per State Master Trainer would handle 15 State Master
trainer Trainers.
No. of National Master 122
trainers required (i/j)
3.3 Selection of Resource Persons
3.31 Effective implementation of the Framework is critically
dependent on the quality of Resource Persons at each level. Care will

107
need to be taken to specially identify people with the right mindset,
commitment and drive as Resource persons. These could be drawn
from Panchayat members themselves (or ex-members), NGOs, or could
be Government servants, both serving or retired. The process of
selection has three phases as follows:
(a) a preliminary screening before selection for the orientation
course.
(b) a rigorous orientation course.
(c) a post orientation evaluation.
The details of each step are elaborated below:
3.3.2. Preliminary Screening of candidates before selection for the
orientation course:
Criteria for preliminary identification and screening are as follows:
(a) Commitment to values of gender and caste equity and
secularism and lack of prejudices based on caste, gender or
religion.
(b) Experience in Panchayati Raj system may be desirable, but
not compulsory.
(c) Ability to sympathetically communicate, particularly to draw
out the withdrawn.
(d) Ability for multitasking, as Resource Persons will need to
be equally at home in face to face trainings, satellite training,
operating helplines and providing online assistance at the
field level for Panchayat representatives.
3.3.3. The Induction Course:
The induction training programmes for selection of master trainers
would be a rigorous and well-documented process, concentrating on
sensitization of all Master Trainers to the special needs and concerns
of Panchayati Raj. This will be a 2 month long course, aimed at testing
various skills of participants particularly that of empathizing with the
poor and ability to persevere in adverse conditions. It will include a
village immersion stage. The induction course will also equip Master
trainers with a thorough knowledge of the entire gamut of the
management of training processes, including funding and logistics.

108
3.3.4. Final Screening:
The induction course would be followed by a final screening that
tests both knowledge, commitment and mentioning skills.
3.4 Line department staff as trainers:
Line department staff could be inducted into the training system
at all levels, namely, as National or State level Master Resource persons
or as Field level Resource Persons. Of the five resource persons required
at each training batch, at least two could be such the department
officials. These officials would come into the training system with some
amount of prior knowledge and commitment. While ideally such
persons should also be put through the induction course of 2 months.
In case it is fell that they cannot be spared full-time for training, then
they could be put through a shorter induction course (about 2 to 3
weeks) and then join the resource team batch.
Separate honoraium would be paid to such field level staff, who
join the Resource persons teams. These will need to be fixed by the
State. For the purposes of standardisation of calculation of costs, the
costs pertaining to honorarium have been subsumed into the costs of
each training course.
3.5. Refresher Courses for Resource Persons:
There would be yearly colloquia for the interaction of Resource
persons. Exposure visits for trainers, especially to well performing States
in Panchayati Raj, would also be part of the refresher courses for
Master Resource Persons.
CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT OF TRAINING MATERIALS
4.1. General Principles for guidance in preparation of training
materials:
Training materials should be mostly illustrated. They must always
be in the local language, preferably in the local dialect and simple.
Local best and innovative practices should be captured in pictorial
training materials. Folk resources should be used extensively. For the
lower level functionaries the materials should be in question-answer
mode. Frequently asked questions, (Dos and dont’s) and a detailed
glossary of the frequently used terminologies should be included in

109
training materials. A handbook containing basics of PR system in simple
language should be handed over to the PRI functionaries at the time
of oath taking.
4.2 Print material
Training of the magnitude envisaged will require the development
of a variety of print material, which ought to be easy on the eye and
preferably well illustrated. Print material could be of the following
kinds:
(a) Reference handbooks for Panchayat members, staff and other
stakeholders, which is best arranged in the form of answers
to frequently asked questions.
(b) Charts, wall newspapers and posters on various aspects of
Panchayati Raj, which can be displayed in Panchayat offices
and other public places.
(c) Newsletters for both circulation among stakeholders as well
as the general public.
4.3 Film and Electronic Material
Some of the points that could underline the development of film
material for training are as follows:
(a) Format of the films could be workshop discussions,
individual interviews and dramatised plays derived from
the experience of elected Panchayat members, discussing
and thinking about what they bring out, and considering
lessons for one’s own gram Panchayats.
(b) Films need not be pre-scripted and there need not be expert
lectures. The films will reflect the lived experience of elected
gram panchayat members.
(c) Gender and caste equality would be a cross cutting theme.
Wherever possible, NGOs could be involved in developing the
film material.
4.4 Panchayat participation in programme design and management:
There is a need to encourage Panchayats to develop a sense of
ownership of the training programmes and to play a major role in
designing content and mechanisms of training. This could start with
providing representation for Panchayat members in the Governing
Boards and Task Forces within training institutions that address their
needs. In the first instance, trained members should be encouraged to
become resource persons for further training of panchayat
representatives peer to peer learning, both within and outside the State
through regional or national tie ups should be encouraged and
supported. However, a more long-term approach would be to ensure
that Panchayat member networks take over a large part of the
management of training programmes a kind of self-training system.

110
CHAPTER 5
PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT, EVALUATION AND
DOCUMENTATION
5.1 Evaluation of training ought to be undertaken by those
institutions that do not undertake training. Training institutions should
undertake a self-evaluation. The mechanism for monitoring and
evaluation of Framework implementation would include both:
(a) Quantitative and measurable outputs, in terms of activities
such as numbers of training workshops conducted,
attendance obtained, presence and participation of women
and SC/ST representatives, use of radio/films, use of satellite
training etc. and
(b) Outcomes, in terms of
(i) Quality of facilitation provided to Panchayats,
particularly Gram Panchayats, in undertaking their
responsibilities,
(ii) Attitudinal change or enhancement in the conduct of
activities at the Panchayat level and quality of service
delivery.
5.2 Monitoring of outcomes:
Outcomes would need to be assessed against detailed analysis of
qualitative parameters. Some aspects that could be assessed to
determine to what extent the potential of Panchayats has been unlocked
are as follows:
(a) How training has enabled more effective community
participation, particularly with reference to the conduct of
Gram Sabhas, Ward Sabhas and Social Audit,
(b) How training has affected the functioning of standing
committees in the Panchayats,
(c) How training has catalysed partnering amongst functionaries,
Panchayat elected representatives and people,
(d) Efforts undertaken by Panchayats to practice democratic
processes in decision making, both in the Panchayat itself
and the Gram Sabha,
(e) How training has facilitated designing and approving
participative plans,
(f) Taking numerous decisions involved with the
implementation process, particularly compliance with
Statutory procedures,
(g) Improvement in accountability, in terms of responding,
(h) Addressing public grievances,

111
(i) Participation by Ward Members in GP meetings and in
decisions, and
(j) Participation of Gram Sabha members in decision making
of the Gram Panchayat.
5.3 Training Programme Management:
Programme management, shall be decentralized and adapted for
local needs. Separate sub-committee to oversee specific aspects of
programme management could also be set up, as given in Table 12
below:
TABLE 12
Name of Committee Duties
Curriculum Committee This Committee can be responsible for developing training
designs—including the content and process of training. It
can also identify core and supplementary reading/training
material for development, production and dissemination.
Monitoring, This Committee would identify indices for monitoring and
Evaluation and evaluation. It will also identify appropriate agencies to
Documentation undertake documentation and evaluation of the various
Committee training programmes undertaken.
Finance and This Committee will monitor utilization of funds released
Accounts Committee for training and ensure regular and periodic audit of the
funds released. It will ensure timely submission of
utilization certificates on training funds, as required.
5.4 At the District level, Peer groups of Panchayat representatives,
resource persons and NGO representatives may be involved in the
preparation of training, material, design of content, evaluation forms
and post training performance of Panchayats.
CHAPTER 6
ESTIMATION OF COSTS OF IMPLEMENTING
THE FRAMEWORK
6.1 Several aspects need to be taken into consideration while
preparing the cost estimations for the Capability Building Framework.
The costs of implementation of the Framework comprises of Capital
and revenue costs. Ideally speaking, capital costs are to be invested

112
during the first year of the implementation. As the training process
under the framework will undergo continuous improvement and
refinement. While training for the first year would be to give every
stakeholder a basic minimum input required to operate the programme,
experiences of the first year can substantially modify the training
programme for the second year. Modules, training groups and training
strategies etc., will change, leading to modifications in cost estimations.
Some costs are incurred once in every few years, such as preparation
of printed and audio-visual material. They are proposed to be paid
for in the first year. For the above reasons, revenue costs would be
different for the first year and for subsequent years of training. The
details of the components for which the costs are calculated are given
in Table 13 Below:
TABLE 13
Capital Costs (to be Revenue Costs
invested up-front in the Items to be covered in Yearly items, from
first year) first year second year onwards
Satellite training Induction course for Master Refresher Courses for
facilities Resource Persons Resource Persons
Installation of Computer I(a): Foundation Course III(e): Yearly Refresher Course
hardware in
Panchayats
Intermediate Panchayat I(b): Basic Functional Course III(f): Visits to identified
level Resource Centres ‘beacon’ Panchayats
Strengthening of NIRD I(c): Functional III(a): Gram Sabha level
Literacy Course Campaigns
Strengthening of SIRDs II(a): Sectorally focussed III(I): Certificate courses
training programme
III(d): Formation of Monitoring of outcomes
networks of Panchayat
elected representatives
II(b): Building ICT Skills
Film and Electronic Action research
Material
Print material
Common items from first year onwards
III(b): Panchayati Raj TV channel and radio programmes
III(c): Panchayati Raj Newsletter
III(g): Intermediate Panchayat level Resource Centres
III(h): Helplines
Training Programme Management

113
6.2 The cost in respect of the Capital costs may be worked out in
Table 14 below:
Table 14: Capital Costs
Table 14 (a-2) Capital costs for satellite training:
Item Cost per No. of Level of Total
unit units unit cost
(Rs. cr.)
Satellite studio 5 State
Satellite receiving stations 0.007 One at each
Intermediate
Panchayat
level
Miscellaneous civil works (electrification,
training halls etc.)
Table 14(b): Cost of installation of Computer Hardware in Panchayats:
Computer Hardware 50,000 One at each
Village
Panchayat
level
Table 14(c): Capital cost for strengthening of training infrastructure:
Intermediate Panchayat level Resource 10 One at each
Centres Intermediate
Panchayat
level
Strengthening of SIRDs 100 One per State
TABLE 15
Item Total cost
(Rs. cr)
Satellite Training
Computer Hardware
Intermediate Panchayat level Resource Centres
Strengthening of SIRDs
Total

114
Capital costs would vary on the basis of the extent of availability
of existing infrastructure, such as extension training centers, satellite
training facilities etc. already existing in States.
6.3 Revenue Expenditure:
6.3.1 Revenue expenditure would vary from year to year, depending
on the mix of programmes that are implemented each year.
6.3.2 Costs for the first year may be calculated on the basis of
the matrix below:
TABLE 16
Sl.No. Item Number Basis of Total amount
calculation (Rs. cr)
12 3 4 5
1. Induction course 60 days course, at the Rate
for Master of Rs. 1000 per day per
Resource participants (Inclusive of all
Persons costs)
2. I(a): Foundation 4 day course at the rate of
Course Rs. 150 per day for 22 lakh
elected representatives
and 8 lakh officials
3. I(b): Basic 4 day course at the rate of
Functional Rs. 150 per day for 10 lakh
Course elected office bearers and
chairpersons of Standing
Committees and 5 lakh
officials
4. I(c): Functional Rs. 1000 lump sum grant
Literacy Course per illiterate person for 8
lakh illiterate persons
5. II(a): Sectorally 4 day course at the rate of
focused training Rs. 150 per day for 22 lakh
programme elected representatives
and 8 lakh officials
6. III(d): Formation One network per State,
of networks of with basic start up costs
Panchayat given at Rs. 2 lakh per
elected representatives State

115
12 3 4 5
 7. II(b): Building Cap of Rs. 2000/- per
ICT Skills individual for 5 lakh
persons
 8. Film and At Rs. 10 lakhs per half-
Electronic hour film
Material
 9. Print material Lump sum allocation
10. III(b): Panchayati Lump sum allocation
Raj TV channel
and radio
programmes
11. III(c): Panchayati At rate of Rs. 10 per
Raj Newsletter newsletter, 5 copies per
Panchayat every month
(i.e., 60 copies per
annum per Panchayat)
12. III(g): Intermediate Lump sum allocation of
Panchayat level Rs. 3 lakhs per
Resource Resource Centre
Centres
13. III(h): Helplines Lump sum allocation of
Rs. 1 cr per State
14. Training 1 per cent of total
Programme revenue cost
Management
Total
6.2.4 Revenue expenditures in respect of each year from the
second year onwards may be calculated as per the matrix in Table 17
below:
Sl.No. Item Number Basis of Total
calculation amount
(Rs. cr)
12 3 4 5
1. Refresher 4 days course, at the Rate
Courses for of Rs. 200 per day per
Resource participant (Inclusive of all
Persons costs)

116
12 3 4 5
 2. III(e): Yearly 4 days course at the rate of
Refresher Rs. 150 per day for 22 lakh
Course elected representatives
 3. III(f): Visits to 2 days course at the rate of
identified Rs. 150 per day for 10 lakh
‘beacon’ elected office bearers and
Panchayats chairpersons of Standing
Committees
 4. III(a): Gram Rs. 5 lakh lump sum grant
Sabha level per district
Campaigns
 5. III(i): Certificate At the rate of Rs. 10,000
courses per course for 100
persons per year
10. III(b): Panchayati Lump sum allocation
Raj TV channel
and radio
programmes
11. III(c): Panchayati At the rate of Rs. 10 per
Raj Newsletter newsletter, 5 copies per
Panchayat every month
(i.e., 60 copies per
annum per Panchayat)
12. III(g): Intermediate Lump sum allocation of
Panchayat level Rs. 3 lakhs per
Resource Resource Centre
Centres
13. III(h): Helplines Lump sum allocation of
Rs. 1 cr per State
Monitoring of Lump sum allocation
outcomes
Action research Lump sum allocation
14. Training Maintain the cost for first
Programme year
Management
Total

117
6.3 Detailed Projectisation for each State:
Every State may prepare a project report covering implementation
of every aspect of the framework. Technical assistance shall be provided
by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the preparation of State specific
Framework implementation project documents. State specific projects
will follow the same sequence of courses and activities. However, there
may be variations on the number of days devoted to training on certain
matters, based on the extent of devolution to Panchayats. Similarly, in
States that do not have satellite-training facilities at present, an interim
cascade mechanism of training may be adopted, while working toward
the eventual goal of establishing a distance-training network. State-
wise projects will also undertake a census of facilities already available
for training, so that only the incremental requirement needs to be met.
All these matters will be captured in a State-wise needs assessment,
which will form an integral part of the State Specific Framework design.
ANNEXE—4 LIST OF PRIORITY SCHEMES FOR FUNDS
EARMARKED FOR SC AND ST DEVELOPMENT
1. Community halls.
2. Residential Intermediate college/hostels for SC/ST children.
3. ITSs
4. Rural playgrounds.
5. One time support (of about 20 lakh) to reputed NGOs who
have land for setting up Secondary Schools/Colleges for
girls.
6. Tractors with trolleys and agricultural implements to SHGs
of 20 small/marginal SC/ST farmers.
7. Training of educated youth in areas such as computers,
repairs of mobile phones, driving etc.
8. Pre-recruitment training for para-military and other security
forces.
9. Construction and allotment of shops, etc.

118
APPENDIX VIII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON THURSDAY, THE 29 MARCH, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah— In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Zora Singh Mann
4. Shri D. Narbula
5. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
6. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
7. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
8. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
11. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari
13. Shri Jayantilal Barot
14. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
15. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

119
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Smt. Meenakshi Datta Ghosh — Secretary
2. Shri B.K. Sinha — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Avtar Singh Sahota — Joint Secretary
4. Smt. Aditi Mehta — Joint Secretary
5. Shri T.R. Raghunandan — Joint Secretary
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Dr.
Chandan Mitra, M.P . to act as the Chairman for the sitting under Rule
258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha.
3. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee, convened for taking oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on Demands for
Grants (2007-2008).
[The representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj were then called
in].
4. The Committee thereafter took oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on Demands for
Grants (2007-2008).
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj and drew their attention to direction 55(1) of ‘Directions
by the Speaker’. The main issues that came up during the course of
evidence include, need for optimal utilisation of enhanced allocation
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj during 2007-2008, need to give
focused attention for implementation of various provisions of Part IX
of the Constitution especially on devolution of 29 subjects as enlisted
in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution, from various State
Governments/Union territory Administrations to three tiers of
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in terms of functions, functionaries
and finances, need for early constitution of mandatory District Planning

120
Committees (DPCs) for ensuring planning at district level, need for
ensuring greater centrality of Panchayati Raj Institutions in Centrally
Sponsored Schemes, need for ensuring greater participation in Gram
Sabhas for the purpose of empowering Panchayati Raj Institutions,
need for arriving consensus over Draft Nyaya Panchayati Bill before
its introduction in Parliament etc. The representatives of the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj replied to the queries raised by the members and
were asked to send replies to the point which could not be made
available during the sitting.
A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

121
APPENDIX IX
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 24 APRIL, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo— In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
4. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
5. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
6. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Balihari
8. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
9. Dr. Chandan Mitra
10. Shri P .R. Rajan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary

122
2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo, MP to act as Chairman for the sitting
under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the
draft Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj.
4. The Committee adopted the said draft Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) with a slight modification.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Report on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

123
APPENDIX X
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSEVATIONS
Sl. No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.4 The Committee wish to point out that the
primary objective of inserting direction 73A in
the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ was to make
the Government more accountable for
implementation of various recommendations of
the Committee. The Committee are constrained
to note that even after lapse of around five
months when the statement on Twenty-First
Report had fallen due, the statement is yet to
be made by the Hon’ble Minister. The Ministry
proposes to lay the statement during the current
session of Parliament. The Committee
recommend to the Ministry to ensure that the
statement is made at the earliest during the
second part of the Budget Session of Parliament
commencing from 26 April, 2007. The
Committee, further, strongly recommend to the
Ministry to ensure that the statements in respect
of each of the report are made within the
specified period i.e., six months after the
presentation of the Report to Parliament as per
direction 73 A of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha, in future.
2. 2.11 The Committee note that although the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj was created as far back as
2004-2005, yet adequate allocation was made
available to the Ministry only from 2006-2007
onwards to carry out its functions for
meaningful achievement during Tenth Plan
(2002-2007) period. For instance the Budget
allocations of the Ministry during 2004-2005,
2005-2006 were Rs. 30.60 crore and Rs. 50 crore

124
12 3
respectively. The Budget Estimates for 2006-2007
were significantly enhanced to Rs. 3,825 crore.
However the Committee are constrained to note
that whatever Budget allocations were made
available to the Ministry were drastically
reduced at Revised Estimates stage during
annual plans of 2004-2005 and 2006-2007 of
Tenth Plan period. For instance the Budget
Estimates of Rs. 30.60 crore and Rs. 3,825 crore
during 2004-2005 and 2006-2007 were drastically
reduced to the level of Rs. 10.60 crore and
Rs. 2,000 crore respectively. Even the reduced
allocation of Rs. 10.60 crore during 2004-05
could not be utilised fully by the Ministry and
resulted in underspending of Rs. 1.15 crore i.e.
around 15 per cent of the allocated outlay.
Delay in creation of posts and accommodation
for the Ministry based on the recommendations
of Group of Ministers has been attributed to
be the reason for under-utilisation of Budget
allocation during 2004-2005 delay in transfer of
the scheme of ‘Backward Regions Grants Fund’
to Ministry of Panchayati Raj has led to the
reduction in Budget Estimates of Rs. 3,825 crore
to the level of Rs. 2,000 crore at Revised
Estimates stage during 2006-2007. While
appreciating the fact that the year 2004-2005
was the first year of the working of the newly
constituted Ministry and the year 2006-07 was
the year when bulk of the outlay of the
Ministry was allocated for Backward Region
Grant Fund (BRFG), the scheme which was
transferred from the Ministry of Finance to the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj in August, the
Committee observe that reduction in outlay at
Revised Estimates stage retards the overall
performance of the Ministry during a plan
period particularly when there is a challenging
task of strengthening of Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs) and training of over 14 lakh
PRI functionaries is yet to be accomplished. The

125
12 3
Committee, therefore, recommend that all out
efforts should be made to ensure that the
allocations made during a year are fully
utilised. Since the cut at Revised Estimates stage
during the aforesaid two years was because of
gross underspending due to the reasons as
explained above, the Ministry has to work hard
to convince the Planning Commission not to
resort to cut at Revised Estimates stage.
3. 2.15 The Committee appreciate the concerns of the
Planning Commission as highlighted in the
Approach Paper to the Eleventh Plan (2007-
2012) regarding need to empower Panchayati
Raj Institutions (PRIs). In this context the
Committee also appreciate that though some
headway has been made in this regard, yet the
task ahead is very challenging before the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj during the Eleventh
Plan period. The Committee find that the
focused areas during the Eleventh Plan would
be implementation of programmes like
Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyan and
Panchayat Yuva Khel Abhhiyan, Centrally
Sponsored Schemes routed through Panchayati
Raj Institutions (PRIs), Devolutions of Functions,
Functionaries and Finances and capacity
buildings of Panchayats through the schemes
‘Gram Swaraj and Backward Region Grant
Fund’. Besides, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
has proposed a legislation, Nyaya Panchayat
Bill which will further enhance the activities of
the Panchayats. The detailed analysis of the
proposed legislation has been made in the
succeeding part of the Report.
The Committee, however, feel that although the
main focus areas have been identified by the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the Eleventh Plan
Period, the trends of allocation of outlay to the
Ministry during Tenth Plan and the first year

126
12 3
of the Eleventh Plan raise doubts about the
practicability and execution of these objectives.
The Ministry has been allocated far lesser than
the proposed allocation during the last two
years of the Tenth Plan which were the first
two years of the newly created Ministry. During
2005-06, the allocation provided i.e., Rs. 50 crore
was less than half of the projected outlay i.e.,
Rs. 105 crore. Later, during 2006-07 the Ministry
was allocated only Rs. 75 crore against the
proposed allocation of Rs. 2,000 crore. However,
in the later half of the year Rs. 3750 crore were
allocated to the Ministry by way of transfer of
BRGF from the Ministry of Finance to Ministry
of Panchayati Raj 2007-08 is the first year of
Eleventh Plan and the trends of allocation to
different Ministries would indicate the thrust
of the Government on different programmes
and the set priorities. In this context, the
Ministry had proposed the outlay of Rs. 15,789
crore which include Rs. 5,789 crore for Gram
Swaraj, Rs. 5,000 crore each for Panchayat
Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme and Backward Regions Grant Fund.
Against the aforesaid proposed allocation, the
outlay earmarked is just Rs. 4,770 crore. The
substantial part of the allocation i.e, Rs. 4,670
crore is for Backward Regions Grant Fund, thus
leaving only Rs. 100 crore for the various
activities of the Ministry relating to the capacity
building of the Panchayats.
4. 2.16 The Committee find that the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj has bold objectives of ensuring
centrality of Panchayats in various Centrally
Sponsored Schemes run by various Ministries/
Departments of the Union Government along
with the mandate of decentralization. The
proposed Nyaya Panchayat Legislation would
further enhance the responsibilities of
Panchayats to a great extent. All these objectives

127
12 3
can be achieved only when each Panchayat has
a Secretariat to assist the Panchayat members
in handling these responsibilities. Besides, the
financial capacity is another area to be taken
care of. The Ministry’s Gram Swaraj Scheme
intends to achieve the objective of capacity
building of Panchayats but with the meagre
outlay, the bold objectives cannot be realised.
The Committee are of the firm opinion that
adequate resources should be allocated to the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj so that the
Panchayats can shoulder the enhanced
responsibilities which the Constitution has
bestowed upon them which the Ministry is
rightfully trying to transfer to Panchayats. The
Eleventh Plan allocation should be made
keeping in view the task ahead of the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj. Keeping in view the
aforesaid observation, the allocation for the year
2007-08 should be enhanced specifically when
the first year of the Eleventh Plan would set
the priority of the Government.
While recommending for higher outlay , the
Committee strongly recommend to the Ministry
to ensure that the allocation is meaningfully
utilised and does not result in huge
underspending or unspent balances with the
implementing agencies. The utilisation capacity
need to be enhanced to effectively utilise the
higher allocation.
5. 2.17 The Committee further find that at present
different schemes relating to the subjects
enshrined under Eleventh Schedule of the
Constitution are being implemented by the
various Ministries/Departments of Union
Government. The annual allocations for these
schemes are approximately between Rs. 55,000
crore to Rs. 72,000 crore. The Panchayats can
play an important role in effective

128
12 3
implementation of these schemes. Besides,
Panchayats can help in the realistic planning
process as envisaged in the Approach Paper to
Eleventh Plan. The Government can think of
allocating a small fraction of the outlay of these
schemes say one percent or so for
empowerment of Panchayats. The Committee
would like that the concerns of the Committee
in this regard should be duly communicated
to the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission.
6. 2.18 The Committee further feel that though much
is being planned by the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj to endow Panchayats with the
responsibilities in the true spirit of article 243G
of the Constitution, it is high time to have some
mechanism to fix accountability on the
respective three tiers of Panchayats. The
Committee recommend to the Ministry to
evolve some mechanism in this regard so that
the maximum outlay meant for the poorest of
the poor reaches the intended beneficiaries and
there are least chances of corruption and
malpractices.
7. 2.25 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is working hard
on evolving a National Training Framework for
providing training to PRIs and functionaries.
The National Training Design prepared by
NIRD was deliberated upon with a group of
NGOs and others who were involved at grass-
root level development and the Ministry is
working towards the National Capability
Building Framework that was aimed at building
effective and sustainable capabilities of all
stakeholders in Panchayati Raj, particularly,
elected representatives, office bearers,
Chairpersons of Standing Committees and
officials connected with subjects devolved to
Panchayats under State legislations.

129
12 3
8. 2.26 The Committee while noting that efforts are
being made to work out a detailed training
module observe that the Ministry has not done
much on finding out the quantum of task ahead
for the Ministry in this regard. Even after the
passage of full two years since the Ministry
was created, efforts have not been made to
know the data of PRIs and functionaries who
could be trained so far by the efforts being
made through Union Government and the State
Governments. Since efforts are being made in
this regard by various quarters as admitted by
the Ministry, there is an urgent need to
coordinate with the various agencies involved
in task of training of PRIs and know how much
of PRIs and functionaries could already be
trained and the task ahead so as to address
the issue in a more focused manner. The
Committee would like the Ministry to get the
information from the State Governments in this
regard and the Committee be kept apprised.
Since the training of PRIs is a continuous
process, the Ministry should evolve a
permanent mechanism so as to have the first
hand knowledge of the status of training of
PRIs through the Ministry’s training scheme
and the efforts being made by other quarters,
i.e. the other Ministries of Union Government/
State Government, various training institution
etc.
9. 2.35 The Committee while reviewing the efforts
being made by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
in ensuring the centrality of Panchayats in
various Centrally Sponsored Schemes run by
different Ministries/Departments of Union
Government had observed (refer para 7 of 26th
report) that not much progress has been made
in this regard. While examining the Demands
for Grants of the current year, the Ministry has
furnished the details of the initiatives taken by

130
12 3
the Ministry in this regard. The Committee find
that a Group of Ministers for strengthening of
Panchayati Raj Institutions was constituted by
the Cabinet Secretariat vide its order dated
6 May, 2005. As per the decision taken by the
Government, all the prioritised Ministries were
required to undertake Activity Mapping to
pursue the aforesaid agenda of the Ministry. A
workshop was also held on 24 April, 2006. In
spite of best of the efforts made by the Ministry,
not much has been done in this regard. Only
five Ministries viz. (i) Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare (ii) Ministry of Agriculture
(iii) Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment (iv) Department of Food and
Public Distribution (v) Ministry of Youth Affairs
and Sports have completed the exercise of
activity mapping. The Ministry is pursuing with
the remaining Ministries to undertake Activity
Mapping. The resistance from various
Ministries/Departments has been cited as one
of the reasons for the slow progress. The
Committee find that the major concern of the
various Ministries as stated by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj itself is general lack of
confidence in the ability of Panchayats to
manage their own affairs in an efficient manner.
The Committee observe that the challenge of
making various Ministries/Departments
agreeable in this regard is great for the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj. The Committee feel that
perhaps the lack of confidence in the ability of
PRIs in handling the various Centrally
Sponsored Scheme for which crores of rupees
are annually being spent for Social Sector
Schemes of the various Ministries/Departments
of Union Government is due to the various
issues related to capacity building of
Panchayats. With the existing position where
the Panchayats has hardly any staff and
technical expertise, the concerns of the
Ministries are somewhat genuine. The Ministry

131
12 3
of Panchayati Raj should first of all endeavour
to empower PRIs through the various
components of Gram Swaraj Scheme, the
analysis of which has been done in the
subsequent part of the report. The adequate
allocation for the aforesaid programme should
be provided by the Planning Commission.
Besides, the Ministry has to prove the
qualitative impact in the schemes run by PRIs.
For example under National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme, 50 percent of the projects
shall be implemented by PRIs. The effectiveness
of PRIs in handling the part of NREGA can
prove the ability of PRIs in handling these
schemes. If there are qualitative differences
between the projects run by PRIs and other
implementing agencies, the Ministry has the
reason enough to convince the Central
Ministries to transfer these schemes.
10. 2.36 The Committee further note that the position
of PRIs may vary from State to State. In some
States the PRIs may be strong and able to
discharge the great responsibility entrusted to
these institutions. In such States, PRIs should
be encouraged to take on these added
responsibilities. However, in some States, PRIs
may not be empowered enough to take the
challenges envisaged under the Constitution. In
such States, the Ministry should ensure that the
Panchayats are empowered to such a level that
they would be in a position to discharge the
various responsibilities efficiently. Besides, all
the desired initiatives should be taken to
address the concerns of the Committee as
expressed above. The Committee should also
be kept apprised in this regard.
11. 2.44 The Committee find that the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj was created to give focused
attention to the implementation of Part IX of

132
12 3
the Constitution the main component of which
is effective devolution of the 3Fs i.e. functions,
functionaries and finances. Further, the
enactment of the Seventy-third Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 1992 was aimed at providing
Constitutional status to local self-Governments
i.e. Panchayats. In this regard Article 243 G
explicitly states that the State Governments may
by law endow the Panchayats with such
powers so as to enable them to function as
institutions of self-Government.
The Committee note that the need for
empowerment at grass root level in rural areas
is the reason for creation of an exclusive
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. In this context
devolution of functions, functionaries should
have been accorded primacy by the Ministry
and efforts made to that effect. However, the
perusal of the comparative progress of
devolution over the past two years ( i.e. since
June, 2005) as indicated in the Appendices II
and III reveal that status quo has been
maintained. Only in the States of Gujarat and
Haryana there has been improvement in the
number of subjects devolved. However, this is
the status of transfer of subjects through
legislation. The Ministry has not provided the
information regarding the actual devolution of
functions, functionaries and finances to
Panchayats as has been requested by the
Committee repeatedly in their earlier reports.
The information that the Ministry has provided
is incomplete and a true picture of devolution
does not emerge from it. The Committee
observe that simply transferring subjects to
Panchayats will not result in real empowerment
unless concomitant funds and functionaries are
also made available to Panchayats. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the aforesaid
information be furnished by the Ministry to

133
12 3
enable the Committee to analyse the position
of devolution and comment further.
12. 2.45 The Committee find that in addition to the slow
progress with respect to devolution there is also
the negative trend of reversal of subjects
devolved. In the States of Madhya Pradesh
(from 25 to 23 subjects) and in Maharashtra
(from 19 to 18 subjects) there has been reversal
of subjects. Further, the Ministry has informed
that State Governments effect reversals by
issuing notifications withdrawing these subjects.
The Committee find that under Article 243G
State Governments transfer subjects to
Panchayats by law. The subjects are being
transferred in pursuance of article 243G of the
Constitution. However, the States withdraw
these subjects using only notifications. This is
a serious offence and the Committee has taken
strong exception to such activities being carried
out by the State Governments which are not in
the true spirit of the Constitution. The
Committee, therefore, recommend to the
Government that suitable corrective steps
should be taken so that States are not allowed
to by-pass the Constitutional provisions. The
Committee would like to be informed of the
action taken in this regard
13. 2.46 Further, the Committee find that States often
resort to reporting of incorrect data regarding
devolution. When requested, they simply
inform the Central Ministry of the number of
subjects devolved through legislation while
withholding information about the actual
devolution of functions, functionaries and
finances to Panchayats. This prevents the true
picture from emerging. The Committee strongly
object to such practice by the State
Governments and recommend that the Union
Ministry take urgent and strong steps to

134
12 3
impress upon States not to resort to such
practices as it confuses the true picture of
devolution.
14. 2.47 The Committee note that Activity Mapping has
been undertaken by the Ministry to identify
subjects to be devolved to the appropriate tier
of the Panchayats. The Committee, further, note
that only four States viz. Kerala, Karnataka,
Sikkim and West Bengal have completed this
exercise. Haryana and Orissa have undertaken
Activity Mapping for a limited number of
subjects. The Ministry has set a deadline of
31 May, 2007 to States for completion of this
exercise.
The Committee are concerned at the slow
progress of Activity Mapping. It is a matter of
great concern that only 6 States have managed
to achieve some degree of progress in respect
of Activity Mapping. The Committee are
disheartened to find that the large majority of
States have not yet completed this exercise. The
deadline for completion of Activity Mapping
which was set for 1 April, 2006 has now been
extended to 31 May, 2007. The Committee note
that since only the successful completion of
Activity Mapping will ensure true devolution
this exercise needs to be undertaken much more
seriously by States and emphasized by the
Central Ministry. The Committee hope that the
Ministry will ensure that Activity Mapping in
respect of all States would be completed within
the designated deadline. The Committee urge
the Ministry to take appropriate steps to that
effect and inform them accordingly.
15. 2.56 The Committee note that progress on
constitution of District Planning Committees
(DPCs) in different States is far from satisfactory
even though it is one of the mandatory

135
12 3
provisions given under Part IX of the
Constitution of India by enactment of Seventy-
third Constitution Amendment Act, 1992. The
Committee find that Constitution enjoins that
DPCs are to be constituted in all States and
Union territories (except Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, J&K the hill areas of Manipur, the
hill areas of the district of Darjeeling for which
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists, the NCT
of Delhi and six scheduled areas) with a view
to consolidate plans prepared by Panchayats
into draft development plans for the districts.
The Committee note with dismay that only in
14 States viz. Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Manipur, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal and 4 Union
territories of Andaman & Nicobar, Dadra &
Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep
DPCs have been constituted in all districts. The
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has further informed
that constitution of DPCs in Haryana, Punjab,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Andhra Pradesh
and Gujarat are at various stages. The district-
wise position of constitution of DPCs in the
remaining States have not been made available
to the Committee. The Ministry has informed
that details are being obtained from States
about the precise details when DPCs were first
constituted in each of the States after the
enactment of the Seventy-third Constitution
Amendment Act. The Committee feel that the
year-wise status of constitution of DPCs need
to be maintained by the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj to have an idea of the status of
implementation of various provisions of the
Constitution particularly the mandatory ones,
of which constitution of DPCs is one. The
Committee may be informed of the position as
received from the various States/UTs.

136
12 3
16. 2.57 The Committee have been expressing strong
concern over the non-constitution of DPCs in
their various reports. During the course of
examination of Demands for Grants (2007-08),
the Committee have been informed that certain
strong decisions have been taken by the
Ministry to put pressure on the States/UTs to
constitute DPCs expeditiously. In this regard,
Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF)
guidelines stipulates that the release of funds
would be contingent upon States constituting
DPCs and the district plan being applied by
the DPCs. The Committee are pleased to note
that as a result of this, at least four States, Bihar,
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana and Punjab have
taken concrete steps to establish DPCs. The
Committee hope that DPCs would be
constituted in all the districts of every State
with the firm resolve of the Ministry and
adopting certain harsh measures mechanism so
as to achieve the objectives of preparing real
and effective plans with a bottom up approach
which reflect the reality of grassroots level.
17. 2.62 Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Area Act
(PESA), 1996 is being implemented in areas
falling under the Fifth Schedule of the
Constitution. Fifth Schedule areas are in nine
States viz.  Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh,
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and
Rajasthan. The Committee find from the
information provided by the Ministry that all
States have enacted the requisite compliance
legislation by amending their respective
Panchayati Raj Acts. However, certain gaps
continue to exist. Most States are also yet to
amend the subject laws like those relating to
money lending, forest, excise etc. In this
connection the Ministry has entrusted the task
of formulation of appropriate amendments in

137
12 3
the concerned State Laws to the Indian Law
Institute, Delhi. The amendments to the State
laws as proposed by the Indian Law Institute
which run into hundreds, have been sent to
the respective State Governments. As regards
the achievements, only Gujarat has been able
to amend a local Statute relating to agriculture.
The Committee strongly recommend to the
Ministry to follow up vigorously with the
various State Governments to carry on the
amendments to the various local laws
expeditiously so as to enable the
implementation of amended Acts/Laws in letter
and spirit.
18. 2.66 The Committee find that for the purpose of
establishing an informal system of justice,
conciliation and dispute redressal at Panchayat
level a draft Nyaya Panchayat Bill has been
prepared based on the recommendations of
Drafting Committee headed by the eminent
jurist Prof. Upendra Baxi. The aforesaid draft
Bill has been referred to all States and Union
Ministries for their comments and 13 States and
21 Central Ministries have furnished the
comments. Most of the Union Ministries are in
favour of the legislation. However a few
Ministries like the Ministry of Law and Justice
are against the draft Bill. The Committee find
that in order to arrive at consensus on the draft
Bill the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is making
efforts.
The Committee find that at present the district
courts are first level of judicial redressal. By
providing the proper equivalent of courts the
Panchayats may help to lessen the burden of
district courts specifically when these courts are
over burdened. There is considerable delay in
settlement of cases which one or the other way
denies justice to the petitioner. However, the

138
12 3
Committee are aware of the fact that the
proposal of Nyaya Panchayat, if implemented
would add to the existing powers and
responsibilities of Panchayats which at present
are not adequately equipped with the required
judicial acumen. With the existing scenario of
empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions
even after passage of around 14 years of
enactment of the Constitution 73rd Amendment
Act, the analysis of which has been done in
the preceding part of the report, the idea of
Nyaya Panchayat need to be handled carefully
by the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee
strongly recommend to the Ministry to have
wider consultations with the State Governments
and all the interest groups. Besides, consultation
of experts and public at large is also required.
The objections from various quarters need to
be addressed carefully before taking final
decision in this regard so as to avoid any
unavoidable confrontation and resistance from
any of the quarters.
19. 2.70 The Committee note that as per
recommendations of Twelfth Finance
Commission a huge amount of Rs. 20,000 crore
is to be made available to State Governments
during the period 2005-2010 to augment the
Consolidated Fund of State level to facilitate
supplementing the financial resources of PRIs.
In this connection the Committee are glad to
note that for the purpose of speedy flow of
funds from State Governments to PRIs the
Ministry of Finance has formulated stringent
guidelines in consultation with Ministry of
Panchayati Raj stipulating that these funds
should be transferred from State Governments
to PRIs within 15 days of being credited in
State Consolidated Fund, otherwise State
Governments would have to pay interest
thereon on RBI rates.

139
12 3
In this connection the Committee have been
informed that as many as nine States which
included Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil
Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka have already
been penalised for delay in transfer of Twelfth
Finance Commission grants from State
Governments to PRIs. Further the Committee
have been informed that for the purpose of
monitoring of funds a Committee headed by
Secretary, Panchayati Raj has already met twice
in August, 2006 and January, 2007. The
Committee hope that aforesaid guidelines being
implemented by the Ministry of Finance will
go long way in making available in time the
TFCs grants to PRIs across the country.
The Committee also note that Ministry of
Panchayati Raj has already prepared a software
to maintain data base of Bank accounts of all
2.4 lakh PRIs across the country to facilitate
transfer of funds under Twelfth Finance
Commission to PRIs. The Committee, however,
find that Bank transfer mechanism is yet to be
institutionalised by the Banks. The Committee
desire that Ministry of Panchayati Raj should
take up the matter with Ministry of Finance to
impress upon Banks to utilise software prepared
by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
20. 2.71  From the figures of allocation vis.-a-vis. releases
of 1st and 2nd installment of Twelfth Finance
Commission of Grants to PRIs in different
States during 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, the
Committee find that many States have not even
received their second installment during 2005-
2006. The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Goa, Sikkim and Tripura have not been released
the second instalment during 2005-06. As
regards, the status of allocation during 2006-07,
the Committee note that first installment
has not been allocated to five States viz.

140
12 3
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Sikkim and
Uttar Pradesh. With regard to releases as many
as eleven States have not furnished the
information with regard to releases made to
PRIs. The Committee would like the specific
reasons with regard to the installments not
being released during the year 2005-06 and
2006-07 and the States not reporting about the
releases to PRIs. The Committee would also
like that the position of expenditure out of the
released amount to PRIs also needs to be
monitored. The Committee would like to be
informed about the utilisation position in this
regard so as to analyse the position and
comment further.
21. 2.76 The Committee find that the concept of Rural
Business Hubs (RBHs) was mooted by Hon’ble
Prime Minister in June, 2004 as an initiative
towards increasing rural income through the
platform of public-private-panchayat-
partnership. As regards the progress during the
year 2006-07, 14 States have set up RBH
councils. An RBH Executive Committee co-
chaired by Secretary, Panchayati Raj and
Ms. Laxmi Venkatesh, Chairperson of Bhartiya
Yuva Shakti Trust has been constituted to chalk
out action plans. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Ministry to initiate all the
desired actions so that the idea of establishing
Rural Business Hubs can be translated into
reality.
22. 3.14 The Committee note that Rashtriya Sam Vikas
Yojana, a scheme meant for the upliftment of
backward districts was approved in the year
2004-2005 and was actually implemented during
the year 2005-2006. The scheme was under the
administrative control of Planning Commission.
Rs. 5,000 crore were allocated for RSVY during
the year 2005-2006. In August, 2006 RSVY was

141
12 3
subsumed into Backward Region Grant Fund
and transferred to the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj. While transferring the aforesaid scheme,
the Planning Commission retained Rs. 1,250
crore meant for the special plans for Bihar and
KBK districts of Orissa to be handled separately
by the Planning Commission. The Standing
Committee expressed concern over the
fragmented approach in implementation of the
programme and desired further details of the
two segments of the erstwhile RSVY.
The Ministry during the course of oral evidence
of Demands for Grants 2007-2008 has submitted
that the objective of the special plan for Bihar
and KBK districts of Orissa are to provide
initial infrastructure at the regional level and
are not limited to a single district. It is the
considered view of the Planning Commission
that these special plans are regional plans with
inter-districts schemes and need to be discussed
and approved as part of the Annual Plans of
these States and needs to be handled by the
Planning Commission. The Committee find
from the information furnished by the Ministry
that views of the Planning Commission for
retaining the part of the scheme for Bihar and
KBK districts of Orissa have been furnished.
However the Ministry has not furnished its
own views keeping in view the comments of
the Committee in their earlier report. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the
comments of the Ministry on the formula of
dividing the scheme in the light of the specific
reasons furnished by the Planning Commission
alongwith the details of the component of the
two schemes, RSVY and Backward Region
Grant Fund so as to review the position and
comment in this regard.
23. 3.15 The Committee find that a laudable scheme of
Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) has been

142
12 3
transferred to Ministry of Panchayati Raj to
address regional imbalances in development by
way of inflow of funds for supplementing and
converging existing developmental inflows into
identified 250 most backward districts across
the country. The Committee find that the
scheme has been in operation since 2006-2007
with a budget allocation of Rs. 3,750 crore
subsequently revised to the level of Rs. 1,925
crore at the Revised Estimates stage. The
Committee’s examination has revealed that
since there was an unspent balance of over
Rs. 1,000 crore till December, 2006 under
Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY) with
different State Governments the budget
estimates were drastically reduced at revised
estimate. In the Committee’s view the reduction
of budget outlay reflects failure on the part of
different State Governments to utilise available
funds under RSVY a scheme that was merged
to the existing scheme. Thus the Committee feel
that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj also on their
part had not interacted with different State
Governments to impress upon them the need
to utilise the funds available under RSVY. In
the Committee’s opinion revising the budget
outlay on the ground that considerable amount
was left with the State Governments under
previous scheme does not augur well with over
all utilisation of funds on the part of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The Committee
therefore recommend the Ministry to make all
out efforts to ensure that the budget outlays
are not reduced at revised estimates level
particularly when the task before the Ministry
during the Eleventh Plan period is huge.
The Committee strongly recommend to the
Government to monitor the BRGF effectively
with the various mechanism so as to ensure
the meaningful utilization of the resources

143
12 3
allocated to different backward districts under
BRGF.
24. 3.16 The Committee find that the scheme of
Backward Region Grant Fund envisages
disbursement of funds of fixed amount of
Rs. 10 crore per annum to every district.
50 per cent of the balance allocation will be on
the basis of share of population of the districts
in total population of all backward districts and
remaining 50 per cent on the basis of area of
the district in total area of all backward
districts. The Committee have been informed
that programmes under this scheme will be
selected through people’s participation
particularly through Gram Sabhas by way of
preparation of participatory plans to be
prepared in each Panchayat which will take into
account flow of funds from all sources like
Centrally Sponsored Schemes, National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme etc.
The Committee further find that BRGF funds
will primarily be used to build capacity in
planning, implementation, monitoring,
accounting and improving accountability and
transparency and could also include
arrangements for contracting and outsourcing.
Besides substantial untied grants would be
allocated under BRGF to Panchayats to address
critically gaps in integrated development. The
Committee while noting the laudable objectives
of the scheme emphasize on strict monitoring
of the programme particularly when the
programme has various components. The
expenditure position for the capability building
funds to Panchayats and to local bodies and
untied grants should be monitored separately.
Further the Committee feel that in order to
have judicious utilization of the funds, there is
a need for proper monitoring by an

144
12 3
independent agency outside the jurisdiction of
concerned District Rural Development Agency
(DRDA) and State Governments. The
Committee would like that their concerns
should be adequately addressed by the Ministry
and strategies evolved for proper
implementation of the programme so as to
achieve the set objectives. The Committee
further recommend that the position of
expenditure in different districts along with the
position of physical achievements should be
reflected in the Outcome Budget of next year
i.e. 2008-09 so as to make an assessment of the
performance of the scheme in various districts.
The Committee further note that the type of
work to be undertaken in various backward
districts under the aforesaid schemes include
rural electrification, type of appropriate
technology options by Panchayats for drinking
water supply in hilly and tribal areas,
augmenting Indira Awaas Yojana etc. The
Committee find that the aforesaid works are
being undertaken by the respective Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Union Government.
Besides there may be State schemes to address
the aforesaid issues. The Committee feel that
there is an urgent need for proper co-ordination
with the respective schemes of Union
Government and State Governments. The
Ministry should evolve a mechanism to address
to the aforesaid observation of the Committee.
25. 3.30 The Commit tee find that Rashtriya Gram
Swaraj Yojana (RGSY) is the largest scheme
being implemented by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj in terms of components it
addresses, issues like training and capacity
building of elected representatives and officials
of Panchayats, e-governance for all the
Panchayats, improving infrastructure at
Panchayat level, Rural Business Hubs etc.

145
12 3
However the Committee note with constraint
that a total of Rs. 50.50 crore were allocated
for this large scheme during 2006-2007 which
rose to Rs. 67.90 crore during 2007-2008. In
view of the extent of the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana, in Committee’s opinion there is a need
to increase the allocations under the scheme
for carrying out its functions in revised
estimates level of the current year itself and
also during remaining four years of the
Eleventh Plan. The Committee also desire that
for this proposals for Eleventh Plan be worked
out expeditiously by the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj.
26. 3.31 The Gram Swaraj Scheme is intended to achieve
the vital objective of capacity building of
Panchayats. However, the Committee are of the
opinion that to enable the Ministry effectively
shoulder this immense task the allocation
should be adequate. Therefore, the allocation
of the Eleventh Plan has to be made keeping
in view the task ahead of the Ministry. The
component-wise analysis of the scheme is given
below:—
(i) The Committee are constrained to note
that under the ‘Capacity Building’
component under RGSY a small amount
of Rs. 30 crore was provided during
2006-2007 which was reduced to Rs. 24.50
crore at Revised estimates level and the
same has been fully utilised. Against this
allocation around 3 lakh elected
representatives and officials of PRIs have
been trained. The Committee find that
during 2007-2008 an allocation of Rs. 33
crore has been made. In view of the
foregoing the Committee recommend that
in the light of huge number of around
14 lakh PRIs functionaries and officials
yet to be trained the allocation under

146
12 3
Training and Capacity Building be
suitably enhanced.
(ii) The Committee also find that during the
last four years viz. 2003-2004, 2004-2005,
2005-2006 and 2006-2007 a total of
20.68 lakh elected representatives of PRI
and their officials were imparted training.
The Committee are unable to
comprehend that if 20.68 lakh have been
actually trained so far then the only 10
lakhs are yet to be trained. The
Committee urge that State-wise data of
number of trained and untrained PRI
functionaries State-wise be indicated in
Outcome Budget of the Ministry so that
Committee can arrive at meaningful
conclusion and have a clear picture on
the issue.
(iii) The Committee are glad to note that
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has come
forward with a ‘National Capacity
Building Framework, (NCBF) with the
objectives like enabling elected PRIs
functionaries to update their knowledge,
orienting key officials associated with
devolved functions to function in a better
way as technical advisors and trainers,
improving the functioning of Gram
Sabhas etc. The Committee also find that
aforesaid NCBF also addresses the issue
of Capacity Building of PRIs before
handing over the responsibilities of
subjects to be devolved to them. Here
the Committee would suggest that on
this issue there is a need for devolution
of subjects to PRIs in States where these
are already strong enough to shoulder
the responsibilities like Kerala and
West Bengal, whereas in States like

147
12 3
Uttar Pradesh, where PRIs are very weak
there is a need to build up their capacity
first. The Committee feel that this issue
should be examined in detail.
(iv) The Committee find that another
component of ‘Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana’ (RGSY) of infrastructure
development envisaging assistance to
States for construction of ‘Panchayat
Ghars’ to enable Gram Panchayats to
function in a better way has also not
been given sufficient allocation. In
Committee’s opinion there are lakhs of
Gram Panchayats across different States
in the country requiring such assistance.
However the Committee find that a
meagre amount of Rs. 10 crore has been
allocated for this component during 2006-
2007 and 2007-2008. In view of the
foregoing, in Committee’s opinion the
allocation under this component has to
be enhanced after obtaining estimates
from different States. Further, the
Committee desire that the information
with regard to physical performance of
the scheme be furnished to the
Committee.
(v) The Committee note with dismay that
like other components of ‘Training
Capacity Building’ and ‘Infrastructure
Developments’, of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana the component of Information
Technology is also fund starved. In this
connection the Committee find that a
meagre amount of Rs. 8 crore during
2006-2007 and Rs. 10 crore during 2007-
2008 has been given for this component.
In view of the proposed requirement of
Information Technology of Gram
Panchayats across the country in
Committee’s opinion funds should be
suitably enhanced.

148
12 3
(vi) As regards two components of ‘Research
Studies’ and ‘Media Publicity and
Advocacy’ under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana the Committee are constrained to
note that allocation under both the
components has not been fully utilised
during 2006-2007. In this connection the
Committee find that against allocation of
Rs. 2 crore on Research Studies the
utilisation was only Rs. 0.86 crore.
Similarly on Media Publicity and
advocacy against the allocation of Rs. 3
crore utilisation was only Rs. 2.65 crore.
The Committee however find that during
2007-2008 equal amount has been
restored for Research Studies whereas
higher allocation of Rs. 6.90 crore has
been made for Media Publicity and
Advocacy. The Committee desire that the
higher allocation made be meaningfully
utilized by the Ministry.
The action taken reply addressing each
of the issues indicated above separately
should be furnished to the Committee.
27. 3.35 The Committee find that Panchayat
Empowerment and Accountability Scheme is
very noble Scheme that can work as a tool for
much needed work on implementing part IX
of the Constitution like constitution of District
Planning Committee’s, undertaking the
exercising of activity mapping, transferring of
funds functionaries and finances etc. However
the Committee find that the basis of
implementation of this scheme has been
changed from time to time. In this connection
the Committee have noticed that after
commencement of the scheme in 2005-2006 the
basis for rewarding State Governments for
undertaking necessary reform in the field of

149
12 3
empowering PRIs was seven reform areas like
activity mapping for possible devolution,
transfer of funds, functionaries and finances
from State Governments to PRIs etc. In second
year of implementation of the scheme the basis
was changed to devolution index. Moreover the
Committee find that Ministry is managing with
interim devolution index for this scheme as the
Devolution Index is not yet ready.
The Committee have observed seven reform
areas in their previous report and the major
quantifiable deliverables under the current
interim devolution index. The Committee feel
that by and large the issues in both the
documents are identical. In this connection the
Ministry has stated that the current basis is
more scientific and capable of use across
different schemes. On the other side the
Committee have also been apprised that no
physical progress can be linked to grants for
work done on empowering PRIs under this
scheme. Since the details of the interim
devolution index are not available with the
Committee, the Committee would be unable to
comment on the issue. The Committee however
feel that changing the basis of implementation
of the Scheme on yearly basis would lead to
more and more communication gap between
different State Governments, field agencies and
also with PRI functionaries and should be
discouraged and whenever any such change is
contemplated it should be properly discussed
among different State Governments.