1
REPORT
CHAPTER I
BACKGROUND OF THE LAND ACQUISITION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
1.1 The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 ( Appendix-I) was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2007 and was referred to the
Standing Committee on Rural Development on 7 December, 2007 by
Hon’ble Speaker for examination and report to the Parliament as per
rule 331E (1)(b) of the Rules and Procedure and Conduct of Business,
Lok Sabha.
1.2 Land is one of the biggest resources of any country. The
Government have to acquire land from the private individuals for
setting up various infrastructure and other public purpose projects as
well as developmental activities. Whereas the sovereign power of every
State has the authority to appropriate land for the public purpose,
every subject has the right to be heard before he is deprived of his
property by the State. This is recognized as a legal right as per article
300A of the Constitution which provides as under:
“No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority
of law.”
1.3 Whereas land and its management is under the State List,
Acquisition and requisitioning of property falls under the Concurrent
List. To deal with the issues related to land acquisition and determining
the amount of compensation in lieu of the land acquired by the
Government, ‘The Land Acquisition Act’ was promulgated on the first
day of March, 1894. The Act has been amended in the years 1919,
1921, 1923 and 1933 before independence and in the years 1962, 1967
and 1984 after independence. The details of the amendments after
independence in this regard have been given at Appendix-II
1.4 With the enormous expansion of the State’s role in providing
public welfare and economic development since independence,
acquisition of land for public purposes has become far more important
than ever before. Further, with the changing scenario of
industrialization, liberalization, urbanization and new economic policy,
there is an immense pressure on land. Besides, recently the land is

2
being acquired for setting up of Special Economic Zones (SEZs) to
generate more employment. With the increased activity of land
acquisition for public purposes as well as for setting up industries, the
issues related to land acquisition and rehabilitation of the affected
persons have been the matter of debate recently.
1.5 The provisions made under ‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’
have been found to be inadequate in addressing certain issues related
to the exercise of the statutory powers of the State for involuntary
acquisition of private land and property as acknowledged in the
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the aforesaid Bill.
1.6 As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the
provisions made under the amending legislation seek to extend the
provisions of the extant policies or statutes for rehabilitation and
resettlement of those affected by the acquisition of land under the Act.
Further the legislation seeks to provide for the following:-
(i) expand the ambit of expression ‘person interested’;
(ii) to define the ‘public purpose’ so as to restrict the scope of
land acquisition under the Act to provision of land for
strategic purposes vital to the State and for infrastructure
projects where the benefits accrue to the general public;
(iii) r estricting the State intervention to acquire land for
companies to the extent of a limited portion of the total
area of land required when the ‘person’ which includes any
company or associations or body of individuals has already
purchased the rest of the land through private negotiations;
(iv) to provide for the alternative mechanism of civil courts for
disposal of disputes relating to land acquisition
compensation in a time bound manner;
(v) to provide a fair compensation at market value
commensurate with the purpose for which the acquired land
would be used;
(vi) to ensure that physical possession of the land is taken over
and the amount of compensation is paid within a defined
period from the date of the compensation award; and
(vii) return of the land to the appropriate Government when
any land or part thereof, acquired under the Act remains
unutilized for a defined period from the date of taking over
possession.

3
CHAPTER II
PROCESS OF CONSULTATIONS HELD BY THE GOVERNMENT
WHILE BRINGING THE AMENDMENTS TO ‘THE LAND
ACQUISITION ACT, 1894’ AND THE CONSULTATIONS
HELD BY COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
WHILE EXAMINING THE SAID LEGISLATION
2.1 The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development examined the various provisions made under the Principal
Land Acquisition Act of 1894 in consultation with the State
Governments and made exhaustive observations/recommendations in
the Eighth Report (Tenth Lok Sabha), presented to Parliament on
15 December, 1994. Subsequently, the Standing Committee on Rural
Development have persistently been recommending in their respective
reports to bring amendments to the old and outdated ‘The Land
Acquisition Act, 1894’ so as to balance the larger interests of the public
for which the land is being acquired and the right of the individuals
whose land is being acquired thereby depriving him/her of means of
livelihood and also to address the issue of acquisition of land for
private enterprises.
2.2 Pursuant to the persistent recommendations of the Committee,
the Government have brought ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Bill, 2007’ which has been referred to the Committee for examination
and report to Parliament as stated above.
2.3 When asked about the reasons for delay in bringing
amendments to ‘The Land Acquisition Act 1894’, the Department has
submitted as under :-
“The process for amendment to ‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’
was started in October 1998. The Cabinet, in its meeting held on
23-11-1998, decided that the proposal relating to amendment to
‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’, in the first instance, be
considered by a GoM. The GoM held several meetings to consider
the proposed amendments to `The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’.
Finally, the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2004 was
submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat on 29 January, 2004 for
approval of the Cabinet. The Cabinet Secretariat, after
consideration, returned the Bill with the direction that the
Department of Land Resources may submit a fresh proposal after

4
the formation of the 14th Lok Sabha. Accordingly, the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 was introduced on 6th
December 2007 in the 14th Lok Sabha. The recommendations of
the Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development in its
8th report (10th Lok sabha) have been duly considered and most
of them have been touched upon by the proposed amendments.”
2.4 As regards the details of the consultations held with the various
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations and other
stakeholders before bringing the legislation to the Parliament, the
Department has informed that the comments from the States and the
concerned Ministries/Departments of the Central Government were
sought on the draft Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy and the
Bill under reference flow from the new Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Policy. As regards consultations with the various related Union
Ministries, the Committee during the deliberations have found that
most of the Ministries had been consulted before finalization of the
National Rehabilitation Policy 2007. However, no formal consultations
were held while bringing amendments to one of the important
legislations i.e. ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill 2007’. Even
the sister Ministry of Urban Development which plays a key role in
ensuring that the various issues raised in the amending legislation are
taken care from the urban perspective has not been formally consulted
while bringing the said amending legislation.
2.5  As stated above, the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007
was referred to the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2007-
2008) for examination and report. The Committee (2007-2008),
accordingly obtained written information on various issues which might
have a direct bearing on the Bill from the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry
of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources). The preliminary
meeting of the Committee was held on 24 December, 2007 whereby
the Committee were briefed about the various provisions of the Bill
by the nodal Department. The Committee at the aforesaid sitting
decided to invite the views of experts, organizations, individuals and
other stakeholders through print and electronic media. Accordingly,
approximately 190 related memoranda were received. 15 selected
experts/representatives of association and individuals (the list indicated
at Appendix-III ) which include top researchers, social workers,
representatives of various organizations, legal persons, representatives
from child organizations deposed before the Committee at their sittings
held on 17 and 18 June, 2008. The aforesaid experts and other
stakeholders raised serious reservations on some of the provisions made
in the Bill and suggested some modifications. The most debated

5
provisions of the proposed Bill include the criterion of market value
of land, part payment of compensation by shares, debentures, the
definition of public purpose etc.
2.6 Since the State Governments acquire land and primary
responsibility of the implementation of the provisions made under the
Bill is of the respective State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations, they were requested to give their views on the
aforesaid Bill, after seeking permission of Hon’ble Speaker as per
direction 60 of the ‘Directions by the Speaker Lok Sabha’. Nine State
Governments/UTs viz. Chandigarh, Puducherry, Jharkhand, Goa,
Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Arunachal
Pradesh, Nagaland and Himachal Pradesh have furnished their views
in this regard. The Committee were greatly benefited by the exhaustive
suggestions made by the State Governments of Puducherry and Goa.
2.7 The various Union Ministries of the Government of India like
Railways, Defence, Home Affairs, Information Technology and
Communications (Department of Posts and Department of
Telecommunications), Power, Road Transport and Highways and
Shipping, (Department of Road Transport and Highways) acquire land
for various infrastructure projects. Besides some of the Ministries like
Tribal Affairs and Social Justice and Empowerment play a key role in
protecting the interests of various vulnerable sections of society like
tribals, women and children. The Ministries of Panchayati Raj and
Tribal Affairs play a key role in implementation of Part IX of the
Constitution and PESA and also to ensure that the various legislations
brought by the Government are in tune with the true spirit of Part IX
and PESA. In addition, the Ministry of Agriculture has the major role
in issues related to food security which always get affected due to
excessive acquisition of agricultural land. The issues related to
acquisition of land for setting up of Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
are under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Commerce and Industry
(Department of Commerce). The Department of Industrial Promotion
and Policy is the other Department which have an important role
with regard to various issues involved with the acquisition of land by
companies. The Ministry of Environment and Forests is the Ministry
which plays a major role in ensuring the rights of the tribals as well
as environment concerns related with the acquisition of land. Above
all, the Ministry of Urban Development is the key Ministry to look
after the various issues relating to acquisition of land from the urban
perspective. The Committee held detailed deliberations with the
aforesaid Ministries at their sittings held on 18 January, 2008, 2 and 3
July, 2008 and 18 July, 2008.

6
2.8 Besides various sets of written documents containing the
responses on the various issues raised in large number of sets of list
of points were submitted by the aforesaid Ministries which helped the
Committee in arriving at meaningful conclusions.
2.9 The term of the Committee (2007-2008) expired on 4 August,
2008 and the Committee (2008-2009) was constituted w.e.f. 5 August,
2008. The Committee (2008-2009) at the first sitting held on 11 August,
2008 decided to continue the examination of the Bill from the stage
the earlier Committee had left. Thereafter, the Committee at their same
sitting took evidence of the representatives of the nodal administrative
Department i.e.  Department Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development). The nodal Department furnished replies to the issues
raised in a number of sets of list of points and submitted the desired
documents to the Committee. The representatives of the nodal Ministry
were also present at the various sittings of the Committee where the
Committee took evidence of the various concerned Ministries/
Departments and assisted the Committee. The representatives of the
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and
Legislative Department) also assisted the Committee by clarifying the
various legal matters.
2.10 Subsequently the Committee undertook clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill at the sittings held on 3 and 4 September,
2008.
2.11 The Committee note that ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ is one of the most important legislations
introduced in Parliament after independence. The Government have
to acquire land from the private individuals for setting up various
infrastructure projects and for other developmental activities. Besides
the Government have to acquire land for various strategic defence
purposes. The land, besides being the source of livelihood for a
person, is a symbol of social status in the society where a person
lives. Besides with the land various emotional issues are also
attached. Such acquisition of land leads to displacement of people
depriving them of their livelihood and shelter, restricting access to
their traditional source and uprooting them from their socio-cultural
environment. While acknowledging the sovereign right of the State
to acquire land for public good, it is of utmost importance to address
all these concerns and compensate the affected person/family whose
land is being acquired so as to maintain a balance between the
larger interest of the community for which the land is being acquired
on the one hand and the right of the individual whose land is

7
being acquired thereby depriving him/her of means of livelihood on
the other.
2.12 ‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ has been an effective
instrument for the acquisition of land. With the increased activities
of land and tremendous pressure on land, the issues related to land
acquisition and rehabilitation of the affected persons have been a
matter of debate recently and it has been felt that the provisions
made under the Principal Act are inadequate in addressing these
concerns. Even the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill has
acknowledged this fact. The Committee find that with the persistent
efforts of the erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development and Standing Committee on Rural Development, the
Government have brought the exhaustive amendments to the
Principal Act of 1894 to address the aforesaid concerns. Even when
the process for amendment started in the Ministry way back in
October, 1998, it took around 10 years for the Government to bring
the amending Bill before the Parliament. The Committee find that
even then formal consultations with some of the key Ministries were
not held by the Department. While giving due importance to the
aforesaid legislation which concerns the general masses, the
Committee deliberated at length each and every provision after
detailed consultations with the State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations, various Union Ministries, experts and other
stakeholders through the written views as well as interaction in 17
sittings (the details of which are at Appendix-IV) held for the
purpose. After detailed deliberations, the Committee arrived at
conclusions, which have been given in the subsequent chapters of
the report. Each and every recommendation of the Committee has
been made with the primary objective of ensuring the interests of
the affected person/family whose land is being acquired as well as
other persons affected by the land acquisition.
2.13 The recommendations of the Committee have been given
issue/clause-wise. The Committee urge that while bringing
amendments as suggested by them, the Department should ensure
that all the consequential amendments are appropriately made in
the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill as well as the other related
Bill i.e., ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007.

8
CHAPTER III
A. Issues not addressed by the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill,
2007
3.1 Exhaustive amendments have been proposed in ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’. During deliberations, the
Committee have found that many important issues/concerns have not
been addressed while bringing the amendments. This part of the report
deals with these issues and the amendments/suggestions have been
made by the Committee based on the exhaustive deliberations, the
details of which have been given in the preceding chapter of the report.
B. Bringing exhaustive Land Acquisition Bill before the Parliament
3.2 As per the information provided by the Department, ‘The
Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ has been amended since independence, in
the years 1962, 1967 and 1984. These amendments are listed in
Appendix-II. Exhaustive amendments have been proposed to ‘The Land
Acquisition Act, 1894’ by ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill,
2007’. On the issue of repealing the old and outdated legislation i.e.
‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ and bringing a new comprehensive
legislation, the nodal Department in the preliminary material had
contended that a large number of very old cases are still pending in
various courts and as such, it was decided in consultations with the
Ministry of Law and Justice that instead of bringing an exhaustive
and comprehensive Bill, an Amendment Bill should be brought before
the Parliament. When the information with regard to the number of
cases pending in various courts was sought from the Department, it
has been stated that no formal study in this regard has been conducted.
3.3 When the attention of the nodal Department was drawn to
various social Acts which had been repealed and new legislations
brought since the amendments were exhaustive, it referred the matter
to the Ministry of Law and Justice. The Legislative Department of the
aforesaid Ministry in the opinion furnished to the Committee has stated
that whenever amendments are exhaustive and it is not possible to
understand the amendment clause contained in the Amendment Bill
without reading into each and every section of the Principal Act, new
legislations are enacted by the Parliament. The Department has also
referred to some of such legislations viz. ‘The Cantonment Act, 2006’,
‘The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000’ and
‘The Food Security and Standards Act, 2006.’

9
3.4 The Committee take note of the advice given by the
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice that new
legislations are enacted by the Parliament whenever amendments
are exhaustive and it is not possible to understand the amendment
clause contained in the amendment Bill without reading into each
and every section of the Principal Act. The Legislative Department
has infact referred to some of the legislations where new legislations
were enacted, keeping in view the exhaustive amendments. During
the detailed deliberations on the various provisions made under the
present legislation, the Committee have noted that it is not possible
to understand the meaning of an amending clause without inserting
it properly into the Principal Act. Thus, in each and every case, the
Principal Act has to be referred to. Not only that, bringing such
exhaustive amendments to such an important legislation without
comprehensively amending the Principal Act may create confusion
and invite legal complications too. In this situation the Committee
are of the firm opinion that old and outdated legislation i.e., ‘The
Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ should be repealed and a new
comprehensive legislation brought before the Parliament.
3.5 While recommending for repealing the old legislation and
bringing a new comprehensive legislation, the Committee are aware
of the urgency of bringing the amendments to the Principal Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, keeping in view the recent debate going on
in the country with regard to rehabilitation laws. The Committee
would like that for the time being amending legislation should be
considered by the Parliament and enacted after taking into
consideration the recommendations/observations of the Committee
made in this report. However, the Government may take immediate
action thereafter to bring a comprehensive legislation after suitably
incorporating amendments in the Principal Act and the old and
outdated legislation i.e., ‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ may be
repealed.
C. Use of word ‘may’ in the legislation
3.6 Various experts who appeared before the Committee/submitted
written memoranda expressed concerns over the use of word ‘may’ in
the legislation like Clause 20 of the Bill whereby it has been stated
that the amount of compensation payable to the entitled person may
be determined on the basis of Section 11B as inserted by the said Act.
When asked about the comments of the nodal Department, it has
stated that this is a drafting issue and may be taken up with the
Ministry of Law. Again when the issue was taken up with the Ministry

10
of Law, it has commented as under :—
“It is pertinent to mention that the legislation was drafted by the
Legislative Department as per the policy requirement of the
concerned administrative department on the basis of the inputs
furnished by them. However, in this connection, it is also relevant
to mention that there are cases in which it has been held by the
Apex Court that the words ‘may’ and ‘shall’ are interchangeable.
[Mohan Singh & Ors. V . International Airport Authority of India
& Ors. (1997) 9 SCC 132].”
3.7 The Committee feel that the use of word ‘may’ dilutes the
specific provision and provides undue discretion to the implementing
agency. As such the Committee would like to recommend that the
use of the word ‘may’ should be replaced by ‘shall’ in all the clauses
of the Bill barring some of the clauses where the intent of the
Government is to provide flexibility to the appropriate State
Government.
D. Need for making suitable provisions in the Land Acquisition
Legislation to protect agricultural land in the country
3.8 Nowadays, land is being acquired for setting up Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) to generate employment through industries
and related activities. When asked about the procedure with regard to
acquisition of land for setting up of SEZs, the Ministry of Commerce
in the written replies had submitted that wherever land is acquired,
these are as per the rules and procedures of the State Land Acquisition
Act.
3.9 When asked about the measures taken by the Government to
ensure that agricultural land is not acquired for setting up SEZs, the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry has submitted as under:—
“The Board of approvals follow the general principle that in case
of land acquisition for Special Economic Zones, first priority
should be for acquisition of waste and barren land and if
necessary single crop agricultural land could be acquired for the
SEZs. If perforce a portion of double-cropped agricultural land
has to be acquired to meet the minimum area requirements,
especially for multi-product Special Economic Zones, the same
should not exceed 10 per cent of the total land required for the
SEZ. The State Governments have been advised suitably in this
regard.”

11
3.10 Distribution of land under different usages in India as on
1980-81 to 2005-06 as provided by the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) has been given in
Appendix-V. The analysis of the data indicates that the total cultivable
land has decreased from 185.09 million hectares in 1980-81 to 182.57
million hectares in 2005-06 in spite of the efforts being made by the
various Ministries and the State Governments who develop the
wasteland. The data given by the Ministry of Agriculture indicates
that wasteland has decreased from 16.74 million hectares in 1980-81 to
13.16 million hectares during the year 2005-06.
3.11 When asked about the total area acquired so far for setting
up SEZs, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of
Commerce) has informed that the total extent of land in the 404 formal
approvals for SEZs so far is 57412.7 hectares. The total land area
involved in 490 formal approvals granted till date is 65664 hectares
out of which over 103 approvals are for State Industrial Development
Corporations/State Government Ventures, which account for 20723
hectares approximately.
3.12 When asked about the type of land acquired for setting up
SEZs, the Department of Commerce has submitted that various State
Governments have been requested to furnish the information. Till date,
information has been received in respect of 181 SEZs from 6 State
Governments viz., Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Punjab & Rajasthan. The total area of the land involved
in these SEZs is about 16987 hectares. Out of this, 92 per cent is
reported to be barren/waste land and 7.5 per cent of the land is
single crop. The double crop land acquired for SEZs is negligible.
Further when asked about the status of the other States, the Secretary
during the course of oral evidence has informed as under:—
“We do not have the full details from all the States. I had visited
quite a large number of the States. Bulk of the land is barren.
The States like Gujarat have not been indicated here but almost
80 per cent to 90 per cent of the land there is barren land, which
is coming there in all these SEZs. Mundra is one of the largest
areas where more than 10,000 hectares or 12,000 hectares in two
SEZs are barren. The entire area is barren. In fact, there are salt
lands available. So, they are barren lands. In Goa also, out of
seven approvals, six are industrial estates acquired by the Goa
Industrial Development Corporation in 2001, and, therefore, they
are lying barren with fence and there is no cultivation there.”

12
3.13 The representative of Department of Commerce during the
course of oral evidence has further informed as under :—
“xxx out of the 404 approvals that we have given so far, you
will find the land requirement of 57,000 hectares; in our reply,
we have furnished that; it is 0.035 per cent of the cultivable land
available in the country. Our requirement is extremely small at
this point of time.”
3.14 V arious experts who appeared before the Committee,
submitted written memoranda have expressed serious concerns over
the acquisition of agricultural land for setting up SEZs particularly in
view of the need of food security for billion plus population of the
country. Not only that, the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) were of the opinion that with rapid
urbanization per capita land availability for the purpose of food security
would be a problem. The specific views of the Ministry of Agriculture
are as under :—
“In the Bill, provisions should be made that the person/
organization should give priority to purchase/acquire wasteland
and only after all efforts are exhausted, agricultural land including
single crop land should be purchased.” and
“In extreme cases, if agricultural land is acquired, equivalent
wasteland/degraded land should be developed by the persons/
companies for whom land is being acquired by their own funds
and the cost of development for equivalent wasteland/degraded
land should also be included in the cost of acquisition”.
3.15 On the suggestion of some of the experts to make it
mandatory to provide wasteland for setting up SEZs, the Committee
considered the State-wise position in various States as given in
Appendix-VI . It could be seen from the data that percentage of
wasteland to total geographical area in 8 States is less than 10 per
cent. In UTs, it is just 2.8 per cent of wasteland to total geographical
area.
3.16 When the issue was further debated, the Ministry of
Agriculture made a suggestion as under :—
“In those States where there is limited availability of wasteland,
the States may put an appropriate mechanism in place to promote
yield enhancement through greater use of micro nutrients etc.
which can be subsidized out of the funds generated through
acquisition of land.”

13
3.17 It may further be pertinent to indicate here that the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy 2007 dealt with the aforesaid
issue as under :—
“As far as possible, projects may be set up on wasteland,
degraded land or un-irrigated land. Acquisition of agricultural
land for non-agricultural use in the project may be kept to the
minimum, multi-cropped land may be avoided to the extent
possible for such purposes, and acquisition of irrigated land, if
unavoidable, may be kept to the minimum.”
3.18 When asked about the legal provisions that should have been
made in the Bill as to protect the agricultural land, the nodal
Department has informed that Rule 4 (vi) of Land Acquisition
(Companies) Rules, 1963 specifically provides that Collector will have
to submit report on the following matter:
“where the land proposed to be acquired is good agriculture
land, that no alternative suitable site can be found so as to avoid
acquisition of that land.”
This requirement will be carried through in the revised rules, after
the amendments are carried out to the LA Act.
3.19 When asked whether it is feasible to fix a specific percentage
of agricultural land in the country, the Ministry of Agriculture has
stated that it is not justified. When further attention of the nodal
Department was drawn to the minimum forest area as protected, it
has clarified that agriculture and forest are different subjects. For the
conservation of forests, the Central Government has enacted the Forest
Conservation Act, 1980, which controls the diversion of forest land for
non-forest purposes. For agriculture, there is no similar Act in the
Central Government.
3.20 The Ministry of Agriculture has further informed that the
Government of India have approved the National Policy for Farmers
2007 which provides that prime farmland must be conserved for
agriculture, except under exceptional circumstances provided the
agencies that are provided with the agricultural land for non-
agricultural projects should compensate for treatment and full
development of equivalent degraded wasteland elsewhere. The
Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture during evidence before the Committee
has submitted as under :—
“There should be a provision in the Bill that even after private
persons or companies purchase about 70 per cent of the land

14
acquired for the project, the land use of agricultural land should
not be changed without consultation with the State Land Use
Boards; there must be a system to assess the optimal size of the
land that would be required for the project in question. The
State Land Use Boards which already exist almost in all the States
may be utilised for assessing the requirement of the land in a
particular project in consultations with the concerned Departments
for developing appropriate guidelines for the purpose; further
projects taken out by companies may perhaps be treated as public
projects provided such companies financially contribute for the
development of wasteland.”
3.21 The Committee find that inspite of the efforts being made
by the various Ministries and the State Governments to convert the
wasteland into agricultural land, the data furnished by the Ministry
of Agriculture indicates that the total cultivable land in the country
has declined from 185.09 million hectares in 1980-81 to 182.57 million
hectares in 2005-2006. Besides, almost 50 percent of the total cultivable
land is area sown more than once and the remaining area is under
single crop. With the increased land acquisition, the issue related to
food security has recently been debated by the various quarters in
the country. The Committee in their 27th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-2008) have also dealt with the various issues, related to
acquisition of land vis-à-vis food security and have made several
suggestions. The Committee while examining the present ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ have widely deliberated the
aforesaid issue, the details of which have been given above.
3.22 During the course of examination of the Bill, various experts
have strongly suggested that good agricultural land should not be
acquired at any cost. While appreciating the concerns expressed by
the experts, the Committee feel that such a proposition may not be
practical, particularly, in the States/Districts where the wasteland area
is very limited. Further for linear projects, construction of hydropower
projects and for strategic defence purposes projects, a particular area/
land needs to be acquired. The Committee, therefore, are of the
view that to put a complete ban on the acquisition of agricultural
land would not be a practical solution. While giving the aforesaid
view, the Committee are fully aware of the urgent need to protect
the agricultural land in the country.
3.23  In this context, the Committee note that whereas the
National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007 had provided
some sort of provision, whereby an advisory has been made to avoid

15
acquisition of multi crop land, no such provision to protect the
agricultural land has been made in ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’. The detailed deliberations further indicate
that the Department intend to make some sort of provisions, while
framing rules on the lines of the existing rule 4(vi) of Land
Acquisition (Company) Rule, 1963, whereby it has been provided
that the Collector will have to submit report in case where the land
proposed to be acquired is good agriculture land, that no alternate
and suitable site can be found so as to avoid acquisition of that
land. The Committee feel that making such a provision in the
legislation itself instead of leaving it to the rules would further
strengthen the aforesaid provision. The Committee, therefore, would
like to recommend that the provisions proposed to be made by rules
with some of the modifications as stated below should suitably be
inserted in the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007:—
“where the land proposed to be acquired is agricultural land,
the Collector shall submit a report that wasteland, degraded/
barren land was not available for the particular project in that
district.”
3.24 The Committee further feel that there is an urgent need to
develop wasteland where agricultural land is acquired. As such
suitable provision in the legislation should be made whereby it
should be provided that equal area of wasteland shall be developed
in case the agricultural land is acquired in the respective State/Union
Territory, if wasteland/degraded barren land is available and the cost
of development of that area of wasteland would be borne by the
requiring body or the appropriate Government, as the case may be.
Further, the cost of development of wasteland should be part of the
project cost proposed to be set up on acquired land.
3.25 Since the proposal for setting up of SEZs is approved by
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, the Committee would like
to recommend that in case the land acquired for setting up of SEZs
by a State Government is agricultural land, that Government should
be required to give the following certificate before finalization of
the proposal:—
“wasteland/degraded/barren land was not available in that
district for setting up of SEZs and the acquiring body would
develop equal or double area of wasteland and the cost of
development of wastelands of that area would be borne by the
acquiring body/respective Government”.

16
3.26 While recommending for equal area of wasteland to be
developed in lieu of the agricultural land acquired by the appropriate
Government/requiring body, the Committee feel that there is an
urgent need to indicate which of the wasteland would be developed
by the requiring body/appropriate Government. In this case, a
suitable provision should be made in the legislation whereby the
respective State Government would earmark the area of wasteland
which would be developed in lieu of the acquired agricultural land
based on the scientific data of wasteland maintained by the
Government.
3.27 In addition to the suggested measures and suitable
amendments in the legislation, the Committee would like to
recommend that the Union Government should do the long term
planning for the next 20-25 years regarding the total area of
agricultural land required in future to meet the prospective
requirement of foodgrains for the growing population of the country.
Such a data would further put pressure on the various State
Governments to take the desired initiatives to protect the agricultural
land at any cost.
3.28 The Committee further feel that there is a need for a strong
law whereby the prime agricultural land can invariably be protected.
When the attention of the Ministry of Agriculture was drawn towards
this fact, it has stated that it is not justified. The Committee, while
appreciating the fact that land and its management falls under the
State List, may like to emphasize that already there is a Central law
i.e., Forest Conservation Act 1980, which controls the diversion of
forest land for non forest purposes. The Committee recommend to
the Government to bring some legislation on the lines of Forest
Conservation Act 1980 so that the prime agricultural land can
invariably be protected like forest land. The Committee strongly
recommend to take up the issue with the concerned Ministries/
Departments. Since the matter needs urgent attention, the
recommendation of the Committee should be placed before the
Cabinet Secretary so that immediate action is taken in this regard.
3.29 The Committee further find that State Governments are
frequently changing the land use, whereby good agricultural land is
being acquired by developers for different projects particularly real
estate projects. In this regard, the Committee have persistently been
recommending in their reports to finalize the land use policy. The
Committee emphasize that the land use policy should be finalized
expeditiously which may provide necessary guidelines and

17
instructions to various State Governments. It may be emphasized in
the land use policy to formulate land use plans by the local bodies
so as to minimize and regulate the conversion of agricultural land
for other uses.
3.30 The Committee would further like to recommend that the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry should maintain the data with
regard to the type of land acquired by the State Governments for
setting up of SEZs so as to have a fair idea of the conversion of
agricultural land into other uses. Besides the Ministry of Agriculture/
Department of Land Resources should maintain the data of wasteland
converted into agricultural land which may help the Government to
take the desired initiatives for the food security for large population
of the country. The Department should take up the issue with the
concerned Ministries in this regard.
E. Implementation of various provisions made in the Bill
prospectively or retrospectively
3.31 As clarified by the Ministry , the provision made under ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ would be effective from the
date of notification in the Official Gazette. Some of the experts were
of the view that the benefits that the Government intend to give should
be made available to all pending cases. However, the cases that have
already been settled should not get the benefit of the amending law.
In this regard, clause 20 of the Bill which proposes to insert the
following after Section 28A of the Principal Act seems to address the
issue partially:—
“28B. Where an award is pending or remains unsettled at any
stage under the Act, prior to the coming into force of the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 2007, then the amount of
compensation payable to the entitled person may be determined
on the basis of section 11B as inserted by the said Act.”
3.32 It could be seen from the aforesaid provision that the revised
criteria of market value of the land as proposed to be provided by
clause 13 by inserting Section 11B in the Principal Act would be
applicable retrospectively in the cases where an award is pending or
remains unsettled at any stage under the Act. However with regard to
other benefits provided in the Land Acquisition legislation and
Rehabilitation and Resettlement legislation like the higher rate of
solatium, rehabilitation package etc. nothing has been mentioned about
the retrospective applicability in the pending cases.

18
3.33 The Ministry has further clarified on the issue that in clause
20 of the Bill award being referred to is the award of the Collector
under ‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’. The language of the legislation
does not clarify the position. The reading of the clause indicates that
the retrospective benefits as enumerated above will be available where
an award is pending or remain unsettled at any stage.
3.34  It seems that the aforesaid clause covers the cases where
the various stages of land acquisition prior to award like preliminary
investigation, declaration of intended acquisition, inquiry into
measurements, value and claims have already been completed and
the award by the Collector is pending on the date when the
amending legislation is being made operational. There is utter
confusion with regard to providing retrospective benefits to the
affected persons in such cases. Only Section 11B, which provides for
determination of market value of land has been stated to be
applicable retrospectively. The provision made in the Bill indicates
that whereas the affected person will get the current market value
of land, he will be debarred from the other enhanced benefits like
solatium and the rehabilitation package as provided in R&R
legislation. Another confusion has been created by the Ministry by
stating that the award being referred to is the award of the Collector,
whereas the language of the legislation clearly covers all the cases
where the award is pending or remains unsettled at any stage which
may include the cases where the award is pending with the Collector
or the aggrieved party has filed the case in the court due to one or
the other reason and the award remains unsettled.
3.35 Keeping in view the position as explained above, the
Committee would like to recommend that the applicability of the
various other benefits viz., solatium and the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement package provided under the ‘The Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ in cases of land acquisition where the award
is pending or remains unsettled at any stage under the existing Act
should also be provided retrospectively as has been provided in
case of market rate as per clause 20 of the Bill. The Committee feel
that such a provision would help in early settlement of pending
cases. However, it should be explicitly made clear in the legislation
that revised rates would not be applicable in the cases already settled
on the date, the amending legislation would be made operational.
Accordingly, clause 20 of the Bill should be suitably amended.
3.36 Besides, the Committee urge that the word ‘may’ in the
aforesaid clause should be changed to ‘shall’ to make the provision
more effective.

19
F. Maximum limit of land to be acquired under ‘The Land
Acquisition Act, 1894’.
3.37 The nodal Department has stated that the aforesaid matter of
making a provision for some maximum limit of land to be acquired
under ‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ was considered and it was
thought that fixing an upper limit in the law may create problems in
the future for some major projects of public interest where large area
of land will be required. Further, when asked whether the Department
had consulted agencies/Ministries on the aforesaid issue. The
Department has stated that has not consulted any agency/Ministry on
the aforesaid issue.
3.38  The Committee during the deliberations on the aforesaid Bill
had consultations with various related Ministries on the aforesaid issue.
The Ministry of Environment and Forests felt that it may not be
desirable to fix norms for the extent of area and number of ST people
in a project. The Ministry of Urban Development was of the view that
the quantum of land needed for urban projects is normally governed
by the Master Plan and as such, the aforesaid question gets addressed
to a large extent by the Master Plan. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs
was of the view that fixing limit for the maximum number of STs that
may be displaced in a project will compel a project proponent to look
for other suitable alternatives.
3.39  The Committee feel that it may not be practical to set
maximum limit of land to be acquired under Land Acquisition Act,
keeping in view the concerns expressed by the Ministries of
Environment and Forests, Tribal Affairs and Urban Development as
given above. However, the Committee find that at times more than
the required land is acquired for setting up of a project. Since, land
is a limited resource, its optimum utilization is the need of the
hour. As such there is an urgent need to have some mechanism to
guard against the excessive acquisition of land which is at times
much more than the land required for setting up a project.
3.40 The Committee further find that the appropriate Government
i.e. State Governments/Union Governments acquire land for the
public purpose. As such, the Department in consultation with the
Ministry of Law and Justice should consider creating and
empowering the Committee at the appropriate Government level to
consider and approve the optimum size of land for a project, before
the notification for the acquisition of land is made. Such body may
include experts/professionals, representatives of the respective

20
Government and the representatives of both the acquiring body and
the elected local representatives. Suitable provisions in this regard
may be made in the legislation accordingly.
G. Multiple displacement not to be allowed
3.41 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs was of the view that multiple
displacements i.e. the displacement more than once should not be
allowed except in case of strategic/defence projects having national
importance. Some of the experts have also expressed the similar views.
The Department of Land Resources has not compiled any data relating
to multiple displacement so far under the Land Acquisition legislation.
3.42 The Committee note that the acquisition of land leads to
displacement of people which result in depriving them of their
livelihood and shelter. Besides the displacement has traumatic
psychological and socio-cultural consequences for the affected
population. It takes years together for a displaced person/family to
settle at the rehabilitated place. If the person/family is again uprooted,
it is more painful. While recognizing the fact that sometimes multiple
displacement becomes necessary due to strategic defence purposes
having national importance or for some crucial infrastructure projects,
the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to compensate the
person/family who are uprooted more than once for the purpose of
public good. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all the
benefits provided under the Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation
and Resettlement legislation should be doubled at every stage in
case of second and subsequent displacement of a family/person.
Suitable amendments in both the Bills viz., ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill, 2007’ should accordingly be made.
3.43 The Committee further note that when tribals are
rehabilitated in an area, they face a lot of problems in getting their
rights as tribals. As such the Committee strongly recommend that
all rights and entitlements of such tribals emerging out of the existing
documents should be preserved in perpetuity. The Department may
make suitable provision in this regard in the legislation.
3.44 The Committee further note that no efforts have been made
to maintain the data with regard to multiple displacement due to
land acquisition. The Committee strongly recommend that the Union
Government should maintain data in this regard which should further
be posted on the website for transparency.

21
H. Declaring the area where tribals from Scheduled Areas are
rehabilitated as the Scheduled Area
3.45 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs during the course of oral
evidence has submitted that in most of the Scheduled Areas, there is
a law that you cannot transfer land from a Scheduled tribes area to
a non-tribal area. If they are transferred after the land acquisition,
they shall again settle in the Scheduled Area. If the area is not
Scheduled Area and the number of persons inhabited is large, the
rehabilitation area shall be declared as Scheduled Area. As per Fifth
Schedule of the Constitution of India, the Governor of each State having
Scheduled Area therein, shall annually or whenever so required by
the President of India, make a report to the President of India and the
President of India may at any time by order declare the area of any
Scheduled Area in a State after consultations with the Governor of
that State.
3.46  When asked from the Ministry of Tribal Affairs whether any
request from any State Government to declare a rehabilitated area as
Scheduled Area has been made by any of the State Government and
addressed by the Union Government in view of the aforesaid
Constitutional provision, that Ministry has replied in negative. The
Ministry of Tribal Affairs has put this clause in the draft National
Tribal Policy which has not been approved so far.
3.47  When asked about the legal position for declaring the area
where tribals from Scheduled Areas are rehabilitated as the Scheduled
Area, the nodal Department has reiterated the position as stated above
whereby they have stated that as per the Constitution, President of
India on the suggestion of Governor of a State declares any areas as
Scheduled Area and as such the issue is under the purview of the
concerned State Government.
3.48  The Committee find that the Fifth Schedule of the
Constitution provides that the Governor of each State having
Scheduled Area therein, shall annually or whenever so required by
the President of India, make a report to the President of India and
the President of India may at any time by order declare the area as
Scheduled Area in a State after consultations with the Governor of
that State. The Committee understand that no such request from
any State Government has been received and addressed by the Union
Government which indicates that perhaps the rehabilitated areas are
not being declared as Scheduled Areas by the State Governments.

22
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has put a clause in this regard in the
draft National Tribal Policy which has not been approved so far.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that suitable provision in the
Land Acquisition Bill should be made whereby the State
Governments may be asked to take the desired action to declare the
area where the tribals are rehabilitated as Scheduled Area as per the
Constitutional position on the lines of the proposed provisions in
the draft tribal policy.
I. Clarification with regard to the applicability of the legislation in
the State of Nagaland to be made in the short title of the Act
3.49 The experts who appeared before the Committee/tendered
evidence have drawn the attention of the Committee to Article 371 A
of the Constitution which provides that no Act of Parliament in respect
of ownership and transfer of land and its resources shall apply to the
State of Nagaland unless the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland by
resolution so decides.
3.50  When asked about the impact of the aforesaid Article of the
Constitution to the provisions made in the LA and R&R Bills, the
Department has informed that the matter may be clarified by the
Ministry of Law and Justice. In this regard, the Department of Legal
Affairs has commented as under :—
“Article 371A of the Constitution deals with special provision
with respect to the State of Nagaland. Under the provisions of
Article 371A (1)(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of
administration of civil and criminal justice involving decision
according to Naga customary law and ownership and transfer of
land and its resources shall apply to the State of Nagaland unless
the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland by a resolution so decides.
In view of the above, Constitutional provision, the applicability
of the `Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and `The
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ to Nagaland will have
to be decided by a resolution of the Nagaland Legislative
Assembly.”
3.51 The Committee find that as per the Constitutional provision
and clarification given by the Department of Legal Affairs, the LA
legislation would apply to Nagaland only when decided by a
resolution of the Nagaland Legislative Assembly. The LA Act is not
applicable in the State of Jammu & Kashmir in view of its special

23
status, as per Article 370 of the Constitution. As such the short title
of the Principal Act indicates that the Act extends to the whole of
India except (the State of Jammu & Kashmir). The Committee feel
that similar clarification with regard to Nagaland as per the
Constitutional position should be made in the short title of the LA
Act. As such the Department should propose suitable amendment in
the short title of the Principal Act in the amending legislation.

24
CHAPTER IV
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE ANALYSIS OF THE VARIOUS PROVISIONS
MADE IN DIFFERENT CLAUSES OF THE BILL
In this part of the report, the Committee have examined the
respective clauses of the Bill and observations/recommendations have
been made consequent upon the detailed consultations.
A. Definition of ‘person interested’
4.1 Clause 3(b) of the existing Land Acquisition Act, 1894 defines
‘person interested’ as under:—
b) the expression ‘person interested’ includes all persons claiming
an interest in compensation to be made on account of the
acquisition of land under this Act; and a person shall be deemed
to be interested in land if he is interested in an easement affecting
the land;”
4.2 As per the amendment proposed by clause 5(b) of ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’, the expression ‘person interested’
has been defined as under:—
‘(b) the expression “person interested” includes,—
(i) all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made
on account of the acquisition of land under this Act;
(ii) tribals and other traditional forest dwellers, who have lost
any traditional rights recognised under the Scheduled Tribes
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006;
(iii) a person interested in an easement affecting the land; and
(iv) persons having tenancy rights under the relevant State laws;’
4.3 Further, ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ defines
‘affected family’ as under:—
“affected family” means—
(i) a family whose primary place of residence or other property
or source of livelihood is adversely affected by the
acquisition of land for a project or involuntary displacement
due to any other reason;

25
(ii) any tenure holder, tenant, lessee or owner of other property,
who on account of acquisition of land (including plot in
the abadi or other property) in the affected area or otherwise,
has been involuntarily displaced from such land or other
property;
(iii) any agricultural or non-agricultural labourer, landless person
(not having homestead land, agricultural land, or either
homestead or agricultural land), rural artisan, small trader
or self-employed person; who has been residing or engaged
in any trade, business, occupation or vocation continuously
for a period of not less than five years in the affected area
preceding the date of declaration of the affected area, and
who has been deprived of earning his livelihood or alienated
wholly or substantially from the main source of his trade,
business, occupation or vocation because of the acquisition
of land in the affected area or being involuntarily displaced
for any other reason.”
4.4 Various experts who submitted memoranda/tendered evidence
before the Committee were of the view that the definition of ‘person
interested’ in LA Bill should include the non-landed and non-cultivating
persons dependent on the land and local economy for livelihood and
common property. It was suggested that the definition of affected family
in the R&R Bill should be incorporated into the definition of interested
persons.
4.5 When asked about the comments of the Department on the
aforesaid suggestion, it has opined that ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007’ deal with different issues, so the same definition cannot be
repeated. All persons coming under the definition of the ‘affected
family’ as proposed in clause 3 of the R&R Bill, 2007 will be entitled
for the R&R benefit package. This has a wider connotation, and is
designed to benefit all those whose livelihood is adversely affected
due to involuntary displacement of a permanent nature. However,
under the LA Act, 1894, the compensation and solatium will be
available to the landowner and others included under the definition
of ‘person interested’ that are tribals and other traditional forest
dwellers, persons interested in an easement affecting the land, and
persons having tenancy rights under the relevant laws.
4.6 The Committee find that whereas the ‘Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ provides R&R benefits in case of involuntary
displacement of an affected person/family due to land acquisition as

26
well as due to any reason which as clarified by the nodal Department
may be war, natural calamity etc. `The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill’ provides certain benefits like market rate of land
acquired, solatium etc. to the affected person/family only when
involuntary displacement is due to the land acquisition. Since the
R&R Bill has wider coverage as compared to LA Bill, there is bound
to be difference in the definition of person interested/affected family.
In view of this, the Committee approve the definition of interested
persons proposed in the amending Bill.
4.7 Further, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has suggested that in
clause 5(b)(i), the responsibility may be given to the acquiring authority,
and therefore ‘claiming an interest’ may be replaced by ‘all affected
persons eligible for compensation’. When asked about the difference
between the phrase ‘a person claiming an interest’ and ‘eligible for
compensation’, the Ministry has opined that the phrase ‘a person
claiming an interest’ has arbitrariness, whereas the phrase ‘all affected
persons eligible for compensation’ highlights a systematic approach
wherein the affected persons are identified through a survey before
taking up the project. It also brings the responsibility on the project
proponent and the concerned Government that nobody from the
affected area should be left out, and negates the possibility of an
ignorant person being left out.
4.8 When asked about the comments of the nodal Department on
the suggestion given by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, it has stated
that the current definitions under the two Bills are adequate.
4.9 The aforesaid analysis indicates that as per the amending
legislation, the onus of getting the desired compensation and other
benefits envisaged under the LA legislation is on the affected person.
In case the amendment suggested by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs
is accepted, the onus of providing the adequate compensation as per
the legislation would rest with the appropriate Government. The
Committee after detailed deliberations conclude that the onus of
getting the desired benefit on the claimant as provided under LA
legislation is a better proposition and as such decided that the
definition of ‘person interested’ as given in clause 5(b)(1) is
appropriate and may be retained.
B. Protecting the interest of tenants whose tenancy is an informal
arrangement
4.10 Clause 5 of the Bill, which intends to amend Section 3 of the
Principal Act, includes in the definition of person interested those

27
persons having tenancy rights under the relevant State laws. The
Department in this regard has clarified that different States/UTs have
different laws for tenancies. The aforesaid Clause of the Bill refers to
persons having tenancy rights under the relevant State laws, which
will also include the local laws covering tenancies in urban areas.
When asked how the interest of tenants where the tenancy is not
registered and there is some informal arrangement between the landlord
and the tenant would be protected, the Department has clarified that
these issues will be taken care of by the tenancy laws of the respective
State Governments and Union Territories.
4.11 The Committee appreciate that since most of the times,
tenancy is an informal arrangement between the landlord and the
tenant, there is an urgent need to protect the interest of those tenants.
The Committee further find that as per the Constitutional position
tenancy falls under the State List and as such State Governments
have to devise the mechanism to cover the informal tenancies for
the purpose of providing benefits under the LA as well as R&R
legislation. Necessary instructions in this regard should be issued to
the State Governments.
C. Protecting the interests of tribals and forest dwellers
4.12 Further the Clause protecting the interests of tribals and forest
dwellers of the Bill includes the following in the category of persons
interested:—
(ii) tribals and other traditional forest dwellers, who have lost
any traditional rights recognized under the Scheduled Tribes
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006;
4.13 In Clause 3 (b) of the R&R Bill occupier has been defined as
a member of the Scheduled Tribe community in possession of forest
land prior to the 13th day of December, 2005 which is in accordance
with the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. Whereas reference to the
aforesaid Act has been made in aforesaid clause of the Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Bill, no cut off date has been defined in the LA
legislation. When asked how it would be decided that a Scheduled
Tribe family is in possession of land at a particular period of time,
particularly when the tribals do not have proper title of land to the
place they reside, the Department has stated that the possession of
land will have to be determined in accordance with the provisions of
the applicable laws and rules including the Scheduled Tribes and Other

28
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006.
Although the specified date has not been mentioned in the LA Bill by
linking the tribals and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers with the
aforesaid Act, cut off date has indirectly been made applicable. Various
experts who appeared before the Committee/submitted written
memoranda have expressed concern over the exclusion of Scheduled
Tribe community in possession of forest land after 13th day of
December, 2005 from the benefits of R&R Bill. Another issue is deciding
the legal right of tribals according to the aforesaid cut off date when
in most of the cases the tribals do not have proper title of land.
4.14 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs was further of the view that
Clause 5 suffers from legal infirmities in as much as it is against the
provisions relating to various State laws for Scheduled areas where
land belonging to STs cannot be transferred to non-tribal persons.
Similar views have been expressed by the experts who appeared before
the Committee. When the nodal Department was asked whether the
legal opinion in this matter was obtained, it has informed that the Bill
has been drafted by the Ministry of Law & Justice in consultation
with the Department. Again when the issue was referred to the Ministry
of Law and Justice, it too has ignored the question and did not respond
the matter categorically. Further the Ministry of Environment and
Forests in connection with R&R Bill has stated that other traditional
forest dwellers living in the forest for atleast three generations as
provided in the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 should be included for benefits
under R&R.
4.15 The Committee find that at present there are various laws
which clearly define how community rights can be recognized. To
protect the interests of the tribals, it is of utmost importance that no
land acquisition in the Scheduled Areas should take place unless
the rights of the tribals are recognized and settled. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that suitable provisions should be made in
the legislation.
4.16 The aforesaid details indicate that the cut off date of
13th December, 2005 has indirectly been made applicable. The
Committee considered the reservations expressed by various experts
with regard to the aforesaid cut off date. After detailed deliberations,
the Committee are of the view that since the aforesaid cut off date
has been provided in the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 for the
purpose of recognizing the rights of the tribals in Scheduled Areas,

29
providing some different date for the purpose would contradict the
provisions made in the two legislations. In view of this, the
Committee feel that the aforesaid cut off date as 13th day of
December, 2005 for providing benefits of R&R Bill in cases where
the land of the tribals is acquired is appropriate. Besides the
Committee would like to recommend to indicate the aforesaid cut
off date in ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ on the
lines of ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ keeping in
view the fact that both the legislations are independent legislations.
D. Preliminary notification for acquisition of land and the
advertisement of the notification in the daily newspapers.
4.17 As per the pr ovisions made under Section 4(1) of the Principal
Act, whenever it appears to the appropriate Government that the land
in any locality is needed or is likely to be needed for any public
purpose, a notification to that effect shall be published in the Official
Gazette and in two daily newspapers circulated in that locality, of
which at least one shall be in the regional language. It has further
been provided that the Collector shall cause public notice of the
substance of such notification to be given at convenient places in the
said locality. The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development in their Eighth Report on the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
had recommended that a copy of the notification in English, Hindi
and the concerned regional language should be affixed in the
Tehsildar’s Office/Gram Panchayat’s/Patwari’s office in order to remove
those complications which might arise due to inadequacy of means of
communications, especially, in remote areas. The Committee had also
recommended that the affected person must also get a copy of the
notification by a registered post.
4.18 When asked whether the Department had considered the
aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Committee have been
informed that the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee was
considered before proposing the amendments to the LA Act, 1894.
Serving notification on individuals would require information on
holders of land titles, which may not be possible at this stage. Further,
the process of establishing legal titles to land is a quasi-judicial process
and is governed by section 9(3) of the LA Act.
4.19 Section 4 (1) of the Principal Land Acquisition Act, 1894 states
that publication of preliminary notification shall be published in the
Official Gazette and in two daily newspapers including atleast one in
regional language. Further, it has been mentioned that the Collector

30
shall cause public notice of the substance of such notification to be
given at convenient places in the said locality. R&R Bill, 2007 also
addresses to the aforesaid area. In that Bill, it has been mentioned that
every declaration shall be published in atleast three newspapers two
of which shall be in local vernacular having circulation in villages or
areas likely to be affected. It has further been mentioned that a copy
of the notification may be affixed on the notice board of the concerned
Gram Panchayats or Municipalities and other prominent place or places
in the affected area as well the resettlement area.
4.20 The Committee consider the recommendation made by the
erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development in
their 8th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) whereby it has been
recommended that the person affected due to the land acquisition
must get a copy of the notification by registered post. After due
deliberations, the Committee note that the aforesaid suggestion is
not practical, keeping in view, the fact that the land records are not
updated regularly and it may be really difficult to find out the real
name of the owner of the properties which are going to be acquired
from the Registrar Office in urban areas and Revenue Offices in
rural areas. In view of this, the Committee feel that the details of
the property viz. khasra numbers in rural areas and quarter number
in urban areas should at least be identified and widely publicized
through prominent local English, Hindi and regional language
newspapers. Besides, the Committee reiterate the recommendation
of the earlier Committee that a copy of the notification in English,
Hindi and the concerned regional language should be displayed in
the Tehsildar Offices/Gram Panchayat Offices in rural areas and
Municipality Offices in urban areas in order to remove the
complications which might arise due to inadequacy of communicating
the intent of acquisition through notification especially in hilly, tribal
and remote areas.
4.21 The Committee would also like to recommend that the
aforesaid provision of due publicity of the notification should also
be made applicable in cases where the appropriate Government
acquire land for private companies for setting up projects of public
purpose.
4.22 The Committee further note that the Land Acquisition
legislation and R&R legislation are inter-linked legislations. As such,
there is an urgent need to make identical provisions, where there is
duplication of issues in the two Bills. In view of this, the Committee
would like to recommend that identical provision with regard to the

31
number of newspapers through which the publicity of notification
would be given by the appropriate Government should be made in
LA Bill on the lines of the provisions made in R&R Bill. As such
the notification should be published in at least three newspapers
two of which shall be the local vernacular having circulation in
villages or areas likely to be affected on the lines of the proposed
provisions in this regard in R&R Bill. The Committee would also
like to add that the newspapers through which publicity would be
made should be widely circulated newspapers in that area. Suitable
amendments in the respective clauses of the Bill should accordingly
be made.
E. Suitable placement of proviso to Section 4 of the Principal Act
4.23 The detailed reading of the Principal Act indicates that
Section 4 deals with preliminary investigation followed by Section 5
and 5A, which relate to payment of damages and hearing of objections.
Further, Section 6 deals with the declaration of the intended acquisition.
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert provisos related to declaration in
Section 4 of the Principal Act. In this regard, it may be pointed out
that whereas the proviso relates to declaration which has to be made
under Section 6, the amending legislation propose to insert it after
Section 4 which deals with preliminary investigation which does not
seem to be proper.
4.24 When asked whether the provisos as indicated in clause 9 of
the Bill should be inserted in Section 6 of the Principal Act suitably,
particularly, when the provisos relate to issue of fresh notification where
no declaration is made consequent upon the issue of a notification
which has been dealt with under Section 6 of the Act, the Department
has stated that this is a drafting issue, and the Law Ministry may be
requested to take position on the same.
4.25 The Department of Legislative Department in this regard has
clarified that the provisos proposed in section 4(1) (clause 9 of the
Bill) intend that no fresh notification shall be issued for a period of
one year in respect of the same land and no proceedings to be initiated
for five years if the notification issued under sub-section (1) lapses for
the second time. Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 relates to
issuing of the preliminary notification with regard to intention of
acquisition of land. As such, the provisos proposed to be inserted
therein provides for a bar with regard to issue of the declaration/
notification under section 6 of the said Act, where no notification under
that section is issued within a period of one year from the date of

32
impugned notification under section 4, and as a corollary to it the
said preliminary notification would lapse. Thereafter, as per the provisos
no second notification for the same land under section 4 can be issued
by the Government for a period of five years. Since the provisos
provide a time frame with regard to continuance of the notification
made under section 4, and as such may appropriately be provided in
section 4 (1) only as reversal prior to the intent notification upon the
failure of declaration notification under section 6.
4.26 The Committee consider the advice of the Legislative
Department that the provisos proposed in Section 4 (1) (Clause 9 of
the Bill) provide a time frame with regard to continuance of the
notification made under section 4, and as such may appropriately be
provided in section 4 (1) only as reversal prior to the intent
notification upon the failure of declaration notification under
section 6 and feel that the existing position in the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 is appropriate.
F. Period for hearing objections to the acquisition of land
4.27 As per Section 5A (1) of the Bill, any person interested in
any land which has been notified under Section 4, sub-Section 1 can
object to the acquisition of land or notification thereof within 30 days
from the date of publication of the notification. When asked whether
the aforesaid period is sufficient particularly in view of the fact that
a large number of people may not be aware and informed of this
notification in this regard, the Department has informed that the
aforesaid Section of the principal Act has not been touched by the
proposed amendment Bill. However, the Committee may take a view
on this aspect. Further, the erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban
and Rural Development in their 8th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) had
recommended that one-month time must be counted from the date of
the receipt of the copy of the notification by the affected person.
4.28 The Committee find that as per the provisions made in the
Principal Act, 30 days time period from the date of publication of
the notification has been provided for the affected person to object
to the acquisition of land or notification thereof. The Committee
feel that the aforesaid period is not sufficient and would like to
recommend that the period of 30 days should be increased to
60 days. As such the desired amendment should be made in the
proposed legislation.

33
G. Definition of ‘public purpose’
4.29 Comparative position of the definition of ‘public purpose’ as
per the Principal Act of 1894 [Section 3 (f)] as per the amending
legislation [Clause 5 (v) (f)] of the Bill is given as under:—
Provision as per the Provision as per the ‘Land
Principal Act Acquisition (Amendment)
Bill, 2007’
12
Section 3(f)
The expression “public purpose”
includes—
(i) the provision of village-sites, or the
extension, planned development or
improvement of existing village-sites;
(ii) the provision of land for town or
rural planning;
(iii) the provision of land for planned
development of land from public
funds in pursuance of any scheme or
policy of Government and subsequent
disposal thereof in whole or in part
by lease, assignment or outright sale
with the object of securing further
development as planned;
(iv) the provision of land for a
corporation owned or controlled by
the State;
(v) the provision of land for
residential purposes to the poor or
landless or to persons residing in
areas affected by natural calamities,
or to persons displaced or affected by
reason of the implementation of any
scheme undertaken by Government,
any local authority or a corporation
owned or controlled by the State;
(vi) the provision of land for carrying
out any educational, housing, health
or slum clearance scheme sponsored
Clause 5(v)(f)
Clause 5(v) for clause ( f), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(f) the expression “public purpose”
includes,—
(i) the provision of land for strategic
purposes relating to naval, military
and air force works or any other work
vital to the State;
(ii) the provision of land for
infrastructure projects of the
appropriate Government, where the
benefits accrue to the general public;
and
(iii) the provision of land for any other
purpose useful to the general public,
for which land has been purchased
by a person under lawful contract to
the extent of seventy per cent but the
remaining thirty per cent of the total
area of land required for the project
as yet to be required.’.
Explanation.—The word “person” shall
include any company or association
or body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not.;
(vi) after clause ( f), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—

34
12
by Government or by any authority
established by Government for
carrying out any such scheme, or with
the prior approval of the appropriate
Government, by a local authority, or
a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or
under any corresponding law for the
time being in force in a state, or a co-
operative society within the meaning
of any law relating to co-operative
societies for the time being in force
in any State;
(vii) the provision of land for any
other scheme of development
sponsored by Government or with the
prior approval of the appropriate
Government, by a local authority;
(viii) the provision of any premises or
building for locating a public office,
but does not include acquisition of
land for companies;
Section 3(e)
The expression “Company” means—
(i) a company as defined in section 3
of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956), other than a Government
company referred to in clause (cc);
(ii) a society registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of
1860), or under any corresponding law
for the time being in force in a State,
other than a society referred to in
clause (cc);
(iii) a co-operative society within the
meaning of any law relating to co-
operative societies for the time being
in force in any State, other than a co-
operative society referred to in clause
(cc);
‘(ff) the expression “infrastructure
project” shall include,—
(i) any project relating to generation,
transmission or supply of electricity;
(ii) construction of roads, highways,
bridges, airports, ports, rail systems or
mining activities;
(iii) water supply project, irrigation
project, sanitation and sewerage
system; or
(iv) any other public facility as may
be notified in this regard by the
Central Government in the Official
Gazette.’.
Explanation.—The word “person”
shall include any company or
association or body of individuals,
whether incorporated or not.;

35
4.30 V arious experts who appeared before the Committee/
submitted memoranda were of the view that the definition as per the
Principal Act was more detailed. The views have also been expressed
that the clause 5(v)(f)(iii) of the Bill which includes acquisition of land
for any other purpose useful to the general public is very vague and
can be misused. Some of the experts were also of the view that the
previous definition was much better and should be retained.
4.31 Whereas the word ‘companies’ has been deleted from the LA
Act, a provision has indirectly been made to acquire 30 per cent of
the total area of the land required for the project for ‘public purpose’
in the case where the private company has purchased land to the
extent of 70 per cent under lawful contract. The explanation to
clause 5 (v) provides that the word ‘person’ shall include any company
or association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not. In
this regard, various experts who appeared before the Committee/
submitted written memoranda were of the view that the aforesaid
provision would in other way open a field for the private parties to
acquire the land, particularly when the definition of public purpose as
per clause 5(v)(f)(iii) is too vague. The experts have also expressed the
apprehensions that even the commercial activities of certain
organizations have an element of usefulness to general public, which
raises a question mark on the provision of making available 30 per
cent of the land to the private parties by the State Governments.
4.32 On the aforesaid issue, the Ministry of Commerce has opined
that the definition of ‘public purpose’ could be tightened further.
4.33 Various appr ehensions have been expressed by various experts
and other stakeholders, who submitted memoranda/appeared before
the Committee, as under:—
(i) Some of the experts have expressed that the aforesaid
provision of providing 30 per cent of land by the
Government to the companies in a way encourage the
private sector to acquire more and more land and is more
dangerous than the provision of acquiring land for
companies in the Principal Act.
(ii) In cases where 70 per cent of the land is acquired by private
party i.e. the requiring body and 30 per cent is acquired by
the Government for setting up public welfare project as per
the clarification provided by the Government, the provisions
of rehabilitation and resettlement would apply only to the
involuntarily displaced persons i.e. up to 30 per cent of the

36
total area of the project. Thus, out of the total area acquired
for setting up a public welfare project, the provisions with
regard to social impact assessment and rehabilitation would
apply only to the 30 per cent of the population and for
70 per cent of the families, seller-buyer agreement would
be applicable.
Some of the experts were of the view that in the aforesaid
case, the acquisition by the Government will be costlier and
for private companies, it will be cheaper because the
provisions of R&R Bill are not applicable to them. It can be
argued that for the same project, people residing in a same
area would be treated differently as regards the issue of
rehabilitation and resettlement packages, which may create
contradictions and frictions.
(iii) Various apprehensions have further been expressed by the
experts with regard to 70:30 criteria of acquisition of land.
It has been argued that once the 70 per cent of the land is
acquired by the requiring body for a project, the market
price of the surrounding area will artificially increase. As
such when the Government would acquire the 30 per cent
of the land, the market price would be higher which may
deprive the persons who had agreed to sell their land on
a ‘willing seller-willing buyer’ basis to the price of land,
which the Government would pay to the remaining 30 per
cent. Thus, the benefits provided to two sets of affected
families would be quite different.
(iv) As per the clarification given by the Department, the
provisions of the R&R would apply only to the involuntarily
displaced. Thus, the SIA clearance shall be necessary for
the land acquisition by the Government (up to 30 per cent
of the total area of the project) if it involves involuntary
displacement of the prescribed number of families. For
70 per cent of affected families, in whose case the land is
acquired on willing seller-willing buyer basis, SIA will not
be done.
4.34 Further Clause 21 of the Bill provides that Part VII of the
Principal Act relating to acquisition of land for companies
(Sections 38A to 44B) (both inclusive) shall be omitted. Part VII of the
Principal Act is given below.
38A. An industrial concern, ordinarily employing not less than
one hundred workmen owned by an individual or by an

37
association of individuals and not being a Company, desiring to
acquire land for the erection of dwelling-houses for workmen
employed by the concern or for the provision of amenities directly
connected therewith shall, so far as concerns the acquisition of
such land, be deemed to be a Company for the purposes of this
Part, and the references to Company in sections 4, 5A, 6, 7 and
50 shall be interpreted as references also to such concern.
39. The provisions of sections 6 to 16 (both inclusive) and sections
18 to 37 (both inclusive) shall not be put in force in order to acquire
land for any company under this part, unless with the previous consent
of the appropriate Government, nor unless the Company shall have
executed the agreement hereinafter mentioned.
40. ( 1) Such consent shall not be given unless the appropriate
Government be satisfied, either on the report of the Collector under
section 5A, sub-section ( 2), or by an enquiry held as hereinafter
provided—
(a) that the purpose of the acquisition is to obtain land for the
erection of dwelling-houses for workmen employed by the
Company or for the provision of amenities directly connected
therewith; or
(aa) that such acquisition is needed for the construction of some
building or work for a Company which is engaged or is taking
steps for engaging itself in any industry or work which is for a
public purpose; or
(b) that such acquisition is needed for the construction of some
work and that such, work, is likely to prove useful to the public.
(2) Such enquiry shall be held by such officer and at such time
and place as the appropriate Government shall appoint.
(3) Such officer may summon and enforce the attendance of
witnesses and compel the production of documents by the same
means and, as far as possible, in the same manner as is provided
by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in the case of Civil Court.
41. If the appropriate Government is satisfied after considering the
report, if any, of the Collector under section 5A, sub-section ( 2), or on
the report of the officer making an inquiry under section 40 that the
proposed acquisition is for any of the purposes referred to in clause
(a) or clause ( aa) or clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 40, it shall

38
require the Company to enter into an agreement with the appropriate
Government providing to the satisfaction of the appropriate
Government for the following matters, namely:—
(1) the payment to the appropriate Government of the cost of
the acquisition;
(2) the transfer, on such payment, of the land to the Company;
(3) the terms on which the land shall be held by the Company;
(4) where the acquisition is for the purpose of erecting dwelling-
houses or the provision of amenities connected therewith, the
time within which, the conditions on which and the manner in
which the dwelling-houses or amenities shall be erected or
provided;
(4A) where the acquisition is for the construction of any building
or work for a Company which is engaged or is taking steps for
engaging itself in any industry or work which is for a public
purpose, the time within which and the conditions on which, the
building or work shall be constructed or executed; and
(5) where the acquisition is for the construction of any other
work the time within which and the conditions on which the
work shall be executed and maintained, and the terms on which
the public shall be entitled to use the work.
42. Every such agreement shall, as soon as may be after its
execution, be published in the Official Gazette, and thereupon (so far
as regards the terms on which the public shall be entitled to use the
work) have the same effect as if it had formed part of this Act.
43. The provisions of section 39 to 42, both inclusive, shall not
apply and the corresponding sections of the Land Acquisition Act,
1870, shall be deemed never to have applied, to the acquisition of
land of any Railway or other Company, for the purposes of which,
under any agreement with such Company, the Secretary of State for
India in Council, the Secretary of State, the Central Government or
any State Government is or was bound to provide land.
44. In the case of the acquisition of land for the purposes of a
Railway Company, the existence of such an agreement as is mentioned
in section 43 may be proved by the production of a printed copy
thereof purporting to be printed by other of Government.

39
44A. No Company for, which any land is acquired under this Part
shall be entitled to transfer the said land or any part thereof by sale,
mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise except with the previous sanction of
the appropriate Government.
44B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Act, no land shall
be acquired under this Part, except for the purpose mentioned in
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 40, for a private company which
is not a Government company.
Explanation.—‘‘Private company” and “Government company” shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Companies
Act, 1956.
4.35 As per Clause 5 (v) of the Bill, ‘public purpose’ includes the
provision of land for strategic purposes relating to naval, military and
air force works or any other work vital to the State. The Ministry of
Home Affairs has submitted that entry of Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution of India mentions Navy, Military and Air Force; and other
armed forces of the Union as a Central subject. It is therefore felt that
the relevant clause in these bills should make a specific mention of
“Armed Forces of the Union” in addition to Navy, Military and Air
Force as is mentioned in the Constitution. Otherwise vital requirements
of the Central Para military Forces (CPFs) which are primarily
responsible for internal security and guarding the frontiers of the
country will be open to interpretation of the Land Acquisition process
on each occasion.
4.36 The Department of Land Resources has agreed with the view
of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
4.37 The Committee find that although the proposed amending
legislation omits the word ‘company’ from the Principal Act, the
70:30 criteria as stated above in a way would help the company or
association or body of individuals to acquire land for the public
purpose projects. This clause has widely been debated by various
experts and other stakeholders. The details of the apprehensions
expressed by the experts and various stakeholders as emerged during
the deliberations of the Committee have been given in the preceding
paras. The Committee considered the proposed amendment with
regard to public purpose in detail during the various sittings of the
Committee. This clause was further deliberated exhaustively while
undertaking clause by clause consideration of the Bill. The
conclusions arrived during the deliberations are as under:—
(i) The criteria of acquiring land for private company where
70 per cent of the land is acquired by private company

40
i.e. requiring body for setting up public welfare projects
is contradictory particularly in view of the clarifications
given by the Department whereby it has been stated that
the issues with regard to rehabilitation and resettlement
for 30 per cent of the population would be taken care of
by the appropriate Government and for 70 per cent by
the private company. Further, Social Impact Assessment
Study would be done for 30 per cent of the families for
which appropriate Government is acquiring land. Thus,
the benefits provided to two sets of families would be
governed by different criteria and would result in
contradictions and frictions in families living in the same
area.
(ii) The provisions made under Clause 5 (v)(f)(iii) which
includes ‘any other purpose useful’ to the general public
for declaring a project as public purpose gives too much
discretion to the appropriate Government and can be
interpreted favourably to give benefit to a particular
person/company. The earlier definition of public purpose
was more detailed and did not provide any such discretion
to the appropriate Government.
(iii) Part VII of the Principal Act provided certain
conditionalities and details of the agreement of the
company with appropriate Government and as such was
more exhaustive, detailed and conditional whereas the new
definition provides too much liberty.
4.38 The Committee find that land is acquired by the appropriate
Government for setting up public purpose projects. Sometimes the
appropriate Government help the private body in acquisition of land
for setting up public purpose projects. The Committee are of the
firm opinion that fixing some percentage of the land to be acquired
by the appropriate Government and private body for a particular
project of public purpose is very contradictory and impractical, the
analysis of which has been given above. As such the Committee
unanimously decided not to agree to the aforesaid 70:30 criteria.
Further the Committee feel that the definition of public purpose
as given in Section 3 (f) of the Principal Act was much better. Besides
Part VII of the Principal Act which the amending legislation propose
to delete further tightened the definition of public purpose by putting
some of the conditionalities. In view of this, the Committee
unanimously decided not to agree to the proposed definition of

41
public purpose as per Clause 5 of the amending legislation. The
Committee after deliberations unanimously decided that the
definition of public purpose as given in the Principal Act of 1894
along with Part VII of the Principal Act should be retained.
4.39 While recommending to retain the earlier definition
alongwith Part VII (clause 38A to 44B) of the Principal Act the
Committee deliberated further on the aforesaid provisions in the
Principal Act in the light of the various reservations expressed by
various quarters which include the various Union Ministries. As such
the Committee decided to retain the existing definition of public
purpose alongwith Part VII as per the Principal Act with some of
the modifications, the details of which are given in the succeeding
paras.
4.40 In the existing position as per the Principal Act, the
provision of land for strategic purposes has not been included in
the definition of public purpose whereas in the amending clause it
has specifically been provided. Since strategic purpose is the foremost
need for the acquisition of land, the Committee after considering
the suggestions of the Ministry of Home Affairs as stated above
would like that the following should be added in the existing details
of the public purpose in the Principal Act.
“The provision of land for strategic purposes relating to naval,
military, air force and armed forces of the union or any other
work vital to the State.”
4.41 Further, Section 3(f) (vi) of the Principal Act provides as
under:—
“the provision of land for carrying out any educational, housing,
health or slum clearance scheme sponsored by Government or
by any authority established by Government for carrying out
any such scheme, or with the prior approval of the appropriate
Government, by a local authority, or a society registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or under any
corresponding law for the time being in force in a state, or a
co-operative society within the meaning of any law relating to
co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State”
The Committee note that the word ‘housing’ in the aforesaid
section is too liberal and includes the acquisition of land for private
company for the purpose of building posh high income group
residential premises as well as posh colonies/residential complexes

42
by the private builders. In view of this the Committee would like
that the word ‘housing’ should be replaced by ‘housing for lower
and middle-income groups’ in the aforesaid section.
4.42 Further, Section 3(f) (vii) of the Principal Act provides as
under:—
“the provision of land for any other scheme of development
sponsored by Government or with the prior approval of the
appropriate Government, by a local authority”
The Committee note that the aforesaid provision provide too
much discretion to the appropriate Government. The Committee
feel that only the acquisition of land for any Centrally
sponsored/State Sector Scheme of the Union Government as
well as the State Government’s social welfare Schemes should
be included for the purpose of acquisition of land by the
Government.
4.43  The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Government
to retain the existing definition of public purpose as given in
Section 3(f) of the Principal Act alongwith Part VII (clause 38A to
44B) with the modifications as suggested above.
4.44 The Committee while deliberating the definition of public
purpose have found that at times the Government helps the
companies in acquisition of land for a particular public purpose
project say hospitals or schools. After sometimes definition of public
purpose for which the private company was assisted in the
acquisition of land is changed. The Committee feel that allowing
such change of the public purpose defeats the very purpose of
acquisition of land. As such change of the purpose should not be
allowed. The Committee further find that while helping the private
companies in acquiring land for a public purpose, the appropriate
Government fixes some conditionalities. Such conditionalities should
not be allowed to be changed subsequently. The Committee
recommend that suitable provisions should be made in this regard
either in Part VII or appropriately in the amending legislation.
H. Social Impact Assessment Study
4.45 As per clause 8 of the Bill, social impact assessment study is
mandatory for all projects involving physical displacement beyond the
defined threshold i.e. 400/200 families en masse  in plain and 200 in
hilly, tribal, scheduled areas.

43
4.46 Different Ministries have given different views on the number
of families as given in Clause 8 for making the social impact assessment
study mandatory:
Ministry Suggestion
Ministries of Panchayati Raj The Ministry had suggested that for the
and Tribal Affairs areas governed by PESA the aforesaid
limit of 200 households should be flexible
so that the entire habitation is covered
even if it were to be below the prescribed
limit of 200 families. Various arguments
substantiating aforesaid suggestion have
been given by the Ministry—
(i) The pattern of habitation in PESA
areas is different from the plains and
there is a lesser population
contained in their Panchayats. There
would be at an average about 5000
persons in a Panchayat in Jharkhand
while there would be about 1500
persons, in Chhattisgarh. This figure
varies from State to State.
(ii) Under the Provisions of the
Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled
Areas) Act, 1996. “A village shall
ordinarily consist of a habitation or
a group of habitations comprising a
community and managing its affairs
in accordance with traditions and
customs.” Ordinarily, tribal
habitations are scattered and would
comprise 30-40 households.
(iii) In ar eas inhabitated by primitive
tribes, the number of households
would be significantly less.
(iv) The Ministry would, therefore,
suggest that for the areas governed
by PESA, the aforesaid limit of
200 households should be flexible so
that the entire habitation is covered
even if it were to be below the
prescribed limit of 200 families.

44
4.47 All the experts who tendered evidence/submitted memoranda
were of the view that the limit of families for SIA study as given
above is too large particularly in hilly/difficult/tribal areas. The experts
were of the view that social impact assessment study should be done
irrespective of the number of families displaced for a particular project.
4.48 On the other hand, the Ministry of Urban Development has
suggested to increase the limit to 1000 families in the context of metro
cities i.e. a city like Delhi. The Department of Telecommunication was
of the view that the aforesaid threshold can be increased. When asked
about the basic criteria for fixing the aforesaid limit of prescribed
number of families, the Department has clarified that the criteria for
aforesaid limit of 400 in plain and 200 in hilly/difficult/scheduled
areas for mandatory social impact assessment was fixed after
consultations with various Ministries including Ministry of
Tribal Affairs. This number of 400/200 for social impact assistance has
been taken from the National Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy
2007, duly notified in the official Gazette on 31 December, 2007. The
draft policy was circulated to various Ministries/Departments of
Government of India including Ministry of Urban Development.
However, no comment was received from the Ministry of Urban
Development.
4.49 The State Government of Goa has suggested that it would be
appropriate that State Governments should be given the option to
make social impact assessment study even for smaller projects.
4.50 When the opinion of the administrative Department was
sought on the concerns expressed by various stakeholders as well as
Union Ministries, it has agreed to review its stand. The Department
has suggested that the Standing Committee of the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement at the district level proposed in R&R Bill, 2007 may be
empowered to decide the limit of number of families for the purpose
of Social Impact Assessment for various projects.
4.51  Keeping in view the concerns expressed by various quarters
with regard to the limit of number of families for undertaking Social
Impact Assessment Study, the Committee observe that the discretion
should be provided to the Standing Committee of the Rehabilitation
and Resettlement at the district level proposed in R&R Bill, 2007 to
decide about the Social Impact Assessment Study where the number
of families is below the stipulated criteria  i.e. four hundred families
en masse  in plain and two hundred in hilly, tribal and scheduled

45
areas. However, the Social Impact Assessment study should invariably
be undertaken where the number of families exceeds the aforesaid
threshold. The desired amendments in Clause 8 of the Bill should
accordingly be made.
4.52 Ministries of Railways, Defence and Road, Transport and
Highways have suggested to exempt their projects from social impact
assessment study. Clause 8 of the R&R Bill already prescribes that the
projects involving emergency acquisition of minimum area of land by
the Central Government for the purpose of defence or national security
shall be exempted from the provisions of this Chapter, subject to such
institutional safeguards as may be prescribed for protecting the interests
of the affected families.
4.53  The Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways has stated
that their projects are of linear nature which require acquisition of
only a narrow strip along highways. Consequently , there is no
en masse displacement of population as compared to large scale projects
concentrated in a particular area. The Ministry of Railways has also
requested to exempt their linear project from SIA.
4.54  The Committee considered the request of the Ministry of
Defence to exempt their projects from the Social Impact Assessment
study. In this regard, the Committee decided that the defence projects,
which are for strategic purposes should be exempted from
Social Impact Assessment Study. However, for the projects other than
the strategic purpose like building houses for employees of the
Defence, the provisions of SIA Study should be retained.
4.55  As regards the request of the Ministries of Railways, Road
Transport and Highways to exempt their projects from SIA Study,
the Committee recommend that only the linear projects which require
acquisition of only a narrow strip should be exempted from SIA
Study. For other projects of these Ministries, the provision of SIA
Study should be retained. The desired amendments in this regard
should be made accordingly.
I. Determination of Market Value of Land
4.56 As per the principal Act, (section 11 (1)(ii)) states that the
Collector shall make an award for the compensation which in his
opinion should be allowed for the land.

46
4.57 Clause 13 of ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’
seeks to insert Section 11B in the Principal Act. The aforesaid clause
provides the following with regard to the determination of market
value of land:—
“11B.(1) The Collector shall adopt the following criteria in
assessing and determining the market value of the land,—
(i) the minimum land value, if any , specified in the Indian
Stamp Act, 1899 for the registration of sale deeds in the
area, where the land is situated; or
(ii) the average of the sale price for similar type of land situated
in the village or vicinity, ascertained from not less than
fifty per cent. of the sale deeds registered during the
preceding three years, where higher price has been paid; or
(iii) the average of the sale price, ascertained from the prices
paid or agreed to be paid for not less than fifty per cent
of the land already purchased for the project where higher
price has been paid, for the purpose of item ( iii) of clause
(f) of section 3, whichever is higher.
(2) Where the provisions of sub-section ( 1) are not applicable for
the reason that:
(i) the land is situated in such area where the transactions in
land are restricted by or under any other law for the time
being in force in that area; or
(ii) the registered sale deeds for similar land as mentioned in
clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) are not available for the
preceding three years; or
(i) the minimum land value has not been specified under the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 by the appropriate authority, the
concerned State Government shall specify the floor price
per unit area of the said land based on the average higher
prices paid for similar type of land situated in the adjoining
areas or vicinity, ascertained from not less than fifty per
cent. of the sale deeds registered during the preceding three
years where higher price has been paid, and the Collector
may calculate the value of the land accordingly.
(3) The Collector shall, before assessing and determining the market
value of the land being acquired under this Act,—
(a) ascertain the intended land use category of such land; and

47
(b) take into account the value of the land of the intended
category in the adjoining areas or vicinity, for the purpose
of determination of the market value of the land being
acquired.
(4) In determining the market value of the building and other
immovable property or assets attached to the land or building
which are to be acquired, the Collector may use the services of
a competent engineer or any other specialist in the relevant field,
as may be considered necessary by the Collector.
(5) The Collector may, for the purpose of determining the value
of trees and plants, use the services of experienced persons in
the field of agriculture, forestry, horticulture, sericulture, or any
other field, as may be considered necessary by him.
(6) For the purpose of assessing the value of the standing crops
damaged during the process of land acquisition proceedings, the
Collector may utilise the services of experienced persons in the
field of agriculture as he considers necessary.
4.58 The comments of the various Ministries on the aforesaid
criteria of market value of land along with the reaction of the nodal
Department on the suggestions are as under:—
Name of the Suggestion Comments of the
Ministry Nodal Department
        1 2 3
Urban Development The criteria for assessing
and determining the
market value of land
should be the average of
the sale price for similar
type of land situated in
the village for vicinity
ascertained from not less
than 50 per cent of the
sale deeds registered
during the preceding
three years, where
higher prices have been
paid. This should be
made applicable to urban
areas.
Agreeable

48
        1 2 3
The normal practice of
looking at market price base
and its statistics can be
totally inadequate and
inequitable. The value of
land to the farmer has both
tangible and intangible
aspects. Further, the value
of the land is much more
than the recorded in the
market value. It opens up
wide opportunities. The
farmer is deprived of this
potential and benefits
simply because the rate of
compensation and fund
valuation process does not
capture the future potential
of enhanced value of land.
We are trying to take that.
Even if we give the liberal
compensation that may not
capture the potential value
of land because once
developed its value is much
higher. So, a minimum
should be put in place so
that the farmer gets the
benefit because the potential
have been realized in future.
Clause 13 dealing with the
determination of market
value of land to be acquired
must include the parameters
related with Net Present
Value of land and the
opportunity cost, which is
not there at present.
The aim of the proposed
provisions is to give the
land owner the best
possible value for his/
her land. The
requirement that private
parties must purchase
70% or more of the total
area required through
voluntary sale and
purchase, and only then
they can approach the
Government for the
remaining 30% or less of
the total land needed, is
one such provision.
Another provision in
this direction is the
requirement that the
intended category of use
of the land being
acquired shall be taken
into consideration in
fixing the value of the
land. The suggestion
that a minimum land
value to be fixed by the
Government should be
the criteria, is also there
at proposed sections
11B(1)(i) and 11B(2)(iii).
The NPV and
opportunity cost
calculation may not
always be accurate,
because these
calculations are based on
many assumptions. Also,
particularly in the case
of acquisition of
agricultural land, the
NPV calculation may
not always give a better
deal to the land owner.
Therefore, a provision
has been made that the
intended category of use
of the land being
acquired shall be taken
into account in
determining the value of
the land.
Agriculture
Tribal Affairs

49
4.59 Various experts who deposed before the Committee/submitted
memoranda have given various suggestions with regard to the market
value of the land formula as proposed under Clause 13 of the Bill.
Almost all the experts were unanimous in the view that the affected
persons should also get the share in the enhanced value of the land
acquired due to change in the land use. On the averaging criteria as
given under clause 2 (i) of the proposed Section 11 (b) of the Act
various views have been expressed. Some of the experts were of the
view that the average of the sale deeds registered during the preceding
one year should be taken into consideration.
4.60 Another view expressed was that instead of less than 50 per
cent of the sale deeds it should be of the highest sale deeds to the
tune of 25 per cent. On this the administrative Department has stated
that the proposed provision in the amending legislation seem to be
adequate.
4.61 The State Government of Puducherry has further given the
following suggestion:—
“Sub-section (i) of Section 11 B of the Bill provides for adopting
the minimum land value specified in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899
for registration of sale deeds as the criterion for assessing and
determining the market value of the land. The minimum land
value register maintained for the purpose of collecting stamp
duty under the provisions of the Indian Stamp Act, is often not
updated or updated after long intervals of time. The minimum
land values should be updated periodically every year. If it is
not updated, the last such minimum land value in the register
may be updated on cost index basis or through similar other
mechanism. A proviso to this effect is suggested under sub-Section
(i) of Section 11 B of the Bill.
Sub-section (ii) of Section 11 B of the Bill provides for taking the
average sale price of similar type of land situated in the village
ascertained from not less than fifty per cent of registered sale
deeds during the preceding three years. A clarification is needed
that average sale price is not the average of unit price of different
transactions. It is a common experience that land owners sell
and register documents showing higher market values for small
parcels of land to push up average sale price. The ‘modal average’
or ‘weighted average of land price and area’ may reflect a more
realistic market price of land.”

50
On this the nodal Department has stated that the suggestion is
agreeable.
4.62 The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development in their earlier report had also recommended that the
increasing value of land during the years which are taken into
consideration for average value of the sale deeds should also be taken
into consideration while granting compensation. The nodal Department
in this regard has stated that this suggestion shall be taken care, once
the changes are made as per the suggestions of the Government of
Puducherry.
4.63  Further Clause 11 B (3)(a) of the Bill states that the Collector
shall before assessing and determining the market value of the land
being acquired under the Act ascertain the intended land use category
of such land. The experts have stated that a clarification to the intended
land use is required clearly specifying whether the intended land use
means the purpose of the acquired land by the appropriate
Government/requiring authority or the use as is permitted under the
building regulation in force. Some of the experts have also stated that
the provision of intended land use may make the valuation process
subjective and speculative.
4.64 The Standing Committee in the earlier report had also referred
to the valuation of compensation of land according to the special
features of the land. In this regard, some of the recommendations are
reproduced below:—
1.35 The Land Acquisition Manual of all the State Governments
have envisaged that the cost of land should include the
cost of the properties attached to it and while evaluating
the cost of land and other properties, State Governments
have been following the guidelines contained in their manual
and the executive instructions issued to them from time to
time.
1.37 As regards the valuation of compensation of land under
Land Acquisition Act, it has been observed by the
Committee that in some of State Government’s manuals, it
has been stated that owners of trees may be given the option
of cutting them down instead of receiving compensation
for them. The Committee are of the view that there are
certain trees which are in a pre/bearing stage but have

51
timber value. They feel that this is quite unjustifiable that
a farmer, who has planted trees which acquire timber value
after 10 to 20 years and if in the meantime the Government
acquires land under Land Acquisition Act by completing
entire proceedings, will not get any compensation for the
labour and other expenditure incurred by him/her for
planting such trees. Similarly, there are trees for example
fruit bearing trees e.g. coconut, sindhi, rubber, tea, coffee
etc. which do not have any timber value, but involve lots
of labour and expenditure for planting and rearing are not
taken into account while deciding about compensation.
1.38 It has also been observed by the Committee that there are
some non-agricultural land which do not have any
agricultural value but may have mineral resources with
immense economic value underneath. The Committee
observe that this factor is not taken into account while
evaluating non-agricultural land for the purpose of granting
compensation.
In order to provide judicious compensation to the land
owner, the Committee would like to recommend that while
evaluating land for the purpose of deciding compensation,
the Acquisition Officer shall take into account all these
factors. While evaluating all the above mentioned factors
the concerned authority must consult Departments of
Agriculture, Horticulture, Forest and Irrigation etc. some
uniform modalities, guidelines should also be issued by the
Ministry of Rural Development to the State Governments
so that no area of compensation should be left unassessed.
Any benefit which might accrue from those trees subsequent
years should also be taken into consideration.”
4.65 Some of the experts have also stated that there should be
some criteria to compensate the unique feature of a land. A suggestion
has also been made to involve the services of professional like assessors
for determining the special feature of an area so as to give the proper
compensation to the affected person. On this, the Department has stated
that the aforesaid recommendations of the Committee have been duly
considered before bringing the amendments to the LA Act, 1894. Clause
13 of the proposed Bill prescribes scientific method for determining
the market value of the land, buildings, immovable property and other
assets attached to the land.

52
4.66 The Committee find that besides public purpose, the other
most debated clause of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007
was the market value of land. The concerns expressed by various
Union Ministries/State Governments of Puducherry and experts were
considered in detail at the various sittings of the Committee. Further
the issue was debated threadbare while undertaking the clause by
clause consideration of the Bill by the Committee. The Committee
noted that the value recorded in the registered sale deeds is generally
far less than the actual market value since the usual tendency of a
buyer is to indicate lesser price to save the stamp fee/registration
fee. Further the Committee could not agree to the principle of
averaging since by adopting this formula also the affected person
could not be compensated adequately.
4.67 The Committee also considered the suggestion of the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs to include the parameters related to net
present value of land and the opportunity cost. However, in view of
the clarification given by the administrative Department that the
NPV and opportunity cost calculation may not always be accurate,
primarily being based on many assumptions and also the fact that
NPV calculation may not always give a better deal to the land owner,
the Committee could not agree to the said concept.
4.68 Further, the Committee also considered the suggestion of
the State Government of Puducherry to adopt Modal Average or the
Weighted Average of land price and area and found from
the calculations done by the State Government as given in
Appendix-VII that by the Weighted Average the average sale price
comes far lesser than the simple average. As such the Committee
could not agree to the aforesaid concept suggested by the Government
of Puducherry.
4.69 After detailed deliberations during the clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill, the Committee finally decided to
recommend that the highest price of sale deed as indicated in the
sale deeds of the last three years plus 50 per cent of the said highest
price should be the criteria for assessing and determining the market
value of the land. As regards the question of determining the market
value of the land in the cases covered by Clause 11B(2)(i)(ii) as
given below:—
“(2) Where the provisions of sub-section ( 1) are not applicable
for the reason that:
(i) the land is situated in such area where the transactions in
land are restricted by or under any other law for the time
being in force in that area; or

53
(ii) the registered sale deeds for similar land as mentioned in
clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) are not available for the
preceding three years; or”,
(iii) the average of the sale price, ascertained from the prices
paid or agreed to be paid for not less than fifty per cent
of the land already purchased for the project where higher
price has been paid, for the purpose of item (iii) of clause
(f) of section 3”,
whichever is higher,
4.69A The Committee decided that in such cases the sale deeds
of adjoining areas for the last three years should be taken into
consideration. The highest price of a sale deed for the last three
years of the adjoining area plus 50 per cent of that highest price
should be the criteria in such cases. Further the Committee note that
in tribal areas since the land could not be purchased by the non-
tribals, tribals usually do not get adequate compensation when their
land is acquired. For tribal areas, the Committee would like to
recommend that the highest price of a sale deed of the adjoining
non-tribal blocks/village for the last three years plus 50 per cent
should be the criteria in this regard. The Committee strongly
recommend that Clause 13 of the Bill which proposes to insert
Section 11B in the Principal Act should suitably be changed in the
light of the suggestions given above.
4.70  The Committee further do not agree to Section 11B (3) to
be inserted as per Clause 13 of the Bill which provides that the
Collector shall before assessing and determining the market value
of the land ascertain the intended land use category of such land
and take into account the value of the land of the intended category
in the adjoining areas or vicinity in the light of the views given by
the experts that the intended land use may make the valuation
process subjective and speculative. As such the Committee
recommend that the aforesaid clause should be deleted from the
Bill.
4.71 The Committee further considered Section 11B (4) proposed
to be inserted by Clause 13 of the Bill. They recommend that the
use of word ‘may’ in the aforesaid Clause should be changed to
‘shall’ to make the provisions more effective. Further, the word ‘as
may be considered necessary by the Collector’ as appearing at the
end of the Clause should be deleted.

54
4.72 The Committee considered the Section 11B (5) to be inserted
by the proposed Clause 13. The Committee again recommend that
the use of word ‘may’ should be changed by ‘shall’ and the last
words as appearing in the Clause ‘as may be considered necessary
by the Collector’ should be deleted. Similarly for Section 11B (6),
the Committee recommend to substitute the word ‘may’ by shall.
The Committee feel that besides the services of experienced persons
in the field of agriculture, the specialists from other relevant fields
should also be taken for the purpose of assessing the value of the
standing crops damaged during the process of land acquisition
proceedings and as such recommend that ‘specialists from other
relevant fields’ should be added after the words ‘in the field of
agriculture’ in the said Clause.
4.73 The Committee further find that sometimes appropriate
Government acquire the land for a public purpose and the land use
of that land is changed which results into several times hike of the
price of that land. Whereas the people residing in the surrounding
areas are greatly benefited by the project that is set up on the
acquired land, the persons whose land is acquired for setting up the
project do not get any portion of the resultant hike due to the
acquisition. The Committee feel that some share of the resultant
hike due to land acquisition should also go to the persons on whose
land the specific project is set up. In view of this, the Committee
recommend that provisions should be made to give some sort of
extra monetary benefits to the affected person/family in such cases.
The nodal administrative Department should consider the aforesaid
recommendation of the Committee and make appropriate provision
in the amending legislation after consultation with the Ministry of
Law & Justice.
J. Part payment of compensation by shares/debentures etc.
4.74 As per Clause 11 (c) of the amending legislation, the acquiring
body is authorized to issue shares and debentures to the extent of
50 per cent, but in any case not less than 20 per cent of the
compensation amount to be paid to the person whose land has been
acquired. Various experts have expressed strong concerns over the
payment of compensation by the companies by shares and debentures
particularly when the affected person is illiterate and do not know
how to make transaction in shares and debentures. Further in cases
where the company is running on losses or do not have good standing
the compensation by way of shares and debentures should be
misleading. The experts have suggested that the payment of shares

55
and debentures should be over and above the compensation provided
under LA and R&R legislations.
4.75  Various Ministries who furnished views/appeared before the
Committee have given divergent views use on the aforesaid provision.
The Ministry of Defence has stated that most of the Defence PSUs and
Ordnance Factories are 100 per cent owned by the Government. It
would be inadvisable to dilute the ownership pattern in such PSUs
and Ordnance Factories. Secondly, Defence PSUs and Ordnance
Factories have security implications and giving shares to Project
Affected Families would not be desirable.
4.76 The Ministry of Power has further stated that the Government
companies should be excluded from the provision, which mandates
allotment of shares and debentures to the affected parties. The Ministry
has also stated that in case of Government owned companies
implementing these provisions it would amount to a disinvestments
decision.
4.77 The State Government of Puducherry has raised another issue
whereby they have suggested that the shares should be allotted at
face value.
4.78 The nodal Department has responded to the aforesaid issues
raised by various Ministries, experts and State Governments of
Puducherry as under:—
“The provision of shares or debentures has been taken from the
National Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy 2007, duly notified
in the Official Gazette on 31 October, 2007. The draft Policy was
circulated to various Ministries/Departments of Government of
India including Ministry of Finance. The views of Ministry of
Finance are as under:—
‘if the requiring body is a company and it makes a public issue
of shares, the affected family may subscribe to the IPO in the
category reserved for retail investors and such application shall
be considered on preferential basis among the applicants in the
category of retail investors’.”
4.78A The administrative Department has further stated that above
suggestions of the Ministry of Finance will be taken into consideration
while formulating the rules under the Bill.

56
4.79 The Committee note that the allotment of shares and
debentures involves various technical issues which perhaps have not
been taken into consideration by the nodal Department. As
represented by various Ministries, it is not clear how the various
Government undertakings would issue the shares and debentures to
the affected persons, particularly when the implementation of the
aforesaid provision would amount to disinvestment decision. Further,
how the Defence PSUs and Ordnance Factories would issue the
shares and debentures to public is not clear particularly when it
would dilute the ownership pattern in such PSUs and Ordnance
Factories. Other technical issues involved are how the company,
which has no rights issue would address to the provision of allotment
of shares and debentures to the public.
4.80 The nodal Department has referred to the comments of the
Ministry of Finance according to which if the requiring body is a
company and it makes a public issue of shares, the affected family
may subscribe to the IPO in the category reserved for retail investors
and such application shall be considered on preferential basis among
the applicants in the category of retail investors. The Committee
find that the provisions made in the legislation are not of the nature
of preferential shares/debentures.
4.81 Above all, the Committee feel that it is not possible for the
illiterate rural poor to understand the technicalities involved in
making transaction in shares/debentures. Further, if the company
involved is a loss making company the affected person would
definitely be a loser.
4.82 In view of the position as explained above, the Committee
conclude that issue of shares and debentures as part of the
compensation is not practical and as such issue of shares and
debentures should be over and above the admissible compensation.
Further, it should be left to the acquiring body to issue shares and
debentures over and above the admissible compensation to the
affected person/family whose land is acquired.
K. Contradiction in Clause 11 (c)of LA Bill and Clause 42 of the
R&R Bill on the issue of offering shares and debentures to the
affected persons.
4.83 The reading of the R&R Bill indicates that the issue of shares
up to 50 per cent but not less than 20 per cent of the rehabilitation
grant amount is optional. However, in case of LA Bill it seems that
the issue of shares and debentures is compulsory.

57
4.84 When the attention of the Department was drawn to the
aforesaid contradiction, it has stated that the issue of shares and
debentures can be made optional in the two legislations.
4.85  The detailed reading of the two legislations viz. ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ indicates that provisions relating to some of
the common issues have been made in the two Bills. However, there
is some difference in the language used which has created
contradictions as in the present case. Since the provisions made in
‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ are applicable in
every case where ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ is
being applied by clause 1A of the ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’, the Department may consider retaining this
provision in only ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’.
However, if it is decided that the provision needs to be retained in
the two Bills, it should be ensured that the language in those clauses
is identical so as to avoid such contradictions. The Committee would
like that while taking the desired action, the aforesaid
recommendation of the Committee should be read alongwith 4.79 to
4.82 of the report.
L. Section 17(1) of the Principal Act – Special Powers in case of
urgency
4.86 As per the aforesaid Section, whenever the appropriate
Government so directs, the Collector, though no such award has been
made, may, on the expiration of fifteen days from the publication of
the notice mentioned in Section 9, sub-section (1), take possession of
any land needed for a public purpose. Such land shall thereupon vest
absolutely in the Government, free from all encumbrances. A suggestion
in this regard has been made that the word ‘urgency’ may be revoked
as it may widely be used by the Collector due to sweeping powers.
Another suggestion has been made that the Act must contain adequate
safeguards against its misuse and Section 17(1) must be deleted.
4.87  The Legislative Department in this regard commented as
under:—
‘Section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1874 relates to the
acquisition of land in case of urgency . The cases of urgency are
required to be decided by the appropriate Government [section
17 (1)]. It has been left to the best judgment of the Government.
Apart, it also provides that before taking over the possession, it
is mandatory for the Collector to offer 80 per cent of the amount
of compensation before he proceeds to take over possession of

58
the land. In the Bill it has also been proposed that in addition
to other benefits payable under the Act, an additional
compensation of 75 per cent of the market value as determined
under section 11B shall be paid by the Collector. Hence, it is
matter of policy.’
4.88 The nodal Department while reviewing the existing position
has stated that the emergency powers may be restricted to acquisition
of minimum area of land by the Central Government for the purpose
of defence or national security, or the appropriate Government in cases
of natural calamities requiring permanent displacement, subject to such
institutional safeguards as may be prescribed for protecting the interests
of the affected persons. The Department has also stated that the Law
Ministry may examine these aspects.
4.89 The Committee find that section 17(1) of the Principal Act
has not been touched while bringing amendment to the Principal
Act. However, since the nodal Department has agreed to review the
existing position under Section 17A of the Principal Act with regard
to special powers in case of urgency in the light of various
reservations expressed by experts, the Committee recommend that
suitable amendments to ensure the following should be made in the
Bill after consulting the issue with the Ministry of Law & Justice:—
(i) the emergency powers may be restricted to acquisition of
minimum area of land by the Central Government for the
purpose of defence or national security;
(ii) appropriate Government in cases of natural calamities
requiring permanent displacement may be permitted to
acquire the land, subject to institutional safeguards as may
be prescribed by rules for protecting the interests of the
affected persons.
M. The rate of solatium
4.90 As per clause 19 of the Bill, the rate of solatium has been
proposed to be increased from thirty per centum on market value to
sixty per centum on market value. Some of the experts have suggested
to increase the rate of solatium to 100 per cent/150 percent. The reasons
for increasing the rate of solatium has been given as:—
(i) Registered sale deeds do not indicate the true market value;
(ii) The World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3413
has been referred by the expert whereby it has been stated

59
that the under statement of the value of the registered sale
deeds has been stated as 50 per cent, therefore, in order to
give true market value, solatium amount should be doubled;
and
(iii) To compensate compulsory nature of acquisition.
4.91 The State Government of Puducherry has suggested for
enhancement of solatium from 30 per cent in normal acquisitions to
60 per cent and in emergent acquisition to 75 per cent of the market
value.
4.92 Contrary to the suggestion given by some of the experts
Mumbai SEZ has suggested that the provision of solatium should be
dropped and omitted. Keeping in view the benefits available under
the proposed R&R Legislation and market price as per LA Legislation.
Besides the Ministry of Transport has stated that the hike is reasonable.
4.93 When a sked about the rationale for doubling the rate of
solatium from 30 per cent to 60 per cent, the nodal Department has
informed that
“this figure was arrived at by the GoM after due deliberations.”
4.94 Further, when asked about the comments of the nodal
Department as given by experts to increase the compensation further
to 100 per cent/150 per cent, they have informed as under:—
“the proposed increase in solatium to 60 per cent in the proposed
Bill is appropriate.”
4.95 The Committee note that as per the proposed amendment
in the LA Bill, the rate of solatium has been increased from thirty
per centum on market value to sixty per centum on market value.
The Committee consider that the aforesaid enhancement is
appropriate and as such approve the proposed amendment.
N. Alternate mechanism for speedy disposal of disputes
4.96 Existing provision as per the Principal Act are as under:—
‘18. Reference to Court. - (1) Any person interested who has not
accepted the award may, by written application to the Collector,
require that the matter be referred by the Collector for the
determination of the Court, whether his objection be to the
measurement of the land, the amount of the compensation, the
person to whom it is payable, or the apportionment of the
compensation among the persons interested.’

60
4.97 Clause 17K of the Bill proposes to debar civil courts to
entertain any dispute relating to land acquisition. It has clearly been
stated that no injunction shall be granted by any court in respect of
which the Collector or the Authority is empowered under the Land
Acquisition Legislation. However, the appeals from original decrees
can be made in High Court/Supreme Court, as per Section 54 of the
Principal Act.
O. Land Acquisition Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority
of the State
4.98 Clause 17A (2) provides for the constitution of more than one
authority or benches that a State Government may constitute. Further
Clause 17A (3) provides that the authority shall consist of not more
than three but not less than two members, including the Chairperson
to be appointed by the State Government. Further Clause 17A (4) and
(5) prescribe for qualification of members of the authority. The aforesaid
clauses are given as under:—
“(4) The Members of the Authority shall be persons of ability,
integrity and standing who have adequate knowledge of, and
have shown capacity in, dealing with the problems relating to
land acquisition matters, public administration, finance, economics
and law.
(5) A person shall not be qualified to be a Member of the
Authority unless he is or has been—
(i) a judge of a district court;
(ii) an officer of the State Government not below the rank of
District Collector;
(iii) an officer of the State Government in the Law Department
not below the rank of Director.”
P. Land Acquisition Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority
for the Centre
4.99 As per Clause 17L (3), the aforesaid authority shall consist of
a Chairperson and not less than two members to be appointed by the
Central Government. The qualification of member of the authority as
per Clause 17L (4) is as under:—
“(4) A person shall not be qualified to be a Member of the
Authority for the Centre unless he,—

61
(i) is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or
(ii) has for at least fifteen years held any Legislative or Legal
post of the Union and a post in the Grade II of the Indian Legal
Service for at least three years; or
(iii) a person who is or has been a member of the Indian
Administrative Service having sufficient knowledge of land
acquisition and has held the post of Collector of a district and
a post equivalent to a Joint Secretary in the Government of India:
Provided that no appointment of a sitting Judge under clause ( i)
shall be made except after consultation with the Chief Justice of
the High Court concerned.”
4.100 Almost all the experts were against debarring civil courts.
The provisions with regard to the establishment of authorities, one for
the Centre and one for the State have differently been objected by
different stakeholders.
(i) The members of the authority shall be appointed by the
State Government/Union Government. It has been
apprehended that the political reasons, favouritisms, castism
would worsen the appointment of the members and there
is no representation of any judicial member.
(ii) The retirement age as 67 years indicates that all the retiring
persons would be the members of the aforesaid authorities.
(iii) The proposal for appointment of an officer not below the
rank of District Collector would show that the reference
would be from the award to the Collector which would
give rise to dissatisfaction amongst the land owners.
4.101 The nodal Department has stated that a member with judicial
background is already provided for and the award of the Collector
would be referred to the authority as a body and not to a person. On
the issue of retirement age, the Department has clarified that the
provisions provides for an upper age limit and not debar the
appropriate Government from appointing any younger person as a
member of the authority.
4.102 Further, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has stated that there is
no representation of local Government in the Land Acquisition
Compensation Dispute Settlement Authority. To this, the nodal
Department has informed that the Land Acquisition Compensation

62
Disputes Settlement Authority is a quasi-judicial authority, so only
persons experienced in revenue administration and law may be
appointed as members of the Authority .
4.103 The Committee note from the Statement of Objects and
Reasons that the Land Acquisition Compensation Disputes Settlement
Authorities at the Centre and State level have been proposed as an
alternate mechanism proposed to be created for the disposal of
disputes which remain pending in the courts of law. By creating
this alternate judicial mechanism civil courts have been debarred to
entertain any dispute relating to land acquisition. However, the
appeals from original decrees can be made in High Court/Supreme
Court as per Section 54 of the Principal Act. The Committee after
detailed deliberations decided to approve the aforesaid alternate
dispute redressal mechanism and hope that it would result in
settlement of large number of pending cases and would also help in
settlement of disputes related to land acquisition in a time bound
manner.
4.104 The Committee further note that as per the proposed Bill,
the Acquisition Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority at the
State level shall consist of not more than three members but not
less than two members including Chairperson to be appointed by
the State Government. Further, the aforesaid Authority for the Centre
shall consist of Chairperson and not less than two members to be
appointed by the Central Government. After deliberations, the
Committee decided that the authority at the State as well as Central
level should consist of at least three members including Chairperson.
The requisite amendments should accordingly be made in the
amending legislation.
4.105  The Committee further note that as per the provisions
made under the legislation, no member of the Centre and State
Authority shall hold office as such after he has attained the age of
67 years. After deliberations, the Committee recommend that the
retirement age should be reduced from 67 years to 65 years.
Q. Reversion of acquired land, if not utilized
4.106 Clause 22 of the Bill provides for insertion of Section 54A,
according to which the land acquired shall not be transferred to any
other purpose except for a public purpose and when any acquired
land or part thereof remains unutilized for a period of five years from
the date of taking over the possession, the same shall return to the
appropriate Government by reversion. Most of the experts have

63
welcomed this provision in principle. Some of the Ministries have
reacted to the aforesaid provision in the context of the activities of
their Ministry. The concerns of some of the Ministries are given
below:—
S. No. Name of the Comments
Ministry
12 3
1. Ministry of Railways For mega projects, gestation period
is much larger and period of 5 years
for non-utilization is too short. In
respect of Railway Projects, land is
acquired considering a future growth
period. Wherever Railway systems
are established, growth of cities and
towns follows and it may not be
possible to acquire land subsequently
for expansion needs. As appropriate
and comprehensive rehabilitation/
resettlement package including
compensation is envisaged to be
provided for in the proposed
amendment bill, this clause along
with sub-clause for sharing with
landowners the difference in price of
a land in the event of transfer to
other person may not be applied for
land acquired for Government
purposes.
2. Ministry of Power There are some apprehensions on the
applicability of Clause 22 for projects
with long gestation period
(exceeding 5 years), on account of
planned future expansions, the
definition of unutilized land etc.
While the objective of expeditious
development of project and the
intended utilisation of the acquired
land is appreciated, there are several
genuine concerns relating to project
delays on account of geological

64
12 3
surprises, prolonged litigation etc.
which need to be excluded from
these provisions.
3. Department of The Department of Telecommuni-
Telecommunications cations is also of the view that the
period of five years proposed in
Clause 22 for reversion to the
appropriate Government may not be
adequate in view of long term plan
and development activities required
in the telecom sector. The Telecom
Sector would come under the
definition of ‘Infrastructure’. In view
of this, a period of five years in
clause 22 may be increased to 10 to
15 years. This will enable the public
sector undertakings under
Department of Telecommunications
to acquire land and utilize it in the
most efficient manner.
4. Department of Posts The period of five years seems to
be on a lower side. The expenditure
on construction of buildings is in the
nature of ‘Capital expenditure’ and
funds are allotted in the Five Year
Plan for construction of Post Offices/
Administrative Offices/Staff
Quarters, etc. Construction of
building requires substantial degree
of coordination involving number of
formalities before actual
commencement of construction work
relating to the building project. The
construction on acquired lands is not
possible within a specific time and
within a Plan period. As such, 10
years may be provided for utilization
of the land. On other points, the
Department of Posts have no
comments as these are not in its
domain.

65
4.107 When asked for the comments, the nodal Department
has stated that the time period of 5 years prescribed under the
clause 22 of proposed LA Amendment Bill, 2007 is quite reasonable.
Land Acquisition deeply affects the lives of concerned people. So, the
acquiring bodies are expected to go for minimum land acquisitions,
which can be utilized in a specific time only. In any case, since the
land will revert to Government only, the Government can re-allot the
land to the requiring body if it is convinced that the project period
quoted by the requiring body is warranted.
4.108 Some of the experts were of the view that the acquired land,
if not utilized for the specific purpose, should revert back to the owner
of the land instead of the appropriate Government as suggested in the
aforesaid clause of the Bill.
4.109 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs is of the view that unutilized
land should be returned to the original tribal owner, not to the
Government.
4.110 On this the Department has stated that reverting back the
land to the original owner may not be practicable, as the original
landowner has already been adequately compensated, so there is no
need to revert this land to him. One of the experts has referred to an
identical provision in the UP Urban Planning and Development Act,
1973. He has suggested that on similar lines provision should be made
to revert back the agricultural land, if not put to use for five years, to
the original owner. As regards the question of compensation already
been paid to the land owner he has suggested that it can be refunded
with interest.
4.111 The Department has however stated that it is not aware of
the provisions made in the UP Urban Planning and Development Act,
1973. Reverting back the land to the original owner may not be
practicable, as the original landowner has already been adequately
compensated. Also, making such a provision can lead to misuse of the
Land Acquisition Act.
4.112 The Committee considered the request of the Ministries of
Railways and Power to exempt them from the provision of reversion
of acquired land. Besides, the Committee also considered the request
of the Department of Telecommunication and Posts to extend the
aforesaid period from 5 years to 10 years for reversion of acquired
land. The Committee understand from the clarification given by the
nodal Department that unutilised land in this regard would revert
back to the Government only and the Government can always

66
re-allot the land to the requiring body. As such, as per the existing
position the Government can always review the position after five
years. Keeping in view the aforesaid clarification the Committee feel
that the proposed provision of reverting back the acquired land to
the appropriate Government if it remains unutilised for a period of
five years is appropriate.
4.113 The Committee also considered the suggestion made by
experts that unused land should be returned to the original owner.
After detailed deliberations, the Committee noted that the aforesaid
suggestion is not practical and decided to approve the provision
made in the amending legislation whereby the unused land would
revert back to the appropriate Government.
4.114 The provisions made in the amending legislation provide
that the land acquired shall not be transferred to any other purpose
except for a public purpose and after obtaining the prior approval
of the appropriate Government. During deliberations it has come
out that the acquired land should be utilized for the specific purpose
for which the land has been acquired. Keeping in view the fact that
public purpose is very vast and due to the aforesaid provision, the
appropriate Government would be at liberty to use the acquired
land for any purpose coming within the definition of public purpose,
the Committee after detailed consideration decided that the land
acquired should be used only for the purpose it has been acquired
and if not utilized for that specific purpose, it should be returned
to the appropriate Government. Besides an inbuilt safeguard against
acquisition of excess land should be provided at Section 4 notification
stage so that the provisions of sub-Section (2) of proposed section
54-A of the LA are rarely resorted to. The desired provisions in this
regard should be made in the legislation.
R. Large tracts of land lying unutilised with various Ministries
4.115 Various Ministries acquired the land and large tracts of land
are remaining unutilized with various Ministries, some of the
information collected from the various Ministries is as under:—
Ministry Information
12
Railways Information is being collected
Post 145 have not been constructed upon mainly
because of constraint of fund 206108 sq. mtrs.
is unutilized

67
12
Defence Information received from DGDE has been
referred to the three services for their comments
Trying to collect the exact data
Commerce Data is not available with the Ministry
Home All acquired land has been utilized in fact we
are always short of land
4.116 The Committee find that large tracts of land remain
unutilised with various Ministries. In this regard, the Committee
would like to recommend that the appropriate Government should
make a clear list and repository of land unutilised. Before making
notification for acquiring land in every case the respective
Government should be required to certify that no acquired land at
that particular time was available in that area for the particular
project. Besides, the Committee would also like to recommend that
the different Departments of the Union Government as well as State
Governments should maintain the data with regard to unused land
and indicate the same on their website for transparency.
S. Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
4.117 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has made the following
suggestions with regard to involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs) in Scheduled Areas:—
‘4(i) The Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level
should be consulted before making the acquisition of land in the
Scheduled Areas for development projects and before re-setting
or rehabilitating persons affected by such projects in the Scheduled
Areas; the actual planning and implementation of the projects in
the Scheduled Areas shall be coordinated at the State level.’
‘The Ministry is of the opinion that authentication of land records
must necessarily in the Gram Sabha and the Panchayats at the
appropriate levels must be fully consulted as per the provisions
of Section 4(i) of the PESA Act prior to the formal land acquisition
proceedings for greater transparency and accuracy .’
4.118 The Committee appreciate such assurance by the nodal
Department. As such, the Committee recommend that the suggestion

68
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj should be considered urgently
and the necessary changes made in the amending legislations.
Besides, utmost care should be taken to ensure that there is no
contradiction between the provisions made in the amending Bill and
PESA.
4.119  The Committee would also like to recommend that suitable
provisions should be made for active involvement of the three tiers
of Panchayati Raj Institutions and particularly the Gram Sabhas while
undertaking SIA study.
T. Gender Bias
4.120 As per clause 45(3) of the Bill, the service of the notice shall
be made on the person therein named. Further, clause 45(3) of the Bill
provides that when such person cannot be found the service may be
made on any adult male member of his family residing with him.
Various experts who appeared before the Committee have expressed
concern over the gender bias in the Bill.
4.121  The nodal Department on this has agreed that the word
‘adult male member’ mention in section 45 (3) of LA Act, 1894 may
be replaced by ‘adult member’.
4.122 The Committee find that Clause 45 (3) of the Bill provides
that the service of the notice shall be made on the person therein
named and when such person cannot be found, the service may be
made on any adult male member of his family residing with him.
The Committee take strong objection to the use of word ‘adult male
member’ and recommend that the ‘adult male member’ should be
replaced by ‘adult member’.
U. Overriding authority of PESA
4.123 Clause 57 of the R&R Bill states that the provisions of this
Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force [(except the
Provision of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act,
1996] or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other
than this Act. In this regard the Ministry of Environment and Forest
has suggested to add Forest Conservation Act, 1980 in the bracket
after except along with PESA.
4.124 Whereas specific provision in this regard giving overriding
authority to PESA has been provided in the R&R Legislation, there is

69
no mention about this in LA legislation. When asked how the situation
of conflict between the aforesaid laws would be addressed, the
Department has stated that the provisions of Scheduled Tribes and
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act,
2006 have carefully been examined and there is no conflict between
this Act and the proposed Bill.
4.125 The Committee find that whereas specific provisions have
been made in Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 to give
overriding authority to PESA., no such provision has been made under
the LA Bill, 2007. Since each of the Bill is an independent legislation,
the Committee would like to recommend that suitable provisions to
give overriding effect to PESA under the LA legislation on the lines
of Rehabilitation and Resettlement legislation should be made. Besides,
the Committee would recommend that Forest Conservation Act 1980
should also be given overriding effect as has been done in the case of
PESA in the R&R legislation. Suitable provisions in this regard should
accordingly be made in the legislation.
V. The time period prescribed with regard to various provisions in
the Principal Act as well as amending Bill 2007
4.126 The statement showing the time period provided with regard
to various provisions made in the Principal Act as well as the amending
Bill 2007 is given at Appendix-VIII. The Committee deliberated each
and every provision with regard to time period as given in the
statement and decided to recommend for some of the modifications,
the details of which have been given in the succeeding paras. The
suggested amendments in this regard are as under:—
4.127 Serial No. 1 in the statement—Clause 8 of the Bill proposes
to insert a new Section 3A in the Principal Act which provides for
a Social Impact Assessment Study. In this regard, at the end of the
aforesaid clause, it has been stated that Social Impact Assessment
Study shall be carried in such manner and within such time as may
be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government whereas in
the starting of the clause, it has been stated that the Social Impact
Assessment Study shall be carried out whenever the appropriate
Government intends to acquire land for public purpose. The
Committee feel that the words ‘Central Government’ as appearing
in the end of the clause should be replaced by ‘appropriate
Government’.
4.128 Further the Committee note that the limit of number of
two hundred or more families en masse in tribal or hilly areas or

70
Desert Development Programme blocks or areas specified in
Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule to the Constitution has been
provided as per clause 3A (ii) of the Bill for the purpose of carrying
out Social Impact Assessment Study. The Committee feel that besides
Desert Development Programme blocks, Drought Prone Area
Programme blocks should also be included for the aforesaid purpose.
Desired amendment in the aforesaid clause should accordingly be
made.
4.129 Serial No. 4 in the statement—Clause 12 of the amending
Bill seeks to substitute Section 11A in the Principal Act. The aforesaid
provision provides that the Collector shall make an award under
Section 11 within a period of one year from the date of publication
of the declaration. The aforesaid period under the Principal Act was
two years. Further proviso 1 to clause 12 provides that where the
said declaration has been published before the commencement of
the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 2007, the award shall be
made within a period of one year from such commencement. Proviso
2 further provides that the Collector may after the expiry of the
period of limitation, if he is satisfied that the delay has been caused
due to unavoidable circumstances, and for the reasons to be recorded
in writing, make the award within an extended period of six months.
Further, third proviso provides that where the award is made within
the extended period the entitled person shall be paid an additional
compensation for the delay in making of the award, every month
for the period so extended, at the rate of not less than five per cent
of the value of the award, for each month of the delay. The
Committee after deliberation decided that the period of one year for
making an award is sufficient. No further extension should be
provided. As such the Committee recommend that proviso 2 and
proviso 3 of the Clause 12 of the Bill should be deleted.
4.130  Serial No. 5 – Clause 13 of the Bill proposes to insert
Section 11B(1) & (2). After Section 11A of the Principal Act. The
aforesaid Clause provides the criteria for determination of market
value of land. The Committee have already recommended
modifications in the aforesaid clause as per recommendation No 4.69.
As such the aforesaid clause should be read in the light of the
recommendation made in the earlier part of the Report and suitable
changes in the time prescribed wherever applicable may accordingly
be made.
W. The rate of interest provided under various sections of the
Principal Act and the amending Bill
4.131 The Statement indicating the rate of interest provided under
various sections of the Principal Act and the amending Bill has been
given in the Appendix-IX.

71
4.132  The clause 11A of the amending legislation and Sections
28 and 34 of the Principal Act provide for rate of interest at the rate
of nine per centum per year. Besides, Section 23(1A) of the Principal
Act provides for rate of interest at the rate of twelve per centum per
annum. The Committee after deliberations decided that the rate of
interest in this regard should be increased from nine per centum/
twelve per centum per annum to fifteen per centum per annum.
Besides, the Committee also recommend that the compound rate of
interest should be paid wherever the provision of providing interest
has been made in the Principal Act/amending legislation. In view of
this the desired modifications should be made in the amending
legislation.

72
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
A. Expeditious enactment of the Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Legislation
5.1 The Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Government that the said legislation should be enacted expeditiously
so that the relief measures envisaged under the legislation are
expeditiously implemented which may provide benefits to the affected
persons/families whose land is acquired for ‘public purpose’. The
Committee have arrived at various conclusions made in the Report
after exhaustive deliberations with various Union Ministries, State
Governments and other stakeholders. The Committee strongly
recommend that due consideration should be given to the various
recommendations/observations of the Committee and amendments as
suggested brought before the Parliament when the legislation is taken
up for consideration by the Parliament.
B. Awareness Campaign
5.2 The ultimate beneficiaries of the various provisions made in
the legislation are the general masses. A major portion of the population
of the country comprises of the poorest of the poor who are not even
literate.
5.3 On the issue of ‘awareness campaign’, the Department has
stated as under:—
“taking up awareness campaigns about the rights and benefits
proposed to be conferred upon the people by the two Bills is
under active consideration of the Ministry. The preparatory work
is underway, and the advertisements, etc. would be released soon,
so as to generate public awareness about the provisions of the
new R&R Policy and associated legislative measures.
Also, the District Collector could be given the responsibility of
making the people aware of the rights and benefits conferred
under the two proposed legislations, on an ongoing basis. The
Committee could take a view on this.”
5.4 The Committee would like to recommend to the Government
to take all the steps for wide publicity of various provisions made
in the Bill, particularly through print and electronic media. Further,
District Collector should be given the responsibility of making the

73
people aware of the rights and benefits conferred under the two
proposed legislations, on an ongoing basis and suitable provisions
in the rules may be made in this regard.
C. Court Fee
5.5 One of the experts has drawn the attention of the Committee
to ad valorem court fee which a land owner or a farmer has to pay
while filing an appeal as per Section 8 of the Court Fees Act 1870. He
has apprised the Committee that in U.P . 75 per cent of the claim value
is to be paid as court fee whereas in Punjab High Court, this fee is
Rs. 100. The expert has suggested that Section 54 of the Principal Act
should be amended to make Section 8 of the Court fees non-applicable
or alternatively the Court Fees Act be suitably amended.
5.6 When asked whether the Department is aware of the provisions
made under Section 8 of the Court Fees Act 1870 which require ad
valorem court fee for filing an appeal before the High Court, the
Department has stated that the Ministry of Law and Justice can provide
the details regarding this which has been requested separately. The
Ministry of Law and Justice have informed that the subject of ‘Court
Fee payable in any Court except the Supreme Court’ falls under Entry
3 of list II (State List) of Schedule Seventh of the Constitution of
India. Court fee payable in Supreme Court falls under the Entry 77 of
List I (Union List). As the Court Fees payable in any Court except
Supreme Court falls under the ‘State List’ ten States have already
repealed the Court Fees Act, 1870 in application to their respective
states and have enacted their own Court Fees Legislation. Most of the
other States have also amended the Court Fees Act, 1870 as applicable
in these States. Union Territory of Puducherry has also enacted a
separate Court Fee Act. Parliament can made law only for Union
Territories and the Supreme Court on the subject of Court Fee. The
Supreme Court has made Rules in this behalf.
5.7 The Committee would like to recommend to the Government
to take up the issue of Court Fee with the various State Governments,
so that it is not exorbitant. The Committee have been apprised by one
of the experts that in Punjab High Court, the fee is Rs.100. The
Government should take up the issue with various State Governments
to ensure that the Court Fee is not more than Rs. 100 in any State.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
16 October, 2008 Chairman,
24 Asvina, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

74
APPENDIX I
Bill No. 97 of 2007
THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-
eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different
dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any provision
to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as reference to the coming into force
of that provision.
2. In the long title to the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the words “and for Companies”
shall be omitted.
3. In the principal Act, in the preamble,
the words “and for Companies” shall be
omitted.
4. After section 1 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“1A. The provisions of the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2007
shall apply in respect of acquisition of land
by the appropriate Government under this
Act.”.
Short title
and
commen-
cement.
Amendment
of long
title.
Amendment
of
preamble.
Insertion of
new section
1A.
Application
of
Rehabilitation
and
Resettlement
Act, 2007
to persons
affected
due to land
acquisition.
1 of 1894

75
5. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(i) for clause ( b), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely :—
‘(b) the expression “person interested”
includes,—
(i) all persons claiming an interest in
compensation to be made on account of the
acquisition of land under this Act;
(ii) tribals and other traditional forest
dwellers, who have lost any traditional
rights recognised under the Scheduled
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006;
(iii) a person interested in an easement
affecting the land; and
(iv) persons having tenancy rights
under the relevant State laws;’;
(ii) after clause ( cc), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ccc ) the expression “cost of
acquisition” includes—
(i) compensation awarded including the
solatium and other amount and interest
payable thereupon;
(ii) demurrage to be paid for damages
caused to the land and standing crops in
the process of acquisition;
(iii) cost of acquisition of out-project
land for settlement of displaced or
adversely affected families;
(iv) cost of development of
infrastructure and amenities at resettlement
sites;
(v) additional cost of resettlement as
may be required after admissible
adjustment of rehabilitation and
Amendment
of section 3.
2 of 2007

76
resettlement cost against compensation
awarded to affected persons or families;
(vi) administrative cost of acquisition of
land including both in project and out-
project areas lands; and
(vii) administrative cost involved in
planning and implementation of
resettlement and rehabilitation packages for
providing physical rehabilitation and
resettlement to the entitled and interested
families, displaced or adversely affected on
account of in-project acquisition of land;’;
(iii) clauses ( d) and ( e) shall be omitted;
(iv) for clause ( ee), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(ee ) the expression “appropriate
Government” means,—
(i) in relation to acquisition of land for
the purposes of the Union, the Central
Government;
(ii) In relation to acquisition of land for
the purposes of any infrastructure project
in more than one State, the Central
Government; and
(iii) in relation to acquisition of land
for any other purpose, the State
Government;’;
(v) for clause ( f), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(f) the expression “public purpose”
includes,—
(i) the provision of land for strategic
purposes relating to naval, military and air
force works or any other work vital to the
State;
(ii ) the provision of land for
infrastructure projects of the appropriate

77
Government, where the benefits accrue to
the general public; and
(iii) the provision of land for any other
purpose useful to the general public, for
which land has been purchased by a person
under lawful contract to the extent of
seventy per cent but the remaining thirty
per cent of the total area of land required
for the project is yet to be required.’.
Explanation.—The word “person” shall
include any company or association or body
of individuals, whether incorporated or
not.’;
(vi) after clause ( f), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ff) the expression “infrastructure
project” shall include,—
(i) any project relating to generation,
transmission or supply of electricity;
(ii) construction of roads, highways,
bridges, airports, ports, rail systems or
mining activities;
(iii) water supply project, irrigation
project, sanitation and sewerage system; or
(iv) any other public facility as may be
notified in this regard by the Central
Government in the Official Gazette.’.
(vii) in clause ( g) for the expression
“court”, wherever it occurs, the expression
“the Authority for the Centre or, as the case
may be, the Authority” shall be substituted;
(viii) after clause ( g), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(h) the expression “Authority” means
the Land Acquisition Compensation
Disputes Settlement Authority established

78
by the State Government under subsection
(1) of section 17A;
(i) the expression “Authority for the
Centre” means the Land Acquisition
Compensation Disputes Settlement
Authority for the Centre established by the
Central Government under sub-section ( 1)
of section 17L;
(j) the expression “Member” means a
Member of the Authority for the Centre, or
as the case may be, the Authority, and
includes the Chairperson.’.
6. Throughout the principal Act, the words
“or for a company” along with their
grammatical variations, shall be omitted.
7. Throughout the principal Act except in
Explanation to sub-section ( 1A) of section 23, ,
for the words ”the Court”, along with their
grammatical variations the words “the
Authority for the Centre, or as the case may
be, the Authority” shall be substituted.
8. After section 3 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘3A. Whenever the appropriate
Government intends to acquire land for
public purpose involving physical
displacement of—
(i) four hundred or more families en
masse in plain area; or
(ii) two hundred or more families en
masse in tribal or hilly areas or Desert
Development Programme blocks or areas
specified in Fifth Schedule or Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution,
Omission of
the
expression
“or for a
company”
throughout
the Act.
Substitution
of words
“Authority
for the
Centre or
the
Authority”
in place of
words “the
Court”
throughout
the Act.
Insertion of
new section
3A.
Mandatory
social
impact
assessment
prior to
acquisition
of land
under this
Act.

79
a social impact assessment study shall be
carried out in the affected area for the purpose
of social impact appraisal, incorporation of
Tribal Development Plan, plan for giving
emphasis for the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and other vulnerable sections
of the society, provision for infrastructural
amenities and facilities in the proposed
resettlement area in terms of the provisions
contained in Chapters II, IV , V and VI of the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2007, in
such manner and within such time as may be
prescribed by rules made by the Central
Government.’.—
9. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), the following provisos
shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where no declaration is
made consequent upon the issue of a
notification under sub-section ( 1) within the
time-limit specified in subsection ( 1) of section
6, no fresh notification under this sub-section
shall, subsequent to the expiry of the period
aforesaid, be made for a period of one year in
respect of the same land:
Provided further that in case a notification
issued under sub-section ( 1) in respect of a
particular land lapsed for the second time, no
proceeding under subsection ( 1) shall be
initiated at least for a period of five years from
the date of such notification.”;
(b) After sub-section ( 1), the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) No person shall make any transaction
or cause any transaction of land specified in
the notice of acquisition to create any
encumbrances on such land from the date of
publication of such notice under this section
till the final declaration under section 6, or the
Amendment
of section
4.

80
award made and paid under section 16 of the
Act, whichever is earlier:
Provided that the Collector may, on the
application made by the land owner in respect
of the land so notified, exempt in special
circumstances to be recorded in writing, such
owner from the operation of this sub-section:
Provided further that any loss or injury
suffered by any person due to his wilful
violation of this provision shall not be made
up by the Collector.
(1B) After issuance of notice under sub-
section ( 1), the Collector shall, before issue of
declaration under section 6, undertake and
complete the exercise of updating of land
records, classification of land and its tenure,
survey and standardisation of land and
property values in respect of the land under
acquisition.”.
10. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-
section ( 1),—
(i) the words and figures “subject to the
provisions of Part VII of this Act” shall be omitted;
(ii) the Explanation 1 shall be omitted.
11. After section 8 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“8A. The damages caused while carrying
out works on land such as survey, digging or
boring sub-soil, marking boundaries or cutting
trenches or clearing away any standing crop,
fence or forest or doing such other acts or
things which may cause damages while acting
under section 4 particularly relating to land
which is excluded from acquisition proceeding,
shall be evaluated and compensation shall be
paid to the persons having interest in that land,
within six months from the completion of the
said works.”.
Amendment
of section
6.
Insertion of
new section
8A.
Evaluation
of damages
during
survey,
measurement,
etc.

81
12. For section 11A of the principal Act,
the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“11A. The Collector shall make an award
under section 11 within a period of one year
from the date of the publication of the
declaration and if no award is made within
that period, the entire proceedings for the
acquisition of the land shall lapse:
Provided that in a case where the said
declaration has been published before the
commencement of the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Act, 2007, the award shall be
made within a period of one year from such
commencement:
Provided further that the Collector may,
after the expiry of the period of limitation, if
he is satisfied that the delay has been caused
due to unavoidable circumstances, and for the
reasons to be recorded in writing, he may make
the award within an extended period of six
months:
Provided also that where an award is made
within the extended period, the entitled person
shall, in the interest of justice, be paid an
additional compensation for the delay in
making of the award, every month for the
period so extended, at the rate of not less than
five per cent. of the value of the award, for
each month of such delay.”.
13. After section 11A of the principal Act,
the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“11B.( 1) The Collector shall adopt the
following criteria in assessing and determining
the market value of the land,—
(i) the minimum land value, if any,
specified in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 for the
registration of sale deeds in the area, where
the land is situated; or
Substitution
of new
section for
section 11A.
Period
within
which an
award shall
be made.
Insertion of
new
sections
after section
11A.
Determination
of market
value of
land.
2 of 1899

82
(ii) the average of the sale price for
similar type of land situated in the village
or vicinity, ascertained from not less than
fifty per cent. of the sale deeds registered
during the preceding three years, where
higher price has been paid; or
(iii ) the average of the sale price,
ascertained from the prices paid or agreed
to be paid for not less than fifty per cent.
of the land already purchased for the
project where higher price has been paid,
for the purpose of item ( iii) of clause ( f) of
section 3,
whichever is higher.
(2) Where the provisions of sub-section ( 1)
are not applicable for the reason that:
(i) the land is situated in such area
where the transactions in land are restricted
by or under any other law for the time
being in force in that area; or
(ii) the registered sale deeds for similar
land as mentioned in clause ( i) of sub-
section ( 1) are not available for the
preceding three years; or
(iii) the minimum land value has not
been specified under the Indian Stamp Act,
1899 by the appropriate authority,
the concerned State Government shall specify
the floor price per unit area of the said land
based on the average higher prices paid for
similar type of land situated in the adjoining
areas or vicinity, ascertained from not less than
fifty per cent. of the sale deeds registered
during the preceding three years where higher
price has been paid, and the Collector may
calculate the value of the land accordingly.
(3) The Collector shall, before assessing and
determining the market value of the land being
2 of 1899

83
acquired under this Act,—
(a) ascertain the intended land use
category of such land; and
(b) take into account the value of the
land of the intended category in the
adjoining areas or vicinity,
for the purpose of determination of the market
value of the land being acquired.
(4) In determining the market value of the
building and other immovable property or
assets attached to the land or building which
are to be acquired, the Collector may use the
services of a competent engineer or any other
specialist in the relevant field, as may be
considered necessary by the Collector.
(5) The Collector may , for the purpose of
determining the value of trees and plants, use
the services of experienced persons in the field
of agriculture, forestry, horticulture, sericulture,
or any other field, as may be considered
necessary by him.
(6) For the purpose of assessing the value
of the standing crops damaged during the
process of land acquisition proceedings, the
Collector may utilise the services of experienced
persons in the field of agriculture as he
considers necessary.
11C. ( 1) When land is acquired for the
purpose of item ( iii) of clause ( f) of section 3
and the person for whom the land is acquired
is a company authorised to issue shares and
debentures, such company shall, with the
previous approval of the appropriate
Government, offer its shares or debentures to
the extent of fifty per cent. but in any case not
less than twenty per cent. of the compensation
amount to be paid to the person whose land
has been acquired.
Part
payment of
compensation
by shares,
debentures,
etc.

84
(2) On the acceptance of the offer, a part
of the compensation amount shall be adjusted
by transfer of shares and debentures to the
person to whom such compensation is due and
on such transfer the liability of the company
in respect of such part of the compensation
shall stand discharged.
(3) The allotment of shares and debentures
mentioned in this section shall be made by the
company in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression
“shares and debentures” has the same meaning
as assigned to it under the Companies Act,
1956.”.
14. In section 12 of the principal Act, after
sub-section ( 2), the following sub-sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(3) The Collector shall keep open to the
public and display a summary of the entire
proceedings undertaken in a case of acquisition
of land including the amount of compensation
awarded to each individual along with details
of the land finally acquired under this Act.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section ( 3), the
summary of the entire proceedings shall include
the summary of schedule for payment of
compensation, dates of taking possession of the
land and such other information as may be
prescribed.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Collector to
ensure that physical possession of the land is
taken over and the amount of compensation is
paid within a period of sixty days commencing
from the date of the award.
(6) The possession of the land acquired
shall not be taken unless the compensation due
under this Act is paid in full or is tendered to
the entitled person.”.
Amendment
of section
12.
1 of 1956

85
15. In section 15 of the principal Act, for
the words and figures “sections 23 and 24”,
the words, figures and letter, “sections 11B, 23
and 24” shall be substituted.
16. In section 17 of the principal Act, after
sub-section ( 4), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely :—
“(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section ( 3) and sub-section ( 3A), an
additional compensation of seventy-five per
cent. of the market value as determined under
section 11B, shall be paid by the Collector in
respect of land and property for acquisition of
which proceedings have been initiated under
sub-section ( 1) of this section.”.
17. After Part II of the principal Act, the
following Parts shall be inserted, namely:—
‘PART IIA
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE
AUTHORITY
17A. ( 1) The State Government shall, for
the purpose of providing speedy disposal of
disputes relating to land acquisition
compensation, establish, by notification in the
Official Gazette, an Authority for the State to
be known as the (name of the State) Land
Acquisition Compensation Disputes
Settlement Authority to exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred
on it by or under this Act with regard to
acquisition of land by the State Government:
Provided that a State Government may
constitute more than one Authority or the
benches thereof, for the purposes of this Act,
if considers necessary.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall
be at such place as the State Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
Amendment
of section
15.
Amendment
of section
17.
Insertion of
new parts
IIA and
IIB.
Establishment
of Land
Acquisition
Compensation
Disputes
Settlement
Authority.

86
(3) The Authority shall consist of not more
than three but not less than two Members,
including the Chairperson to be appointed by
the State Government.
(4) The Members of the Authority shall
be persons of ability, integrity and standing
who have adequate knowledge of, and have
shown capacity in, dealing with the problems
relating to land acquisition matters, public
administration, finance, economics and law.
(5) A person shall not be qualified to be
a Member of the Authority unless he is or
has been—
(i) a judge of a district court;
(ii) an officer of the State Government
not below the rank of District Collector;
(iii) an officer of the State Government
in the Law Department not below the
rank of Director.
 ( 6) The Members of the Authority shall
not hold any other office.
(7) The Authority shall ensure transparency
while exercising its powers and discharging its
functions.
17B. ( 1) A Member shall hold office for a
term of five years from the date he enters upon
his office:
Provided that the Member shall not be
eligible for re-appointment in the same capacity
in that Authority in which he had earlier held
the office:
Provided further that no Member shall hold
office as such after he has attained the age of
sixty-seven years.
(2) A Member of the Authority may, by
notice in writing under his hand addressed to
the State Government, resign his office:
Term of
office and
conditions
of service
of
Members.

87
Provided that the Member shall, unless he
is permitted by the State Government to
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters
upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.
(3) The salary , allowances and other terms
and conditions of service of the Members shall
be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government:
Provided that the salary, allowances and
other terms and conditions of service of the
Members, shall not be varied to their
disadvantage after appointment.
17C. (1) No Member shall be removed from
office except in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(2) The State Government may by order
remove from office any Member, if he—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent;
(b) has been convicted of an offence
which, in the opinion of the State
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(c) has become physically or mentally
incapable of acting as a Member;
(d) has acquired such financial or other
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member;
(e) has so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(f) has been guilty of proved
misbehaviour.
(3) No person shall be removed under this
section until that person has been given an
opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Removal of
Member.

88
17D. (1) The State Government may specify
the numbers, nature and categories of the
officers and employees of the Authority.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to,
and other terms and conditions of service of,
the officers and employees of the Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
17E. The Authority shall have its sittings
at the head office or any other place and at
such time as the Chairperson may direct, and
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard
to the transaction of business in its sittings as
it may specify.
17F. A casual vacancy in the office of a
Member of the Authority shall be filled by the
State Government, by notification in the Official
Gazette, as soon as may be, after the occurrence
of the vacancy.
17G. ( 1) The Authority shall, for the
purposes of the settlement of disputes relating
to land acquisition compensation under this
Act, have the same powers as are vested in a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) discovery and production of any
document or other material object
producible as evidence;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning of any public record;
(e) issuing commission for the
examination of witnesses;
(f) reviewing its decisions, directions
and orders;
Officers
and
employees
of
Authority.
Proceedings
of
Authority.
Filling of a
casual
vacancy.
Powers of
Authority.
5 of 1908.

89
(g) any other matter which may be
prescribed;
(2) The Authority shall have the powers to
pass such interim order in any proceeding,
hearing or matter before it as it may consider
appropriate.
17H. All proceedings before the Authority
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of
the Indian Penal Code and the Authority shall
be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes
of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
17-I. The applications relating to settlement
of land acquisition compensation under this
Act, shall be decided by the Authority as
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall
be made by it to dispose of the disputes finally
within a period of six months from the date of
receipt of the reference under section 18.
17J. The Members and officers of the
Authority shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
17K. No civil court shall have jurisdiction
to entertain any dispute relating to land
acquisition in respect of which the Collector or
the Authority is empowered by or under this
Act, and no injunction shall be granted by any
court in respect of any such matter.
PART IIB
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE AUTHORITY
FOR THE CENTRE
17L. ( 1) The Central Government may, for
the purpose of providing speedy disposal of
disputes relating to land acquisition
compensation, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish one or more Authority to be
known as the Land Acquisition Compensation
Proceedings
before
Authority.
Speedy
disposal of
disputes by
Authority.
Members
and officers
of
Authority
to be
public
servants.
Jurisdiction
of civil
courts
barred.
Establishment
of Land
Acquisition
Compensation
Disputes
Settlement
Authority
for the
Centre.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974
45 of 1860.

90
Disputes Settlement Authority for the Centre
to exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority
conferred on it by or under this Act with regard
to the acquisition of land by the Central
Government.
(2) The Central Government shall specify
in the notification referred to in subsection ( 1)
the matters and places in relation to which the
Authority for the Centre may exercise
jurisdiction.
(3) The Authority for the Centre shall
consist of a Chairperson and not less than two
Members to be appointed by the Central
Government.
(4) A person shall not be qualified to be a
Member of the Authority for the Centre unless
he,—
(i) is or has been a Judge of a High
Court; or
(ii) has for at least fifteen years held
any Legislative or Legal post of the Union
and a post in the Grade II of the Indian
Legal Service for at least three years; or
(iii) a person who is or has been a
member of the Indian Administrative
Service having sufficient knowledge of land
acquisition and has held the post of
Collector of a district and a post equivalent
to a Joint Secretary in the Government of
India:
Provided that no appointment of a sitting
Judge under clause ( i) shall be made except
after consultation with the Chief Justice of the
High Court concerned.
(5) The Authority for the Centre will have
a Secretariat consisting a Secretary-General and
such other staff as may be decided by the
Central Government.

91
17M. The provisions of sections 17B, 17C,
17D, 17E, 17F, 17G, 17H, 17-I, 17J and 17K shall
apply to the Authority for the Centre and shall
have effect, subject to the following
modifications, namely:—
(a) references to “Authority” shall be
construed as references to “Authority for
the Centre”;
(b) references to “State Government”
shall be construed as references to “Central
Government”;
(c) for the reference “any Member” in
sub-section (2) of section 17C, the reference
“any Member except a sitting Judge of a
High Court” shall be substituted.’.
18. In section 18 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section ( 1), the following
provisos shall be inserted, at the end,
namely:—
“Provided that the Collector shall,
within a period of fifteen days from the
date of receipt of application, make a
reference to the Authority for the Centre,
or as the case may be, the Authority:
Provided further that where the
Collector fails to make such reference
within the period so specified, the applicant
may apply to the Authority for the Centre,
or as the case may be, the Authority,
requesting it to direct the Collector to make
the reference to it within a period of thirty
days.”;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), after the proviso,
the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely :—
“Provided further that the Collector
may entertain an application after the
expiry of the said period, within a further
Application
of certain
provisions
relating to
Authority
for
compensation
dispute.
settlement
to
Authority
for the
Centre.
Amendment
of section
18.

92
period of one year, if he is satisfied that
there was sufficient cause for not filing it
within the period specified in the first
proviso.”.
19. In section 23 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), in item “first”,
after the words ‘‘market value of the land”,
the words, figures and letter ”in terms of
section 11B” shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “a
sum of thirty per centum on such
marketvalue”, the words “a sum of sixty
per centum on such market-value” shall be
substituted.
20. After section 28A of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“28B. Where an award is pending or
remains unsettled at any stage under the
Act, prior to the coming into force of the
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 2007,
then the amount of compensation payable
to the entitled person may be determined
on the basis of section 11B as inserted by
the said Act.”.
21. Part VII of the principal Act relating to
“Acquisition of Land for Companies” and
sections 38 to 44B (both inclusive) shall be
omitted.
22. After section 54 of the principal Act,
the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“54A. ( 1) The land acquired under this
Act shall not be transferred to any other
purpose except for a public purpose, and
after obtaining the prior approval of the
appropriate Government.
Insertion of
new section
28A.
Determination
of amount
of
compensation
in pending
or unsettled
cases.
Omission of
Part VII.
Insertion of
new
sections
54A and
54B.
Utilisation
of land for
the purpose
it is
acquired.
Amendment
of Section
23.

93
(2) When any land or part thereof, acquired
under this Act remains unutilised for a period
of five years from the date of taking over the
possession, the same shall return to the
appropriate Government by reversion.
54B. Whenever any land acquired under
this Act is transferred to any person for a
consideration, eighty per cent. of the difference
in the acquisition cost and the consideration
received, which in no case shall be less than
the acquisition cost, shall be shared amongst
the persons from whom the lands were
acquired or their heirs, in proportion to the
value at which the lands were acquired, and
for the purpose, a separate fund may be
maintained which shall be administered by the
Collector in such manner as may be
prescribed.”.
23. In section 55 of the principal Act, in
sub-section ( 1),—
(i) the first proviso shall be omitted;
(ii) in the second proviso, for the words
“Provided further that”, the words
“Provided that” shall be substituted;
(iii) in the third proviso, for the words
“Provided also”, the words “Provided
further” shall be substituted.
Sharing
with
landowners
the
difference
in price of
a land
when
transferred
for a
higher
conside-
ration.
Amendment
of section
55.

94
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (the Act) has been an effective
instrument for the acquisition of land for public purposes and also for
companies, yet its provisions have been found to be inadequate in
addressing certain issues related to the exercise of the statutory powers
of the State for involuntary acquisition of private land and property .
2. Often, such acquisition of land leads to displacement of people,
depriving them of their livelihood and shelter, restricting access to
their traditional resource base, and uprooting them from their socio-
cultural environment. These have traumatic, psychological and
sociocultural consequences for the affected population, which call for
protecting their rights, including those of the weaker sections of society,
particularly tribals, tenants, etc. Rehabilitation and resettlement of the
persons and families affected by involuntary acquisition of private land
and immovable property is of paramount importance. Thus, it is
necessary to extend the provisions of the extant policies or statutes for
rehabilitation and resettlement of those affected by the acquisition of
land under the Act.
3. Also, the ambit of the expression “person interested” under the
Act is proposed to be expanded so as to include tribals and other
traditional forest dwellers, who have lost any traditional rights
recognised under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest
Dwellers (Recognitions of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007). Moreover,
it is necessary to ensure that persons having tenancy rights under the
relevant State laws are included under the scope of “person interested”.
4. Although the Land Acquisition Act provides for acquisition of
land for public purpose, the expression “public purpose” has not been
defined. Hence, the necessity of defining “public purpose”, so as to
restrict the scope of land acquisition under the Act to provision of
land for strategic purposes vital to the State, and for infrastructure
projects where the benefits accrue to the general public is essential.
5. The provision of the Act are also used to acquire private lands
for companies. This frequently raises a question mark on the desirability
of such state intervention when land could be arranged by the company
through private negotiations on a “willing seller-willing buyer” basis,
which could be seen to be a more fear arrangement from the point of
view of the land owner. In view of this it is desirable to omit the

95
provisions for the acquisition of land for companies under the Act.
However, under certain circumstances, it may be necessary to acquire
some land through statutory mechanism to the extent of a limited
portion of the total area of the land required when the “person” has
already purchased the rest of the land through private negotiations
and the purpose is useful to the general public. Such “person” may
include any company or association or body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not.
6. Further, it has been the experience that a large number of
disputes relating to land acquisition compensation are brought before
the courts of law. Quite often these cases remain pending for long
periods of time in the courts. Such cases also add to the workload of
the courts, which are generally over-burdened with cases other than
land acquisition matters. Thus, it would be desirable that the
jurisdiction of civil courts is barred for the purposes of the land
acquisition compensation disputes and other alternate mechanisms
created for disposal of such disputes in a time-bound manner.
7. Also, it is desirable to make the various steps of the land
acquisition process timebound, so that the entire process can be
completed within a reasonable period of time. This will be in the
interest of the land owners and farmers whose lands are acquired as
well as the projects and requiring bodies.
8. Another area of concern in the application of the Act, so far,
has been the requirement of providing a fair compensation at market
value commensurate with the purpose for which the acquired land
would be used. Certain provisions need to be introduced accordingly
in the Act. In addition, in view of the involuntary nature of the
acquisition, adequate solatium amount should be offered to the land
owners, and the amount may be higher in cases of acquisition under
urgency .
9. Often it is seen that the possession of land acquired is not
taken over in time, and also there are delays in the payment of the
compensation amount. Therefore, it is necessary to make a provision
to ensure that physical possession of the land is taken over and the
amount of compensation is paid within a defined period from the
date of the compensation award under the Act.
10. Issues around the utilisation of the land acquired and their
transfer are also areas of concern. Here, provisions are proposed to be
made so that the land acquired is not transferred to any other purpose
except for a public purpose, and that too, not without prior approval

96
of the appropriate Government. When any land or part thereof,
acquired under the Act remains unutilised for a defined period from
the date of taking over possession, the same will return to the
appropriate Government. Further, whenever any land acquired under
the Act is transferred to any person for a consideration, a part of the
net unearned income so accruing to the transferor, will be shared
amongst the persons from whom the lands were acquired or their
heirs, in proportion to the value at which the lands were acquired.
11. Bringing in suitable amendments to the Land Acquisition Act,
1894 on these lines will go a long way in striking a balance between
the need for land for development and other public purposes and
protecting the interests of the persons whose lands are statutorily
acquired.
12. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
New Delhi; RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH
The 30th November, 2007.

97
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 17 of the Bill proposes to insert a new section 17L in the
Act under which it is proposed that the Central Government may, by
notification, establish one or more Authority to be known as the Land
Acquisition Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority for the Centre
to exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or
under this Act with regard to the acquisition of land by the Central
Government, for the purpose of providing speedy disposal of disputes
relating to land acquisition compensation. The Authority for the Centre
shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than two members to be
appointed by the Central Government. It will have a Secretariat
consisting of a Secretary-General and other staff as may be decided by
the Central Government. The terms and conditions subject to which
the Chairperson and other members of the Authority, will be appointed
and the procedure of transaction of business of the Authority for the
Centre shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
This will involve expenditure of a recurring as well as non-recurring
nature, which would be a part of the administrative expenditure of
the Ministry.
The exact expenditure which will be involved under the proposed
Bill will depend upon the composition of the above-mentioned
Authority, which will be decided after the Bill is passed. Hence, it is
not practicable to make an exact estimate of the recurring and
nonrecurring expenditure for the purpose at this stage.

98
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2 and 3 seek to omit the words “and for companies” from
the long title and the preamble.
Clause 4 seeks to insert new section 1A to provide for application
of the provisions of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2007 for
land acquisition under this Act.
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 3 relating to definitions of certain
expressions, insert definitions of new expressions, etc. as a consequence
of the amendment to the Act.
Clause 6 seeks to amend the Act to omit the words “or for a
Company” (wherever they occur in the Act) alongwith grammatical
variations.
Clause 7 seeks to amend the Act to substitute the words “the
Court” (along with grammatical variations), with the words “the
Authority for the Centre, or as the case may be, the Authority”.
Clause 8 seeks to insert new section 3A relating to mandatory
social impact assessment prior to acquisition of land under the Act in
cases of displacement of a certain number of families.
Clause 9 seeks to amend section 4 providing that no fresh
notification to be issued for a period of one year in respect of the
same land and no proceedings to be initiated for five years if the
notification issued under sub-section (1) lapses for the second time. It
also seeks to bar any person from making any transaction of land
specified in the notice of acquisition till final declaration, etc.
Clause 10 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 6 so as not to
make this subsection “subject to the provision of Part VII of the Act.”.
It also seeks to omit Explanation 1 regarding computation of the period
referred to in the first proviso.
Clause 11 seeks to insert new section 8A for the purpose of
evaluation of damages during survey, measurement, etc.
Clause 12 seeks to substitute new section 11A to provide that the
award shall be made within one year; for delay due to unavoidable
circumstances and reasons to be recorded, the award to be made within

99
an extended period of 6 months, and for such extended period
additional compensation shall be paid.
Clause 13 seeks to insert new sections 11B and 11C. The proposed
new section 11B provides the criteria for assessing and determining
the market value, such as the minimum land value if any specified in
the Stamp Act, average sale price of similar type of land or average
sale price paid for already land purchased for the same project; the
State Government may specify floor price per unit area, etc. The
proposed new section 11C provides for part payment of compensation
by shares, debentures etc. where a company is authorized to issue
shares.
Clause 14 seeks to amend section 12 casting upon the Collector a
duty to keep open and display summary of the entire proceedings,
such summary to include schedule of payment of compensation, date
of taking possession, etc.; to ensure physical possession of the land
and payment of compensation within 60 days from the date of award
etc.
Clause 15 seeks to amend section 15 to include therein reference
to new section 11B.
Clause 16 seeks to amend section 17 as a consequence of new
section 11B, for the purpose of additional compensation.
Clause 17 seeks to insert Part IIA and Part IIB. The proposed
Part IIA relates to Establishment of the State Authority and contains
the proposed new section 17A to section 17K. These deal with
establishment of the Land Acquisition Compensation Disputes
Settlement Authority by the State, number of Members of the authority ,
qualifications of the Members; terms and conditions of service of the
Members, removal of a Member, officers and employees of the
Authority, proceedings of the Authority, filling of casual vacancies,
powers of the Authority, speedy disposal of disputes, members and
officers to be public servants; and barring of jurisdiction of civil courts.
The proposed Part IIB relates to establishment of Authority for the
Centre, and contains section 17L and section 17M. These deal with
Land Acquisition Compensation, Disputes Settlement Authority by the
Centre, constitution of the Authority, qualifications of the members
etc.; and application of the provisions of sections 17B to 17K (both
inclusive to the Authority for the Centre with necessary modifications
to references to “Authority” and “State Government” to be read as
“Authority for the Centre” and “Central Government” respectively,

100
and reference to “any Member” in section 17C to be read as “any
member except a sitting Judge of a High Court”.
Clause 18 seeks to amend section 18 for the purpose of making
reference to the Authority for the Centre by the Collector, etc.
Clause 19 seeks to amend section 23 as a consequence of new
section 11B, etc.
Clause 20 seeks to insert new section 28B for determination of
amount of compensation in cases which are pending or unsettled at
any stage under the Act prior to the coming into force of this Act.
Clause 21 seeks to omit Part VII of the Act relating to Land
Acquisition Act and sections 38 to 44B (both inclusive).
Clause 22 seeks to insert new sections 54A and 54B providing for
utilization of land for the purpose for which it is required; and sharing
with land owners difference in price of land where the land is
transferred for higher consideration.
Clause 23 seeks to omit the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section
55 of the Act.

101
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 3A in the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 which relates to mandatory social impact
assessment prior to acquisition of land under the said Act. The new
section 3A seeks to empower the Central Government to prescribe, by
rules, the manner and time in which social impact assessment study
and other matters enumerated in the new section shall be carried out.
Clause 13 seeks to insert new section 11C in the Land Acquisition Act,
1894 to provide for allotment of shares and debentures in such manner
as may be prescribed. Clause 14 seeks to amend section 12 of the Act
to provide for payment of compensation and other related matters by
framing the rules.
2. Sub-section (3) of section 17B and sub-section (2) of section 17D,
which has been proposed to be inserted by clause 17 of the Bill in the
1894 Act seeks to provide that the State Government may by rules
prescribe the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of Members of the Authority and the officers and
employees of the said Authority. In respect of the Authority for the
Centre, similar rules can be framed by the Central Government under
section 17M.
3. Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 54B in the
1894 Act which provides sharing with landowners the difference in
price of a land when transferred for a higher consideration and
provides for making rules for maintaining and administering the fund
for the purposes of new section 54B.
4. As per the provisions contained in sub-section (1) of section 55
to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the rules made under the Act are
required to be laid before Parliament or State Legislature, as the case
may be.
The aforesaid matters in respect of which rules may be made relate
to matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

102
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE L AND A CQUISITION A CT, 1894
 (1 OF 1894)
An Act to amend the law for the acquisition
of land for public purposes and for Companies.
WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the law
for the acquisition of land needed for public
purposes and for Companies and for
determining the amount of compensation to be
made on account of such acquisition.
It is hereby enacted as follows:—
PART I
P
RELIMINARY
1. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(2)*  *  * * *
(3)*  *  * * *
* * * * *
(b) the expression “person interested”
includes all persons claiming an interest in
compensation to be made on account of the
acquisition of land under this Act; and a person
shall be deemed to be interested in land if he
is interested in an easement affecting the land;
* * * * *
(d) the expression “Court” means a
principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction,
unless the appropriate Government has
appointed (as it is hereby empowered to do) a
special judicial officer within any specified local
limits to perform functions of the Court under
this Act;
Definitions.

103
(e) the expression “company” means—
(i) a company as defined in section 3
of the Companies Act, 1956, other than a
Government company referred to in clause
(cc);
(ii) a society registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860, or under
any corresponding law for the time being
in force in a State, other than a society
referred to in clause ( cc);
(iii) a co-operative society within the
meaning of any law relating to cooperative
societies for the time being in force in any
State, other than a cooperative society
referred to in clause ( cc);
(ee) the expression “appropriate
Government” means, in relation to
acquisition of land for the purposes of the
Union, the Central Government, and, in
relation to acquisition of land for any other
purposes, the State Government;
(f) the expression “public purpose”
includes—
(i) the provision of village-sites, or the
extension, planned development or
improvement of existing village-sites;
(ii) the provision of land for town or
rural planning;
(iii) the provision of land for planned
development of land from public funds in
pursuance of any scheme or policy of
Government and subsequent disposal
thereof in whole or in part by lease,
assignment or outright sale with the object
of securing further development as planned;
(iv) the provision of land for a
corporation owned or controlled by the
State;
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.

104
(v) the provision of land for residential
purposes to the poor or landless or to
persons residing in areas affected by natural
calamities, or to persons displaced or
affected by reason of the implementation
of any scheme undertaken by Government,
any local authority or a corporation owned
or controlled by the State;
(vi) the provision of land for carrying
out any educational, housing, health or
slum clearance scheme sponsored by
Government, or by any authority
established by Government for carrying out
any such scheme, or, with the prior
approval of the appropriate Government,
by a local authority, or a society registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860,
or under any corresponding law for the
time being in force in State, or a
cooperative society within the meaning of
any law relating to cooperative societies for
the time being in force in any State;
(vii) the provision of land for any other
scheme of development sponsored by
Government or, with the prior approval of
the appropriate Government, by a local
authority;
(viii) the provision of any premises or
building for locating a public office, but
does not include acquisition of land for
Companies;
(g) the following persons shall be
deemed persons “entitled to act” as and to
the extent hereinafter provided (that is to
say)—
trustees for other persons beneficially
interested shall be deemed the persons entitled
to act with reference to any such case, and that
to the same extent as the persons beneficially
interested could have acted if free from
disability;
21 of 1860.

105
a married woman, in cases to which the
English law is applicable, shall be deemed the
person so entitled to act, and, whether of full
age or not, to the same extent as if she were
unmarried and of full age; and
the guardians of minors and the committees
or managers of lunatics or idiots shall be
deemed respectively the persons so entitled to
act, to the same extent as the minors, lunatics
or idiots themselves, if free from disability,
could have acted:
Provided that—
(i) no person shall be deemed “entitled
to act” whose interests in the subject-matter
shall be shown to the satisfaction of the
Collector or Court to be adverse to the
interest of the person interested for whom
he would otherwise be entitled to act;
(ii) in every such case the person
interested may appear by a next friend, or,
in default of his appearance by a next
friend, the Collector or Court, as the case
may be, shall appoint a guardian for the
case to act on his behalf in the conduct
thereof;
(iii) the provisions of Order XXXII of
the First Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 shall, mutatis mutandis,
apply in the case of persons interested
appearing before a Collector or Court by a
next friend, or by a guardian for the case,
in proceedings under this Act; and
(iv) no person “entitled to act” shall be
competent to receive the compensation-
money payable to the person for whom he
is entitled to act, unless he would have
been competent to alienate the land and
receive and give a good discharge for the
purchase-money on a voluntary sale.
5 of 1908.

106
PART II
ACQUISITION
Preliminary investigation
4. ( 1) Whenever it appears to the
appropriate Government that land in any
locality is needed or is likely to be needed for
any public purpose or for a Company, a
notification to that effect shall be published in
the Official Gazette and in two daily
newspapers circulating in that locality of which
at least one shall be in the regional language,
and the Collector shall cause public notice of
the substance of such notification to be given
at convenient places in the said locality the last
of the dates of such publication and the giving
of such public notice, being hereinafter referred
to as the date of the publication of the
notification.
* * * *
Declaration of intended acquisition
6. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of Part VII
of this Act when the appropriate Government
is satisfied after considering the report, if any,
made under section 5A, sub-section ( 2) that any
particular land is needed for a public purpose
or for a Company a declaration shall be made
to that effect under the signature of a Secretary
to such Government or of some officer duly
authorised to certify is orders and different
declarations may be made from time to time
in respect of different parcels of any land
covered by the same notification under section
4, sub-section ( 1), irrespective of whether one
report or different reports has or have been
made (wherever required) under section 5A,
sub-section ( 2):
Provided that no declaration in respect of
any particular land covered by a notification
under section 4, sub-section ( 1),—
Publication
of
preliminary
notification
and powers
of officers
thereupon.
Declaration
that land is
required for
a public
purpose.

107
(i) published after the commencement
of the Land Acquisition (Amendment and
Validation) Ordinance, 1967 but before the
commencement of the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Act, 1984 shall be made after
the expiry of three years from the date of
the publication of the notification; or
(ii) published after the commencement
of the Land Acquisition (Amendment Act,
1984 shall be made after the expiry of one
year from the date of the publication of
the notification:
Provided further that no such declaration
shall be made unless the compensation to be
awarded for such property is to be paid by a
Company, or wholly or partly out of public
revenues or some fund controlled or managed
by a local authority.
Explanation 1.— In computing any of the
periods referred to in the first proviso, the
period during which any action or proceeding
to be taken in pursuance of the notification
issued under section 4, sub-section ( 1), is stayed
by an order of a Court shall be excluded.
* * * * *
Enquiry into measurements value and claims and
award by the Collector
11. ( 1) On the day so fixed, or any other
day to which the enquiry has been adjourned,
the Collector shall proceed to enquire into the
objections (if any) which any person interested
has stated pursuant to a notice given under
section 9 to the measurements made under
section 8, and into the value of the land at the
date of the publication of the notification under
section 4, sub-section (1), and into the respective
interests of the persons claiming the
compensation, and shall make an award under
his hand of—
Enquiry
and award
by
Collector.
Ord. 1 of
1967.
68 of 1984.

108
(i) the true area of the land;
(ii) the compensation which in his opinion
should be allowed for the land; and
(iii ) the apportionment of the said
compensation among all the persons known or
believed to be interested in the land, of whom,
or of whose claims, he has information, whether
or not they have respectively appeared before
him:
Provided that no award shall be made by
the Collector under this sub-section without the
previous approval of the appropriate
Government or of such officer as the
appropriate Government may authorise in this
behalf:
Provided further that it shall be competent
for the appropriate Government to direct that
the Collector may make such award without
such approval in such class of cases as the
appropriate Government may specify in this
behalf.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 1) if at any stage of the
proceedings, the Collector is satisfied that all
the persons interested in the land who
appeared before him have agreed in writing
on the matters to be included in the award of
the Collector in the form prescribed by rules
made by the appropriate Government, he may,
without making further enquiry, make an
award according to the terms of such
agreement.
(3) The determination of compensation for
any land under sub-section ( 2) shall not, in any
way affect the determination of compensation
in respect of other lands in the same locality
or elsewhere in accordance with the other
provisions of this Act.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Registration Act, 1908, no agreement made
16 of 1908.

109
under sub-section ( 2) shall be liable to
registration under that Act.
11A. (1) The Collector shall make an award
under section 11 within a period of two years
from the date of the publication of the
declaration and if no award is made within
that period, the entire proceedings for the
acquisition of the land shall lapse:
Provided that in a case where the said
declaration has been published before the
commencement of the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Act, 1984, the award shall be
made within a period of two years from such
commencement.
Explanation.— In computing the period of
two years referred to in this section, the period
during which any action or proceeding to be
taken in pursuance of the said declaration is
stayed by an order of a Court shall be
excluded.
* * * *
15. In determining the amount of
compensation, the Collector shall be guided by
the provisions contained in sections 23 and 24.
* * * *
PART III
R
EFERENCE TO C OURT AND P ROCEDURE T HEREON
18. ( 1) Any person interested who has not
accepted the award may, by written application
to the Collector, require that the matter be
referred by the Collector for the determination
of the Court, whether his objection be to the
measurement of the land, the amount of the
compensation, the persons to whom it is
payable, or the apportionment of the
compensation among the persons interested.
Referrence
to Court.
Period
within
which an
award shall
be made.
16 of 1984.
Matters to
be
considered
and
neglected.

110
(2) The application shall state the grounds
on which objection to the award is taken:
Provided that every such application shall be
made,—
(a) if the person making it was present
or represented before the Collector at the
time when he made his award, within six
weeks from the date of the Collector’s
award;
(b) in other cases, within six weeks of
the receipt of the notice from the Collector
under section 12, sub-section ( 2), or within
six months from the date of the Collector’s
award, whichever period shall first expire.
19. ( 1) In making the reference, the
Collector shall state, for the information of the
Court, in writing under his hand,—
(a) the situation and extent of the land,
with particulars of any trees, buildings or
standing crops thereon;
(b) the names of the persons whom he
has reasons to think interested in such land;
(c) the amount awarded for damages
and paid or tendered under sections 5 and
17, or either of them, and the amount of
compensation awarded under section 11;
(cc) the amount paid or deposited
under sub-section ( 3A) of section 17; and
(d) if the objection be to the amount of
the compensation, the grounds on which
the amount of compensation was
determined.
(2) To the said statement, shall be attached
a Schedule giving the particulars of the notices
served upon, and of the statements in writing
made or delivered by the parties interested,
respectively.
Collector’s
statement
to the
Court.

111
20. The Court shall thereupon cause a
notice specifying the day on which the Court
will proceed to determining the objection, and
directing their appearance before the Court on
that day, to be served on the following persons,
namely:—
(a) the applicant;
(b) all persons interested in the
objection, except such (if any) of them as
have consented without protest to receive
payment of the compensation awarded; and
(c) in the objection is in regard to the
area of the land or to the amount of
compensation, the Collector.
* * * *
23. ( 1) In determining the amount of
compensation to be awarded for land acquired
under this Act, the Court shall take into
consideration—
first, the market-value of the land at the
date of the publication of the notification under
section 4, sub-section ( 1);
* * * *
(2) In addition to the market-value of the
land, as above provided, the Court shall in
every case award a sum of thirty per centum
on such market-value, in consideration of the
compulsory nature of the acquisition.
24. But the Court shall not take into
consideration—
first, the degree of urgency which has led
to the acquisition;
secondly, any disinclination of the person
interested to part with the land acquired;
thirdly, any damage sustained by him
which, if caused by a private person, would
not render such person liable to a suit;
Service of
notice.
Matters to
be
considered
in
determining
compensation.
Matters to
be
neglected in
determining
compensation.

112
fourthly, any damage which is likely to be
caused to the land acquired, after the date of
the publication of the declaration under section
6, by or in consequence of the use to which it
will be put;
fifthly, any increase to the value of the land
acquired likely to accure from the use to which
it will be put when acquired;
sixthly, any increase to the value of the
other land of the person interested likely to
accrue from the use to which the land acquired
will be put;
seventhly, any outlay or improvements on,
or disposal of, the land acquired, commenced,
made or effected without the sanction of the
Collector after the date of the publication of
the notification under section 4, sub-section ( 1);
or
eighthly, any increase to the value of the
land on account of its being part to any use
which is forbidden by land or opposed to
public policy.
25. The amount of compensation awarded
by the Court shall not be less than the amount
awarded by the Collector under section 11.
* * * * *
27. ( 1) Every such award shall also state
the amount of costs incurred in the proceedings
under this Part, and by what persons and in
what proportions they are to be paid.
(2) When the award of the Collector is not
upheld, the costs shall ordinarily be paid by
the Collector, unless the Court shall be of
opinion that the claim of the applicant was so
extravagant or that he was so negligent in
putting his case before the Collector that some
Amount of
compensation
awarded by
Court not
to be lower
than the
amount
awarded by
the
Collector.
Costs.

113
deduction from his costs should be made or
that he should pay a part of the Collector’s
costs.
28. If the sum which, in the opinion of the
Court, the Collector ought to have awarded as
compensation is inexcess of the sum which the
Collector did award as compensation, the
award of the Court may direct that the
Collector shall pay interest on such excess at
the rate of nine per centum per annum from
the date on which he took possession of the
land to the date of payment of such excess
into Court:
Provided that the award of the Court may
also direct that where such excess or any part
thereof is paid into Court after the date of
expiry of a period of one year from the date
on which possession is taken, interest at the
rate of fifteen per centum per annum shall be
payable from the date of expiry of the said
period of one year on the amount of such
excess or part thereof which has not been paid
into Court before the date of such expirty.
28A. (1) Where in an award under this Part,
the Court allows to the applicant any amount
of compensation in excess of the amount
awarded by the Collector under section 11, the
persons interested in all the other land covered
by the same notification under section 4, sub-
section ( 1) and who are also aggrieved by the
award of the Collector may, notwithstanding
that they had not made an application to the
Collector under section 18, by written
application to the Collector within three months
from the date of the award of the Court require
that the amount of compensation payable to
them may be re-determined on the basis of the
amount of compensation awarded by the Court:
Provided that in computing the period of
three months within which an application to
the Collector shall be made under this sub-
Collector
may be
directed to
pay interest
on excess
compensation.
Re-
determination
of the
amount of
compensation
on the
basis of the
award of
the Court.

114
section, the day on which the award was
pronounced and the time requisite for obtaining
a copy of the award shall be excluded.
(2) The Collector shall, on receipt of an
application under sub-section ( 1), conduct an
inquiry after giving notice to all the persons
interested and giving them a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, and make an award
determining the amount of compensation
payable to the applicants.
(3) Any person who has not accepted the
award under sub-section ( 2) may, by written
application to the Collector, require that the
matter be referred by the Collector for the
determination of the Court and the provisions
of sections 18 to 28 shall, so far as may be,
apply to such reference as they apply to a
reference under section 18.
PART IV
A
PPORTIONMENT OF C OMPENSATION
* * * * *
30. When the amount of compensation has
been settled under section 11, if any dispute
arises as to the apportionment of the same or
any part thereof, or as to the persons to whom
the same or any part thereof, is payable, the
Collector may refer such dispute to the decision
of the Court.
PART V
P
AYMENT
31. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(2) If they shall not consent to receive it,
or if there be no person competent to alienate
the land, or if there be any dispute as to the
title to receive the compensation or as to the
apportionment of it, the Collector shall deposit
the amount of the compensation in the Court
Dispute as
to
apportion-
ment.
Payment of
compensation
or deposit
of same in
Court.

115
to which a reference under section 18 would
be submitted:
Provided that any person admitted to be
interested may receive such payment under
protest as to the sufficiency of the amount:
Provided also that no person who has
received the amount otherwise than under
protest shall be entitled to make any application
under section 18:
Provided also that nothing herein contained
shall affect the liability of any person, who may
receive the whole or any part of any
compensation awarded under this Act, to pay
the same to the person lawfully entitled thereto.
* * * * *
32. ( 1) If any money shall be deposited in
Court under sub-section ( 2) of the last
preceding section and it appears that the land
in respect whereof the same was awarded
belonged to any person who had no power to
alienate the same, the Court shall—
(a) order the money to be invested in
the purchase of other lands to be held
under the like title and conditions of
ownership as the land in respect of which
such money shall have been deposited, was
held, or
(b) if such purchase cannot be effected
forthwith, then in such Government or
other approved securities as the Court shall
think fit;
and shall direct the payment of the interest or
other proceeds arising from such investment to
the person or persons who would for the time
being have been entitled to the possession of
the said land, and such moneys shall remain
so deposited and invested until the same be
applied—
Investment
of money
deposited
in respect
of lands
belonging
to persons
incompetent
to alienate.

116
(i) in the purchase of such other lands
as aforesaid; or
(ii) in payment to any person or
persons becoming absolutely entitled
thereto.
(2) In all cases of moneys deposited to
which this section applies, the Court shall order
the costs of the following matters, including
therein all reasonable charges and expenses
incident thereon, to be paid by the Collector,
namely:—
(a) the costs of such investments as
aforesaid;
(b) the costs of the orders for the
payment of the interest or other proceeds,
of the securities upon which such moneys
are for the time being invested, and for
the payment out of Court of the principal
of such moneys, and of all proceedings
relating thereto, except such as may be
occasioned by litigation between adverse
claimants.
33. When any money shall have been
deposited in Court under this Act for any cause
other than that mentioned in the last preceding
section, the Court may , on the application of
any party interested or claiming an interest in
such money, order the same to be invested in
such Government or other approved securities
as it may think proper, and may direct the
interest or other proceeds of any such
investment to be accumulated and paid in such
manner as it may consider will give the parties
interested therein the same benefit therefrom
as they might have had from the land in
respect whereof such money shall have been
deposited or as near thereto as may be.
* * * *
Investment
of money
deposited
in other
cases.

117
PART VI
TEMPORARY O CCUPATION OF L AND
35. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(3) In case the Collector and the persons
interested differ as to the sufficiency of the
compensation or apportionment thereof, the
Collector shall refer such difference to the
decision of the Court.
* * * * *
37. In case the Collector and persons
interested differ as to the condition of the land
at the expiration of the term, or as to any
matter connected with the said agreement, the
Collector shall refer such difference to, the
decision of the Court.
PART VII
A
CQUISITION OF L AND FOR C OMPANIES
* * * *
38A. An industrial concern, ordinarily
employing not less than one hundred workmen
owned by an individual or by an association
of individuals and not being a Company,
desiring to acquire land for the erection of
dwelling-houses for workmen employed by the
concern or for the provision of amenities
directly connected therewith shall, so far as
concerns the acquisition of such land, be
deemed to be a Company for the purposes of
this Part, and the references to Company in
sections 4, 5A, 6, 7 and 50 shall be interpreted
as references also to such concern.
39. The provisions of sections 6 to 16 (both
inclusive) and sections 18 to 37 (both inclusive)
shall not be put in force in order to acquire
land for any company under this part, unless
with the previous consent of the appropriate
Government, nor unless the Company shall
Temporary
occupation
of waste or
arable land,
procedure
when
difference
as to
compensation
exists.
Difference
as to
condition of
land.
Industrial
concern to
be deemed
Company
for certain
purposes.
Previous
consent of
appropriate
Government
and
execution
of
agreement
necessary.

118
have executed the agreement hereinafter
mentioned.
40. ( 1) Such consent shall not be given
unless the appropriate Government be satisfied,
either on the report of the Collector under
section 5A, sub-section ( 2), or by an enquiry
held as hereinafter provided—
(a) that the purpose of the acquisition
is to obtain land for the erection of
dwelling-houses for workmen employed by
the Company or for the provision of
amenities directly connected therewith; or
(aa) that such acquisition is needed for
the construction of some building or work
for a Company which is engaged or is
taking steps for engaging itself in any
industry or work which is for a public
purpose; or
(b) that such acquisition is needed for
the construction of some work and that
such, work, is likely to prove useful to the
public.
(2) Such enquiry shall be held by such
officer and at such time and place as the
appropriate Government shall appoint.
(3) Such officer may summon and enforce
the attendance of witnesses and compel the
production of documents by the same means
and, as far as possible, in the same manner as
is provided by the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 in the case of Civil Court.
41. If the appropriate Government is
satisfied after considering the report, if any, of
the Collector under section 5A, sub-section ( 2),
or on the report of the officer making an
inquiry under section 40 that the proposed
acquisition is for any of the purposes referred
to in clause ( a) or clause ( aa) or clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 40, it shall require
Previous
enquiry.
Agreement
with
appropriate
Government.
5 of 1908.

119
the Company to enter into an agreement with
the appropriate Government providing to the
satisfaction of the appropriate Government for
the following matters, namely:—
(1) the payment to the appropriate
Government of the cost of the acquisition;
(2) the transfer, on such payment, of
the land to the Company;
(3) the terms on which the land shall
be held by the Company;
(4) where the acquisition is for the
purpose of erecting dwelling-houses or the
provision of amenities connected therewith,
the time within which, the conditions on
which and the manner in which the
dwelling-houses or amenities shall be
erected or provided;
(4A) where the acquisition is for the
construction of any building or work for a
Company which is engaged or is taking
steps for engaging itself in any industry or
work which is for a public purpose, the
time within which and the conditions on
which, the building or work shall be
constructed or executed; and
(5) where the acquisition is for the
construction of any other work the time
within which and the conditions on which
the work shall be executed and maintained,
and the terms on which the public shall be
entitled to use the work.
42. Every such agreement shall, as soon as
may be after its execution, be published in the
Official Gazette, and thereupon (so far as
regards the terms on which the public shall be
entitled to use the work) have the same effect
as if it had formed part of this Act.
Publication
of
agreement.

120
43. The provisions of section 39 to 42, both
inclusive, shall not apply and the corresponding
sections of the Land Acquisition Act, 1870, shall
be deemed never to have applied, to the
acquisition of land of any Railway or other
Company, for the purposes of which, under any
agreement with such Company, the Secretary
of State for India in Council, the Secretary of
State, the Central Government or any State
Government is or was bound to provide land.
44. In the case of the acquisition of land
for the purposes of a Railway Company, the
existence of such an agreement as is mentioned
in section 43 may be proved by the production
of a printed copy thereof purporting to be
printed by other of Government.
44A. No Company for, which any land is
acquired under this Part shall be entitled to
transfer the said land or any part thereof by
sale, mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise except
with the previous sanction of the appropriate
Government.
44B. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Act, no land shall be acquired under this
Part, except for the purpose mentioned in
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 40, for a
private company which is not a Government
company.
Explanation. —‘‘Private company” and
“Government company” shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Companies Act, 1956.
PART VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
* * * * *
49. ( 1) The provisions of this Act shall not
be put in force for the purpose of acquiring a
part only of any house, manufactory or other
building, if the owner desires that the whole
Sections 39
to 42 not
to apply
where
Government
bound by
agreement.
How
agreement
with
railway
Company
may be
proved.
Restiction
on transfer,
etc.
Land not
to be
acquired
under this
Part except
for certain
purposes
for private
companies
other than
Government
Companies.
Acquisition
of part of
house or
building.
10 of 1870.
1 of 1956.

121
of such house, manufactory or building shall
be so acquired:
* * * * *
Provided also that, if any question shall
arise as to whether any land proposed to be
taken under this Act does or does not form
part of a house, manufactory or building within
the meaning of this section, the Collector shall
refer the determination of such question to the
Court and shall not take possession of such
land until after the question has been
determined.
In deciding on such a reference, the Court
shall have regard to the question whether the
land proposed to be taken is reasonably
required for the full and unimpaired use of
the house, manufactory or building.
* * * * *
50. ( 1) Where the provisions of this Act are
put in force for the purpose of acquiring land
at the cost of any fund controlled or managed
by a local authority or of any Company, the
charges of any incidental to such acquisition
shall be defrayed from or by such fund or
Company.
(2) In any proceeding held before a
Collector or Court in such cases the local
authority or Company concerned may appear
and adduce evidence for the purpose of
determining the amount of compensation:
Provided that no such local authority or
Company shall be entitled to demand a
reference under section 18.
* * * * *
53. Save in so far as they may be
inconsistent with anything contained in this Act,
the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, shall apply to all proceedings before the
Court under this Act.
Acquisition
of land at
cost of
local
authority or
Company.
Code of
Civil
Procedure
to apply to
proceedings
before
Court.
5 of 1908.

122
54. Subject to the provisions of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, applicable to appeals
from original decrees, and notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in any enactment for
the time being in force, an appeal shall only
lie in any proceedings under this Act to the
High Court from the award, or from any part
of the award of the Court and from any decree
of the High Court passed on such appeal as
aforesaid an appeal shall lie to the Supreme
Court subject to the provisions contained in
section 110 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
and in Order XLIV thereof.
55. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall
have power to make rules consistent with this
Act for the guidance of officers in all matters
connected with its enforcement, and may from
time to time alter and add to the rules so made:
Provided that the power to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of Part VII of this
Act shall be exercisable by the Central
Government and such rules may be made for
the guidance of the State Governments and the
officers of the Central Government and of the
State Governments:
Provided further that every such rule made
by the Central Government shall be laid as
soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament while it is in session for
a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under the rule:
Appeals in
proceedings
before
Court.
Power to
make rules.
5 of 1908.

123
Provided also that every such rule made
by the State Government shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before the State
Legislature.
* * * * *

124
LOK SABHA
————
A
Bill
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
————
(Shri Raghuvansh Prasad Singh, Minister of
Rural Development)

125
APPENDIX II
AMENDMENTS TO THE LAND ACQUISITION ACT,
1894 AFTER INDEPENDENCE
LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1962
(1) Ins. By Act 31 of 1962, Section 3
That such acquisition is needed for the construction of some
building or work for a company which is engaged or is taking steps
for engaging itself in any industry or work which is for a public
purpose.
(2) Subs. by Act 31 of 1962, Section 4, for certain words
“Proposed acquisition is for any of the purposes referred to in
clause (a) or clause (aa) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 40.
(3)“Ins. by Act 31 of 1962, Section 4
Where the acquisition is for the construction of building or work
for a company which is engaged or is taking steps for engaging itself
in any industry or work which is for a public purpose, the time within
which and the conditions on which, the building or work shall be
constructed or executed;
(4) Ins. by Act 31 of 1962, Section 5
No company for which any land is acquired under this part shall
be entitled to transfer the said land or any part thereof by sale,
mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise except with the previous sanction of
the appropriate Government.
(5) Added by Act 31 of 1962, Section 6
Provided that the power to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of part vii of this Act shall be exercisable by the
Central Government and such rules may be made for the guidance of
the State Governments.

126
THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION)
ACT, 1967
(1) Subs. by Act 13 of 1967 Sec. 2
Hearing of objections
Sec. 5A (2)—either make a report in respect of land which has
been notified U.S. 4, Sub-Section (1), or make different reports in respect
of different parcels of such land, to the appropriate Government,
containing his recommendations on the objections, together with the
record of the proceedings held by him, for the decision of the
Government.
(2) Ins. by Act 13 of 1967, Sec. 3
Sec. 6—Declaration that land is required for public purpose and
different declarations may be made from time to time in respect of
different parcels of any land covered by the same notification under
Section 4, Sub-Section (1), irrespective of whether one report or
different reports has or have been made (wherever required) under
Section 5-A, Sub-Section (2);
(3) Subs. by Act 13 of 1967, Sec. 3, for the proviso
Section 6—Proviso
Provided that no declaration in respect of any particular land
covered by a notification under Sect. 4, Sub-Sec. (1), (i) & (ii).
(4) Subs. by Act 13 of 1967, Sec.-3, for the proviso
Sec. 6—for “Provided that” in place of”“Provided further that”.
(5) Sub. By Act 13 of 1967, Sec. 3
Sec. 6—Explanation (2)—for “the declaration” instead of “Every
declaration”.
LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1984
(6) Subs. By Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 2
For “the territories which, immediately before the 1st day of
November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States, and”.

127
(7) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 3
(aa):—the expression “local authority” includes a town planning
authority (by whatever name called) set up under any law for the
time being in force;
(8) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 3
(cc):—Definition of the expression “Corporation owned or controlled
by the State”
(9) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 3 for clause (e)
(c):—the expression
“company” means
(i) a company as defined in Section 3 of the Companies Act,
1956, other than a Government Company.
(ii) a Society registered under the Societies Restriction Act, 1860.
(iii) A co-operative society within the meaning of any law
relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force
in any State.
(10) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 3 for clause (f)
(f) the expression “public purposes” includes—
(as listed therein)
(11) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 3 for chapter xxxi of the code of
Civil Procedure, 1882
Order xxxii of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (5 of 1908).
(12) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 4
“and in two daily newspapers circulating in that locality of which
at least one shall be in the regional language”.
(13) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 5
For “within thirty days after the issue of the notification”.
(14) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 5
for
“either in person”

128
(15) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 6—for the first proviso
Provided that no declaration in respect of any particular land
covered by a notification under section 4, sub-section (1)—
(i) before the commencement of the LA (Amendment) Act, 1984
shall be made after the expiry of three years from the date
of publication of the notification.
(16) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 6
Explanation 1—In computing any of the periods referred to in the
first proviso, the period during which any action or proceeding to be
taken in pursuance of the notification issued under Section-4.
(17) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 6
for, “and shall state”
(18) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 7
For “registered under Part III of the Indian Post Office Act, 1866
(14 of 1866)”
(19) Section 11 re-numbered as Sub-Section (i) of that section by Act
68 of 1984, Sec. 8
(20) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 8
Proviso of clause II provided that no award shall be made by the
collector under this Sub-Section without the previous approval of the
appropriate Government or of such officer as the appropriate
Government may authorise in this behalf.
(21) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 9 in clause 11A of Principal Act
11 A—Period within which an award shall be made.
(22) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 10
13A—Correction of clerical errors etc.
(23) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 11
14. Under the “Code of Civil Procedure, 1908” for “Code of Civil
Procedure, 1882”

129
(24) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 12
15A-Powers to call for records, etc.
(25) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 13 for certain words
17—“Appropriate Government”.
(26) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 13
Section 17—Special power in case of urgency 17 (3A)—Before taking
possession of any land under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section 17, the collector, shall, within prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section (3)
(27) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 13
17(4)—for “after the publication of the notification”.
(28) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 14
19 (cc)—“the amount paid or deposited under sub-section (3A) of
section 17; and
(29) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 15
23 (1A)—In addition to the market value of the land, to court
shall award calculated at the rate of twelve per centum per annum.
(30) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 15
23 (2)—for “fifteen per centum” in place of”“thirty per centum”
(31) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 16
Sec. 24 (eighthly)—any increase to the value of the land on account
of its being part to any use which is forbidden by land or opposed
to public policy.
(32) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 17 for Section 25 of Principal Act
Sec. 25—Amount of compensation awarded by court not to be
lower than the amount awarded by the collector under sec. 11
(33) Section 28 of the principal Act (see Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 30(2)
Sec. 28—Collector may be directed to pay interest on excess
compensation.

130
(34) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 18
Sec. 28—for “Six per centum“ in place of““nine per centum”.
(35) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 18
Sec. 28 (Proviso)–added—After the expiry of a period of one year,
interest at the rate of fifteen per centum per annum.
(36) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 19
Sec. 28A—Re-determination of the amount of compensation on the
basis of the award of the court.
(37) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 20
Sec. 34—Payment of interest—“for six per centum” in place of
“nine per centum.”
(38) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 20
Sec. 34—Proviso added—After the expiry of a period of one year,
interest at the rate of fifteen per centum per annum.
(39) Subs. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 26
Sec. 46—Penalty for obstructing acquisition of land for “fifty
rupees” in place of “five hundred rupees.”
(40) Ins. by Act 68 of 1984, Sec. 27
Sec. 51A—Acceptance of certified copy as evidence.

131
APPENDIX III
LIST OF EXPERTS/STAKEHOLDERS WHO TENDERED ORAL
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ‘THE LAND
ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007’
Sl. No. Name of Expert/Stakeholder
  1 2
 1. (i) Ms. Aruna Roy
(ii) Shri Nikhil Dey, Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan
 2. (i) Shri K.C. Jain, Advocate Supreme Court;
(ii) Shri Hemant Jain;
(iii) Shri Akash Gupta;
(iv) Shri Kshitiz Sachdeva; and
(v) Shri Rahul Jain
 3. Shri Shankar Gopalkrishnan, Campaign for Survival and
Dignity
 4. Dr. Abhijit Guha, Reader & Head, Department to
Anthropology
 5. Shri, S.R. Pillai, President, All India Kisan Sabha, New Delhi
 6. Prof. Sebastin Morris, Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad
 7. (i) Smt. Mebdha Patkar, National Convenor, National
Alliance of People’s Movement
(ii) Shri Sanjay Parikh
 8. (i) Shri Ajit Warty, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
(ii) Shri Sanjay Punkhia;
(iii) Shri Sanjay Radkar;
(iv) Shri Atul Sharma; and
(v) Shri Ashok Shahi

132
 12
 9. (i) Shri Ashok K. Harnal, Additional Director General,
Defence Estates (Acquisition), Ministry of Defence;
(ii) Shri. S. Majumdar, Deputy Director General, Defence
Estates
10. (i) Ms. Sudha Sundaraman, General Secretary, All India
Democratic Women’s Association (AIDWA);
(ii) Dr. Shakti Kak;
(iii) Dr. Archana Prasad
11. Shri Avik Saha, Secretary, Land Resources Law Research
Forum, Kolkata
12. (i) Prof. Shantha Sinha, Chairperson, National Commission
for Protection of Child Rights, New Delhi;
(ii) Ms. Sandhya Baja, member, NCPCR;
(iii) Ms. Dipa Dixit; and
(iv) Shri S.K.Ravi
13. Shri Suhas Chakma, Convenor, North East Regional
Consultation and Director, Asian Centre for Human Rights
14. Ms. Nandita Haksar, Human Rights lawyer & Activist
15. Shri Gam A. Shimray, Advisor on Traditional Knowledge,
UN Convention on Bio-deversity (UNCBD), Manipur

133
APPENDIX IV
LIST OF STATE GOVERNMENTS/UNION TERRIROTY
ADMINISTRATIONS WHOSE VIEWS ON THE LAND
ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
WERE RECEIVED
Sl. No. State/Union Territory Administration
1. Chandigarh
2. Puduchery
3. Jharkhand
4. Goa
5. Chhattisgarh
6. Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu
7. Arunachal Pradesh
8. Nagaland
9. Himachal Pradesh

134
LIST OF MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS FROM WHOM WRITTEN
REPLIES ON LIST OF POINTS WERE OBTAINED AND WITH
WHOM THE COMMITTEE HELD DETAILED DELIBERATIONS
ON VARIOUS PROVISIONS OF THE BILL
Sl. No. Name of the Ministry
 1. Ministry of Tribal Affairs
 2. Ministry of Environment and forests
 3. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
 4. Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
 5. Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of
Commerce and Department of Industrial Promotion and
Policy)
 6. Ministry of Urban Development
 7. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
 8. Ministry of Railways
 9. Ministry of Defence
10. Ministry of Home Affairs
11. Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of Posts)
12. Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of
Telecommunications)
13. Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways
(Department of Road Transport & Highways)
14. Ministry of Power

135
DETAILS OF SITTINGS HELD IN CONNECTION WITH
EXAMINATION OF ‘THE LAND ACQUISITION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007’
Sl. No. Date of Sitting Subject/Agenda
 12 3
 1. 24 December, 2007 Briefing by the representatives of the
nodal Ministry  i.e. Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Land
Resources).
 2. 18 January, 2008 Oral evidence of various related
ministries viz . Ministries of Tribal
Affairs, Environment and Forests,
Panchayati Raj, Agriculture and
Commerce.
 3. 17 June, 2008 Evidence of experts and organisations/
(1100 hrs.-1330 hrs.) stake holders etc.
 4. 17 June 2008 -do-
(1430 hrs.-1600 hrs.)
 5. 18 June 2008 -do-
(1100 hrs.-1230 hrs.)
 6. 18 June 2008 -do-
(1400 hrs.-1530 hrs.)
 7. 02 July, 2008 Oral evidence of the representatives of
(1100 hrs.-1230 hrs.) various related ministries viz. Ministries
of Urban Development, Social Justice
and Empowerment, Defence and
Railways.
 8. 02 July, 2008 -do-
(1100 hrs.-1530 hrs.)

136
12 3
 9. 03 July, 2008 Oral evidence of the representatives of
(1100 hrs.-1300 hrs.) various related ministries viz. Ministries
of Agriculture, Tribal Affairs, Panchayati
Raj, Environment and Forests and
Commerce and Industry.
10. 03 July, 2008 -do-
(1400 hrs.-1500 hrs.)
11. 18 July 2008 Oral evidence of related ministries  i.e.
(1100 hrs.-1300 hrs.) Ministries of Urban Development,
Defence and Home Affairs
12. 18 July 2008 Oral evidence of related Ministres/
(1400 hrs.-1530 hrs.) Departments i.e. Department of posts,
Telecom, Road Transport and Highways
and Power
13. 11 August 2008 Oral evidence of the Department of
(1100 hrs.-1330 hrs.) Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development) on ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007;
14. 3 September 2008 Clause-by-clause consideration of
(1100 hrs.-1300 hrs.) The Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Bill, 2007;
15. 3 September 2008 -do-
(1400 hrs.-1600 hrs.)
16. 4 September 2008 -do-
(11.00 hrs.-13.00 hrs.
17. 4 September 2008 -do-
(14.00 hrs.-15.00 hrs.)
18. 3 October 2008 Consideration and adoption of the draft
(1200 hrs.-13.45 hrs.) Report on ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’

137
APPENDIX V
DISTRIBUTION OF LAND UNDER DIFFERENT USAGES IN
INDIA AS ON 1980-81 TO 2005-06 AS PROVIDED
BY THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION)
(Area in Million hectares)
Sl. No. Classification of area             Land under Different Usages
1980-81 2005-06
1. Geographical Area 328.73 328.73
(i) Forests 67.47 69.72
(ii) Not Available for Cultivation
(a) Area Under Non-Agricultural Uses 19.66 24.94
(b) Barren & Un-Culturable Land 19.96 17.54
(iii) Other Uncultivated Land Excluding Fallow Land
(a) Permanent Pastures & Other Grazing Lands 11.97 10.42
(b) Land Under Miscellaneous Crops 3.60 3.37
and Groves not included in Net Area sown
(c) Culturable Waste Land 16.74 13.16
(iv) Fallow Lands
(a) Fallow land other than current fallows 9.92 10.41
(b) Current fallows 14.83 14.03
(v) Net Area Sown 140.00 141.60
(vi) Total cultivable land 185.09 182.57
• Population in million 684.00 1107.00
• Per capita availability of cultivable land 0.27 ha. 0.16 ha.
• Area sown more than once 32.63 49.82
• Area under Single Crop 107.37 91.78
• Cropping Intensity 123.30 135.00
Source: Agricultural Statistics at a Glance 2006, DAC, New Delhi

138
APPENDIX VI
STATEWISE POSITION OF WASTELANDS IN THE COUNTRY
Area in Sq. Kms; 10,000 sq. kms = 1 Million Ha.
Sl. No. State Total geographical Total Wastelands % of
Areas of districts area in districts wastelands
covered covered to total
geog.
Area
 12 3 4 5 6
1. Andhra Pradesh 23 275068 45267.15 16.46
2. Arunachal Pradesh 16 83743 18175.95 21.7
3. Assam 23 78438 14034.08 17.89
4. Bihar 37 94171 5443.68 5.78
5. Chhattisgarh 16 135194 7584.15 5.26
6. Goa 2 3702 531.29 14.35
7. Gujarat 25 196024 20377.74 10.4
8. Haryana 19 44212 3266.45 7.39
9. Himachal Pradesh 12 55673 28336.8 50.9
10. Jammu and Kashmir* 14 101387 70201.99 69.24
11. Jharkhand 19 79706 11165.26 14.01
12. Karnataka 27 191791 13536.58 7.06
13. Kerala 14 38863 1788.8 4.6
14. Madhya Pradesh 49 308252 57134.03 18.53
15. Maharashtra 33 307690 49275.41 16.01
16. Manipur 9 22327 13174.74 59.01
17. Meghalaya 7 22429 3411.41 59.01
18. Mizoram 8 21081 4469.88 21.2
19. Nagaland 7 16579 3709.4 22.37

139
12 3 45 6
20. Orissa 30 155707 18952.74 12.17
21. Punjab 17 50362 1172.84 2.33
22. Rajasthan 32 342239 101453.86 29.64
23. Sikkim 4 7096 3808.21 53.67
24. Tripura 4 10486 1322.97 12.62
25. Tamil Nadu 29 130058 17303.29 13.3
26. Uttar Pradesh 70 240926 16984.16 7.05
27. Uttaranchal 13 53483 16097.46 30.1
28. West Bengal 18 88752 4397.46 4.95
29. Union Territories 20 10973 314.38 2.87
Total 597 3166412 552692.16 17.45
*Un-surveyed area (J&K) 120849
Total geographical area 3287263
Source: 1:50,000 scale wasteland maps prepared from Landsat Thematic Mapper/IRS
LISSS II/III Data (Wasteland Atlas-2005)

140
APPENDIX VII
STATEMENT SHOWING EXAMPLE OF SIMPLE AVERAGE
AND WEIGHTED AVERAGE
Following illustration may be considered—
No. Date of Area sold Amount Unit cost
transaction (in acre) (Rs. in lakhs) (Rs. in lakhs)
1. 18.01.2006 2 18 9
2. 28.03.2007 5 35 7
3. 20.12.2007 1 100 100
Total 8 153 116
The first two sales are normal. The third item requires careful
consideration to rule out the possibility of fictitious sale to boost the
value. Market value calculated on simple average and weighted average
will be as below:
SIMPLE AVERAGE:
Average unit cost = 
  
Sum of unit costs
No.of transactions  = 
  
97 100
3
116
3
++ =  =
Rs. 38.66 Lakhs/acre
WEIGHTED AVERAGE:
Average sale price =
  
Total sale amount
Total Area sold  = 
  
18 35 100
251
153
8
++
++ =  =
Rs. 19.13 Lakhs/acre
However, for more number of transactions, the most repeating unit
cost, i.e. the ‘modal average’, will indicate the most realistic average
sale price.

141
APPENDIX VIII
CHART SHOWING OLD PROVISIONS VIS-A-VIS PROVISION WITH
REGARD TO TIME PERIODS ON VARIOUS PROVISIONS IN
‘THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007’
Relevant Section Old Provision New Provision
12 3
‘3A. Whenever the appropriate
Government intends to acquire
land for public purpose
involving physical
displacement of—
(i) four hundred or more
families en masse in plain area;
or
(ii) two hundred or more
families en masse in tribal or
hilly areas or Desert
sixth Development Programme
blocks or areas specified in V
Schedule or Schedule VI to the
Constitution, a social impact
assessment study shall be
carried out in the affected area
for the purpose of social
impact appraisal, incorporation
of Tribal Development Plan,
plan forgiving emphasis for
the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and other
vulnerable sections of the
society, provision for
infrastructural amenities and
facilities in the proposed
resettlement area in terms of
the provisions contained in
Chapters II, IV , V and VI of
the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2007, in such
manner and within such time as
New Section 3A inserted.As per the Clause 8 of the
Amendment Bill, Section 3 A
to be inserted in Principal Act

142
12 3
(1) Whenever it appears to the
[appropriate Government] the
land in any locality [is needed
or] is likely to be needed for
any public purpose, a
notification to that effect shall
be published in the Official
Gazette [and in two daily
newspapers circulating in that
locality of which at least one
shall be in the regional
language], and the Collector
shall cause public notice of the
substance of such notification
to be given at convenient
places in the said locality [(the
last of the dates of such
publication and the giving of
such public notice, being
hereinafter referred to as the
date of the publication of the
notification)].
New Section 8A to be inserted.
may be prescribed by rules made
by the Central Government .’—
1. As per clause 9 of the Bill,
the following provisos shall be
inserted in Section 4(1) of the
principal Act—
“Provided that where no
declaration is made
consequent upon the issue of
a notification under sub-
section (1) within the time-
limit specified in subsection (1)
of section 6, no fresh
notification under this sub-
section shall, subsequent to the
expiry of the period aforesaid,
be made for a period of one year
in respect of the same land:
Provided further that in case
a notification issued under
sub-section (1) in respect of a
particular land lapsed for the
second time, no proceeding
under sub-section (1) shall be
initiated at least for a period of
five years from the date of such
notification.”;
“8A. The damages caused
while carrying out works on
land such as survey, digging
or boring sub-soil, marking
boundaries or cutting trenches
or clearing away any standing
crop, fence of forest or doing
such other acts or things
which may cause damages
while acting under section 4
particularly relating to land
which is excluded from
acquisition proceeding, shall
be evaluated and
compensation shall be paid to
the persons having interest in
that land, within six months
from the completion of the said
works.”
As per Clause 9 of the Bill,
new provisos to be inserted in
Section 4(1) of the Principal
Act
As per the Clause 11 of the
Bill, Section 8A to be inserted
in the Principal Act

143
12 3
[11A. Period shall be which an
award within made—The
Collector shall make an award
under section 11 within a period
of two years from the date of the
publication of the declaration and
if no award is made within
that period, the entire
proceeding for the acquisition
of the land shall lapse:
Provided that in a case where
the said declaration has been
published before the
commencement of the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Act,
1984 (68 of 1984), the award
shall be made within a period
of two years from such
commencement.
Explanation—In computing the
period of two years referred to
in this section , the period
during which any action or
proceeding to be taken in
pursuance of the said
declaration is stayed by an
order of a Court shall be
excluded.]
New Section 11B to be
inserted.
“11A. The Collector shall make
an award under section 11
within a period of one year from
the date of the publication of the
declaration and if no award is
made within that period, the
entire proceedings for the
acquisition of the land shall
lapse:
Provided that in a case where
the said declaration has been
published before the
commencement of the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Act,
2007, the award shall be made
within a period of one year from
such commencement:
Provided further that the
Collector may, after the expiry
of the period of limitation, if
he is satisfied that the delay
has been caused due to
unavoidable circumstances,
and for the reasons to be
recorded in writing, he may
make the award within an
extended period of six months:
Provided also that where an
award is made within the
extended period, the entitled
person shall, in the interest of
justice, be paid an additional
compensation for the delay in
making of the award, every
month for the period so extended,
at the rate of not less than five
per cent. of the value of the
award, for each month of such
delay.”
(i) the land is situated in such
area where the transactions in
land are restricted by or under
any other law for the time
being in force in that area; or
As per the Clause 12 of the
Amendment Bill, Section 11A
shall be substituted in the
Principal Act
As per clause 13 of the Bill,
Section 11B (1) and (2) shall
be inserted after Section 11A
of the Principal Act.

144
12 3
(ii) the registered sale deeds
for similar land as mentioned
in clause (i) of sub-section (1)
are not available for the
preceding three years;  or
(iii) the minimum land value
has not been specified under
the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 by
the appropriate authority, the
concerned State Government
shall specify the floor price per
unit area of the said land
based on the average higher
prices paid for similar type of
land situated in the adjoining
areas or vicinity, ascertained
from not less than fifty per
cent. of the sale deeds
registered during the preceding
three years  where higher price
has been paid, and the
Collector may calculate the
value of the land accordingly.
“(3) The Collector shall keep
open to the public and display
a summary of the entire
proceedings undertaken in a
case of acquisition of land
including the amount of
compensation awarded to each
individual alongwith details of
the land finally acquired under
this Act.
(4) For the purposes of sub-
section (3), the summary of
the entire proceedings shall
include the summary of
schedule for payment of
compensation, dates of taking
possession of the land and
such other information as may
be prescribed.
(5) It shall be the duty of the
Collector to ensure that
physical possession of the land
As per clause 14 of the
Amendment Bill, following
sub-Sections shall be inserted
after Section 12(2) of the
Principal Act.
New sub-sections 12 (3), (4),
(5) and (6) to be inserted.

145
12 3
is taken over and the amount
of compensation is paid within
a period of sixty days
commencing from the date of the
award.
(6) The possession of the land
acquired shall not be taken
unless the compensation due
under this Act is paid in full
or is tendered to the entitled
person.”
17-I. The applications relating
to settlement of land
acquisition compensation
under this Act, shall be
decided by the Authority as
expeditiously as possible and
endeavour shall be made by
it to dispose of the disputes
finally within a period of six
months from the date of receipt
of the reference under section 18.
(i) in sub-section (1), the
following provisos shall be
inserted, at the end, namely:—
“Provided that the Collector
shall, within a period of fifteen
days from the date of receipt of
application, make a reference to
the Authority for the Centre,
or as the case may be, the
Authority:
Provided further that where
the Collector fails to make
such reference within the
period so specified, the
applicant may apply to the
Authority for the Centre, or as
the case may be, the Authority,
requesting it to direct the
Collector to make the reference
to it within a period of thirty
days.”
New Section 17 I to be
inserted in the Part II A of the
Principal Act.
(1) Any person interested who
has not accepted the award
may, by written application to
the Collector, require that the
matter be referred by the
Collector for the determination
of the Court, whether his
objection be to the
measurement of the land, the
amount of the compensation,
the person to whom it is
payable, or the apportionment
of the compensation among
the persons interested.
(2) The application shall state
the grounds on which
objection to the award is
taken:
Provided that every such
application shall be made—
(a) if the person making it was
Part IIA for the ‘Establishment
of the State Authority’ shall be
inserted in the Principal Act.
As per clause 18 of the
Amendment Bill, the following
provisos shall be inserted in
Section 18(1), sub-section (i) of
the Principal Act—

146
12 3
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the
proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that the
Collector may entertain an
application after the expiry of
the said period, within a further
period of one year,  if he is
satisfied that there was
sufficient cause for not filing
it within the period specified
in the first proviso.”
present or represented before
the Collector at the time when
he made his award, within six
weeks from the date of the
Collector’s award;
(b) in other cases, within six
weeks of the receipt of the
notice from the Collector
under section 12, sub-section
(2), or within six months from
the date of the Collector’s award,
whichever period shall first
expire.

147
APPENDIX IX
CHART SHOWING EXISTING PROVISIONS OF PRINCIPAL ACT
OF 1894 AND PROVISIONS MADE IN THE AMENDING
LEGISLATION WITH REGARD TO INTEREST RATE
Sl.No. Old Provision New Provision Expert’s opinion
12 3 4
The requiring body should not
be penalized if delay in
making award is for reasons
not attributable to the
requiring body.
The additional compensation
of 5% of the value of award
for each month of delay is
excessive. This will attract 60%
interest per annum, which is
exorbitant. The existing
provision for payment of
interest at the rate of 12% per
annum from the date of issue
of section 4(1) notification is
sufficient to take care of such
situation.
The second proviso to section
11A imposing penal provision
in the form of additional
compensation at the rate not
less than 5% of the value of
the award for each month of
such delay should therefore be
dropped.
“11A. The Collector shall make
an award under section 11
within a period of one year
from the date of the
publication of the declaration
and if no award is made
within that period, the entire
proceedings for the acquisition
of the land shall lapse:
Provided that in a case where
the said declaration has been
published before the
commencement of the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Act,
2007, the award shall be made
within a period of one year
from such commencement:
Provided further that the
Collector may, after the expiry
of the period of limitation, if
he is satisfied that the delay
has been caused due to
unavoidable circumstances,
and for the reasons to be
recorded in writing, he may
make the award within an
extended period of six months:
Provided also that where an
award is made within the
extended period, the entitled
person shall, in the interest of
justice, be paid an additional
compensation for the delay in
making of the award, every
1. 11A. Period shall be
which an award within
made.—The Collector
shall make an award
under section 11 within
a period of two years
from the date of the
publication of the
declaration and if no
award is made within
that period, the entire
proceeding for the
acquisition of the land
shall lapse:
Provided that in a case
where the said
declaration has been
published before the
commencement of the
Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Act, 1984
(68 of 1984), the award
shall be made within
a period of two
years from such
commencement.
Explanation — In
computing the period of
two years referred to in
this section, the period
during which any action
or proceeding to be
taken in pursuance of
the said declaration is
stayed by an order of a
Court shall be excluded.

148
12 3 4
2. 23[(1A) In addition to
the market value of the
land, as above provided,
the Authority for the
Centre or as the case
may be, the Authority,
shall in every case
award an amount
calculated at the rate of
twelve per centum per
annum on such market
value for the period
commencing on and
from the date of the
publication of the
notification under
section 4, sub-section (1),
in respect of such land
to the date of the award
of the Collector or the
date of taking
possession of the land,
whichever is earlier.
3. 28. Collector may be
directed to pay
interest on excess
compensation.—If the
sum, which the
Collector did award as
compensation, the
award of the Court may
direct that the collector
shall pay interest on
such excess at the rate
of [nine per centum] per
annum from the date on
which he took
possession of the land to
month for the period so
extended, at the rate of not less
than five per cent of the value of
the award, for each month of such
delay.”
No change in the new bill
with respect to interest rate.
No changes
The existing provision for
payment of interest at the rate
of 12% per annum from the
date of issue of section 4(1)
notification is sufficient to take
care of such situation.

149
12 3 4
the date of payment of
such excess into Court.
[Provided that the
award of the Court may
also direct that where
such excess or any part
thereof is paid into
Court after the date or
expiry of a period of
one year from the date
on which possession is
taken, interest at the rate
of fifteen per centum
per annum shall be
payable from the date of
expiry of the said period
of one year on the
amount of such excess
or part thereof which
has not been paid into
Court before the date of
such expiry .]
4. 34. Payment of interest.—
When the amount of
such compensation is
not paid or deposited
on or before taking
possession of the land,
the Collector shall pay
the amount awarded
with interest thereon at
the rate of [nine per
centum] per annum  from
the time of so taking
possession until it shall
have been so paid or
deposited:
[Provided that if such
compensation or any
part thereof is not paid
or deposited within a
period of one year from
the date on which
possession is taken,
The rate nine percent for first
year and fifteen percent for
subsequent years. This interest
is tabulated as simple interest
whereas in our country we are
governed by compound
interest. All Banks in India
function on compound interest
all loaning agencies charge
compound interest. The farmer
when he takes any loan from
any agency , whether Bank or
otherwise pays compound
interest and when he has to
take interest on delay
compensation it is given as
simple interest.
This should be given
as compound interest
compounded at six months
intervals (All public
sector Banks are banking
No changes

150
12 3 4
interest at the rate of
fifteen per centum per
annum shall be payable
from the date or expiry
of the said period of one
year on the amount of
compensation or part
thereof which has not
been paid or deposited
before the date of such
expiry.
on compound interest
compounded on daily basis).

151
APPENDIX X
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON MONDAY, THE 24TH DECEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in  Committee
Room ‘E’ Basement Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Shri D. Narbula
5. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
6. Shri Madhusudan Reddy
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Dr. Chandan Mitra
14. Dr. Ram Prakash
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary-II

152
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Department of Land Resources
(Ministry of Rural Development)
1. Shri Bhaskar Chatterjee, Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh, Director
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman informed the
members that ‘Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and the
‘Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ as introduced in Lok Sabha
on 6 December, 2007 have been referred to the Committee by Hon’ble
Speaker for examination and report within three months to Parliament.
The Chairman informed them that the sitting of the Committee has
been convened to decide the future course of action with regard to
examination of the aforesaid Bills as also for a briefing by the
representatives of the nodal Ministry/Department i.e. Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) on the aforesaid Bills.
The Chairman also informed the members that the aforesaid Bills are
important legislations concerning the public at large, thus, various
provisions of the Bill need wider consulations with a view to have
detailed examination. In this connection, the Committee decided to
obtain public opinion on the respective Bills through print and
electronic media. The Committee also decided to obtain the views of
State Governments/Union Territory (UT) Administrations on the Bills
as implementation of the provisions made under the said Bills is the
responsibility of the State Governments. The Committee also decided
to seek views of experts on the aforesaid Bills based on a list of
experts given by the nodal Ministry.
[The representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of
Rural Development) were then called in]
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the nodal
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Land
Resources to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman
expressed his unhappiness over non-appearance of Secretary of the
nodal Ministry before the Committee. He clarified that since the sitting
was convened for briefing over the aforesaid Bills, exemption was
granted to Secretary. The Chairman, however, pointed out that
Committee  has to present the report thereon within three months to
Parliament and as both the above Bills concern with public at large,
number of sittings of the Committee will be held for examining the
Bills and attendance of Secretary of the Ministry is, therefore, essential.

153
4. Thereafter, the Chairman also informed that the aforesaid Bills
have been brought out by the Government as a result of repeated
pursuance by the Committee in their respective reports. Before asking
the representatives of the nodal Ministry to Brief the Committee, the
Chairman made some observations which inter-alia pertained to
acquisition of agricultural land for setting up Special Economic Zones
(SEZs), non-acquisition of agricultural land for setting up a Company
as ruled by Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, balanced use of land for
agriculture, industries etc. for food security, absence of clarity with
regard to preferred use of westeland development for projects involving
involuntary displacement etc. The Chairman also drew their attention
to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha’.
[Thereafter a power point presentation highlighting various provisions of
both the Bills was done before the Committee]
5. After the aforesaid presentation the members raised queries
pertaining to various provisions of each of the two Bills. These include,
need for one Bill for Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation and
Resettlement of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) involving involuntary
displacement of land acquisition, need for comprehensive examination
of both the two Bills as these concern the common man.
6. On Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 the main issues
that came up for discussion were: need for broad based parametres
for land acquisition in the country as Bill amounted to concentration
of land acquisition in the country by a limited big business houses in
the country, need for involving civil society activist in the issue of
land acquisition, need for over all planning for setting up industries
in the country before actual land acquisition, need for higher
compensation as existing provision in the Bill is quite inadequate, need
for revising the provision of compensation in the form of shares in
companies requiring land acquisition as the companies will not register
profit fearing payment of accrued compensation thereon, need for
revising arbitrary limit of four hundred persons or more en masse in
plain areas and two hundred persons or more en mass in hilly areas
for mandatory social impact assessment prior to land acquisition, need
for making some provisions for common man’s interest in the Bill for
whom land acquisition is becoming a distant dream in view of high
price of land being offered by multinational companies etc.
7. On the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007, the points
that emerged out of the discussions include making employment
essential and not preferable in the event of involuntary displacement

154
by land acquisition, uncertainty over funding the rehabilitation and
resettlement package by the requiring bodies particularly when it has
been left to State Governments to implement package for rehabilitation
and resettlement, uncertainty over land assessment of cost of land as
land records in the country are largely unauthentic, faulty mechanism
for implementation of rehabilitation and resettlement package etc.
8. The representatives of the nodal Ministry responded to the
queries of the members of the Committee. The representatives were
asked to send written replies to the points on which information was
not readily available.
9. Thereafter, the Committee decided to meet on Friday , the
18th January, 2008 at 1100 hrs.
A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

155
APPENDIX XI
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON FRIDAY, THE 18TH JANUARY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1345 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
6. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
7. Shrimati Tejasvini Seeramesh
8. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shri Jayantilal Barot
14. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
15. Dr. Chandan Mitra
16. Dr. Ram Prakash
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh
19. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

156
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II
Representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs
1. Shri G.B. Mukherjee, Secretary
2. Smt. Ruchira Pant, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture & Cooperation)
1. Shri P .K. Mishra, Secretary (A&C)
2. Dr. S.M. Jharwal, Principal Advisor
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri G.K. Prasad, Additional Director General (Forests)
2. Shri R. Ananda Kumar, Advisor
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Smt. Sushma Singh, Secretary (Panchayati Raj)
2. Shri B.K. Sinha, Additional Secretary (PR)
3. Ms. Susen D. George, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Commerce
1. Shri R. Gopalan, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Anil Mukim, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Shrimati Rita Sinha, Secretary
2. Shri Bhaskar Chatterjee, Additional Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Singh, Director

157
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Malhotra, Additional Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee convened for briefing by the representatives
of Ministries of (i) Tribal Affairs (ii) Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation) (iii) Environment and Forests
(iv) Panchayati Raj and (v) Commerce on  ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Resettlement and Rehabilitation Bill,
2007’ as introduced in Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2007 and referred to
the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha for examination
and report.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
aforesaid Ministries.  The representatives were called in Ministry/
Department-wise one by one and Hon’ble Chairman drew their
attention to direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ and
invited their views and suggestions on the various provisions made in
the aforesaid Bills.   After a brief presentation by the representatives
of the Ministries, the detailed deliberations were held on some of the
issues related to each Ministry/Department.
4. The various pertinent issues that were raised during the
deliberations included the need to make provision for acquisition of
degraded/wastelands for setting up SEZs, issues related to land use
and balance use of land for particular purposes, need to ensure that
agricultural land is not acquired for other purposes to meet the food
security in the country, impact of the aforesaid legislation on tribal
and Scheduled Tribes living in forests and compatibility between the
provisions made under the aforesaid legislations and Panchayat
Extension to Scheduled Areas Act (PESA)  and Forest Act and effective
role of Panchayati Raj Institutions at every stage of land acquisition
and rehabilitation etc.  Valuable suggestions emerged during the
deliberations.
5. The representatives of the Ministries of Tribal Affairs and
Agriculture explained that they were not consulted by the nodal
Ministry/Department while drafting the aforesaid legislations.  Since
the Committee had desired their comments, detailed study required
time and they would submit the detailed note in due course. The
Committee requested them to send the comments expeditiously.

158
6. The witnesses responded to the clarifications sought by the
members of the Committee.  On some of the queries raised by
members, on which the information was not readily available, they
were requested to send the written replies to the Secretariat at the
earliest.
7. The representatives of the nodal Ministry/Department i.e. the
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources) and
the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) also
assisted the Committee by providing the desired clarifications on the
queries raised during the deliberations.
8. The representatives withdrew after the evidence one by one.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

159
APPENDIX XII
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 17 JUNE 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
17. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K.Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

160
WITNESSES
1. Ms. Aruna Roy, Former member of National Advisory Council
2. Shri Nikhil Dey, Mazdoor Kishan Shakti Sangathan
3. Shri K.C. Jain, Advocate, Supreme Court
4. Shri Hemant Jain, Advocate
5. Shri Akash Gupta, Advocate
6. Shri Kshitiz Sachdeva, Advocate
7. Shri Rahul Jain, Advocate
8. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan, Campaign for Survival and
Dignity
9. Dr. Abhijit Guha, Reader & Head, Department of Anthropology ,
Vidyasagar University
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee.  The Committee then welcomed
Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP , Lok Sabha, Shri Prabhat Jha and
Smt. T. Ratna Bai, members of Rajya Sabha on their nomination to
serve as members of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter condoled the sad demise of Kumari
Nirmala Deshpande, who was a member of Rajya Sabha and also a
member of the Committee.  The Committee observed two minute’s
silence in memory of the departed soul.
4. The Committee then took evidence of the following experts/
representatives of organizations/individuals on the provisions made
under the ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The
Rehabilitation & Resettlement Bill, 2007’at the time indicated against
each:
Sl. No.  Name From To
1. Ms. Aruna Roy 1110 hrs. 1150 hrs.
Shri Nikhil Dey
2. Shri K.C. Jain, Advocate, 1150 hrs. 1240 hrs.
Supreme Court
3. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan 1240 hrs. 1300 hrs.
4. Dr. Abhijit Guha, Reader & 1300 hrs. 1330 hrs.
Head, Department of
Anthropology

161
5. The aforesaid witnesses were called one-by-one at the time
indicated above. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the witnesses and
drew their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
6. The experts/representatives of organizations/individuals
deposed before the Committee one-by-one. The Committee held detailed
deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid two Bills
and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations. The
witnesses responded to the queries raised by the members of the
Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to send
the written replies in respect of the issues on which the information/
clarification was not readily available within ten days.
7. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1400 hrs.

162
APPENDIX XIII
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 17TH JUNE 2008
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’ Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
17. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

163
WITNESSES
1. Shri S.R. Pillai, President, All India Kisan Sabha
2. Prof. Sebastian Morris, Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad
2. The Committee resumed the evidence and the following experts/
representatives of organizations/individuals deposed before the
Committee one by one on the various provisions made under ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation &
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ at the time indicated against each:
Name From To
1. Shri S.R. Pillai, President 1410 hrs. 1450 hrs.
All India Kisan Sabha,
New Delhi
2. Prof. Sebastian Morris, 1450 hrs. 1530 hrs.
Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad
3. The aforesaid witnesses were called one by one at the time
indicated above. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the witnesses and
drew their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
4. The experts/representatives of organizations/individuals deposed
before the Committee one by one. The Committee held detailed
deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid two Bills
and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations. The
witnesses responded to the queries raised by the members of the
Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to send
the written replies in respect of the issues on which the information/
clarification was not readily available within ten days.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at
1100 hrs. on 18 June, 2008.

164
APPENDIX XIV
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 18 JUNE 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
17. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K.Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

165
WITNESSES
1. Smt. Medha Patkar, National Convenor, National Alliance of
People’s Movements
2. Shri Sanjay Parekh, Advocate, Supreme Court
3. Shri Villabh Bhai, Matu Jan Sangathan
4. Shri Vijayan, Sangharsh 2007
5. Ms. Shree Devi, Delhi Forum
6. Shri Bhupendra Rawat, Jansangharsh Vahini
7. Shri Ajit Warty, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
9. Shri Sanjay Punkhia, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
9. Mr. Sanjay Radkar, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
10. Mr. Atul Sharma, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
11.M r. Ashok Shahi, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
12. Shri Ashok K. Harnal, Additional DG DE (Acq), Directorate
General Defence Estates (Ministry of Defence)
13. Shri S. Mazumdar, Dy. DG DE (Acq.), Directorate-General
Defence Estates (Ministry of Defence)
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took evidence of
the following experts/representatives of organizations/individuals on
the provisions made under the ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation & Resettlement Bill, 2007’at the time
indicated against each:
Name From To
1. Smt. Medha Patkar, National 1115 hrs. 1220 hrs.
Convenor, National Alliance
of People’s Movements
2. Shri Ajit Warty, Mumbai, SEZ 1220 hrs. 1305 hrs.
Limited
3. Shri Ashok K. Harnal, Additional  1305 hrs. 1330 hrs.
DG DE (Acq.), Directorate General
Defence Estates (Ministry of Defence)
3. Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the
Committee, the Chairman welcomed them and drew the attention of
each of the witnesses to the provisions of direction 55 (1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.

166
4. The experts/representatives of organizations/individuals
deposed before the Committee one-by-one. The Committee held detailed
deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid two Bills
and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations. The
witnesses responded to the queries raised by the members of the
Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to send
the written replies in respect of the issues on which the information/
clarification was not readily available within ten days.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1430 hrs.

167
APPENDIX XV
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 18 JUNE 2008
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
17. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K.Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

168
Name of the experts who tendered evidence
1. Ms. Sudha Sudaraman, General Secretary, All-India Democratic
Women’s Association (AIDWA)
2. Dr. Shakti Kak, All-India Democratic Women’s Association
(AIDWA)
3. Dr. Archana Prasad, All-India Democratic Women’s Association
(AIDWA)
4. Shri Avik Saha, Secretary, Land and Resources Law Research
Forum
5.  Ms. Shantha Sinha, Chairperson, National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, New Delhi
6. Smt. Sandhya Bajaj, Member, National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, New Delhi
7. Ms. Dipa Dixit, Member, National Commission for Protection
of Child Rights, New Delhi
2. The Committee resumed the evidence and the following experts/
representatives of organizations/individuals deposed before the
Committee one-by-one on the various provisions made under ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation &
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ at the time indicated against each:
Sl. No.         Name From To
1. Ms. Sudha Sudaraman, 1430 hrs. 1500 hrs.
General Secretary ,
All-India Democratic Women’s
Association (AIDWA),
New Delhi
2. Shri Avik Saha, 1500 hrs.  1520 hrs.
Secretary,
Land and Resources Law
Research Forum, Kolkata
3. Ms. Shantha Sinha, 1535 hrs. 1600 hrs.
Chairperson,
National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights,
New Delhi
3. Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the
Committee, the Chairman welcomed them and drew the attention of
each of the witnesses to the provisions of direction 55 (1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.

169
4. The experts/representatives of organizations/individuals
deposed before the Committee one-by-one. The Committee held detailed
deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid two Bills
and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations. The
witnesses responded to the queries raised by the members of the
Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to send
the written replies in respect of the issues on which the information/
clarification was not readily available within ten days.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

170
APPENDIX XVI
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 2 JULY 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
7. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
13. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
14. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Balihari Babu
17. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
18. Shri Prabhat Jha
19. Dr.Chandan Mitra
20. Shri P .R. Rajan
21. Shri Bhagwati Singh
22. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

171
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
WITNESSES
(i) Shri Suhas Chakma, Convenor, North-East Regional
Consultation and Director, Asian Centre for Human Rights
(ii) Ms. Nandita Haksar
(iii) Gam A. Shimray, Advisor on Traditional Knowledge, UN
Convention on Bio- Diversity (UNCBD), Manipur
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
(i) Shri M. Ramachandran, Secretary
(ii) Dr. M.M. Kutty, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri P .K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
(iv) Shri A.K. Mehta, Joint Secretary
(v) Shri S.K. Lohia, Director (UT)
(vi) Smt. Veena Ish, Principal Commissioner, DDA
Representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment
(i) Shri K.M. Acharya, Secretary
(ii) Smt. Sangita Gairola, Additional Secretary
(iii) Dr. Vinod Kumar Aggarwal, Joint Secretary
(iv) Shri V .R. Malhotra, Director
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee. The Committee thereafter took evidence
of some of the experts/representatives of organizations from North
Eastern region in connection with the examination of the ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and ‘The Rehabilitation &
Resettlement Bill, 2007’. The experts/representatives of organizations
from North East presented their views on the aforesaid Bills before
the Committee. The witnesses also responded to the queries raised by
the members of the Committee pertaining to the Bills.
[The witnesses then withdrew]

172
[Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Urban
Development were called in]
3. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives and drew
their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
4. The representatives presented their views in brief on the
aforesaid two Bills. The representatives requested the Committee to
grant more time to enable them to furnish the detailed response on
the various provisions of the Bill related to their Ministry. The
Committee after deliberations decided to give 10 days’ time to the
representatives of the Ministry to furnish the detailed replies. The
Committee decided to take the evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry after the receipt of the replies.
[The witnesses then withdrew]
[Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment were called in]
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment. He also welcomed the representatives
of the Ministries of Rural Development and Law and Justice who
were called to assist the Committee in examination of the aforesaid
Bills. The Committee held detailed deliberations on the various issues
related to their Ministry in the context of examination of the aforesaid
two Bills and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations.
The representatives responded to the queries raised by the members
of the Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to
send the written replies in respect of the issues on which the
information/clarification was not readily available within ten days.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1400 hrs .

173
APPENDIX XVII
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 2 JULY 2008
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Chandan Mitra — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
7. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
13. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
14. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Balihari Babu
17. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
18. Shri Prabhat Jha
19. Shri P .R. Rajan
20. Shri Bhagwati Singh
21. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

174
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
WITNEESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
Smt. Neelam Nath, Additional Secretary (N)
Shri Anand Misra, JS (C&W)
Shri Balsharn Singh, DGDE
Shri Ashok Harnal, Additional DGDE
Lt. Gen. Sudhir Sharma, QMG
Brig. G.S. Bindra, DDG PPE
Col. Manish Erry, Dir Plg (Lands)
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways
Shri S.K. Vij, Member Engineering, Railway Board
Shri V .K. Gupta, Adviser(Land & Amenities), Railway Board
Shri P .D. Sharma, Executive Director (Land &Amenities)-I,
Railway Board
Shri J.S. Lakra, Director (Land & Amenities), Railway Board
The Committee resumed the deliberations on ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007’ after the lunch-break. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, the
Committee chose Dr. Chandan Mitra, MP to act as Chairman for the
sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
[The representatives of the Ministry of Defence were then called in]
2. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry to
the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to the provisions
of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. The
Ministry of Defence could not furnish the written replies to the list of
points sent by the Secretariat by the stipulated time frame. The
representatives explained that they needed more time to furnish the
detailed replies and requested to grant three weeks’ time for the said

175
purpose. The Committee after detailed deliberations agreed to grant
10 days’ time. However, the representatives insisted on three weeks’
time. To this, the Committee decided to leave the issue to be decided
by the Hon’ble Chairman. The Committee decided to take evidence of
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence after they submit the
detailed replies as well as comments on each clause of the Bill.
[The witnesses then withdrew]
[Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways were called in]
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways. He also welcomed the representatives of the Ministries of
Rural Development and Law and Justice who were called to assist the
Committee in examination of the aforesaid Bills. The Committee held
detailed deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid
two Bills and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations.
The representatives responded to the queries raised by the members
of the Committee pertaining to the issues related to their Ministry.
The witnesses were asked to send the written replies in respect of the
issues on which the information/clarification was not readily available
within ten days.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on Thursday,
the 3 July 2008 at 1100 hrs.

176
APPENDIX XVIII
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 3RD JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
4. Shri Zora Singh Mann
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri D. Narbula
7. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
8. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
10. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
13. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
14. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
15. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Balihari Babu
17. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
18. Shri Prabhat Jha
19. Dr. Chandan Mitra
20. Shri P .R. Rajan
21. Shri Bhagwati Singh
22. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

177
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K.Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation
1. Shri S.K. Mishra, Secretary ,
2. Dr. S.M. Jharwal, Principal Advisor,
3. Dr. C.M. Pandey, Deputy Commissioner,
4. Shri Mukesh Khullar, Joint Secretary (DM)
5. Ms. Upma Srivastava, Joint Secretary (NRM&RFS)
Representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs
1. Shri G.B. Mukherjee, Secretary ,
2. Smt. Ruchira Pant, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Smt. Sushma Singh, Secretary (PR)
2. Shri Sudhir Krishna, Additional Secretary
3. Shri D.K. Jain, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri Vijai Sharma, Secretary (E&F)
2. Shri G.K. Prasad, Additional Director General of Forests, MoEF
3. Shri Ansar Ahmed, Inspector General of Forests, MoEF
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
2. Dr. A.K. Singh, Director

178
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members of
the Committee. He informed the members that the Committee had
heard the views of the aforesaid Ministries viz Ministries of Agriculture,
Tribal Affairs, Panchayati Raj and Environment & Forests at their
sittings held on 18 January 2008. The representatives who were then
asked to furnish the concrete amendments to the various provisions of
the Bills based on the suggestions made by them at the sitting of the
Committee. Accordingly, the representatives of the aforesaid Ministries
had again been called to place before the Committee their concrete
amendments in this regard. The Committee thereafter took evidence
of the aforesaid Ministries on the provisions made under the ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and ‘The Rehabilitation &
Resettlement Bill, 2007’at the time indicated against each:
Name of Ministry/Department Time taken
(i) Ministry of Agriculture (Department 1100 hrs – 1130 hrs
of Agriculture and Cooperation)
(ii) Ministry of Tribal Affairs 1130 hrs – 1200 hrs
(iii) Ministry of Panchayati Raj 1200 hrs – 1300 hrs
(iv) Ministry of Environment and 1300 hrs – 1330 hrs
Forests
2. The aforesaid representatives were called one by one at the
time indicated above. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the
representatives and drew their attention to the provisions of direction
55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. He also welcomed
the representatives of the Ministries of Rural Development and Law
and Justice who were present at the sitting of the Committee to assist
the Committee in examination of the aforesaid Bills.
3. The representatives deposed before the Committee and furnished
their views on the aforesaid two Bills and suggested concrete
amendments to the various provisions of the Bills. The representatives
were asked to send the written replies in respect of the issues on
which the information/clarification was not readily available within
ten days.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1400 hrs.

179
APPENDIX XIX
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 3RD JULY, 2008.
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’ Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
4. Shri Zora Singh Mann
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
7. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
13. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
14. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Balihari Babu
16. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
17. Shri Prabhat Jha
18. Dr. Chandan Mitra
19. Shri P .R. Rajan
20. Shri Bhagwati Singh
21. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

180
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry
(i) Shri G.K. Pillai, Secretary, Commerce
(ii) Shri Ajai Shankar, Secretary (Department of Industrial Policy
& Promotion)
(iii) Shri Gopal Krishan, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice
(i) Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
(ii) Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
(i) Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
(ii) Dr. A.K. Singh, Director
2. The Committee resumed deliberations on ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007’ after the lunch-break. In the absence of the Chairman, the
Committee chose Shri Hannan Mollah, MP to act as the Chairman for
the sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha.
{The representatives of the Department of Commerce and Department of
Industrial Policy and Promotion, (Ministry of Commerce) were then called
in}
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department
of Commerce and Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion,
(Ministry of Commerce) to the sitting of the Committee and drew
their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. The Chairman also welcomed the
representatives of the Ministries of Rural Development and Law and

181
Justice who were present at the sitting of the Committee to assist the
Committee in examination of the aforesaid Bills. The Committee held
detailed deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid
two Bills and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations.
The representatives responded to the queries raised by the members
of the Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to
send the written replies in respect of the issues on which the
information/clarification was not readily available within ten days.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned

182
APPENDIX XX
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 18TH JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building (PLB), New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
6. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
7. Shri Sita Ram Singh
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
10. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II

183
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri M. Ramachandran, Secretary,
2. Dr. M.M. Kutty, Joint Secretary,
3. Shri P .K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary ,
4. Shri S.K. Lohia, Director (UT)
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Smt. Neelam Nath, A.S. (N),
2. Shri Anand Misra, JS(C&W)
3. Shri Balsharn Singh, DGDE
4. Shri Ashok Harnal, Addl. DGDE
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri M.L. Kumawat, Spl. Secretary (IS)
2. Shri V .N. Gaur, Joint Secretary (Police)
3. Shri D.K. Jain, Joint Secretary
Representative of the Ministry of Law & Justice
(Legislative Department – Legislative I Section)
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
2. Dr. A.K. Singh, Director
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee. He informed the members that the
representatives of the Ministries of Urban Development and Defence
had been called for evidence at the sitting of the Committee held on
2 July 2008 in connection with the examination of ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007’. The representatives could not furnish the written replies to the
various issues raised in the list of points sent to them by the Secretariat
and, therefore, requested the Committee to grant them some more
time. Accordingly, the Committee had agreed to their request. Now,

184
the representatives had furnished the replies and had been called
for evidence.
2. The representatives of the Ministries of Urban Development,
Defence and Home Affairs were then called in one by one. The Hon’ble
Chairman welcomed the representatives to the sitting of the Committee
and drew their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. He also welcomed the
representatives of the Ministries of Rural Development and Law &
Justice who were called to assist the Committee in examination of the
aforesaid two Bills. The representatives of the Ministries of Urban
Development, Defence and Home Affairs, thereafter, presented their
views on the various provisions of the Bills. They also furnished the
concrete amendments based on the suggestions made by them. The
representatives were asked to furnish the written replies to the issues
on which clarification/replies were not readily available with them.
The representatives of the Ministries of Rural Development and Law
& Justice assisted the Committee during the course of deliberations.
3. A vertabim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet after
lunch at 1400 hrs. again.

185
APPENDIX XXI
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 18TH JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building (PLB), New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
6. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
7. Shri Sita Ram Singh
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
10. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II

186
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology
(Department of Posts)
1. Ms. Radhika Doraiswamy, Secretary,
2. Ms. Meera Datta, Secretary (O),
3. Shri Ansar Ahmed, Inspector General of Forests, MoEF
4. Shri K.L. Khanna, DDG (Estates)
Representatives of the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology
(Department of Telecommunications)
1. Shri Subodh Kumar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.P . Aggarwal, Wireless Advisor
3. Shri Kirthy Kumar, DDG (C&A)
4. Shri N.K. Yadav, DDG (SU)
5. Shri Kuldeep Goyal, CMD (BSNL)
6. Shri R.S.P . Sinha, CMD (MTNL)
Representatives of the Ministry of Shipping,
Road Transport & Highways
(Department of Road) and (Department of Highways)
1. Shri Brahm Dutt, Secretary
2. Shri G. Sharan, DGC (RD), D/o RT&H
3. Shri A.N. Dhodapkar, Chief Engineer,
4. Shri K.S. Money, Member (Admn.), NHAI,
5. Shri V .K. Sharma, G.M., NHAI,
6. Shri V . Rajgopal, DDG (T&P), BRO
Representatives of the Ministry of Power
1. Shri Anil Kumar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Gurdial Singh, Member, CEA and Additional Secretary
3. Shri Jayant Kawale, Joint Secretary
4. Shri A.B.L. Srivastava, Director (F) NHPC

187
Representative of the Ministry of Law & Justice
(Legislative Department – Legislative I Section)
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
2. Dr. A.K. Singh, Director
The Committee resumed deliberations after the lunch break. The
representatives of the Departments of Posts and Telecommunications
under the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,
the representatives of the Departments of Road Transport and
Highways under the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and
Highways and the representatives of the Ministry of Power were then
called in one by one to depose before the Committee on the provisions
made under ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’. The representatives of the
Ministry of Rural Development and Law & Justice were also called in
to assist the Committee. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed and drew
the attention of each of the witnesses to direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. The representatives, thereafter, deposed
before the Committee and explained their views on the various
provisions made in the two Bills, particularly, related to the respective
representative Ministry/Department.
2. The Committee held detailed deliberations on the various issues
and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations. The
representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development and Law & Justice
assisted the Committee during the course of deliberations. The
representatives were asked to send the written replies to the issues on
which information was not readily available.
3. A vertabim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

188
APPENDIX XXII
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE, HELD
ON MONDAY, THE 11TH AUGUST, 2008.
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’ Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri D. Narbula
7. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
8. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
10. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
13. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
14. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
15. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh
19. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

189
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
5. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Department of Land Resources
(Ministry of Rural Development)
(i) Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
(ii) Shri Chinmay Basu, Additional Secretary
(iii) Dr. A.K. Singh, Director (Land Reforms)
Representatives of the Legislative Department
(Ministry of Law & Justice)
(i) Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary (Legislative Department)
(ii) Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
(iii) Shri Diwakar Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Committee about
the sad demise of Shri D.C. Srikantappa, MP , Lok Sabha and member
of the Committee on 4 August, 2008. The Committee then condoled
the death of the member by observing two minutes silence as a mark
of respect to the departed soul.
3. Theraftar, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and congratulated them on being nominated by
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to serve as members of the Standing
Committee on Rural Development for the year 2008-09.
4. Subsequently, the Committee took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 1 regarding selection of subjects for examination by
the Committee during the year 2008-09. After deliberations the
Committee decided to continue with the examination of the following
subjects during 2008-09 as were selected by the Standing Committee
on Rural Development during 2007-08 from the stage the preceding
Committee (2007-08) had left.
(i) Devolution of functions, functionaries and finances by
different State Governments/Union territory Administrations
to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs);

190
(ii) Drinking water scenario in rural areas in the country;
(iii) Implementation of National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act (NREGA) Act, 2005;
(iv) Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozagar Yojana (SGSY)
(v) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna (PMGSY); and
(vi) Wastelands development in the country under the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Department of Land Resources.
5. In addition to the aforesaid subjects, the Committee also
decided to examine on priority basis, ‘the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’, ‘the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007'
introduced in Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2007 and referred to the
Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker on 7 December, 2007 for
examination and report to the Parliament.
[The representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department
of Land Resources) and Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative
Department) were then called in].
6. The Committee held detailed discussion on the different
provisions made under ‘the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’.
During deliberations, the Committee noted that the nodal Ministry
had referred various questions for legal interpretations to the Ministry
of Law & Justice. The representatives of the Legislative Department
present at the sitting were asked to clarify the issues referred by the
nodal Ministry. To this the representatives clarified that certain issues
pertained to their sister Department i.e. the Department of Legal Affairs
of the Ministry of Law & Justice. The Committee observed that the
Legislative Department might take up the matter with the sister
Department and written replies to the various issues on which legal
interpretation was required should be submitted expeditiously so as to
enable the Committee to finalise the report.
7. The Various issues raised in the List of Points were deliberated
issue-wise. The representatives of the Department of Land Resources
responded to the queries of the Committee. The representatives were
asked to send the written replies to the issues on which the information
was not readily available.
8. The Committee decided that the next sitting might be convened
on 25th August, 2008 to take oral evidence of the Department of Land
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) on ‘the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’.
9. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

191
APPENDIX XXIII
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE, HELD
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 3RD SEPTEMBER, 2008.
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Shri A.F.G.Osmani
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
9. Shri Sita Ram Singh
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
11. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
12. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
13. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
14. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
15. Shri Prabhat Jha
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh
19. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

192
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to sitting of the Committee. He, thereafter, drew the attention of the
members to direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha’ whereby it has been provided that deliberations of the
Committee are confidential and not to be made public till the report
on the subject is presented to Parliament. He then informed the
members that a note containing the clause-by-clause analysis of the
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007, had already been circulated
to the members of the Committee. The aforesaid note contains the
details of the deliberation clause-wise along with the suggested
amendments based on the deliberations.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took-up clause-by-clause
consideration of the aforesaid Bill. The detailed note was read out and
the Bill was considered clause-by-clause upto paragraph Nos. 1-66 of
the aforesaid note. The various provisions contained in ‘the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1894’ on which the amendments were
not proposed in the amending legislation were also considered by the
Committee. After exhaustive deliberations, the Committee suggested
some amendments to the respective clauses of the Bill and also to
some of the Sections of the Principal Act not touched by the aforesaid
amending legislation.
4. A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again after lunch at
1400 hrs. to consider the remaining clauses of the Bill.

193
APPENDIX XXIV
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE,
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 3RD SEPTEMBER, 2008.
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘139’ First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Shri A.F.G.Osmani
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
9. Shri Sita Ram Singh
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
11. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
12. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
13. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
14. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
15. Shri Prabhat Jha
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh
19. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

194
2. The Committee resumed the clause-by-clause consideration of
‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’. The Committee took
up for consideration clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. The
note containing the analysis clause-by-clause of the amending Bill was
read out from para Nos. 67 to 116. After detailed deliberations, the
Committee suggested some amendments to the respective clauses of
the Bill. The Committee could not arrive at definite conclusion with
regard to the following issues and decided to defer these issues to the
next sitting of the Committee.
(i) Market value of the acquired land contained in clause 13 of
the Bill.
(ii) The fate of Social Impact Assessment Study when some of
the families refuse to cooperate.
3. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on Thursday, the
4th September, 2008 to consider the remaining clauses of the Bill.

195
APPENDIX XXV
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SETTING OF THE COMMITTEE, HELD
ON THURSDAY, THE 4TH SEPTEMBER, 2008.
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Zora Singh Mann
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri D. Narbula
7. Shri A.F.G.Osmani
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
13. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
14. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
15. Dr. Chandan Mitra
16. Shri P .R. Rajan
17. Shri Bhagwati Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
5. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

196
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of Committee. The Committee, thereafter, resumed the
clause-by-clause consideration of ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Bill, 2007’, The Committee first of all took up the issues on which the
Committee could not arrive at the definite conclusion at the previous
sitting held on 3 September, 2008. After deliberations, the Committee
decided unanimously that the formula of market value of land as
given in clause 13 of the Bill be modified. On the other issue viz. fate
of Social Impact Assessment Study where some families refuse to
cooperate, the Committee deliberated at length but could not decide
and again deferred the issue to the next sitting of the Committee.
3. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again after lunch at 1400 hrs. to
consider the remaining clauses of the Bill.

197
APPENDIX XXVI
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE, HELD
ON THURSDAY, THE 4TH SEPTEMBER, 2008.
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1500 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Zora Singh Mann
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri D. Narbula
7. Shri A.F.G.Osmani
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
13. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
14. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
15. Dr. Chandan Mitra
16. Shri P .R. Rajan
17. Shri Bhagwati Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
5. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

198
2. The Committee resumed consideration of the remaining clauses
of ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’. The note containing
the clause-by-clause analysis of the Bill was read out from para.
No. 117 onwards. The Committee considered each clause in detail and
after exhaustive deliberations, suggested some modifications to the
respective clauses of the Bill.
3. The Committee, thereafter, decided to postpone the next sitting
scheduled for 5 September 2008 to 22 September 2008 for the clause-
by-clause consideration of ‘the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007’.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

199
APPENDIX XXVII
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE,
HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 3RD OCTOBER, 2008.
The Committee sat from 1200 hrs. to 1345 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
6. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Dr. Chandan Mitra
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Vinod Gupta — Under Secretary

200
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption
of the draft Report on ‘the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’.
The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on
‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’. The recommendations/
observations were then read out. The Committee, thereafter, adopted
the draft Report with slight modifications.
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Report on the basis of factual verification from the
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) and
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided to hold the next sitting of
the Committee on 15 October, 2008 for consideration and adoption of
the draft Report on ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
‘THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2007’
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.10.08
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 21.10.08
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 045
Price : Rs. 210.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE S TANDING C OMMITTEE  ON U RBAN AND R URAL
DEVELOPMENT (1994-1995) ....................................................................... (vii)
COMPOSITION OF THE S TANDING C OMMITTEE ON R URAL D EVELOPMENT
(2007-2008) ............................................................................................... (ix)
COMPOSITION OF THE S TANDING C OMMITTEE ON R URAL D EVELOPMENT
(2008-2009) ............................................................................................... (xi)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (xiii)
CHAPTER I Background of the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 .......................................... 1
CHAPTER II Process of consultations held by the Government
while bringing the amendments to ‘The
Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ and the consultations
held by Committee on Rural Development
while examining the said legislation................... 3
C
HAPTER III
A. Issues not addressed by the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 ................................. 8
B. Bringing exhaustive Land Acquisition Bill
before the Parliament ..................................... 8
C. Use of word ‘may’ in the legislation ........ 9
D. Need for making suitable provisions in
the Land Acquisition Legislation to
protect agricultural land in the country ... 10
E. Implementation of various provisions made
in the Bill prospectively or retrospectively .. 17
F. Maximum limit of land to be acquired
under ‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ ... 19
G. Multiple displacement not to be allowed .. 20
H. Declaring the area where tribals from
Scheduled Areas are rehabilitated as the
Scheduled Area ................................................ 21
I. Clarification with regard to the applicability
of the legislation in the State of Nagaland
to be made in the short title of the Act .. 22
(i)

PAGE
(ii)
CHAPTER IV Clause-by-clause analysis of the various
provisions made in different clauses of
the Bill ......................................................................... 24
A. Definition of ‘person interested’ .................. 24
B. Protecting the interest of tenants whose
tenancy is an informal arrangement .......... 26
C. Protecting the interests of tribals and
forest dwellers .................................................. 27
D. Preliminary notification for acquisition of
land and the advertisement of the
notification in the daily newspapers .......... 29
E. Suitable placement of proviso to Section 4
of the Principal Act ........................................ 31
F. Period for hearing objections to the
acquisition of land .......................................... 32
G. Definition of ‘public purpose’ ...................... 33
H. Social Impact Assessment Study ................. 42
I. Determination of Market Value of Land .. 45
J. Part payment of compensation by shares/
debentures etc. .................................................. 54
K. Contradiction in Clause 11 (c) of LA Bill
and Clause 42 of the R&R Bill on the
issue of offering shares and debentures
to the affected persons................................... 56
L. Section 17 (1) of the Principal Act – Special
Powers in case of urgency ........................... 57
M. The rate of solatium ....................................... 58
N. Alternate mechanism for speedy disposal
of disputes ......................................................... 59
O. Land Acquisition Compensation Disputes
Settlement Authority of the State ............... 60
P. Land Acquisition Compensation Disputes
Settlement Authority for the Centre ........... 60

PAGE
(iii)
Q. Reversion of acquired land, if not
utilized ................................................................ 62
R. Large tracts of land lying unutilized
with various Ministries .................................. 66
S. Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs)................................................................... 67
T. Gender Bias ....................................................... 68
U. Overriding authority of PESA ..................... 68
V. The time period prescribed with regard to
various provisions in the Principal Act as
well as amending Bill 2007 .......................... 69
W. The rate of interest provided under
various sections of the Principal Act
and the amending Bill ................................... 70
C
HAPTER V Miscellaneous ............................................................. 72
A. Expeditious enactment of the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Legislation ........ 72
B. Awareness Campaign ...................................... 72
C. Court Fee ........................................................... 73
A
PPENDICES
I. The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007. .............. 74
II. Amendments to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 after
Independence ............................................................................. 125
III. The List of Experts/ Stakeholders who tendered oral
evidence before the Committee on ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 ................................... 131
IV. List of State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations whose  views on the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 were received, list of Ministries/
Departments from whom written replies on List of Points
were obtained and with whom the Committee held
detailed deliberations on various provisions of the
Bill and details of the  sittings of the Committee
held in connection with examination of ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ .................................. 133

PAGE
(iv)
V. Distribution of land under different usages in India
as on 1980-81 to 2005-06 as provided by the
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of  Agriculture
& Cooperation) ......................................................................... 137
VI. State-wise position of wastelands in the country. .......... 138
VII. Statement showing Example of Simple Average and
Weighted Average. ................................................................... 140
VIII. Chart showing Old provision vis-à-vis provision with
regard to time periods on various provisions in
‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ ............. 141
IX. Chart showing existing provisions of Principal Act of
1894 and Provisions made in the Amending legislation
with regard to Interest Rate ................................................. 147
X. Minutes of the Fifth sitting held on 24 December,
2007 .............................................................................................. 151
XI. Minutes of the Sixth sitting held on 18 January,
2008 .............................................................................................. 155
XII. Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting held on 17 June,
2008 .............................................................................................. 159
XIII. Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting held on 17 June,
2008 .............................................................................................. 162
XIV. Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting held on 18 June,
2008 .............................................................................................. 164
XV. Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting held on 18 June,
2008 .............................................................................................. 167
XVI. Minu tes of the Nineteenth sitting held on 2 July,
2008 .............................................................................................. 170
XVII. Minutes of the Twentieth sitting held on 2 July,
2008 .............................................................................................. 173
XVIII. Minutes of the Twenty-first sitting held on 3 July,
2008 .............................................................................................. 176
XIX. Minutes of the Twenty-second sitting held on 3 July ,
2008 .............................................................................................. 179
XX. Minutes of the Twenty-third sitting held on 18 July,
2008 .............................................................................................. 182

PAGE
(v)
XXI. Minutes of the Twenty-fourth sitting held on
18 July, 2008 .............................................................................. 185
XXII. Minutes of the First sitting held on 11 August,
2008 .............................................................................................. 188
XXIII. Minutes of the Third sitting held on 3 September,
2008 .............................................................................................. 191
XXIV .Minutes of the Fourth sitting held on 3 September,
2008 .............................................................................................. 193
XXV. Minutes of the Fifth sitting held on 4 September,
2008 .............................................................................................. 195
XXVI. Minutes of the Sixth sitting held on 4 September,
2008 .............................................................................................. 197
XXVII. Minutes of the Ni nth sitting held on 3 October,
2008 .............................................................................................. 199

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (1994-1995)
Shri Prataprao B. Bhosale —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijayarama Raju S.
3. Shri Bh. Vijayakumar Raju
4. Shri V . Sobhanadreeswara Rao
5. Dr. Y.S. Rajasekhar Reddy
6. Shri S. Gangadhara
7. Shri J. Chokka Rao
8. Shri Dharmabhiksham
9. Md. Ali Ashraf Fatmi
10. Shri Sukhadeo Paswan
11. Shri Shailendra Mahto
12. Shri Karia Munda
13. Shri K.M. Mathew
14. Shri P .D. Chavan
15. Shri Ram Singh Kashwan
16. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
17. Shri Prabhulal Rawat
18. Shri P .P . Kaliaperumal
19. Shri N. Murugesan
20. Shri N. Sundararaj
21. Shri Surendra Pal Pathak
22. Shri Devi Bux Singh
23. Shri Ram Pal Singh
24. Shri Sudhir Giri
25. Shri Rajesh Khanna
26. Shri Subrata Mukherjee
27. Shri Sajjan Kumar
28. Shri Gulam Mohammad Khan
(vii)

Rajya Sabha
29. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari
30. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
31. Smt. Chandrakala Pandey
32. Shri Thennala Balkrishna Pillai
33. Shri Shiv Prasad Chanpuria
34. Shri Shivajirao Giridhar Patil
35. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
36. Shri Debabrata Biswas
37. Shri Jagmohan
38. Prof. Vijay Kr. Malhotra
39. Shri Nagmani
40. Shri S. Dronamraju
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.C. Gupta — Joint Secretary
2. Shri G.R. Juneja — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri C.S. Joon — Assistant Director
(viii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri George Fernandes
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari*
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
12. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
$
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
17. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
18. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
#
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(ix)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot**
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Dr. Ram Prakash**
28. Shri P .R. Rajan
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
31. Shrimati Kanimozhi
@
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
(x)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari, MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 30 August, 2007, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4022
dated August 30, 2007.
@Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha nominated Shrimati Kanimozhi, MP , (RS) to Standing
Committee on Rural Development w.e.f. 15 September, 2007  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin
Part-II, Para No. 4096 dated 19 September, 2007.
#Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar, MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Energy to Standing Committee on Rural Development
w.e.f. 12 December, 2007 as intimated  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4366
dated 12 December, 2007.
**Ceased to be member of the Standing Committee on Rural Development consequent
upon the retirement from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9 April, 2008.
$Hon’ble Speaker has nominated Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP , Lok Sabha to the Standing
Committee on Rural Development w.e.f 10 March, 2008. Consequent upon vacancy
caused by resignation given by Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy, MP (LS) from the
membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 4 March, 2008.

(xi)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri George Fernandes
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
12. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
17. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
18. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
19. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
24. Shri Prabhat Jha
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal

(xii)
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Shrimati Kanimozhi
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director

(xiii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf present this Thirty-ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’.
2. ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ was introduced
in Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2007 and was referred to the Standing
Committee on Rural Development by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha
under Rule 331 E (1) (b) of the ‘Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha’ on 7 December, 2007 for examination and report
to Parliament.
3. ‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ has been an affective instrument
for the acquisition of land for public purposes and also for companies.
The provisions made under ‘The Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ have
been found to be inadequate in addressing certain issues related to
the exercise of the statutory powers of the State for involuntary
acquisition of private land and property as acknowledged in the
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the aforesaid Bill. As such The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 seeks to make suitable
amendments to The Land Acquisition Act, 1894, so as to align them
with the goals and objectives of the National Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Policy, 2007 enforced w.e.f. 31 October, 2007 as well as to
strike a balance between the need for land for development and other
public purposes and protecting the interests of the persons whose lands
are statutorily acquired.
4. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the Bill from the nodal Ministry i.e. The
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources). The
preliminary meeting of the Committee was held on 24 December, 2007
wherein the Committee were briefed about various provisions of the
Bill by the nodal Ministry. Since, the proposed provisions contained in
the Bill affect the public at large, the Committee at the aforesaid sitting
decided to invite the views of experts/organizations and individuals
through print and electronic media.
5. In response to the Press Communiqué, the Secretariat received
190 related memoranda. 15 selected experts/representatives of
associations and individuals (the list indicated at Appendix-III) which

include top researchers, social workers, representatives of various
organizations, legal persons, representatives from child organizations
deposed before the Committee at their sittings held on 17 and 18
June, 2008.
6. With the purpose of having wider consultations, the Committee
decided to hear the views of the various related Ministries/Departments
of the Union Government. The representatives of the various Ministries
viz. Tribal Affairs; Environment and Forests; Panchayati Raj; Agriculture;
Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce and Department
of Industrial Promotion and Policy) Urban Development; Social Justice
and Empowerment; Railways; Defence; Home Affairs; Communication
and Information Tehcnology (Department of Telecommunications and
Department of Posts); Shipping, Road Transport and Highways
(Department of Road Transport & Highways) and Ministry of Power
deposed before the Committee at the sittings held on 18 January, 2008,
2 and 3 July, 2008 and 18 July, 2008. Besides various sets of written
documents containing the responses on the various issues raised in
large number of sets of list of points were submitted by the aforesaid
Ministries, which helped the Committee in arriving at meaningful
conclusions.
7. Since the State Governments acquire land and primary
responsibility of the implementation of the provisions made under the
Bill is of the respective State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations, they were requested to give their views on the
aforesaid Bill, after seeking permission of Hon’ble Speaker as per
direction 60 of the ‘Directions by the Speaker Lok Sabha’. Nine State
Governments/UTs viz. Chandigarh, Puducherry, Jharkhand, Goa,
Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Arunachal
Pradesh, Nagaland and Himachal Pradesh have furnished their views
in this regard.
8. The term of the Committee (2007-2008) expired on 4 August,
2008 and the Committee (2008-2009) was constituted w.e.f. 5 August,
2008. The Committee (2008-2009) at the first sitting held on 11 August,
2008 decided to continue the examination of the Bill from the stage
the earlier Committee had left. Thereafter, the Committee at their same
sitting took evidence of the representatives of the nodal administrative
Department i.e. Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development). The nodal Department furnished replies to the issues
raised in a number of sets of list of points and submitted the desired
documents to the Committee. The representatives of the nodal Ministry
were also present at the various sittings of the Committee where the
Committee took evidence of the various concerned Ministries/
(xiv)

Departments and assisted the Committee. The representatives of the
Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and
Legislative Department) also assisted the Committee by clarifying the
various legal matters. The Committee undertook clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill at the sitting held on 3 and 4 September
2008.
9. The Draft Report was adopted by the Committee at their sitting
held on 3 October 2008. The Committee were immensely benefited by
the contribution made by the Members of the Committee for which I
express my sincere thanks to them.
10. The Committee place on record their deep appreciation of the
work done by the earlier Committee i.e., the then Committee on Rural
Development (2007-2008).
11. The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development examined the various provisions made under the Principal
Land Acquisition Act of 1894 in consultation with the State
Governments and made exhaustive recommendations/observations in
the Eighth Report (Tenth Lok Sabha), presented to Parliament on 15
December, 1994. The Committee were greatly benefited by the
observations/recommendations made by the erstwhile Standing
Committee on Urban and Rural Development. The Committee place
on record their deep sense of appreciation of the work done by the
erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development
(1994-95).
12. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land
Resources) who appeared before the Committee and placed their
considered views. They further wish to thank the officers of the other
concerned Ministries as mentioned above, who assisted the Committee
and offered their valuable suggestions. The Committee express their
gratitude to officials of State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations for furnishing valuable information and suggestions
which the Committee desired in connection with the examination of
‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’.
13. The Committee are greatly benefited from the perspectives/
suggestions of various individuals/associations/experts on various
provisions of the Bill. The Committee express their gratitude to experts/
individuals who furnished memoranda or tendered evidence before
the Committee.
(xv)

(xvi)
14. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation of the invaluable assistance rendered to them
from time to time by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached
to the Committee.
15. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold type in
the body of the report.
   N EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
16 October, 2008 Chairman,
24 Asvina, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

39
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
‘THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2007’
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI