42
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
FORTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FORTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 19.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 048
Price : Rs. 58.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2008-09) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 21
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 35
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 36
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 42
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 15.12.2008 .............................................................. 46
II. Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-sixth Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 48
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Vacant*
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
11. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
12. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
17. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
18. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
19. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
20. Vacant $
21. Vacant
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
24. Shri Prabhat Jha
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Shrimati Kanimozhi
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II
*Vacancy caused due to the resignation given by Shri George Fernandes, MP from the
membership of Lok Sabha and accepted by the Hon’ble Speaker w.e.f. 11 November,
2008 vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 6205 dated 11 November, 2008.
$Vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Dharmendra Yadav, MP ,
Lok Sabha by Hon’ble Speaker from Standing Committee on Rural Development to
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice w.e.f. 5 December, 2008 vide
Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 6267, dated 5 December, 2008.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2008-2009) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Forty-second Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2007-08) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Thirty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
17 April, 2008. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 26 August, 2008.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
15 December, 2008.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report of the Committee
is given in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 December, 2008 Chairman,
24 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2008-09)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Thirty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 April, 2008.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 24 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:
 (i) Chapter II Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Para Nos.: 2.5, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.15, 3.16, 3.25,
3.26, 3.27, 3.34, 3.39, 3.45, 3.52, 3.66, 3.69 and
3.74
(ii) Chapter III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies:
Para No.: Nil
(iii) Chapter IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Para Nos.: 3.40, 3.41, 3.55, 3.61 and 3.75
(iv) Chapter V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.: 3.63, 3.68 and 3.76
3. The Committee would like the Department to expedite the
proposed action and furnish final replies in respect of
Recommendation Nos. 3.63, 3.68 and 3.76, which have been
categorized under interim category, within three months of the
presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Underspending of Annual Plan allocation for the year 2007-2008
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 3.9)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that during the year 2007-08 i.e. the first
year of the Eleventh Plan, the Department had proposed allocation
of Rs. 2840.46 crore, out of which Rs. 1500 crore were allocated
at Budget Estimates stage. The allocation was further reduced at
RE stage by Rs. 100 crore, thus Rs. 1400 crore were actually
allocated during the aforesaid year. The actual releases as on
15 March, 2008 are over Rs. 1337.69 crore, thus resulting into
underspending of Rs. 62.31 crore. Further during the year
2008-09, out of the proposed allocation of Rs. 3622.50 crore, the
outlay earmarked was Rs. 2400 crore. The Committee note from
the aforesaid position that the Department have not been able to
utilise even the reduced allocation during the year 2007-08. The
main underspending has been stated to be under ‘Professional
Support’, due to its being a new scheme and ‘Externally Aided
Projects’ due to the low absorption capacity of the State
Government. The Committee hope that during the year 2008-09,
there would be cent-percent utilisation of outlay under the scheme
‘Professional Support’. As regards ‘Externally Aided Projects’, the
Committee would like to be apprised what the Department mean
by the absorption capacity of the State Governments. The
Committee would also like that all the corrective actions should
be taken so as to achieve the indicated objectives under the
aforesaid scheme/proposal.”
6. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
“The Department has taken exhaustive measures to ensure that
there is no underspending in the scheme professional support.
The physical and financial targets have been fixed for achieving
the desired objectives in a time bound manner. Regular
interactions are being held with Prasar Bharti, Doordarshan, PIB
for holding talk shows, quiz shows, press conferences and Saras
Melas for creating wide spread awareness about the schemes of
the Department. The Department is monitoring the progress made
under each scheme in a weekly review meeting.
The Western Orissa Rural Livelihoods Project (WORLP) was
sanctioned by DFID in June, 1999 at a cost of Rs. 230 crore
including Technical Consultancy (TC) component over 10 years.

3
It was launched on 18.8.2000. Under the project, 290 watershed
projects of approx. 500 hectares each in 29 blocks of 4 districts
of the State were taken up. The implementation programme under
the project has two components—watershed and watershed plus
activities. Up to 31-07-2008, Rs. 124.0025 crore have been released.
(i) Though the project started at a slow pace, the State
Government has stepped up the pace of execution and
utilization of the funds.
(ii) The State Government is also taking necessary steps for the
timely release of funds under the project.
(iii) During the High Powered Committee (HPC) meeting, the
State has assured that the budgetary provision of 2008-09
shall be fully utilized.”
7. While examining the Demands for Grants (2008-2009) the
Committee had noted that the Department had not been able to
utilize the Annual Plan allocation to the tune of Rs. 62.31 crore
because of underspending in schemes like ‘Professional Support’
due to its being a new scheme and ‘Externally Aided Projects’ due
to the low absorption capacity of State Government. The Committee
had inter-alia desired a clarification as to what the Department meant
by the low absorption capacity of respective State Government.
The Department in the action taken reply has indicated the
initiatives taken/proposed to be taken to ensure cent per cent physical
and financial achievement under the said schemes. However, the
specific query of the Committee as to what the Department meant
by the low absorption capacity of the State Government which
resulted into underspending under ‘Externally Aided Projects’ has
not been addressed by the Department in the action taken reply.
The Committee would like the Department to clarify the position in
this regard.
B. Need for higher outlays under IWMP during the coming years
of the Eleventh Plan
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 5 & 6, Para Nos. 3.15 and 3.16)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“xxxxx The Department had proposed an outlay of Rs. 25,835.67
crore to the Planning Commission for the Eleventh Plan mainly
comprising of Rs. 20,700 crore for IWMP . Under IWMP Rs. 6,522

4
crore are for committed liabilities of on going watershed projects
in the first two years of the Eleventh Plan period, Rs. 12,300 crore
for funding new watershed projects over the next three years of
the Plan and Rs. 1000 crore for necessary ‘Infrastructural Support’
totaling to Rs. 19,822 crore. The Planning Commission initially
agreed to the allocation of Rs. 16,420.84 crore, which has
subsequently been revised to Rs. 17,205.48 crore. The revision
was necessitated after reviewing the needs of the Department
and in view of the suggested modifications in design and contents
of the major programmes envisaged for the current Plan. These
Programmes are Integrated Watershed Management Programme
(IWMP), National Land Records Modernization Programme
(NLRMP), National Mission on Bio-diesel, Externally Aided
Projects (EAPs), Professional Support and National Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Policy. In this connection, the Committee have
been informed that as per the Parthasarthy Committee Report an
estimated 125 million hectares of rainfed areas are to be developed
with an investment outlay of Rs. 1,50,000 crore in the next
15 years. Out of 125 million hectares, 75 million hectares of rainfed
area is to be developed by the Department of Land Resources in
the next 15 years by way of covering 25 million hectares in each
of the coming three Five Year Plans. Therefore, the target before
the Department during the Eleventh Plan is the treatment of
25 million hectares of rainfed areas in the country. After perusal
of the outlay as proposed by the Department and work to be
taken up by the Department during the current Plan, the
Committee find that the Plan allocation of Rs. 17,205.48 crore is
not sufficient for the Department to accomplish the task.”
[Recommendation Serial No. 5 (Para No. 3.15)]
“xxxxx During the first two years of the Eleventh Plan i.e. during
2007-08 and 2008-09, Rs. 3800 crore have been allocated. The
total amount of allocation for the Eleventh Plan is Rs. 17,205.48 crore.
Thus the proportional allocation for the two years comes to
around Rs. 6,880 crore. There is shortfall of Rs. 3080 crore in the
proportionate allocation during the first two years of the Eleventh
Plan. Keeping in view the aforesaid scenario of allocations being
made under different schemes of the Department, the Committee
have their apprehensions about the set target of development of
rainfed area of 25 million hectares during the Eleventh Plan being
achieved. In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend
that adequate allocation should be provided to the Department
to achieve the set targets under different schemes. While

5
recommending for higher outlay during the Eleventh Plan, the
Committee would also like that the Department should make
every effort to ensure that the allocation provided in a year is
meaningfully utilised.”
[Recommendation Serial No. 6 (Para No. 3.16)]
9. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
“The Department has achieved full utilization of the allocated
budget during 2007-08. The Department shall ensure that the
budget allocated for 2008-09 is also fully utilized during
2008-09.”
[Reply to Recommendation Serial Nos. 5 & 6 (Para Nos. 3.15 & 3.16)]
10. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Department
could achieve full utilisation of the allocated outlay during the year
2007-08 and expect full utilisation of the outlay during the current
year 2008-09. The Committee in the earlier recommendations had
noted that the allocation made during the first two years of the
Eleventh Plan was not proportionate to the overall allocation i.e.
Rs. 17,205.48 crore during the Eleventh Plan. In this regard, the
Committee would like that adequate allocation should be made in
the remaining years of the Eleventh Plan so as to ensure that the set
targets of development of rainfed area of 25 million hectares during
the Eleventh Plan are fully achieved. The Committee would also
like to be apprised about the physical achievements against targets
in this regard during the year 2007-08.
C. Clarifications with regard to the provision of foreclosure of
projects under the ‘Common Guidelines, 2008’ for watershed
projects.
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 3.27)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Department have furnished a statement indicating the
comparison between the various features of Hariyali Guidelines,
2003 and Common Guidelines, 2008. The Committee note that
one of the provisions with regard to foreclosure which was not
provided under the previous Guidelines has now been provided
under the revised Common Guidelines, 2008. The Committee in

6
their respective Reports have been observing that a number of
projects under different watershed schemes viz. Integrated
Watershed Development Programme (IWDP), Drought Prone Area
Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development Programme (DDP)
were being foreclosed (refer para 4.59 of 27 Report). On the
insistence of the Standing Committee, the Department has even
indicated the position of foreclosure in the Outcome Budget
(2008-09). The Committee fail to understand how the projects
were being foreclosed when there was no provision in the Hariyali
Guidelines in this regard. Further, the Committee understand that
foreclosure of a project is the last resort available with the
implementing agency when it is noticed that the project is not at
all viable. The foreclosure of a project leads to crucial wastage of
the resources. The Committee are unable to comprehend the
justification of making a special provision for foreclosure in the
Common Guidelines, 2008, which indicates that the implementing
agencies may be free to foreclose any project at any time. The
Committee would like a specific clarification of the Department
in this regard so as to understand the concept and comment
further on the issue.”
12. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
“The Common Guidelines, 2008 have provided for foreclosure
only in extreme cases and the Department would like to clarify
that this provision does not give freedom to the implementing
agency to foreclose the project at any time. This provision is
applicable only in such situation when pursuing the project
further would only be a waste of time, energy and resources and
the extreme step of foreclosure may have to be resorted to Para
79 of the Common Guidelines stipulate following circumstances
for foreclosure of the project:
(a) Consistent apathy on the part of State and District Level
Authorities towards the project.
(b) Non-submission of Detailed Project Report / Approved Work
Plan for two years after the expiry of preparatory phase
without any valid justification.
(c) If any matter relating to project is subjudice in any court of
law and no order for staying the project activity has been
passed by the court.
(d) Any other reason, which justifies foreclosure as, decided by
District/State/Centre from time to time.

7
Common Guidelines 2008 have been prepared by National
Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) and not by Department of Land
Resources, however if as a last resort, if foreclosure is to be
undertaken, it will be done to prevent further wastage of funds,
responsibility will be fixed and a way will be find for adjusting
funds with the State Governments.
Additionally, First Information Reports (FIRs) have been lodged
and many enquiries ordered where PIAs and Voluntary
Organizations have never submitted Completion Report or never
turned up for the second instalments after taking the first
instalment.”
13. The Committee in the earlier recommendation made in their
36th Report had observed that the Common Guidelines, 2008
specifically provided for the foreclosure of the project, even when
the Committee have persistently been expressing concerns over the
foreclosure of the projects, more so when there was no such provision
in the Hariyali Guidelines, 2003. As such the Committee desired a
clarification from the Department in this regard.
The Department in the action taken reply has clarified that
foreclosure of the project is allowed only in extreme case/ situation
when pursuing the project further would only be a wastage of time,
energy, resources and certain other conditions as laid down in Para
79 of the Common Guidelines, 2008. The Department has also
informed that the responsibility for foreclosure would be fixed and
a way would be found for adjusting funds with the State
Governments. The Committee note that no provision in this regard
has been made in the guidelines. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the mechanism to adjust the funds with the State
Governments. Besides, the Committee would also like that a
provision in this regard should be made in the guidelines itself so
as to make it more effective.
The Department has also informed that FIRs have been lodged
and many enquiries ordered where PIAs and Voluntary Organizations
have never submitted Completion Report or never turned up for the
second instalments after taking the first instalment. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the number of PIAs and Voluntary
Organizations against whom the FIRs have been lodged and enquiries
ordered. The number of PIAs and Voluntary Organizations which
have been convicted so far also should be furnished along with the
details of the penalty imposed. The Committee would also like to

8
be apprised whether convicted PIAs and Voluntary Organizations
have been blacklisted. The detailed information should be furnished
to the Committee in this regard.
D. Expeditious formulation of ‘National Land Use Policy’
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 3.40)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the
previous year had also recommended to have a National Land
Use Policy (refer para 3.19 of 27th Report) which can guide the
various State Governments in having laws with regard to the
use of land for different purposes with the objective of balanced
and harmonious use of land for different purposes. In this regard,
the Committee note that the National Land Use and Conservation
Board under the Ministry of Agriculture is dealing with the issue
of the Land Use Policy. The Committee are concerned to note
that no sitting of the aforesaid Board has been held for the last
many years as informed by the Secretary , Department of Land
Resources, during the course of oral evidence. The Committee
deplore the way such an important national issue is being
addressed by the Government. The Committee strongly
recommend to take up the issue urgently with the Ministry of
Agriculture so that a National Land Use Policy is formulated
expeditiously. The Committee may be informed about the concrete
action taken in this regard.”
15. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee was sent to Ministry of
Agriculture with the request that they may take necessary action
to convene the meeting of the National Land Use and
Conservation Board (NLCB) so that the issues relating to
conversion of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes
including SEZs, formulation of a National Land Use Policy etc.
could be discussed. However, that Ministry has informed that
Planning Commission has discontinued the National Land Use
and Conservation Board vide their D.O. letter dated 13.8.2004
and accordingly it is not possible to convene the meeting.”
16. The Committee have persistently been recommending to the
Department to pursue the issue regarding finalization of the National
Land Use Policy with the concerned Ministries particularly the

9
Ministry of Agriculture. In this regard during the course of oral
evidence while examining Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Department, the Committee had been informed that no sitting of
the National Land Use and Conservation Board under the Ministry
of Agriculture was held for the last many years. On the insistence
of the Committee, the Department took up the matter with the
Ministry of Agriculture and were informed that the Planning
Commission has discontinued the National Land Use and
Conservation Board vide their D.O. letter dated 13.08.2004 and
accordingly it was not possible to convene the meeting.
The aforesaid position indicates the callous attitude of the
Department towards such a serious recommendation of the
Committee which was persistently being pursued. The matter was
even raised while examining Demands for Grants of the earlier year
i.e. 2007-08 and the Department had assured in the action taken
reply to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Agriculture.
Surprisingly, the Department was not aware of the exact position as
recently as during the examination of Demands for Grants 2008-09.
While the National Land Use Policy and Conservation Board had
been discontinued w.e.f. 13.08.2004, the Department misled the
Committee by simply stating that no sitting of the Board was held
for so many years.
The Committee strongly deprecate the way the Department has
misled the Committee in this regard. The Committee desire that the
Department should take up the matter of revival of the National
Land Use and Conservation Board with the concerned Ministries/
Departments on war footing so as to have a National Land Use
Policy at the earliest.
E. Expeditious collection of data with regard to the acquisition of
land for Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 3.41)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the
previous year (refer para 3.19 of 27th Report) had been informed
that the data with regard to the acquisition of land for Special
Economic Zones is being collected by the Department from the
concerned Ministry of Commerce and Industry. While examining
the Demands for Grants for the year 2008-09 again, the
Department have informed that the aforesaid data as asked by

10
the Committee is being collected. The Committee fail to
understand even after one year has elapsed since the Committee
desired the aforesaid data, the same could not be collected from
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The Committee while
deploring the casual manner of the Ministry in this regard desired
that the data should be obtained expeditiously and furnished to
the Committee. Besides, the specific data with regard to the
acquisition of agricultural land for setting up SEZs may also be
obtained. The information in this regard may separately be asked
for single crop, double crop and multi crop agricultural land.”
18. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee has been sent to the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry with the request to furnish
the requisite data with regard to the acquisition of agricultural
land for setting up SEZs, including single crop, double crop and
multi crop agricultural land acquired for the purpose. Reply from
that Ministry has not been received so far.
However, during the oral evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, taken by the Standing
Committee on Rural Development on 3rd July, 2008, in connection
with the Examination of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill,
2007 and the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007, they
informed that the total extent of land in the 404 formal approvals
for SEZs so far is 57,412.70 hectares.
As regards type of land, it was informed that the information is
available with the respective State Governments and they have
been requested to furnish the detailed information as per the
proforma prescribed. Till date, information has been received
in respect of 181 SEZs from 6 State Governments viz .
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Punjab and Rajasthan. The total area of the land involved in
these SEZs is about 16987 hectares. Out of this, 92% is reported
to be barren/waste land and 7.5% of the land is single crop. The
double crop land acquired for SEZs is negligible.”
19. The Committee have persistently been recommending to
collect the data with regard to acquisition of land for SEZs category-
wise from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and furnish to
the Committee. The Committee are concerned to note that whereas
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry have given the information

11
with regard to the aforesaid data collected from some of the States
while examining ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’,
which the Department has also indicated in the action taken reply,
the Department failed to get the said information from the concerned
Ministry. It seems that no effort has been made to pursue with the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry on such a serious issue. The
Committee deplore the way the recommendation of the Committee
has been addressed by the Department. The Committee would like
that serious efforts should be made to pursue the matter with the
concerned Ministry so that the information with regard to type of
land acquired for setting up the Special Economic Zones (SEZs) by
various State Governments is maintained and updated regularly. The
Committee may be kept apprised accordingly.
F. Early clearance of the proposal relating to ‘National Mission on
Bio-Diesel’ from Group of Ministers
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 3.45)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are unhappy to note that an important scheme
‘National Mission on Bio – diesel’ that seeks to reduce country’s
20 per cent import dependence on petroleum is still at a nascent
stage even after submission of the Report by the Committee set
up by the Planning Commission on `Development of Bio–diesel’
way back in April, 2003. The Committee have been informed
that the aforesaid ‘National Mission on Bio–diesel’ seeks to obtain
Bio–diesel from seeds of plants like Jatropha (Ratanjot) and
Pongamia (Karanj) by their plantation on wasteland/degraded land
available in different States. It is alarming to note that even after
an elapse of five years since the submission of the report by the
Committee set up by the Planning Commission on the aforesaid
matter, the proposal has still not been approved by the
Government. As per the latest information furnished by the
Department on the above issue, the proposal has been processed
by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 9 October, 2006
and has been considered by the Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) on 8 March, 2007 and currently is before the
Group of Ministers (GoM) wherein a presentation by the Ministry
of Rural Development, Ministry of Science and Technology and
ICAR is awaited on the proposal. The Committee have further
been informed that the next meeting is yet to take place. In this
connection during the course of evidence, it came out that around

12
16.49 crore saplings of Jatropha and Pongamia plants have already
been planted with an expenditure of Rs. 49.50 crore in different
States and an early clearance of the proposal from the Group of
Ministers is essential so that this expenditure does not go waste.
In this connection the Committee in their previous Reports on
Demands for Grants relating to the Department of Land Resources
from 2004-05 onwards have been pursuing the Government for
expeditious clearance of the proposal. The Committee are,
however, constrained to note that the desired results are not
forthcoming. Since the danger of loss of saplings as stated above
is looming large for want of necessary funds, the Committee,
therefore, once again recommend expeditious clearance of the
proposal by the Group of Ministers so that Rs. 50 crore Plan
outlay is utilised by the Department during 2008-09. While
recommending for expeditious clearance of ‘National Mission on
Bio-diesel’, the Committee may like to emphasize that the Jatropha/
Pongamia cultivation in the country should be done without
affecting the food security and agricultural land of the country.”
21. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
“To discuss the issues on launching of National Mission on Bio-
diesel, first meeting of Group of Ministers held on 16/05/2007
and it was decided to have presentation on the proposal of
lunching of National Mission on Bio-diesel, Ministry of Rural
Development, ICAR and Department of Science and Technology
later on. Second meeting of Group of Ministers held on 13/06/
2008 and the Ministry of Rural Development, ICAR and
Department of Science Technology made presentations before the
GoM. Third meeting of GoM was held on 9.7.2008 and it was
the opinion that reliable data on various aspects of plantations
of non-edible oil seed bearing trees is not yet available, and as
work on plantation of about 6 lakh hectares and some commercial
activities have already been initiated in several States, the
demonstration programme proposed by MoRD would not serve
the purpose. After discussion, it was recommended that National
Mission on Bio-diesel of the Ministry of Rural Development need
not be pursued further. Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development
has taken up the matter with the Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture
who is the Chairman of GoM to reconsider the proposal of the
Ministry of Rural Development for setting up the National
Mission on Bio-diesel.”

13
22. The Committee are really perturbed to note that an important
scheme ‘National Mission on Bio-Diesel’ approved by the Planning
Commission way back in April, 2003 and after making an expenditure
of Rs. 49.50 crore for plantation of 16.49 crore saplings of Jatropha
and Pongamia plants has finally been dropped by the Group of
Ministers (GoM) for want of reliable data on various aspects of
plantation of non-edible oil seed bearing trees. The Department has
also informed that the Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has
taken up the matter with the Minister of Agriculture who is the
Chairman of GoM to reconsider the proposal of setting up the
‘National Mission on Bio-Diesel’. The Committee cannot understand
why the requisite data with regard to plantation of non-edible oil
seed bearing trees could not be made available which ultimately led
to the dropping of the proposal of setting up the said Mission. The
Committee would like that the requisite information should be
collected urgently and the matter should further be pursued at the
Minister’s level so that the ‘National Mission on Bio-Diesel’ is not
shelved just for want of data, particularly when the aforesaid Mission
seeks to reduce country’s 20 percent import dependence on petroleum.
The concerns of the Committee in this regard should appropriately
be placed before the Minister of Agriculture while pursuing the
issue by the Minister of Rural Development with GoM.
G. Need to review the position of development of wastelands in
the North Eastern Region
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 15 & 19, Para Nos. 3.52 & 3.66)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“While reviewing the performance of IWDP during the Tenth
Plan (2002-07), the Committee find that as against the outlays, the
utilisation in terms of percentage of releases was 91.87 per cent,
91.58 per cent and 90.88 per cent respectively during the first
three years of the Tenth Plan i.e. 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05.
The Committee also find that in the remaining two years viz.
2005-06 and 2006-2007 of the Tenth Plan, utilisation in terms of
percentage of releases was 100.47 per cent and 99.02 per cent.
The Committee find that the reason for under-spending in the
first three years of the Tenth Plan as indicated by the Department
is that a large amount of outlays was utilised for meeting the
committed liabilities of on going watershed projects as also failure
on the part of North Eastern States to utilise funds for these
projects. For instance during 2002-03, out of Rs. 450 crore

14
earmarked for IWDP as high as Rs. 150 crore was spent on
meeting the committed liabilities of on going projects. Similarly
during 2003-04 under-spending of Rs. 88 crore was due to non-
receipt of new projects from the North Eastern Region. Again
during 2004-05 poor absorption of funds by North Eastern States
was the reason for slow progress. The Committee conclude from
the aforesaid scenario that the expenditure position during the
Tenth Plan has been satisfactory except in the case of the North
Eastern States where no new projects was demanded. The
Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to review
the position of development of wastelands in the North Eastern
Region. The various problems encountered in North Eastern
Region have been dealt with in subsequent paras of the Report.
Here the Committee wish to emphasize that all corrective action
should be taken so as to ensure full utilization of outlay during
the Eleventh Plan.”
[Recommendation Serial No.15 (Para No.3.52)]
“The Committee note that there are serious problems in the
implementation of the watershed programmes in the North-
Eastern Region including Sikkim. One of the issue, which needs
consideration is the lack of coordination between different
Departments of the State Governments which are mainly
responsible for implementing watershed projects in the entire
North Eastern Region. Further, in view of the fragile nature of
soil and vegetation in North Eastern Areas, the Committee
underlines the need for special care for preserving the original
soil and vegetation while dealing with the land management in
these areas. The Committee have been informed by the
Department that a zonal meeting is planned in Shillong in
May, 2008 for an interaction with the members of the North
Eastern Council. The Committee therefore, recommend that the
aforesaid issues should be discussed at the ensuing Zonal meeting
to be held in Shillong and the outcome of the same may be
apprised to the Committee.”
[Recommendation Serial No.19 (Para No.3.66)]
24. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
“The Department will ensure full utilization of outlay earmarked
for North-Eastern States in the Eleventh Plan. A Regional Review
Meeting has already been held in May, 2008 at Shillong in which

15
all the North-Eastern States including Sikkim participated and
exchanged their views and problems faced in timely
implementation of the projects. An orientation for the
operationalisation of the new Common Guidelines was also
arranged by the Department. The roll out plan for the Common
Guidelines, 2008 was explained in detail to the representatives of
the North-Eastern States. A discussion was also held with the
expert team of North-Eastern Council during the review meeting.”
[Reply to Recommendation Serial Nos.15 & 19 (Para Nos. 3.52 & 3.66)]
25. While noting that all the North-Eastern States including
Sikkim participated and exchanged their views and problems faced
in timely completion of Projects at the Regional Review Meeting
held in Shillong, the Committee would like to be informed about
the details of the outcome arising out of the discussions held at the
Review Meeting. Further, the Committee would also like to be
informed about the details of roll out plan for the Common
Guidelines 2008 in North-Eastern States.
H. Pursuing the issue of adequate outlay under IWMP with the
Planning Commission/ Ministry of Finance
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 3.55)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the three programmes of the
Department viz. Integrated Wasteland Development Programme
(IWDP), the major programme of the Department related to
wastelands development in the country alongwith two other area
development programmes viz. Drought Prone Area Programme
(DPAP) and Desert Development Programme (DDP) have been
merged into an integrated programme i.e. Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWMP) during the Eleventh Plan.
Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) is being
implemented from the year 2007-08 i.e. the first year of the
Eleventh Plan. The Committee note that during the year 2007-08
against the proposed allocation of Rs. 2086.46 crore, Rs. 1201
crore were provided at BE stage. The allocation was reduced by
Rs. 35 crore at RE stage, thus Rs. 1166 crore were available during
the year 2007-08. Out of Rs. 1166 crore, the expenditure as on
15 March, 2008 is Rs. 1160.64 crore. During the year 2008-09,
Rs. 1875 crore have been allocated against the proposed allocation
of Rs. 2750 crore. The Committee have been apprised that the

16
Department have decided to complete 45,000 ongoing watershed
projects in the first two years of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee
further note that Rs. 6,522 crore have been proposed for the
committed liabilities of ongoing projects during the Eleventh Plan.
Even if the total allocation earmarked during the first two years
under IWMP is taken into consideration, only Rs. 3,041 crore
(Rs. 1166 crore R.E. of 2007-08 + Rs. 1875 crore B.E. of 2008-09)
have been allocated during the aforesaid years. Thus, if only the
committed liabilities are taken into consideration, there is shortfall
of Rs. 3,481 crore even to meet the committed liabilities for the
ongoing projects. The Committee fail to understand how the
Department propose to meet the committed liabilities during the
first two years of Eleventh Plan with the aforesaid shortfall in
the allocations. Further the Committee are unable to comprehend
how the new projects would be taken under IWMP with the
meagre allocation of resources. The Committee conclude from
the aforesaid scenario that the target of developing 25 million
hectares of rainfed area during the Eleventh Plan seems to be a
distant reality with the position of the allocation of resources
during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan as being stated
above. The Committee strongly recommend that desired initiatives
should be taken to complete the 45,000 ongoing projects in the
stipulated timeframe of two years so that the additional projects
as per the modified guidelines can be taken up and the set targets
could be achieved. The Committee strongly recommend that the
Department should pursue with the Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance for adequate outlay under IWMP .”
27. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The Department has not committed that all the 45,000 projects
shall be completed during the first two years of the Eleventh
Plan. Rather, in view of the huge liabilities, the Department has
proposed to focus on meeting only the committed liabilities of
ongoing projects instead of creating new liabilities during the
first two years of the Eleventh Plan. As the project period is of
5 years and the projects often extends beyond 5 years to be
completed, the projects sanctioned towards the end of the Tenth
Plan can only be completed at the end of the Eleventh Plan and
some projects may also spill over to Twelfth Plan.
The Department is making all out efforts to complete the projects
sanctioned prior to Eleventh Plan in time through continuous
monitoring and interaction with the implementing agencies at
various levels in the states.”

17
28. The Committee note from the action taken reply that the
focus of the Department is only to meet the committed liabilities of
the ongoing projects during the Eleventh Plan. It seems that no new
project is proposed to be undertaken during the Eleventh Plan.
During the course of examination of the Demands for Grants, the
Committee have been informed that a target to develop 25 million
hectares of rainfed area during the Eleventh Plan has been fixed.
The Committee fail to understand how the aforesaid target would
be achieved without taking new projects during the Eleventh Plan.
It is also not clear how the new programme of IWMP would be
implemented since all the existing projects are being implemented
under the previous programmes like DDP , DPAP & IWDP . The
Committee would like the Department to clarify the position in this
regard. Besides, as recommended earlier, adequate outlay should be
provided under IWMP during the remaining years of the Eleventh
Plan so as to achieve the set target.
I. Persuading the State Governments for furnishing Utilization
Certificates (UCs) in time
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 3.61)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are constrained to note that as many as 357
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) amounting to Rs. 281.67 crore are
outstanding as on 31 December 2007 in respect of the three Area
Development Programmes of IWDP , DPAP and DDP . In this
connection the Committee also find that out of these as many as
153 UCs pertain to IWDP and 115 UCs relate to DPAP involving
approximately Rs. 60 crore each. Remaining 24 UCs relate to
DDP amounting to Rs. 21.50 crore. The Committee further find
that as on 20 March, 2008 there has been a slight reduction in
the aforesaid outstanding UCs. For instance, under IWDP 91 UCs
with an amount of Rs. 39.47 crore, under DPAP 101 UCs with an
amount of Rs. 51.91 crore and under DDP 8 UCs with an amount
of Rs. 12.45 crore are outstanding. From the available data, the
Committee find that the major defaulting States are Assam, Kerala,
Orissa, Manipur and Sikkim under IWDP; Bihar, Jharkhand, West
Bengal, Uttarakhand and Maharashtra under DPAP; and
Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Karnataka
under DDP . The capacity constraints, weak monitoring and lack
of will to track out older records etc. have been attributed as the

18
reasons for the above UCs remaining outstanding from various
State Governments. The Committee fail to understand how the
States like Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Orissa who have
done considerable progress on e-governance are not submitting
Utilisation Certificates in time. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend to pursue with the State Governments in this regard.
The concrete action taken should be communicated to the
Committee. ”
30. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
“The Department has taken measures to obtain pending UCs
from the concerned States. The States have been requested to
mention the reasons for delay in submission of each pending
Utilisation Certificate and a discussion on this has been held
with the concerned States in the four Regional Review Meetings
held so far at Chennai, Shillong, Dehradun and Udaipur. The
concerned States have assured that the UCs shall be submitted
in time in future. The Department shall also take up the matter
with the remaining States at the fifth Regional Review Meeting
to be held at Bhubaneshwar during September-October, 2008. The
Department has formulated Area Officers Scheme to ensure that
pending UCs are expedited. These area officers will visit the
States and pursue pending matters with State Governments. The
matter of pending UC’s is also being pursued through video
conferencing.”
31. The Committee note that the concerned States have assured
for submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs) in time in future in
the discussion held in the Four Regional Review Meetings held at
Chennai, Shillong, Dehradun and Udaipur. The Department has also
assured to take up the matter with the remaining States at the Fifth
Regional Review Meeting to be held at Bhubaneswar during
September-October, 2008. Besides under Area Officers Scheme, the
area officers would be visiting the States for pursuing pending
matters. While appreciating the aforesaid initiatives being taken by
the Department, the Committee would like the Department to pursue
the matter with the concerned States more vigorously. The Committee
would also like to be informed about the details of the outcome
arising out of the discussions held at the Fifth Regional Review
Meeting.

19
J. Evaluation of erstwhile programme of Computerisation of Land
Records (CLRs)
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 3.75)
32. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“As regards the performance of CLR during the years 2006-07
and 2007-08, the Committee find that although the financial
achievement is almost 100 per cent, there are serious shortfalls in
the physical achievement. Against the physical target of
installation of Hardware and Software in 75 sub-Divisions, the
achievement upto 31st March, 2007 as indicated in the Outcome
Budget is 2 sub-Divisions only. Again with regard to setting up
of district data level centres for 50 districts, the achievement has
been indicated as 27 districts. Various reasons like the delay in
the release of funds by the States to implementing agencies, non-
availability of data entry agencies and lack of trained staff to
manage the Computer Centres have been cited as the reasons for
under-performance. The Committee express serious concern over
the mis-match between the physical and financial achievement
during the year 2006-07. During the year 2007-08 in the Outcome
Budget in the Quantifiable Deliverables and achievement column
the specific targets have not been indicated. The Committee
express serious concern over not indicating specific targets during
the year 2007-08. In this regard, the Committee would like that
the physical achievement under the programme during the year
2007-08 may be indicated in clear terms so as to analyze the
position of the implementation of the programme during the
aforesaid year. Besides, corrective actions with regard to the
various problems being faced in the implementation of the
programme should be taken urgently so as to achieve the objective
of computerization of land records in all the States within the
stipulated time frame.”
33. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The Scheme of Computerisation of Land Records is demand
driven and funds are released to the State Governments/UT
administrations keeping in view the proposals received, physical
achievements under the scheme and utilization of funds against
releases made during previous years. During the years 2006-07
and 2007-08, major portion of funds was provided to the States/
UTs for operationalisation of the scheme at tehsil level, scanning
of old land records and digitization maps.

20
During 2006-07, while the targets of setting up of computer
centres at Sub-division & District levels and monitoring cell at
State Headquarters could not be achieved, operationalisation of
the Scheme was sanctioned in 773 Tehsils against the target of
100 Tehsils.
During the year 2007-08, implementation of the National Land
Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) was proposed.
However, approval for the NLRMP could not be obtained.
Accordingly, there was no separate provision under the CLR
Scheme. However, funds to the tune of Rs. 41.24 crore were
released to the States/UTs for digitization of cadastral maps and
for operationalisation of the Scheme in 64 more tehsils/blocks,
setting up of computer centres in 26 sub-divisions, 1 district land
records data centre and 1 monitoring cell at State Headquarters.”
34. During the course of examination of Demands for Grants,
the Committee had been informed that no separate provision has
been made for the ‘Computerization of Land Records’ during the
years 2007-08 and 2008-09 as the scheme has been merged with the
National Land Record Modernization Programme (NLRMP) (refer
para 3.72 of 36th Report) under which funds are being released. In
the action taken note, the Department has informed that the approval
of NLRMP could not be obtained. The Committee fail to understand
how a specific allocation has been made for a new scheme NLRMP
when it has actually not been approved as indicated in the action
taken reply. It is really difficult to comprehend the status of the
various land records schemes/programmes of the Ministry. Whereas
the status of new scheme NLRMP is not clear, no outlay is being
provided in the earlier scheme ‘Computerization of Land Records’
and ‘Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records’. While disapproving the way the schemes are being
restructured, the Committee would like to have a clarification from
the Department in this regard. Besides, the Committee strongly
recommend that all the modalities of implementation of the new
scheme NLRMP should be finalized expeditiously so that the targets
set during Eleventh Plan with regard to maintenance/ computerization
of land records are achieved.

21
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that direction 73A of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha is not being followed in the right spirit. This is
evident from the considerable delay in making the statement by the
Minister on various reports of the Committee. As per the direction,
the Minister should make the statement within six months of
presentation of the Report to Parliament, which has not been done.
The statements have been made after 10 to 21 months of the
presentation of the concerned Reports. The Committee desire that, in
future, the statement under direction 73A should be made within the
prescribed time limit.
Reply of the Government
Point has been noted for compliance.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 3.8)
The Committee find that the Department have been allocated
Rs. 6,526 crore as against the proposed allocation of Rs. 5,965 crore
during the Tenth Plan. Out of the allocated amount of Rs. 6,526 crore,
the actual expenditure as on 31 March, 2007 was Rs. 5,526 crore, thus
the underspending was to the tune of Rs. 1000 crore. The Committee
further find that the main reason for not utilizing the allocated amount
during the Tenth Plan was on account of no new initiative having
been taken during the Tenth Plan, for which Rs. 1,000 crore were
exclusively earmarked. The Committee deplore the way the planning
for new schemes is being made. Even when no specific scheme was
proposed, a substantial outlay of Rs. 1,000 crore was earmarked at the
start of the Tenth Plan. No new scheme could be taken during the
whole period of five years resulting in shortfall in expenditure of
Rs. 1,000 crore. The Committee have repeatedly been recommending
for proper planning, particularly, with regard to launching of new
schemes. All the preparatory works should be undertaken before the
specific outlay for a scheme is earmarked. There is entirely no
justification for allocating substantial amount for vague initiatives for
which there are no concrete proposals. The Committee would like the

22
Department to convey the concerns of the Committee to the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee is taken due note of for
guidance. The concerns of the Committee has been conveyed to the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 3.9)
The Committee note that during the year 2007-08 i.e. the first year
of the Eleventh Plan, the Department had proposed allocation of
Rs. 2840.46 crore, out of which Rs. 1500 crore were allocated at Budget
Estimates stage. The allocation was further reduced at RE stage by
Rs. 100 crore, thus Rs. 1400 crore were actually allocated during the
aforesaid year. The actual releases as on 15 March 2008 are over
Rs. 1337.69 crore, thus resulting into underspending of Rs. 62.31 crore.
Further during the year 2008-09, out of the proposed allocation of
Rs. 3622.50 crore, the outlay earmarked was Rs. 2400 crore. The
Committee note from the aforesaid position that the Department have
not been able to utilise even the reduced allocation during the year
2007-08. The main underspending has been stated to be under
‘Professional Support’, due to its being a new scheme and ‘Externally
Aided Projects’ due to the low absorption capacity of the State
Government. The Committee hope that during the year 2008-09, there
would be cent percent utilisation of outlay under the scheme
‘Professional Support’. As regards ‘Externally Aided Projects’, the
Committee would like to be apprised what the Department mean by
the absorption capacity of the State Governments. The Committee
would also like that all the corrective actions should be taken so as to
achieve the indicated objectives under the aforesaid scheme/proposal.
Reply of the Government
The Department has taken exhaustive measures to ensure that there
is no under spending in the scheme ‘Professional Support’. The physical
and financial targets have been fixed for achieving the desired objectives
in a time bound manner. Regular interaction are being held with Prasar
Bharti, Doordarshan, PIB for holding talk shows, quiz shows, press
conferences and Saaras Melas for creating wide spread awareness about
the schemes of the department. The department is monitoring the
progress made under each scheme in a weekly review meeting.
The Western Orissa Rural Livelihoods Project (WORLP) was
sanctioned by DFID in June, 1999 at a cost of Rs. 230 crores including
Technical Consultancy (TC) component over 10 years. It was launched

23
on 18.8.2000. Under the project, 290 watershed projects of approx. 500
hectares each in 29 blocks of 4 districts of the State were taken up.
The implementation programme under the project has two
components—watershed and watershed plus activities. Up to 31-07-2008,
Rs. 124.0025 crores has been released.
(i) Though the project started at a slow pace, the State
Government has stepped up the pace of execution and
utilization of the funds.
(ii) The State Government is also taking necessary steps for
timely release of funds under the project.
(iii) During the High Powered Committee (HPC) meeting, the
State has assured that the budgetary provision of 2008-09
shall be fully utilized.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 3.10)
The detailed analysis scheme-wise has been done in the subsequent
paras of the Report. Here the Committee conclude from the analysis
of the data given by the Department during the first two years of
Eleventh Plan that the Department are not getting adequate allocation.
Further the Committee also observe that to get the allocation as
estimated and proposed, the Department have to strive hard to ensure
cent per cent utilisation under different schemes along with achieving
the physical targets.
Reply of the Government
Department will make necessary efforts to get adequate funding
from the Planning Commission in the remaining period of the Plan i.e.
three years to fulfil its targets in the 11th Plan.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 5 & 6,
Para Nos. 3.15 and 3.16)
The Committee find that the Department had proposed an outlay
of Rs 25,835.67 crore to the Planning Commission for the Eleventh
Plan mainly comprising of Rs. 20,700 crore for IWMP . Under IWMP
Rs. 6,522 crore are for committed liabilities of on going watershed
projects in the first two years of the Eleventh Plan period, Rs. 12,300
crore for funding new watershed projects over the next three years of
the Plan and Rs. 1000 crore for necessary ‘Infrastructural Support’
totaling to Rs. 19,822 crore. The Planning Commission initially agreed
to the allocation of Rs. 16,420.84 crore, which has subsequently been

24
revised to Rs. 17,205.48 crore. The revision was necessitated after
reviewing the needs of the Department and in view of the suggested
modifications in design and contents of the major programmes
envisaged for the current Plan. These Programmes are Integrated
Watershed Management Programme (IWMP), National Land Records
Modernisation Programme (NLRMP), National Mission on Bio-diesel,
Externally Aided Projects (EAPs), Professional Support and National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy. In this connection, the
Committee have been informed that as per the Parthasarthy Committee
Report an estimated 125 million hectares of rainfed areas is to be
developed with an investment outlay of Rs. 1,50,000 crore in the next
15 years. Out of 125 million hectares, 75 million hectares of rainfed
area is to be developed by the Department of Land Resources in the
next 15 years by way of covering 25 million hectares in each of the
coming three Five Year Plans. Therefore, the target before the
Department during the Eleventh Plan is the treatment of 25 million
hectares of rainfed areas in the country. After perusal of the outlays as
proposed by the Department and work to be taken up by the
Department during the current Plan, the Committee find that the Plan
allocation of Rs. 17,205.48 crore is not sufficient for the Department to
accomplish the task.
Recommendation Serial No.5 (Para No. 3.15)
The Committee further note that during the first two years of the
Eleventh Plan i.e. during 2007-08 and 2008-09, Rs. 3800 crore have
been allocated. The total amount of allocation for the Eleventh Plan is
Rs. 17,205.48 crore. Thus the proportional allocation for the two years
comes to around Rs. 6,880 crore. Thus there is shortfall of Rs. 3080
crore in the proportionate allocation during the first two years of the
Eleventh Plan. Keeping in view the aforesaid scenario of allocations
being made under different schemes of the Department, the Committee
have their apprehensions about the set target of development of rainfed
area of 25 million hectares during the Eleventh Plan being achieved.
In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend that adequate
allocation should be provided to the Department to achieve the set
targets under different schemes. While recommending for higher outlay
during the Eleventh Plan, the Committee would also like that the
Department should make every effort to ensure that the allocation
provided in a year is meaningfully utilised.
Recommendation Serial No. 6 (Para No. 3.16)
Reply of the Government
The Department has achieved full utilization of the allocated budget
during 2007-08. The Department shall ensure that the budget allocated
for 2008-09 is also fully utilized during 2008-09.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]

25
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 7 & 8,
Para Nos. 3.25 & 3.26)
The Committee have persistently been recommending in their
Reports presented during 12th, 13th and 14th Lok Sabha that all the
activities related to watershed programmes being undertaken by the
different Ministries of Union Government should be brought under
one umbrella. Pursuant to the aforesaid recommendation of the
Committee, the Ministry of Rural Development initially transferred
DDP , DPAP and Watershed component of its erstwhile Employment
Assurance Scheme from the Department of Rural Development to the
Department of Land Resources to bring convergence of the activities
related to watershed schemes in their own Ministry. With the
continuous pursuance of the issue of bringing the watershed activities
of different Ministries under one umbrella, the Government finally
agreed to the recommendation of the Committee and the National
Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) was constituted under the Ministry
of Agriculture with the initial allocation of Rs. 100 crore during the
year 2007-08. As a further initiative on the issue of convergence, the
Department have merged three area development programmes viz.
Integrated Watershed Development Programme (IWDP), Drought Prone
Area Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development Programme (DDP)
into a single programme of Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP). In the sitting of the National Rainfed Area
Authority held on 11 February, 2008, the Hariyali Guidelines, 2003
have been revised and named as Common Guidelines, 2008. The
Common Guidelines were prepared by the Department and finally
approved by the Governing Body of the National Rainfed Area
Authority on 11 February , 2008. The Department have informed that
the aforesaid Guidelines would come into force from 1 April, 2008.
Further, the Guidelines would be made fully operational by January,
2009. While appreciating the initiatives taken by the Department for
bringing convergence into the watershed activities being undertaken
by the different Departments/Ministries in pursuance of the persistent
recommendations of the Standing Committee, the Committee find that
there is an inordinate delay in the finalisation of the Common
Guidelines. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the process of
operationalisation of the Guidelines should be accelerated keeping in
view the task of covering target of 25 million hectare of rainfed areas
during the current plan period of which the first year i.e. 2007-08 is
already over. For this, the time frames for various stages of
operationalisation of the guidelines need to be tightened considerably
and strict monitoring be ensured.
Recommendation Serial No. 7 (Para No. 3.25)

26
The Committee have also been repeatedly emphasizing on the
convergence of watershed activities at the State level as well as at the
ground level. In this regard, the Committee find that under the
Common Guidelines, a provision has been made for setting-up
dedicated institutional structures at National, District, Project and
Village level. The Committee appreciate the aforesaid initiative taken
by the Department which is in line with the persistent recommendations
of the Committee. The Committee would like that the institutional
structures at national, district, project and village level are set up
expeditiously so as to have proper coordination and an idea of the
actual work being undertaken at the ground level with regard to
watershed activities in the country.
Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No. 3.26)
Reply of the Government
The Department has prepared a rollout plan for implementation of
the new Common Guidelines, 2008 in the States. This rollout plan
includes setting up of the dedicated institution at National, State and
District level in the first phase. This rollout plan has been put on the
website of the Department. The plan has been circulated to all the
States for compliance. The progress of implementation is being
discussed and monitored with each State in the Zonal Review Meetings
scheduled by the Department. An online monitoring system for the
rollout plan is also put on the website of the Department.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 3.27)
The Department have furnished a statement indicating the
comparison between the various features of Hariyali Guidelines, 2003
and Common Guidelines, 2008. The Committee note that one of the
provisions with regard to foreclosure which was not provided under
the previous Guidelines has now been provided under the revised
Common Guidelines, 2008. The Committee in their respective Reports
have been observing that a number of projects under different
watershed schemes viz. Integrated Watershed Development Programme
(IWDP), Drought Prone Area Programme (DPAP) and Desert
Development Programme (DDP) were being foreclosed (refer para 4.59
of 27th Report). On the insistence of the Standing Committee, the
Department have even indicated the position of foreclosure in the
Outcome Budget (2008-09). The Committee fail to understand how the
projects were being foreclosed when there was no provision in the
Hariyali Guidelines in this regard. Further, the Committee understand
that foreclosure of a project is the last resort available with the
implementing agency when it is noticed that the project is not at all

27
viable. The foreclosure of a project leads to crucial wastage of the
resources. The Committee are unable to comprehend the justification
of making a special provision for foreclosure in the Common
Guidelines, 2008, which indicates that the implementing agencies may
be free to foreclose any project at any time. The Committee would
like a specific clarification of the Department in this regard so as to
understand the concept and comment further on the issue.
Reply of the Government
The Common Guidelines, 2008 have provided for foreclosure only
in extreme cases and the Department would like to clarify that this
provision does not give freedom to the implementing agency to
foreclose the project at any time. This provision is applicable only in
such situation when pursuing the project further would only be a
waste of time, energy and resources and the extreme step of foreclosure
may have to be resorted to Para 79 of the Common Guidelines stipulate
following circumstances for foreclosure of the project:
(a) Consistent apathy on the part of State and District Level
Authorities towards the project.
(b) Non-submission of Detailed Project Report/Approved Work
Plan for two years after the expiry of preparatory phase
without any valid justification.
(c) If any matter relating to project is subjudice in any court of
law and no order for staying the project activity has been
passed by the court.
(d) Any other reason, which justifies foreclosure as, decided by
District/State/Centre from time to time.
Common Guidelines, 2008 have been prepared by National Rainfed
Area Authority (NRAA) and not by Department of Land Resources,
however if as a last resort, if foreclosure is to be undertaken, it will
be done to prevent further wastage of funds, responsibility will be
fixed and a way will be find for adjusting funds with the State
Governments.
Additionally, First Information Reports (FIRs) have been lodged
and many enquiries ordered where PIAs and Voluntary Organizations
have never submitted Completion Report or never turned up for the
second installments after taking the first installment.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

28
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 3.34)
The Committee learn from a statement made by the Minister of
Rural Development in Lok Sabha on 3 March, 2008 that Ministry of
Rural Development have developed a system for online reporting of
Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) of rural development schemes
including IWDP , DPAP and DDP . Although sufficient progress in this
regard has been made with regard to sending Quarterly Progress
Reports online, the progress with regard to Monthly Progress Reports
is far from satisfactory . For instance, under IWDP out of 28 States
only 3 States of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Haryana have the
system of online reporting of Monthly Progress Reports. Similarly, out
of 16 States under DPAP and 7 States under DDP only 2 States have
a system of reporting online the Monthly Progress Reports. Andhra
Pradesh is the only State, which has developed online monitoring of
all these Area Development Programmes. The Committee further note
that the process of online monitoring has been started by the
Department of Land Resources during the year 2007-08 and the
Department propose to make it fully operational by the year 2008-09.
Keeping in view the status of implementation of the project of online
monitoring of Monthly Progress Reports as indicated above, the
Committee have doubts about achieving the target of making the
system fully operational by 2008-09. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the Department should work on a war footing so as
to achieve the targets by the stipulated deadline.
Reply of the Government
The Department is pursuing online reporting of Monthly Progress
Reports (MPRs) by the States on a regular basis. Recently, Hon’ble RD
Minister has written to Chief Ministers to accord priority to online
reporting of progress of all watershed schemes. For month of June,
2008 the online reporting has been done by 13 out of 28 States for
IWDP , 11 out of 16 States for DPAP and 4 out of 7 States for DDP .
The Department is making all efforts to get online Monthly Progress
Report from all the States in order to make the system fully operational
by the end of 2008-09. Additionally, a Special Officer of the Department
has been dedicated only for monitoring and to bring the online
monitoring system into a working mode.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 3.39)
The Committee note that the Minister of Rural Development has
taken up the issue of acquisition of agricultural land for setting up of
SEZs with the Minister of Commerce and Industry and has emphasized
that prime agricultural land should not be acquired for establishing

29
SEZs and these Zones need to be established invariably on wastelands.
In unavoidable situation if it is necessary to acquire agricultural land
for SEZs, the requiring body must develop equal area of wastelands
simultaneously so that the loss of agricultural land could be
compensated. While appreciating the initiatives taken by the Minister
of Rural Development, the Committee strongly recommend to pursue
this issue further with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry . Besides,
the concerns of the Committee in this regard expressed while examining
Demands for Grants of the previous year and reiterated here again
should be brought to the knowledge of the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry and the Cabinet Secretariat. The Committee desire that not
only in the case of SEZs including housing colonies whenever
agricultural land is acquired for any non-agricultural purpose, it should
be made mandatory on the requisitioning authority to develop at least
an equal area of wasteland into agricultural land. Exemption from the
development of equal area of wasteland into agricultural land may be
considered only in the States where adequate area of wastelands is
not available.
Reply of the Government
As already intimated, Ministry of Commerce and Industry has been
requested that prime agricultural land should not be acquired for
establishing SEZs and these Zones need to be established invariably
on wastelands. In unavoidable situations if it is necessary to acquire
agricultural land for a SEZ the requiring body must develop equal
area of wastelands simultaneously so that the loss of agricultural land
could be compensated.
Ministry of Commerce and Industry have advised the State
Governments that in case of land acquisition for SEZs, first priority
should be for acquisition of waste and barren land and, if necessary,
single crop agricultural land could be acquired for the SEZs. They
have also been advised that if perforce a portion of double cropped
agricultural land has to be acquired to meet the minimum area
requirements, especially for multi-product SEZs, the same should not
exceed 10% of the total land requiredforsuchSEZ.
The observations of the Committee have been sent to the Ministry
of Commerce and Industry for necessary action.
The observations of the Committee have also been sent to the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation and to the Cabinet
Secretariat for necessary action.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]

30
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 3.45)
The Committee are unhappy to note that an important scheme
‘National Mission on Bio-diesel’ that seeks to reduce country’s
20 per cent import dependence on petroleum is still at a nascent stage
even after submission of the Report by the Committee set up by the
Planning Commission on `Development of Bio-diesel’ way back in
April, 2003. The Committee have been informed that the aforesaid
‘National Mission on Bio-diesel’ seeks to obtain Bio–diesel from seeds
of plants like Jatropha (Ratanjot) and Pongamia (Karanj) by their
plantation on wasteland/degraded land available in different States. It
is alarming to note that even after an elapse of five years since the
submission of the report by the Committee set up by the Planning
Commission on the aforesaid matter, the proposal has still not been
approved by the Government. As per the latest information furnished
by the Department on the above issue, the proposal has been processed
by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 9 October, 2006 and
has been considered by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) on 8 March, 2007 and currently is before the Group of Ministers
(GoM) wherein a presentation by the Ministry of Rural Development,
Ministry of Science and Technology and ICAR is awaited on the
proposal. The Committee have further been informed that the next
meeting is yet to take place. In this connection during the course of
evidence, it came out that around 16.49 crore saplings of Jatropha and
Pongamia plants have already been planted with an expenditure of
Rs. 49.50 crore in different States and an early clearance of the proposal
from the Group of Ministers is essential in order that this expenditure
does not go waste. In this connection the Committee in their all
previous Reports on Demands for Grants relating to the Department
of Land Resources from 2004-05 onwards have been pursuing the
Government for expeditious clearance of the proposal. The Committee
are, however, constrained to note that the desired results are not
forthcoming. Since the danger of loss of saplings as stated above is
looming large for want of necessary funds, the Committee, therefore,
once again recommend expeditious clearance of the proposal by the
Group of Ministers so that Rs. 50 crore Plan outlay is utilised by the
Department during 2008-09. While recommending for expeditious
clearance of ‘National Mission on Bio-diesel’, the Committee may like
to emphasise that the Jatropha/Pongamia cultivation in the country should
be done without affecting the food security and agricultural land of
the country.
Reply of the Government
To discuss the issues on launching of National Mission on Bio-
diesel, first meeting of Group of Ministers held on 16/05/2007 and it
was decided to have presentation on the proposal of lanching of
National Mission on Bio-diesel, Ministry of Rural Development, ICAR
and Department of Science and Technology later on. Second meeting

31
of Group of Ministers held on 13/06/2008 and the Ministry of Rural
Development, ICAR and Department of Science Technology made
presentations before the GoM . Third meeting of GoM held on 9.7.2008
and it was the opinion that reliable data on various aspects of
plantations of non-edible oil seed bearing trees is not yet available,
and as work on plantation of about 6 lakh ha. and some commercial
activities have already been initiated in several States, the demonstration
programme proposed by MoRD would not serve the purpose. After
discussion, it was recommended that National Mission on Bio-diesel
of the Ministry of Rural Development need not be pursued further.
Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has taken up the matter with
the Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture who is the Chairman of GoM to
reconsider the proposal of the Ministry of Rural Development for
setting up the National Mission on Bio-diesel.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 15 & 19, Para Nos. 3.52 & 3.66)
While reviewing the performance of IWDP during the Tenth Plan
(2002-07), the Committee find that as against the outlays, the utilisation
in terms of percentage of releases was 91.87 per cent, 91.58 per cent
and 90.88 per cent respectively during the first three years of the
Tenth Plan  i.e. 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05. The Committee also find
that in the remaining two years  viz. 2005-06 and 2006-2007 of the
Tenth Plan, utilisation in terms of percentage of releases was
100.47 per cent and 99.02 per cent. The Committee find that the reason
for under-spending in the first three years of the Tenth Plan as indicated
by the Department is that a large amount of outlays was utilised for
meeting the committed liabilities of on going watershed projects as
also failure on the part of North-Eastern States to utilise funds for
these projects. For instance during 2002-03, out of Rs. 450 crore
earmarked for IWDP as high as Rs. 150 crore was spent on meeting
the committed liabilities of on going projects. Similarly during 2003-04
under-spending of Rs. 88 crore was due to non-receipt of new projects
from the North-Eastern Region. Again during 2004-05 poor absorption
of funds by North-Eastern States was the reason for slow progress.
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that the
expenditure position during the Tenth Plan has been satisfactory except
in the case of the North-Eastern States where no new projects were
demanded. The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need
to review the position of development of wastelands in the North-
Eastern Region. The various problems encountered in North-Eastern

32
Region have been dealt with in subsequent paras of the Report. Here
the Committee wish to emphasize that all corrective action should be
taken so as to ensure full utilization of outlay during the Eleventh
Plan.
Recommendation Serial No. 15 (Para No. 3.52)
The Committee note that there are serious problems in the
implementation of the watershed programmes in the North-Eastern
Region including Sikkim. One of the issue, which needs consideration
is the lack of coordination between different Departments of the State
Governments which are mainly responsible for implementing watershed
projects in the entire North-Eastern Region. Further, in view of the
fragile nature of soil and vegetation in North-Eastern Areas, the
Committee underlines the need for special care for preserving the
original soil and vegetation while dealing with the land management
in these areas. The Committee have been informed by the Department
that a zonal meeting is planned in Shillong in May, 2008 for an
interaction with the members of the North-Eastern Council. The
Committee therefore, recommend that the aforesaid issues should be
discussed at the ensuing Zonal meeting to be held in Shillong and the
outcome of the same may be apprised to the Committee.
Recommendation Serial No. 19 (Para No. 3.66)
Reply of the Government
The Department will ensure full utilization of outlay earmarked
for North-Eastern States in the XI Plan. A Regional Review Meeting
has already been held in May, 2008 at Shillong in which all the North-
Eastern States including Sikkim participated and exchanged their views
and problems faced in timely implementation of the projects. An
orientation for the operationalisation of the new Common Guidelines
was also arranged by the Department. The roll out plan for the
Common Guidelines, 2008 was explained in detail to the representatives
of the North-Eastern States. A discussion was also held with the expert
team of North-Eastern Council during the review meeting.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 3.69)
The Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants of the
previous year, had expressed serious reservations on the proposed
restructured programme i.e. NPCLRM, now restructured as NLRMP .

33
The aforesaid reservations were again reiterated in 31st Action Taken
Report (refer para 31) as under:—
(i) the restructured programme would help only the good
performing States and the worse performing States again
would be at a disadvantageous situation;
(ii) there is a peculiar problem in North-Eastern States where
cadastral survey has not been done in some of the States
and no land records exist. In view of this scenario, the
Committee had strongly recommended the Government to
continue SRA & ULR and address the shortcomings by
restructuring some of its components.
The Committee would like the Department to clarify how the
concerns expressed by the Committee while examining the Demands
for Grants of the previous year and reiterated in the Action Taken
Report would be taken into consideration in the restructured
programme.
Reply of the Government
It is proposed to converge all activities under the NLRMP on a
district, and to take the district as the unit of implementation. Since
the States and UTs are at different levels of development and
preparedness, a detailed sizing exercise has been undertaken to assess
the magnitude of the problem and to design State-specific strategies
and approaches customized to the local situations. Each State/UT,
including the slow-moving States/UTs, have been requested to prepare
and submit a perspective plan, beginning with work in at least one
district in each State/UT, progressing in a systematic manner, and
covering all the districts over time, so that all districts in all States/
UTs are ready for ushering in the system of conclusive titles by the
12th Plan period. Hand-holding support would be provided under the
programme and no State/UT will be allowed to unduly lag behind.
Land management system in large parts of the North-Eastern region
consists of a wide variety of tenurial and cultivating arrangements,
largely reflecting the customary laws and practices of different tribals,
sub-tribals and clans. Accordingly, a different approach is proposed to
be adopted for introduction of a land records system and carrying out
survey operation for this purpose in the North-Eastern States. For this
purpose, a study has been entrusted by this Department to the Centre
for Rural Studies (CRS), Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration (LBSNAA), following which the special approach for
the NE States will be worked out in consultation with those States.
The objectives and the systematic approach to be adopted for
implementation of the NLRMP were discussed with the representatives
of the North-Eastern States in the Regional Review Meeting held during

34
22nd to 24th May, 2008 at Shillong. The State Govt. representatives
assured their full cooperation in implementation of the programme in
the NE region.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 3.74)
While reviewing the work done under the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme of Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) so far, the
Committee find that although a total of Rs. 321.13 crore has been
released for CLR, very little work has been done at the ground level.
For instance there are only three States viz. Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh
and Uttarakhand which have completed the RoR data entry work and
put the same on their website and stopped manual issue of RoRs. In
the remaining States the progress varies from State to State. For instance
Chhattisgarh has completed the RoR data entry work and put on the
website. However, it has not stopped the issue of manual RoRs. Further,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal
have completed the RoR data entry work and stopped issue of manual
RoRs. However, these States have not put the RoR data on the website.
Goa has completed data entry work only.
The Committee while reviewing the State-wise progress would like
to emphasize that urgent steps should be taken to ensure that the RoR
data entry work is completed in the remaining States and the data is
put on the website. Besides where the RoR data work has been
computerized, there is an urgent need to stop the manual issue of
RoR. The Department should take the desired steps in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Progress made under the Scheme of Computerisation of Land
Records is being reviewed from time to time at various fora including
the Conference of Revenue Secretaries of the States/UTs. The State
Governments have been requested for completion of all activities under
the programme.
The Progress in this regard is also being reviewed in the Regional
Review Meetings being organized by this Department .
The State Governments which have completed computerization of
RoR data, but have not stopped manual issue of RoRs or have not
put the data on the website have been requested to indicate the reasons.
On receipt of the same, the Committee will be apprised of the position.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]

35
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
—Nil—

36
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 3.40)
The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the
previous year had also recommended to have a National Land Use
Policy (refer para 3.19 of 27th Report) which can guide the various
State Governments in having laws with regard to the use of land for
different purposes with the objective of balanced and harmonious use
of land for different purposes. In this regard, the Committee note that
the National Land Use and Conservation Board under the Ministry of
Agriculture is dealing with the issue of the Land Use Policy. The
Committee are concerned to note that no sitting of the aforesaid Board
has been held for the last many years as informed by the Secretary,
Department of Land Resources, during the course of oral evidence.
The Committee deplore the way such an important national issue is
being addressed by the Government. The Committee strongly
recommend to take up the issue urgently with the Ministry of
Agriculture so that a National Land Use Policy is formulated
expeditiously. The Committee may be informed about the concrete
action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee was sent to Ministry of
Agriculture with the request that they may take necessary action to
convene the meeting of the National Land Use and Conservation Board
(NLCB) so that the issues relating to conversion of agricultural land
for non-agricultural purposes including SEZs, formulation of a National
Land Use Policy etc. could be discussed. However, that Ministry has
informed that Planning Commission has discontinued the National
Land Use and Conservation Board vide their DO letter dated 13.8.2004
and accordingly it is not possible to convene the meeting.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)

37
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 3.41)
The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the
previous year (refer para 3.19 of 27th Report) had been informed that
the data with regard to the acquisition of land for Special Economic
Zones is being collected by the Department from the concerned Ministry
of Commerce and Industry. While examining the Demands for Grants
for the year 2008-09 again, the Department have informed that the
aforesaid data as asked by the Committee is being collected. The
Committee fail to understand even after one year has elapsed since
the Committee desired the aforesaid data, the same could not be
collected from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The Committee
while deploring the casual manner of the Ministry in this regard desired
that the data should be obtained expeditiously and furnished to the
Committee. Besides, the specific data with regard to the acquisition of
agricultural land for setting up SEZs may also be obtained. The
information in this regard may separately be asked for single crop,
double crop and multi crop agricultural land.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been sent to the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry with the request to furnish the
requisite data with regard to the acquisition of agricultural land for
setting up SEZs, including single crop, double crop and multi crop
agricultural land acquired for the purpose. Reply from that Ministry
has not been received so far.
However, during the oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry
of Commerce and Industry, taken by the Standing Committee on Rural
Development on 3rd July, 2008, in connection with the Examination of
the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Bill, 2007, they informed that the total extent of land
in the 404 formal approvals for SEZs so far is 57,412.70 hectares.
As regards type of land, it was informed that the information is
available with the respective State Governments and they have been
requested to furnish the detailed information as per the proforma
prescribed. Till date, information has been received in respect of 181
SEZs from 6 State Governments viz. Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab and Rajasthan. The total area
of the land involved in these SEZs is about 16987 hectares. Out of
this, 92% is reported to be barren/waste land and 7.5% of the land is
single crop. The double crop land acquired for SEZs is negligible.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)

38
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 3.55)
The Committee note that the three programmes of the Department
viz. Integrated Wasteland Development Programme (IWDP), the major
programme of the Department related to wastelands development in
the country alongwith two other area development programmes viz.
Drought Prone Area Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development
Programme (DDP) have been merged into an integrated programme
i.e. Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) during the
Eleventh Plan. Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP)
is being implemented from the year 2007-08 i.e. the first year of the
Eleventh Plan. The Committee note that during the year 2007-08 against
the proposed allocation of Rs. 2086.46 crore, Rs. 1201 crore were
provided at BE stage. The allocation was reduced by Rs. 35 crore at
RE stage, thus Rs. 1166 crore were available during the year 2007-08.
Out of Rs. 1166 crore, the expenditure as on 15 March, 2008 is
Rs. 1160.64 crore. During the year 2008-09, Rs. 1875 crore have been
allocated against the proposed allocation of Rs. 2750 crore. The
Committee have been apprised that the Department have decided to
complete 45,000 ongoing watershed projects in the first two years of
the Eleventh Plan. The Committee further note that Rs. 6,522 crore
have been proposed for the committed liabilities of ongoing projects
during the Eleventh Plan. Even if the total allocation earmarked during
the first two years under IWMP is taken into consideration, only
Rs. 3,041 crore (Rs. 1166 crore R.E. of 2007-08 + Rs. 1875 crore B.E. of
2008-09) have been allocated during the aforesaid years. Thus, if only
the committed liabilities are taken into consideration, there is shortfall
of Rs. 3,481 crore even to meet the committed liabilities for the ongoing
projects. The Committee fail to understand how the Department
propose to meet the committed liabilities during the first two years of
Eleventh Plan with the aforesaid shortfall in the allocations. Further
the Committee are unable to comprehend how the new projects would
be taken under IWMP with the meagre allocation of resources. The
Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that the target of
developing 25 million hectares of rainfed area during the Eleventh
Plan seems to be a distant reality with the position of the allocation
of resources during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan as being
stated above. The Committee strongly recommend that desired
initiatives should be taken to complete the 45,000 ongoing projects in
the stipulated timeframe of two years so that the additional projects
as per the modified guidelines can be taken up and the set targets
could be achieved. The Committee strongly recommend that the
Department should pursue with the Planning Commission/Ministry
of Finance for adequate outlay under IWMP .

39
Reply of the Government
The Department has not committed that all the 45,000 projects
shall be completed during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan.
Rather, in view of the huge liabilities, the Department has proposed to
focus on meeting only the committed liabilities of ongoing projects
instead of creating new liabilities during the first two years of the
Eleventh Plan. As the project period is of 5 years and the projects
often extend beyond 5 years to be completed, the projects sanctioned
towards the end of the Tenth Plan can only be completed at the end
of the Eleventh Plan and some projects may also spill over to Twelfth
Plan.
The Department is making all out efforts to complete the projects
sanctioned prior to Eleventh Plan in time through continuous
monitoring and interaction with the implementing agencies at various
levels in the States.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 3.61)
The Committee are constrained to note that as many as 357
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) amounting to Rs. 281.67 crore are
outstanding as on 31 December 2007 in respect of the three Area
Development Programmes of IWDP , DPAP and DDP . In this connection
the Committee also find that out of these as many as 153 UCs pertain
to IWDP and 115 UCs relate to DPAP involving approximately Rs. 60
crore each. Remaining 24 UCs relate to DDP amounting to Rs. 21.50
crore. The Committee further find that as on 20 March, 2008 there has
been a slight reduction in the aforesaid outstanding UCs. For instance,
under IWDP 91 UCs with an amount of Rs. 39.47 crore, under DPAP
101 UCs with an amount of 51.91 crore and under DDP 8 UCs with
an amount of 12.45 crore are outstanding. From the available data, the
Committee find that the major defaulting States are Assam, Kerala,
Orissa, Manipur and Sikkim under IWDP; Bihar, Jharkhand, West
Bengal, Uttarakhand and Maharashtra under DPAP; and Rajasthan,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Karnataka under DDP . The
capacity constraints, weak monitoring and lack of will to track out
older records etc. have been attributed as the reasons for the above

40
UCs remaining outstanding from various State Governments. The
Committee fail to understand how the States like Kerala, Karnataka,
Maharashtra and Orissa who have done considerable progress on
e-governance are not submitting Utilisation Certificates in time. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to pursue with the State
Governments in this regard. The concrete action taken should be
communicated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The Department has taken measures to obtain pending UCs from
the concerned states. The states have been requested to mention the
reasons for delay in submission of each pending Utilisation Certificate
and a discussion on this has been held with the concerned states in
the four Regional Review Meetings held so far at Chennai, Shilong,
Dehradun and Udaipur. The concerned states have assured that the
UCs shall be submitted in time in future. The Department shall also
take up the matter with the remaining states at the fifth Regional
Review Meeting to be held at Bhubaneshwar during September-October,
2008. The Department has formulated Area Officers Scheme to ensure
that pending UCs are expedited. These area officers will visit the States
and pursue pending matters with State Governments. The matter of
pending UCs is also being pursued through video conferencing.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 3.75)
As regards the performance of CLR during the year 2006-07 and
2007-08, the Committee find that although the financial achievement is
almost 100 per cent, there are serious shortfalls in the physical
achievement. Against the physical target of installation of Hardware
and Software in 75 sub-Divisions, the achievement upto 31st March,
2007 as indicated in the Outcome Budget is 2 sub-Divisions only. Again
with regard to setting up of district data level centres for 50 districts,
the achievement has been indicated as 27 districts. Various reasons
like the delay in the release of funds by the States to implementing
agencies, non-availability of data entry agencies and lack of trained
staff to manage the Computer Centres have been cited as the reasons
for under-performance. The Committee express serious concern over

41
the mis-match between the physical and financial achievement during
the year 2006-07. During the year 2007-08 in the Outcome Budget in
the Quantifiable Deliverables and achievement column the specific
targets have not been indicated. The Committee express serious concern
over not indicating specific targets during the year 2007-08. In this
regard, the Committee would like that the physical achievement under
the programme during the year 2007-08 may be indicated in clear
terms so as to analyze the position of the implementation of the
programme during the aforesaid year. Besides, corrective actions with
regard to the various problems being faced in the implementation of
the programme should be taken urgently so as to achieve the objective
of computerization of land records in all the States within the stipulated
time frame.
Reply of the Government
The Scheme of Computerisation of Land Records is demand driven
and funds are released to the State Governments/UT administrations
keeping in view the proposals received, physical achievements under
the scheme and utilization of funds against releases made during
previous years. During the year 2006-07 and 2007-08, major portion of
funds was provided to the States/UTs for operationalization of the
scheme at Tehsil level, scanning of old land records and digitization
maps.
During 2006-07, while the targets of setting up of computer centres
at Sub-division & District levels and monitoring cell at State
Headquarters could not be achieved, operationalization of the Scheme
was sanctioned in 773 Tehsils against the target of 100 Tehsils.
During the year 2007-08, implementation of the National Land
Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP) was proposed. However,
approval for the NLRMP could not be obtained. Accordingly, there
was no separate provision under the CLR Scheme. However, funds to
the tune of Rs. 41.24 crore were released to the States/UTs for
digitization of cadastral maps and for operationalization of the Scheme
in 64 more Tehsils/blocks, setting up of computer centres in 26 sub-
divisions, 1 district land records data centre and 1 monitoring cell at
State Headquarters.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 34 of Chapter-I of the Report)

42
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 3.63)
The Committee find that the per hectare norms of the treatment of
wasteland were revised from Rs. 4000 per hectare to Rs. 6000 per
hectare w.e.f. 1 April 2000. Eight years have passed since the per hectare
cost was revised and the various State Governments have represented
to the Parthasarthy Committee for increase in the per hectare cost of
wasteland. In view of this, the Committee recommend that the issue
of hike in per hectare cost needs to be examined by the Department.
In this connection, the Committee would like to refer to their earlier
recommendation made in this regard as reproduced below (refer para
4.30 of 27th Report):—
“the Committee would like to be informed about the existing
practice indicating clearly whether the allocation is being made
on project to project basis or at the existing rate i.e. Rs. 6,000 per
hectare. Besides, the Committee may also be informed whether
there is any noticeable cost difference between the development
of wastelands and the rainfed area. The Committee feel that the
major portion of the cost of wastelands/rainfed area goes towards
the wages of labourers, since, these are labour intensive work.
As such another fact which needs to be considered while fixing
the cost of treatment of wastelands is the hike in the wages of
labourers in different States.
The Committee while reiterating their stand in this regard would
like that the aforesaid observations should be taken into consideration
while arriving at the decision on the revised per hectare cost norms.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee complied and proposal for
the approval of Expenditure Finance Committee of Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has been moved.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)

43
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 3.68)
The Committee note from the Outcome Budget that from the year
2007-08 onwards, Computerization of Land Records (CLR) and
Strengthening of Revenue Administration & Updating of Land Records
(SRA & ULR) and Comprehensive Modernization of Land Records
(CMLR) have been shown as merged into National Land Records
Modernization Programme (NLRMP). While examining the Demands
for Grants of the previous year, the Committee had been informed
that the aforesaid two schemes were proposed to the merged into the
‘National Programme for Comprehensive Land Resources Management’
(NPCLRM), which was proposed to be started on a pilot basis. The
information furnished by the Department during the course of the
examination of the current Demands for Grants indicates that the
NPCLRM has been renamed as NLRMP and the programme is awaiting
EFC Clearance, which would be placed before the Cabinet for approval
thereafter. Besides the comments on EFC Note from some of the
Ministries/Departments are still awaited. The Committee note that there
is utter confusion with regard to the name and restructuring of the
schemes related to land records and its computerization. The Committee
fail to understand how a restructured programme can be implemented
without getting EFC Clearance and the Cabinet approval. It is difficult
to analyse the performance of such an important scheme in the absence
of clarity with regard to guidelines and restructuring of the programme.
The Committee strongly disapprove the way the planning and
restructuring of the schemes is being made by the Department. The
whole process of restructuring and preparation of guidelines should
be completed before 1st April of the year in which a Five Year Plan
starts so as to ensure effective implementation of the schemes. Almost
one year has been wasted and till today, there is no clarity on the
stand of the Department with regard to merging, restructuring of the
Programme. The Department owe an explanation with regard to utter
confusion in the implementation of the important schemes of the
Department. The modalities and the guidelines of the restructured
programme should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously .
Reply of the Government
As rightly indicated by the Committee, there has been delay in
obtaining approval for the “National Land Records Modernization
Programme (NLRMP)”. However, approval of the ‘Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC)’ for the NLRMP has been obtained and the Cabinet
Note has been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat for placing the same
before the Cabinet for its consideration. Thereafter, detailed
implementation guidelines for the programme shall be finalized and
circulated among all concerned and a copy of the same shall be
furnished to the Committee Secretariat.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]

44
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 3.76)
The Committee note that land records are vital documents. In the
absence of proper land records, there are always apprehensions in the
mind of a person who wants to purchase property. In the absence of
a clear title, there is no guarantee that a person gets the conclusive
right with regard to the property purchased by him. Besides, the land
records are always needed for various purposes like getting loans form
Banks and getting benefits under various schemes of the Governments
like Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY). The efforts made by the State
Governments with regard to updation and computerisation of land
records are being supplemented by making allocations under the
schemes related to computerisation of land records, now named as
NLRMP . The Committee note that the thrust of the Government is on
computerisation of land records. However, they wish to emphasise
that the very purpose of computerisation of land records is defeated
if proper land records are not available. Therefore, there is an urgent
need, first of all, to have the correct and updated land records. The
Committee feel that a solution to the problem should be sought through
technological intervention. Nowadays e-enabled database through
satellite imagery have been developed through which any plot of
land or house can be easily located through the web. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that ways and means should
be found out through technological intervention to achieve the
objective of having correct and up-to-date land records so as to give
the required security to the owner of the land. The Department should
take the desired initiatives in this regard and inform the Committee
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Department agrees with the observations of the Committee.
The Schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR have supported the efforts of the
States/UTs for updating and computerization of land records and have
generated awareness amongst the masses about the benefits of the
computerization of land records. However, much more needs to be
done to reach the ultimate goal of ushering in the system of conclusive
titles with title guarantee, which is essential for security of property
rights, minimizing land disputes, efficient functioning of the economic
operations based on land, and overall efficiency of the economy. Access
to the conclusive titles data to the Cooperatives and other financial
institutions would also facilitate credit operations, and bring the desired
efficiency into the system.

45
With a view to achieving the above objectives, a modified scheme
viz. the National Land Records Modernization Programme (NLRMP)
has been formulated by merging the two Centrally Sponsored Schemes,
namely, Computerization of Land Records (CLR) and Strengthening of
Revenue Administration and Updating of Land Records (SRA&ULR).
The NLRMP is concerned not merely with computerization, updating
and maintenance of land records and validation of titles, but also a
Programme that will add value and provide a comprehensive tool for
development planning wherever location-specific information is
required. Under the NLRMP , three layers of data : (a) spatial data
from satellite imagery/aerial photography, (b) topographic maps and
other data from the Survey of India , and (c) land records data – both
records of rights (RoRs) and maps will be integrated and harmonized
on a geographic information system (GIS) platform. The primary focus
of the Programme will be on (i) providing citizen services, such as
providing records of rights (RoRs) with maps to scale; other land based
certificates such as caste certificates, income certificates (particularly in
rural areas), domicile certificates; information for eligibility for
development programmes, and passbooks, etc, and (ii) developing a
comprehensive tool for supporting and planning developmental,
regulatory, and disaster management activities. Ushering in the system
of conclusive titles in the country is the ultimate goal of the programme,
for which all the required activities shall be undertaken in a systematic
manner, and the primary activities shall coverage in the district, and
all districts in the country are proposed to be covered under the
programme by the 12th Plan period, beginning with 1-2 district per
State/UT this year.
Approval of the ‘Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)’ for the
NLRMP has been obtained and the Cabinet Note has been sent to the
Cabinet Secretariat for placing the same before the Cabinet for its
consideration.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No.Z-11014/4/2008-GC, dated 22nd August, 2008]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter-I of the Report)
 N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 December, 2008 Chairman,
24 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

46
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 15 DECEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Balihari Babu
8. Smt. T. Ratna Bai
9. Shri Prabhat Jha
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11. Shri P .R. Rajan
12. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Vinod Gupta — Under Secretary

47
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption
of three draft action taken reports on Demands for Grants (2008-2009)
of the Department of Land Resources, Drinking Water Supply and
Rural Development of the Ministry of Rural Development.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the
Memorandum Nos. 2, 3 and 4 regarding draft reports on action taken
by the Government on recommendations/observations contained in
Thirty sixth, Thirty-seventh and Thirty-fifth Reports of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) in respect of Departments of Land
Resources, Drinking Water Supply and Rural Development under the
Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee after deliberations
adopted the aforesaid draft action taken Reports with a slight
modification in the draft action taken Report of the Department of
Rural Development.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft action taken Reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

48
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SIXTH
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 24
II. Recommendations which have been accepted 16
by the Government:
Para Nos.: 2.5, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.15, 3.16, 3.25,
3.26, 3.27, 3.34, 3.39, 3.45, 3.52, 3.66, 3.69
and 3.74
Percentage to the total recommendations (66.67%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do NIL
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies:
Para No.: Nil
Percentage to the total recommendations NIL
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies 5
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos.: 3.40, 3.41, 3.55, 3.61 and 3.75
Percentage to the total recommendations (20.83%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final 3
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para No.: 3.63, 3.68 and 3.76
Percentage to the total recommendations (12.5%)