CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2007-08)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Twenty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 14 May, 2007.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 34 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:—
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government :
Para Nos.: 3.15, 3.16, 3.29, 3.31, 3.32, 4.13, 4.21, 4.25, 4.30,
4.41, 4.42, 4.76, 4.77, 4.80, 4.83, 5.24, 5.25, 5.26, 5.28, 5.29, 6.3
(ii) Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies :
Para No.: 4.12
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee :
Para Nos.: 3.17, 3.18, 3.30, 4.22, 4.23, 4.24, 4.59, 4.63, 4.78,
4.79, 5.27
(iv) Recommendation in respect of which final replies of the
Government is still awaited :
Para No. : 3.19.
3. The Committee would like the Department to expedite the
proposed action and final replies in respect of Recommendation
No. 3.19 on the issue of finalisation of new Land Use Policy,
categorised under interim category within three months of the
presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Inadequate attention paid to the recommendations of the
Committee made in the respective reports
 Recommendation Serial Nos. 3 and 4
(Para Nos. 3.17 and 3.18)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:
“On the issue of bringing two legislations, one for the purpose
of land acquisition and the other for rehabilitation, the Department
has informed that the Law Ministry and Attorney General have
strongly advised to have two separate legislations in this regard
because the rehabilitation policy is going beyond land acquisition.
The Committee feel that the issues of land acquisition and
rehabilitation are inter-linked and as such need to be addressed
in a single legislation. The Committee would like the Department
to furnish the details of the interactions and deliberations held
with the Law Ministry and Attorney General in this regard so as
to understand the matter in detail and recommend further in
this respect.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 3 (Para No. 3.17)
“The erstwhile standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development during Tenth Lok Sabha had examined various
provisions made under Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and presented
Eighth Report on ‘ Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ to Lok Sabha on
15 December, 1994. Thereafter, the Standing Committee on Rural
Development pursued various issues related to land acquisition
and rehabilitation of the persons whose land is being acquired,
in their various Reports presented to Parliament. The Committee
would like that their various observations/recommendations made
in the respective reports should be taken into consideration while
making amendments to Land Acquisition Act and bringing in a
new law related to the issue of rehabilitation.”
(Recommendation Serial No. 4 (Para No. 3.18)
6. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as under:-
“* * * The draft National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy-
2007, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Bill, 2007 and the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 prepared by this Department
in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice are being
considered by the Government.”
(Reply to Recommendations Serial No. 3 (Para No. 3.17)

3
“Wide consultations have been held for revising the R&R policy.
A draft Cabinet Note on revision of the NPRR-2003 and
formulation of the National Rehabilitation Policy-2006 (NRP-2006)
was circulated to concerned Ministries/Departments for their
comments. The draft NRP-2006 was also placed in the public
domain on the websites of the Department of Land Resources
and Ministry of Rural Development and at the Facilitation
Counter of the Ministry of Rural Development, Krishi Bhavan
for public comments, and, for which, a Public Notice was also
published in the prominent National and Regional newspapers.
Comments received from States/UTs and Ministries/Departments
of GoI as well as a number of public comments have been
suitably incorporated in the revised R&R policy, 2007. The various
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee would
also be taken into consideration in this regard before finalizing
the drafts.”
(Reply to Recommendations Serial No. 4 (Para No. 3.18)
7. While examining the Demands for Grants 2007-08, the
Committee had expressed serious reservations on bringing two
legislations, one for the purpose of land acquisition and the other
for rehabilitation of the persons whose property is acquired. The
Committee were of the strong opinion that both the issues viz. land
acquisition and rehabilitation should be addressed in a single
legislation since these are inter-related issues. At that stage, the
Department had informed that the Law Ministry and Attorney
General had strongly advised to have two legislations. On this, the
Committee had desired to furnish the details of the interactions held
with the Ministry of Law and Attorney General so as to understand
the matter and comment further.
The Committee are perturbed to note that the Department has
chosen not to pay attention to the serious observations of the
Committee. No need has been felt to apprise the Committee about
the detailed observations of the Law Ministry and Attorney General.
In a casual and evasive way, the Department has stated that two
legislations are being considered by the Government.
Further, the erstwhile Standing Committee had examined the
various provisions made in the old and outdated legislation ‘The
Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ and after detailed deliberations and wider
consultations made a series of recommendations in the eighth report
of the year 1994. Since then the Committee have been highlighting

4
various issues relating to Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation in
almost every report on Demands for Grants of the Department of
Land Resources and insisting on bringing amendments to the
outdated legislation. The Committee are unhappy to find from the
action taken reply that whereas due consideration was given to the
feedback received from various quarters while formulating and
amending the National Rehabilitation Policy and bringing two
legislations, the recommendations of the Committee are just felt fit
to be considered at the finalization stage only when it may be
difficult to deliberate upon and agree to the main issues raised by
the Committee.
A lot of efforts are being made by the Standing Committee while
examining the various issues through different mechanism viz.
Demands for Grants, subjects and different legislations. Wider
consultations and detailed deliberations are held by the Committee
before arriving at meaningful conclusions. A lot of such valuable
input goes waste due to the indifferent attitude of the Government.
The Committee disapprove the way the Department has
sidetracked the recommendations of the Committee on such a serious
matter. Since the Government has brought two legislations viz Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007 to Parliament and these legislations have been
referred to the Committee for examination and report, the aforesaid
issues would be dealt with in detail while examining the two
legislations. Here, the Committee would like the Department to pay
due attention to the recommendations of the Committee and the
reasons for not agreeing to the recommendations of the Committee
should be categorically mentioned in the action taken reply. Besides,
all the details as desired should be made available to the Committee
so as to understand the issue and arrive at the right conclusions.
B. Formulating National Land Use Policy
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para 3.19)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:
“XXXXXXX There is an urgent need to ensure that there is no
reduction in total agricultural land in the country. In this regard,
the Committee note the stand of the Department according to
which industries, Special Economic Zones should be established
preferably on wastelands. Degraded forestland could also be
considered but with higher than the usual norms for
compensatory afforestation or reforestation. To the extent
agricultural land is used for industries etc., there should be

5
compensatory development of wastelands for the sake of food
security of the country. The Committee also note that the data
with regard to the land acquired for Special Economic Zones as
far is being collected by the Department from the concerned
Ministry of Commerce and Industry.  The Committee also note
that legislative provisions restricting use of agricultural land for
non-agricultural purposes exist in most of the States. Further the
Committee note that land is a non-renewable resource and is
finite. It cannot be further extended. In view of this, there is an
urgent need to ensure a balanced use of land for different
purposes viz. agriculture, industries, forestation, housing etc. While
noting the stand of the Department that industries, SEZs should
preferably be set up on wasteland/degraded forest land, the
Committee recommend that the Government should permit
acquisition of land cautiously keeping in view the limited land
resources of the country. In this scenario, perhaps there is an
urgent need to have a National Land Use Policy which can guide
the various State Governments in having laws with regard to the
use of land for different purposes with the objective of balanced
and harmonious use of land for different purposes.  In this regard,
the Committee also note that the Department has requested the
Ministry of Agriculture to convene the meeting of the National
Land Use and Conversion Board to discuss the issues related to
acquisition of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes. The
aforesaid concerns of the Committee should specifically be
brought before all concerned. Besides, the concern of Committee
to have a National Land Use Policy should also be brought to
the knowledge of the concerned Ministries/Departments . The
Committee should also be kept apprised about the follow up of
the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee.”
9. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Agriculture.
Other Ministries/Departments will also be involved as and when
necessary. The Committee will be kept apprised of the progress
in this regard.”
10. The Committee note that the Department has taken up the
issue of bringing out a National Land Use Policy with the Ministry
of Agriculture and other concerned Ministries/Departments would
also be involved as and when necessary. The Committee would like
the Department to pursue further in this regard and expedite
formulation of National Land Use Policy, which can guide the various
State Governments in having laws with regard to use of land for
different purposes with the objective of balanced and harmonious
use of land.

6
C. Distribution of ceiling surplus land by State Governments
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para 3.30)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee would like to point out an interesting situation
whereby on the one hand land is being acquired for setting up
industries, Special Economic Zones and urbanization, on the other
hand, the emphasis is being given to distribute the land to
landless persons. The Committee also feel that the agenda of
distribution of land to the landless persons would have got a
backseat due to the current priorities of acquisition of land for
setting up industries etc. The Committee would like the
Department to furnish the data with regard to distribution of
land/wastelands year-wise so as to understand the aforesaid
change of priorities and comment further in this regard.”
12. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“As indicated above, land and its management falls within the
administrative jurisdiction of the State Governments as provided
under the Constitution of India. Accordingly, land is distributed
to the eligible poor by the State Governments/UT Administrations
under their various programmes. This Department is monitoring
only distribution of ceiling surplus land by the States/UTs, which
becomes available as a result of implementation of ceiling laws,
by preparation of Quarterly Progress Reports. Ceiling laws are
not in all the States/UTs. Further, in spite of requests, QPRs are
not being received regularly from all States/UTs having ceiling
legislations. As per information received from the State/UT
Governments, the cumulative figures of distribution of ceiling
surplus land at the end of last five years was as under:
As on Area distributed
(in lakh acres)
31.3.2007 50.34
31.3.2006 49.40
30.6.2005** 49.18*
31.3.2004 54.03
31.3.2003 52.94
*The difference in area distributed was due to the fact that during May, 2005 Govt.
of J&K informed that their figure of area distributed viz. 4.50 lakh acres being
shown in the QPRs is incorrect. It was informed by the State Government that an
area of 8836 acres has been declared surplus in the State, possession of the same
has not been taken and it remains with ex-owners.
**QPR as on 31.3.2005 not available.”

7
13. The Committee find that one of the important matter under
the jurisdiction of the Department of Land Resources is monitoring
of distribution of ceiling surplus land by the States/UTs. The
Committee are concerned to note that in spite of request made by
the Department, Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) are not being
received regularly from all States/UTs. Further, the Committee are
surprised to note the data of area distributed in different years since
2003. The Committee fail to understand how the area of 52.94 lakh
acres distributed as on 31st March 2003 could decline to 49.40 lakh
acres as on 31st March, 2006. The Committee would like an
explanation from the Department in this regard. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the names of the States/UTs, which
are not regular in sending Quarterly Progress Reports. The
Department should also indicate the efforts being made to procure
Quarterly Progress Reports from the States/Union territory
Administrations so as to understand the reasons for not sending the
reports by various State Governments.
D. Need for separate district-wise data base for rainfed/degraded
land and wastelands
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para 4.22)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:
“As regards the projections for treating the wastelands, it is
imperative to have the exact information about the task ahead so
as to have proper planning. In this regard different data of
wastelands are given in different documents. Whereas, the
Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan has estimated requirement of
Rs. 80,000 crore for treatment of 80 million hectares of wastelands,
as per the Parthasarthy Committee Report the projections have
been made based on the data of 125 million hectares of
wastelands. Further, the updated Atlas indicates the area of
wastelands as 55.27 million hectares. Further clarifying the
position the Secretary informed the Committee that estimates of
125 million hectares include area of DDP and DPAP land. As
regards the estimates of Approach Paper, the Department at one
place has indicated that they are not aware of this data whereas
at another place it has been stated that when the draft of
Approach Paper came to the Department for comments, it has
clarified that there may be an estimated 125 million hectare
degraded land in rainfed area including 80 million hectares of
land under dryland farming. The Committee conclude from what

8
has been stated above that perhaps there is no clarity of the
exact area which is rainfed area under DDP and DPAP blocks as
well as dryland farming in the country. As regards wastelands
since the district-wise data is available as per the scientifically
obtained data in updated Atlas, perhaps the data can be relied
upon. However, there is too much confusion when the data of
wastelands is combined with data of other degraded/rainfed land
which need treatment. In this scenario the Committee would like
the Department to clarify whether the separate district based data
of rainfed/degraded land other than the wastelands data of Atlas
is available with the Government and whether the outlays
required for degraded/rainfed area are different from those for
the wastelands.”
15. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“In the Draft Approach Paper to the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the
Planning Commission have stated as under:
“With an estimated 80 million hectares needing treatment, and
average expenditure of Rs.10,000 per hectare, the total requirement
of funds is about Rs.80,000 crore. For this magnitude of funding
to be feasible during the 11th Plan, it is absolutely essential that
these programmes be converged with or at least supplemented
by the Employment Guarantee programme funding local level
schemes which conserve moisture and recharge ground water”.
The Planning Commission had sent the Approach Paper at the
draft stage to the Ministry of Rural Development for its comments. In
response to the para mentioned above, the Department of Land
Resources had made the following specific comment:
“There may be an estimated 125 million hectares of degraded
land in rainfed areas including 80 million hectares of land under
dryland farming which may actually need to be developed.
Ministry of Rural Development had set up a Technical Committee
on Watershed Programmes under the Chairmanship of Shri S.
Parthasarthy which in its report has recommended an investment
of Rs.1,50,000 crores over a period of next 15 years to completely
develop this 125 million hectares of rainfed areas in convergence
with National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme.”
Thus, it will be seen that the Department of Land Resources had
categorically mentioned a figure of 125 million hectares as indicated in
the Parthasarthy Committee Report.

9
In the Wastelands Atlas of India – 2005, details of the wasteland
available in each district have been given. The outlay of
Rs.1,50,000 crore has been estimated for development of 125
million hectares of degraded land in rainfed areas including 80
million hectares of land under dryland farming which also needs
development.”
16. While noting the confusion with regard to exact data of
wastelands/dryland to be developed in the country, the Committee
in their earlier recommendation had asked the Department to clarify
whether the separate district-based data of rainfed/degraded land
other than the wasteland data of Atlas is available with the
Government and whether the outlays required for degraded rainfed
area are different from those of the wastelands. The Department has
not clarified the position clearly in the action taken reply. In a vague
manner, it has been stated that the outlay of Rs.1,50,000 crore
estimated for development of 125 million hectares of degraded land
in rainfed area include 80 million hectares of land under dryland
farming which also need development. The aforesaid clarification
does not address to the issue raised by the Committee. The
Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the clear-cut
position on the query raised in the earlier recommendation so as to
have a clear picture of the district-wise position of rainfed/degraded
land as well as wastelands in the country based on the different
Survey Reports of various Agencies including National Remote
Sensing Agency (NRSA), Forest Survey of India, etc .
E. Need to expedite finalisation of Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWMP)
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 14, 24 & 25,
Para Nos. 4.23, 4.78 and 4.79)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that whereas wastelands is spread all over
the country, DDP/DPAP blocks are area specific and identified
in various States. DDP blocks have been identified in seven
States/UTs and DPAP blocks have been identified in sixteen
States/UTs whereas wastelands are there in almost every State.
However, the extent of wastelands may vary from State-to-State.
Besides, the DDP , DPAP blocks may vary with the passage of
time. Such frequent change may not be there in wastelands. In
this scenario perhaps, there is a need to set targets separately for
wastelands/other degraded areas. Otherwise there will be utter

10
confusion. The Committee would like the clarification from the
Department on the aforesaid observation so as to analyse the
position further.”
(Recommendation Para No. 4.23)
“The Committee note that although the new programme IWMP
has been proposed to be implemented from the year 2007-08, the
modalities of revised programme has so far not been finalized.
The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the
Ministry of Rural Development to have the detailed homework
done before launching a new scheme or restructuring a
programme. It is difficult to understand how the subsumed
programme would be implemented in the absence of the detailed
guidelines and pending the finalization of the detailed modalities.
The year 2007-08 has already commenced w.e.f. 1st April, 2007
and the Committee fail to understand how the revised programme
would be implemented in this year in the absence of the detailed
modalities. In view of the aforesaid scenario the Committee
strongly recommend expeditious finalization of the guidelines and
the detailed modalities.”
(Recommendation Para No. 4.78)
“The Committee note that DDP and DPAP are being implemented
in the specified identified DDP and DPAP blocks in various States
of the country. Although the Department has informed that the
operational identity of different programmes would be maintained
in the revised programme, the Committee would strongly
recommend to provide adequate priority to the DDP and DPAP
block in the revised programme.”
(Recommendation Para No. 4.79)
18. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as under:
“The DPAP and DDP are implemented in specified Blocks and
the programmes are meant for drought proofing and to combat
desertification to tackle the special problem faced by fragile eco-
systems in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid regions constantly
affected by severe drought conditions and desertification. Since
the proposed new single programme aims at holistic development
of watershed areas by merging all related area development
programmes, the requirements of individual programmes would
also be taken into account during implementation of the
integrated programme.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 4.23)

11
“Action has already been initiated to get the IWMP approved
from the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). Approval of the
competent authority has also been obtained to release funds for
the ongoing projects of IWDP , DPAP and DDP on the existing
pattern. Accordingly, funds are being released for implementation
of ongoing projects of IWDP , DPAP and DDP out of the allocation
made for IWMP for 2007-08.
The task of preparing of the common guidelines has been
undertaken and it is proposed to submit the common guidelines
to the National Rainfed Area Authority for approval shortly.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 4.78)
“In the new programme (IWMP), the consolidation will be for
the purpose of co-ordination between the three programmes for
the sake of integrated planning and optimum use of resources.
The requirements/priorities of individual programmes would also
be taken into account during implementation of the integrated
programme.”
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 4.79)
19. The Committee while examining Demands for Grants had
been informed by the Department that the new programme
‘Integrated Wastelands Management Programme (IWMP)’ was
proposed to be implemented by the year 2007-08. The Committee in
the earlier recommendation while deploring the way the new
programmes are being launched without detailed homework had
recommended the Department to expedite the finalisation of the
guidelines and the detailed modalities of the new programme.
However, the Department is yet not ready with the guidelines and
the detailed modalities of the programme even when the financial
year 2007-08 is going to end. The Committee cannot but conclude
from the aforesaid scenario that IWMP would not be implemented
during the year 2007-08 as proposed. The Committee deplore the
casual way in which the new programmes are proposed by the
Department and again reiterate their earlier recommendation to do
the homework before proposing some new programme. The
guidelines and modalities of the programme should be finalised
before the start of the next financial year so that the programme can
be implemented and meaningful utilization of the resources is
achieved.

12
F. Clarification regarding matching the claim of Government on
wastelands development at ground level
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para 4.24)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:
“As regards the claim of the Department that 8.6 million hectares
of wastelands was covered as reported in the updated Atlas, the
Committee would like to be informed of the States where the
extent of wastelands has considerable come down. Besides, as
per the data indicated by the Department in Assam, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Mizoram, Nagaland, considerable part of
the wastelands have been covered. The Committee would also
like to be informed whether the achievements reflected in these
States match with the position of wastelands coming down in
the updated Atlas which contained district-wise data obtained
through Satellite imagery so as to draw the meaningful conclusion
about the progress of work with regard to development of
wastelands in the country and to chalk out further strategy in
this regard.”
21. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:
“In the Wasteland Atlas of India-2000, an area of about 63.85
million hectare was estimated as wasteland. According to
Wasteland Atlas of India-2005, the wasteland is 55.27 million
hectare. Thus, a reduction of 8.58 million hectare (63.85 – 55.27)
of wasteland has been noticed.
The information made available by this Department was relating
to the area in various States covered under IWDP since 1995. No
data relating to the achievements made by various States was
furnished. Besides, in the Wasteland Atlas, the area developed
under various watershed programmes has not been given.”
22. The Committee during the course of examination of Demands
for Grants had been informed that in Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Kerala, Mizoram and Nagaland, considerable part of the wastelands
could be covered. While noting the aforesaid position, the Committee
had desired to be informed whether the achievements reflected by
the States match with the district-wise position of wastelands coming
down as reported in the updated Atlas. In response to the aforesaid
concern expressed by the Committee, the Department has very
casually stated that the information made available by the
Department related to the area in various States covered under IWDP

13
since 1995 and no data relating to the achievements made by various
States was furnished.
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid statement that the
stress of the Department is only on making allocations under
different schemes. The Department do not have the data of physical
achievement indicating the development of wastelands in the areas
covered under different schemes to find the ground reality of the
implementation of various projects being undertaken under different
schemes. The Committee have repeatedly been deploring the way
monitoring of different programmes is being undertaken by the
Department and had made various recommendations to monitor the
programmes at various levels and also at various stages. The aforesaid
reply of the Department speaks volumes of the sorry state of affairs
with regard to implementation of the programme. In the absence of
the crucial data with regard to district-wise achievement in the States
where the programmes are being implemented, it is difficult to verify
the achievements claimed by the Atlas. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Department to monitor the data with regard to
physical achievements made with regard to wastelands developed in
various States where different schemes are being implemented and
inform the Committee accordingly.
G. Furnishing information with regard to foreclosure of projects and
data of unspent balances in various Budget Documents
Recommendation ((Serial No. 20, Para 4.59)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee have reviewed the physical and financial
achievement during each year of the Tenth Plan in the preceding
chapter of the report whereby it has been noted that Department
have achieved almost 100 per cent physical and financial targets.
While examining the Demands for Grants of the previous years,
the Committee have noted that the position is not so favourable
if the ground situation in this regard is analyzed. The various
Budget documents of the Department indicate that the releases
to the State Governments/implementing agencies are considered
as spending. Besides, the area covered by different projects is
considered to be developed without analyzing the ground
situation. There is no mechanism to analyze the performance of
projects being undertaken under different schemes due to long
gestation period. The data indicated with regard to unspent
balances to the tune of Rs. 969.15 crore under the three major

14
schemes Desert Development Programme (DDP), Drought Prone
Areas Programme (DPAP) and Integrated Wastelands
Development Programme (IWDP) further substantiates the
aforesaid observation of the Committee. As many as 1764 projects
under DPAP , 300 projects under DDP and 7 projects under IWDP
have been foreclosed by now. The Committee have repeatedly
been recommending to the Department to indicate the position
of unspent balances as well as foreclosure of projects in the
various Budget documents so as to know the position with regard
to real achievement at the ground level. The Committee express
strong exception as the information is not being furnished in the
Outcome Budget of the Department inspite of the insistence by
the Committee in the respective Reports.
The Standing Committee on Rural Development while examining
the Demands for Grants 2005-2006 of the Department [(refer Para
2.16 of Tenth Report (14th Lok Sabha)] had suggested a
mechanism to evaluate the performance of different projects under
the aforesaid three major schemes at various stages of
implementation. The recommendation of the Committee in this
regard is reproduced below:
“The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to evolve some
sort of mechanism for evaluating the performance of different
projects. Some sort of grading indicating poor, satisfactory or
very good may be indicated against the number of projects being
undertaken in various States. Besides, another mechanism can be
to have some system indicating the projects at First stage, Second
stage, Third stage etc. Such type of analysis would enable a critical
evaluation of the projects. The Committee would like the
Department to consider the said aspect and apprise the Committee
accordingly.”
The Committee note with satisfaction from the written replies
that the Department has agreed to adopt the monitoring system
suggested by the Committee. To conclude, the Committee again
emphasize the strict monitoring of the projects being undertaken
under the major schemes related to wastelands through various
systems of monitoring viz. monitoring of projects at various stages,
grading of projects, monitoring through area officers schemes.
Besides, another mechanism to evaluate the performance of the
project is through Vigilance Committees. The Committee strongly
recommend to strengthen the monitoring mechanism as suggested
above. Besides, the Committee reiterate their earlier

15
recommendation to indicate the data with regard to unspent
balances and foreclosure of projects in the various Budget
documents. The aforesaid data may also be made available on
the website of Department to bring transparency as well as to
put pressure on the implementing agencies to perform better in
this regard. Besides, the data and outcome of the meetings of
Vigilance Committees as well as the area officers’ schemes should
also be given in the Budget documents. Besides the Department
should categorically inform the Committee the reasons for huge
under-spending under the three major schemes DDP , DPAP and
IWDP and take corrective action to ensure that the allocation
made under different programmes is meaningfully utilized. The
Committee may also be kept apprised about this.”
24. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:-
“While noting the concern of Hon’ble Standing Committee on
unspent balances, it is submitted that all schemes presently
implemented by the Department are demand driven. The annual
allocation made for different schemes in the Budget of the
Department are not released to States or to the Programmes
Implementing Agencies on allocation basis, but on the basis of
demand for further instalment in case of ongoing projects or for
sanction of new projects. In IWDP , DPAP and DDP , the releases
are made to ZPs/DRDAs in 5 instalments over a period of five
years as per the prescribed procedure. Successive instalments are
released only after 50 per cent of the funds released in the
previous instalments have been utilized.
The Department has taken various measures involving the State
Rural Development Department to monitor the performance of
the projects so that delay in implementation of the project is
arrested, the funds are utilized fully within the stipulated period
and unspent balance with the States/PIAs may be minimum.
Some of the measures taken by the Department are elaborated
below –
(1) Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development takes monthly
meeting in which the Nodal Officers from each State furnish
monthly progress reports which are reviewed and ways and
means are suggested to achieve the physical/financial
targets.
(2) A web-based online system has been launched for
monitoring of the projects by direct on-line entry of the

16
watershed projects related data at three levels i.e. DoLR,
State and DRDA/ZP . The quarterly physical and financial
progress reports are to be entered by the DRDA/ZP and
entry for release of Central share and State share is to be
done by Department of Land Resources and State
Government respectively. The on-line application aims at
generating periodically performance linked updated data on
project details and physical and financial achievements.
(3) The Department has modified the proforma of Utilization
Certificate, which has necessitated the implementing agency
to furnish the details of outputs and outcomes as
incorporated in the Outcome Budget along with the usual
details of fund utilization. This will ensure that fund
expenditure is commensurate with the physical achievements
and indicate the performance of the project while releasing
the next instalment.
(4) Since the project funds are released to the DRDAs/ZPs, the
role of Rural Development Departments of the States was
hitherto limited. The Department has taken the initiative to
involve the Rural Development Departments of the States
in monitoring the performance at all the three stages of the
projects through a State level Committee.
(5) The Department monitors performance of the projects on
the basis of quarterly progress reports. Mid Term evaluation
of the projects by an independent evaluator is mandatory
after release of 45 per cent of project cost. The Mid Term
Evaluation Report reveals the physical outputs and outcomes
of the project and only after analyzing and ascertaining the
positive outputs commensurate with the project objectives,
the next instalment of funds is released for the project.”
25. While taking note of the large number of projects being
closed at various stages under different watershed schemes, Integrated
Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP), Desert Development
Programme (DDP) and Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP),
the Committee have persistently been recommending to indicate the
position of unspent balances as well as foreclosure of projects under
different schemes in the various Budget documents. In the
recommendation under consideration, even when the Committee had
expressed strong exception for not addressing the aforesaid
recommendation of the Committee, the Department has least bothered
to indicate the reasons for not furnishing the desired information in
the Budget documents.

17
In addition to what has been stated above, the Committee has
also desired that the aforesaid data with regard to unspent balances
and foreclosure of projects should also be made available on the
website of the Department. Further, the data and outcome of the
meetings of Vigilance Committees as well as the area officers’
schemes should also be given in the Budget documents. In a vague
manner, the efforts made by the Department for better monitoring
of the projects have been indicated in the action taken replies. The
Committee disapprove the way the Department is addressing to their
recommendations and would like that the desired information may
be indicated in the Budget documents of the coming financial year
i.e. 2008-09.
The Committee in the earlier recommendation had also desired
to be informed about the reasons for huge underspending under the
three major schemes of the Department, viz. Integrated Wastelands
Development Programme (IWDP), Desert Development Programme
(DDP) and Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP), which the
Department has not indicated in the action taken reply. The
Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation would like
the categorical response of the Department in this regard.
H. Giving priorities to development of wastelands in North Eastern
States
Recommendation Serial No. 21 (Para 4.63)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that out of total geographical area of
2,62,179 Sq. Kms. Of North-Eastern States including Sikkim,
62,106.64 Sq. Kms. i.e. 23.69 per cent of the total area in
wastelands. In the North-Eastern States, out of the three schemes
DDP , DPAP and IWDP related to watershed development, only
one scheme i.e. IWDP is being implemented since these States
have no DPAP and DDP blocks. As regards the achievement
made with regard to the various projects being implemented in
these areas, so far 558 projects were taken up during Eighth,
Ninth and Tenth Plan under IWDP covering 2.76 million hectares
of land. Out of this 2.76 million hectares only 1,19,324 hectares
i.e. around 4 per cent of the total land could actually, be treated
as per the information provided by the Department. Another
noticeable fact is that the strategy for Eleventh Plan is being
chalked out based on the data of coverage i.e. 2.76 million hectares

18
and as such the Department is very optimistic to cover the
remaining 2.50 million hectares during the Eleventh Plan thus
leaving only 0.95 million hectares in North-Eastern States. Further
Rs. 20.85 crores is lying unspent with various North-Eastern States.
The Committee have dealt with in detail the issue of releases
being considered as spending as well as coverage being treated
as really developed by the Department in the preceding chapter
of the report. Similar trends are noticeable in the case of North
Eastern States. The Committee disapprove the way the projections
are being made without noting the ground situation. There is an
urgent need to understand the ground situation with regard to
the implementations of various projects so as to know the real
impact of these programmes. The Committee strongly recommend
to the Department to review the policy of monitoring as given
in detail in earlier part of the report and give adequate emphasis
on the development of wastelands in North Eastern States which
have a sizeable area of wastelands.”
27. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“IWDP is a demand driven scheme. The annual allocation made
for the scheme for NE Region in the budget of the Department
is not released to the concerned States or to the Programmes
Implementing Agencies on allocation basis, but on the basis of
demand for further instalment in case of ongoing projects or for
sanction of new projects. The funds are released to the DRDAs
in 5 instalments over a period of five years as per the prescribed
procedure. Successive instalments are released only after 50% of
the funds released in the previous instalments have been utilized.
The Department has taken various measures to monitor the
performance of the projects involving the State Rural Development
Departments. Some of the measures taken are as under:–
(1) Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development takes monthly
meeting in which the Nodal Officers from each State furnish
monthly progress reports which are reviewed and ways and
means are suggested to achieve the physical/financial
targets.
(2) The Department has accorded priority status to all those
projects which are near completion for the sake of
monitoring their progress and processing for release of
funds.

19
(3) In order to give thrust to timely completion of the projects,
Department has taken steps to periodically inform through
notices to the States for assessment of the projects delayed
in claiming the second installment to ensure timely
completion of preparatory stage of the project and the
projects delayed for Mid Term Evaluation to ensure timely
completion of Execution stage.
(4) A web-based on-line system has been launched for
monitoring of the projects by direct on-line entry of the
watershed projects related data at three levels i.e. DoLR,
State and DRDA/ZP . The quarterly physical and financial
progress reports are to be entered by the DRDA/ZP and
entry for release of Central share and State share is to be
done by DoLR and State Government respectively. The on-
line application aims at generating periodically performance
linked updated data on project details and physical and
financial achievements.
(5) The Department has modified the proforma of Utilization
Certificate, which has necessitated the implementing agency
to furnish the details of outputs and outcomes as
incorporated in the Outcome Budget along with the usual
details of fund utilization. This will ensure that fund
expenditure is commensurate with the physical achievements
and indicate the performance of the project while releasing
the next instalment.
(6) Since, the project funds are released to the DRDAs/ZPs,
the role of Rural Development Departments of the States
was hitherto limited. The Department has taken the initiative
to involve the Rural Development Departments of the States
in monitoring the performance at all the three stages of the
projects through a State level Committee.
(7) The Department monitors performance of the projects on
the basis of quarterly progress reports. Mid Term evaluation
of the projects by an independent evaluator is mandatory
after release of 45 per cent of project cost. The Mid Term
Evaluation Report reveals the physical outputs and outcomes
of the project and only after analyzing and ascertain the
positive outputs commensurate with the project objectives,
the next instalment of funds is released for the project.”
28. The Committee in their earlier recommendation while noting
the dismal scenario of implementation of IWDP , the only scheme

20
related to wastelands development being implemented in North-
eastern States, had recommended to give adequate emphasis on the
development of wastelands in North-eastern States where sizeable
area is wastelands. Instead of taking the initiatives in the right
direction the Department has chosen to furnish a vague response. It
has simply been stated that IWDP is a demand driven scheme and
the annual allocation made for the scheme for North-eastern States
in the Budget of the Department is not released to the concerned
States or to the programme implementing agencies on allocation
basis.
The Committee note that whereas ten per cent exclusive allocation
is being earmarked in case of North-eastern States under different
schemes, sincere efforts are not being made to properly utilize the
exclusive allocation which can result in the overall development of
these States. The Committee express serious concern over the way
the Committee has been misled by the Department by giving vague
response to the various recommendations. The Committee reiterate
their earlier recommendation to give more emphasis to North-eastern
States and would like to know about the concrete measures initiated
by the Department for proper implementation of the scheme in these
States.
I. Expeditious finalisation of National Land Resources Management
Programme (NLRMP)
Recommendation Serial Nos. 37 (Para No. 5.27)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee while supporting the Department on the issue
of restructuring the programme find that another area of concern
is having correct land records. The proposed restructured scheme
of computerization of land records on the basis of the existing
records would only serve the purpose of saving the decaying
maps/land records but the real purpose of land records can be
achieved only when the land records are correct and reflect the
true ground position in this regard. In this regard, the State
Governments’ efforts were being supplemented by the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme for Strengthening of revenue Administration
and Updating of Land Records. The Secretary has informed that
under the restructured programme, there is no proposal for taking
up any survey. He has also stated that preparation of land records
is basically the task of State Governments and the original work
has to be done by the States. The Secretary has also observed

21
that SRA & ULR has been reduced into a building programme
i.e. strengthening of land revenue administration which is not
the genuine priority of the programme. The Committee differ
here from the observation of the Secretary and note that very
good work has been done under the programme by some of the
States as admitted by the Department in the various documents.
Goa, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal have been stated to
be the States which have completed RoR data entry work with
the assistance provided under the programme. It has also been
mentioned that Orissa and Andhra Pradesh have also done good
work. In this scenario, the Committee express strong concern
over discontinuing the programme meant for maintenance and
updating of land record i.e. SRA & ULR. While agreeing that
there may be some problems in the implementation of the
programme in some of the States, the Committee feel that the
same can be addressed through bringing reforms in the various
modalities of the programme. Since some States could do very
good work, other States can also be motivated to emulate the
good performing States. Besides, the Committee observe that with
the proposed restructured programme only the States who could
do something to have very good land records can be benefited.
Again the worst performing States would be at a disadvantageous
situation since these States have land records in a form which
will serve no purpose after computerization.
The Committee further observe that in North Eastern States, the
position of land records is further worse. In this regard, it is
pertinent to highlight the observation of the Committee while
examining the Demands for Grants 2006-07 that the system of
land records and land administration prevalent in the rest of the
country does not exist in the hilly and tribal areas of North
Eastern States. In most of the States even the cadastral survey
has not been done and so no land records exist. The Committee
had been informed at that stage that under the existing schemes
some of the North Eastern States have done some work like
Arunachal Pradesh has some land records and Manipur has land
records for five valley districts and these States have started data
entry work. The State Government of Meghalaya has no proper
land records and has been requested to carry out survey and
settlement. State Governments of Mizoram and Nagaland have
already started survey and settlement with the financial support
from Government of India under the scheme of SRA & ULR.
The Committee find that the restructured scheme of

22
Computerization of Land Records would be of no help to North
Eastern States because these States have no land records. Some
initiatives were being undertaken by these States under the
existing SRA & ULR Scheme and with the closure of that support,
there is no hope of having proper land records in these States.
In view of the aforesaid observation, the Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to continue SRA & ULR. However,
the shortcomings of the existing scheme can be addressed by
restructuring some of its components.
Keeping in view the existing position of land records in North
Eastern States, the Committee strongly recommend as under.
1. Detailed survey of the land resources including watershed
areas, catchments areas, drainage, forest areas, arable land
areas etc. of each village through satellite and remote sensing
devices should be carried out;
2. Nodal authorities at the State and District level for
coordinated functioning among the departments, engaged
for the enlistment of rural economy through the use of land
and its resources should be set up;
3. The Expert Committee on land management of the hill areas
at the State and district level should be set up;
4. The recommendations of the Expert Committee should be
mandatory followed by all the Departments.
5. The detailed survey of District and Sub-Divisional
headquarter areas for maintaining land records of
government office plots, individual plots, public land etc.
should be carried out.
The Committee further observe that there is an urgent need to
assure the people in North-East that the aforesaid Schemes are
meant for the upkeep and maintenance of existing land records
and in no way proposed to change the age old traditions and
customs. Such an assurance is altogether required keeping in view
the peculiar position of land records in North-East.”
30. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“It is stated that the RoR data entry work has been taken up/
completed by the State Governments/UT Administrations under
the scheme of Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) under
which 100 per cent Central assistance is provided to States/UTs

23
and not under the Scheme of Strengthening of Revenue
Administration & Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR) where
the funding pattern is 50:50 between the Centre and the States.
However, UTs are provided 100 per cent Central assistance.
Central assistance on 100 per cent basis will be provided to the
States/UTs where this work still remains to be done.
As far as sanction/implementation of NLRMP in the States and
UTs is concerned, the States and UTs are at different levels of
progress in respect of computerization of land records, adoption
of modern survey technology, computerization of property
registration, and modernization of the revenue administration. A
detailed proforma for data collection has been developed and
circulated among the States and UTs. Based on the responses, a
sizing exercise is being carried out to have a clear understanding
of the size of the problem. The Programme requirements would
be worked out according to the state of preparedness of each
State and UT and the activities customized. The necessary “hand
holding” support will be provided under the programme to them.
Outsourcing for critical gaps in technology and human resources
will be allowed. Further, support will be provided to the States/
UTs for outsourcing and procurement management.
Training activities will also be supported under the Programme
for capacity building of the functionaries at the various levels.
This will include training needs analysis (TNA), training of
trainers/master trainers, strengthening of the State revenue
training set up, induction of modern equipment and technology,
consultancies, workshops, etc. Setting up National and State
Resource Centres is also envisaged to support the activities under
the Programme on an ongoing basis.
To begin with, the Programme will be piloted in a number of
districts across the country. These districts will be selected
carefully in consultation with the States and UTs. The experience
of these pilots will help in refining the methodology and
approach, following which the Programme will be scaled up to
cover all the districts in the country.
The requirements of the North Eastern States would be taken
into account under the NLRMP . Land management including
survey, settlement, etc; being a State subject, the above mentioned
recommendations of the Committee would be shared with the
concerned States, so that concerted action could be taken from
their end as well.

24
31. The Committee while taking note of the modalities of the
new programme i.e.  National Land Resources Management
Programme (NLRMP) which is proposed to be started on a pilot
basis had made a series of reservations:—
(i) the restructured programme would help only the good
performing States and the worse performing States again
would be at a disadvantageous situation;
(ii) there is a peculiar problem in North-eastern States where
cadastral survey has not been done in some of the States
and no land records exist. In view of this scenario, the
Committee had strongly recommended the Government to
continue SRA & ULR and address the shortcomings by
restructuring some of its components.
The Department has not addressed to the concerns expressed by
the Committee. Instead, the detailed modalities of the restructured
programme already made available while examining Demands for
Grants (2007-08) have again been indicated. While expressing
displeasure over the way the recommendation of the Committee has
been addressed by the Department, the Committee reiterate that the
aforesaid concerns of the Committee should be looked into while
restructuring the programmes related to land records.

25
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Paragraph No. 3.15)
Land is one of the biggest resources for any country. With the
enormous expansion of the State’s role in promoting public welfare
and economic development since Independence, acquisition of land
for public purposes has become far more important than ever before.
Further, with the changing scenario of industrialization, liberalization,
urbanization and new economic policy there is an immense pressure
on land. Now-a-days, land is being acquired for setting up Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) so as to generate employment through
industries and related activities. With the increased activity of land
acquisition for public purposes as well as for setting up industries, the
issues related to land acquisition and rehabilitation of the affected
persons whose land is being acquired have been the matter of debate
recently.
The Committee note that land and its management falls under the
State List. However, the Union Government has played a crucial role
in the advisory capacity as well as a facilitator since Independence. In
this scenario, the responsibility of the Department of Land Resources,
being the nodal Union Department, to deal with the issues related to
land is immense. On the one hand, there is a need to bring
amendments to the old and outdated laws related to land acquisition
to protect the interests of the persons whose land is being acquired,
on the other hand, there is a need to ensure that there is no reduction
in total agricultural land which may further aggravate the demand
and supply mis-match of agricultural products. On both the accounts,
the Department of Land Resources has the key responsibility. On the
issue of bringing amendments to the old and outdated Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 and rehabilitation policy, the Committee have persistently
been recommending in the respective reports to expedite the same.
As regards the status of the amendments to Land Acquisition Act
and rehabilitation policy , the Committee have been informed that the
new rehabilitation policy has been addressed and is in the public
domain at the websites of the Department of Land Resources and
Ministry of Rural Development. The Ministry of Law and Justice has

26
been requested to draft the amendments to the Land Acquisition Act,
1894 on the lines of the new rehabilitation policy. The Committee also
find that it is proposed to give the rehabilitation policy a statutory
backing. As such, two separate legislations on the Land Acquisition
and rehabilitation are proposed to be drafted and placed before the
Parliament. As regards the major changes proposed in the revised
Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation Legislations, the Secretary has
informed that in the revised legislations, attempt is being made to
protect the interests of the following three categories of persons:—
(a) people whose land is being acquired directly;
(b) people who are utilizing the land, they may not have title;
and
(c) labourers who derive livelihood from land though they may
not have interest directly in the land either as owners or
encroachers.
Further, the Secretary has also informed that the issue of giving
land for land is being addressed in the aforesaid proposed legislations.
As regards the deadline for bringing the aforesaid legislations, the
Secretary has informed that the Department would like to do it as
early as possible. While noting the aforesaid contents of the proposed
legislations on Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation, the Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to expedite finalisation of the
aforesaid legislations and if possible, bring the same before Parliament
during the second part of the current Session of Parliament.
Reply of the Government
The draft National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007,
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Bill, 2007 and suitable amendments to
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, prepared by this Department in
consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice, were discussed in the
PMO. However, the Cabinet Secretariat has directed that these may
first be considered by a Group of Ministers (GoM) constituted vide
their notification dated 23.5.2007 to develop and finalize the drafts for
consideration of the Cabinet regarding the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Policy, 2007 and associated measures in cases relating to
land acquisition. So far, three meetings of the GoM have been taken
place, on 20th June, 2007, 3rd July, 2007 and 19th July, 2007. Once, the
GoM finalizes the drafts, the National Rehabilitation & Resettlement
Policy, 2007, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Bill, 2007, and Acquisition

27
the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007 will be taken to the Cabinet for
consideration.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Paragraph No. 3.16)
The Committee would also emphasize that there is an urgent need
to balance the larger interests of the community for which the land is
being acquired and the right of the individual whose land is being
acquired thereby depriving him/her of means of livelihood. Besides,
there is an urgent need to address the issue of acquisition of land for
private enterprises. The acquisition of land for private enterprises cannot
be at the same footing as the land acquired for various projects of
public welfare. The Committee also note the stand of the Department
according to which land should be acquired absolutely for the
functional needs of a particular industry or a project and should not
exceed the particular purpose so as to include quotas of builders etc.
The Committee find that there are various issues in this regard which
need to be addressed strongly in the legislations, the foremost of which
is the policy of giving land for land.  The Committee noted that land
besides being the source of livelihood for a person is also a symbol of
social status in the society where a person lives. Besides, with the
land various emotional issues are also attached. In this scenario, it is
of utmost importance to address all these concerns and compensate
the persons whose land is acquired not only with land but with the
land of the same quality.
Besides, another issue which needs to be addressed is that the
projects for which land is being acquired should be constructed within
a specified time period and extended unduly to get more profits with
the rising prices of land. There is a need to ensure that only the
specific project for which land is acquired is constructed on the land
and not used for other commercial purposes. The Committee would
like the Department to address to the aforesaid concerns of the
Committee in the proposed legislation on Land Acquisition and
Rehabilitation.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee are being addressed in the
proposed revised R&R policy and amendments to the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894, the drafts of which are being finalized by Group of Ministers
(GoM).
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]

28
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Paragraph No. 3.29)
The Committee note that the Department monitors the data with
regard to distribution of surplus land to landless labourers. Besides,
the Department persuades to State Governments from time to time to
conduct special drives for distribution of surplus land over and above
the ceiling to the eligible rural poor. The department has furnished
various data indicating the progress in regard to – (a) distribution of
surplus land, (b) distribution of Government wastelands, (c) number
of tenants conferred ownership rights, and (d) information of alienation
and restoration of tribal land. The analysis of the data indicates that
out of area of 68,72,824 acres declared surplus 60,27,180 acres could be
taken possession of and out of that 48,99,893 acres could be distributed
to 54,01,232 beneficiaries, out of which 39 per cent of the beneficiaries
are Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. As regards distribution of
Government wastelands so far, 148.55 lakh acres could be distributed
in various States. As regards number of tenants conferred ownership
rights, 125.85 lakh could be given 167.157 lakh acres of lands. As
regards alienation and restoration of tribal land, out of 2,02,901 cases
decided in favour of tribals, in 1,80,703 cases, the land was restored to
tribals. The analysis of the data indicates that there is much difference
between the area taken possession of and area distributed to individual
beneficiaries and between the cases decided in favour of tribals and
cases in which land was restored to tribals. The Committee would like
to Department to further pursue the matter with the various State
Governments so that maximum number of beneficiaries could be helped
in this regard.
As regards the distribution of Government’s wastelands to
individual beneficiaries, the Committee feel that besides distributing
land to individuals, there is an urgent need to provide the facilities
and technical know-how to the beneficiaries so that the wastelands
can be developed and can become the means of livelihood for the
individual beneficiaries.
Reply of the Government
Land and its management falls within the administrative jurisdiction
of the State Governments as provided under the Constitution of India.
The role of the Central Government in this field is only advisory and
coordinating.
However, implementation of Land Reforms programmes including
distribution of ceiling surplus land and Govt. wasteland is reviewed
from time to time at various fora including Conferences of Revenue

29
Ministers/Secretaries of States and UTs organized by this Ministry.
State Governments have been requested from time to time for
distribution of ceiling surplus land and Govt. wasteland to the eligible
rural poor by preparation of action plans and complete the task by
undertaking special drives.
The status of implementation of Land Reforms Schemes/
Programmes was last reviewed during the Conference of the Revenue
Secretaries of the States and UTs held in New Delhi on 7th June, 2006
under the Chairmanship of Minister (RD). Minister (RD) stressed the
need for effective implementation of various components/schemes of
Land Reforms so that the benefits reach grass root level. He requested
the participants of the Conference for coordination with Rural
Development/Panchayati Raj Departments so as to ensure better
implementation of land reforms and rural development programmes.
Further, the State Govt. representatives were requested to develop
degraded wastelands under the National Rural Employment Guarantee
Programme, distribute them to the rural poor and take up Jatropha
cultivation in wastelands. Thereafter, Minister (RD) had written to the
Chief Ministers of the States for having a thorough review of
implementation of Land Reforms programmes and Schemes which
would help in planning and formulation of XI Five Year Plan. He has
also separately written to the Chief Ministers for undertaking a special
drive to get the court cases involving ceiling surplus land disposed of
quickly, especially the cases pending in Revenue Courts on which State
Govts. have control. They have also been requested to consider setting
up of Land Tribunals under Article 323-B of the Constitution or
constitution of Special Benches in High Courts for speedy disposal of
the pending cases.
Implementation of Land Reforms Schemes/Programmes was also
reviewed during the National Workshop on the proposed National
Land Resource Management Programme (NLRMP) held on 14th &
15th June, 2007 in New Delhi under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(RD) with participation from the State Governments, UT
Administrations, domain experts and specialized agencies, such as the
NRSA, Survey of India, NIC, etc. The Workshop was organized with
a view to imparting a clear understanding of the components and
activities to be taken up under the NLRMP , the roles and
responsibilities of the various stakeholders, the technological options,
availability of resources, the expected outcomes and deliverables, etc.
The State Govt. representatives were requested for taking suitable steps
to accelerate the pace of implementation of Land Reforms Schemes/
Programmes.

30
Thus Govt. of India are pursuing the States/UTs for accelerating
implementation of land reforms programmes/schemes including
distribution of ceiling surplus land and Govt. wasteland to the eligible
rural poor.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Paragraph No. 3.31)
The Committee note from the statement given with regard to
number of tenants conferred ownership rights and area accrued to
them in various States that in Arunachal Pradesh tenancy laws are not
enacted. The Committee note that in the rural areas at present there
may not be trend of renting the property but with the changing
scenario of economic development there may be pressure on renting
property for housing and other things. There is an urgent need to
foresee the changing realities and bring tenancy reforms in rural areas
too. The Committee would like to have the detailed information about
the tenancy laws in various States so as to enable them to analyze the
position.
Reply of the Government
Tenancy Reforms is an important component of land reform policy
and, as indicated above, is reviewed from time to time at various fora
including conferences of Revenue Ministers/Secretaries of States/UTs
organized by this Ministry.
As regards tenancy reform measures, legislative provisions have
been made in many States of the country providing for conferment of
ownership rights on tenants or for allowing cultivating tenants to
acquire ownership rights on payment of a reasonable compensation to
the landlords. Some States have acquired ownership of land from the
landlords and have transferred them to the tenants who have to pay
a certain amount or premium to the State. Adequate provision to confer
ownership rights on payment does not exist in some States, such as
Andhra Pradesh (Andhra area), Haryana, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and
West Bengal (in respect of Bargadar). In most of the remaining States,
barring some of the North-Eastern tribal areas, ownership right has
been given to the general body of the tenants through one measure or
the other. The national policy however permits land owners who are
members of Defence Services, widows, unmarried women, minors and
persons suffering from physical and mental disability to lease out lands
to tenants without loss of ownership. Even in States, which still do

31
not provide for conferment of ownership rights on tenants, sub-tenants
and sharecroppers, provisions for security of tenure have been made.
Three important guidelines were laid down in the Five Year Plans
for the reform of tenancy. These are:
1. Rent should not exceed the level of 1/5th to 1/4th of the
gross produce;
2. The tenants should be accorded permanent rights in the
land they cultivate subject to a limited right of resumption
to be granted to the land owner; and
3. In respect of non-resumable land, the landlord-tenant
relationship should be ended by conferring ownership rights
on tenants.
Conferment of ownership rights upon tenants is the ultimate goal
of tenancy reform. Accordingly, State Governments have been requested
from time to time for effective implementation of tenancy laws and
for preparation of action plans for conferment of ownership rights on
the tenants.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Paragraph No. 3.32)
The Committee further note that in various States, there is a
peculiar problem of people occupying land and using it for several
years but not having the proper title. As dealt in detail in the preceding
part of the report, the Secretary has assured that the proposed
amendments to the Land Acquisition Act and the proposed
Rehabilitation Legislation would address to the issue of providing due
compensation to these categories of land holders. The Committee note
that land acquisition is not the only area where these people are at a
disadvantageous position, but otherwise also they are debarred from
various facilities like availing of loan under different Central/ State
Schemes or for housing etc. There is an urgent need to address to this
issue by bringing various reforms in land laws of various State
Governments. The Union Government can play a role of facilitator by
guiding these States through various guidelines to bring such reforms.
The Committee recommend to the Department to take action in view
of the aforesaid observation of the Committee.

32
Reply of the Government
To make the land acquisition process time-bound and effective,
proposal for amendment in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 has been
under consideration in consultation with the State Governments for
some time past. However, a draft Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill,
2007 has been prepared. This, along with the draft of the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007, is under consideration of
a Group of Ministers (GoM), which is in the process of finalizing the
drafts.
With a view to assisting the States/UTs in the task of strengthening
their revenue administration, updating of land records and
computerization of land records, two Centrally sponsored schemes of
Computerization of Land Records (CLR) and Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and Updating of Land Records (SRA&ULR) are under
implementation since 1988-89 and 1987-88 respectively. Since inception,
funds to the tune of Rs. 545.36 crores and Rs. 373.88 crores have been
released to the States/UTs under the Schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR
respectively. While significant progress has been made under the two
schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR, the desirable outcomes are yet to be
achieved.
Under the scheme of SRA&ULR, the States and UTs have made
progress towards adopting modern technology for survey and resurvey
of land, training of survey and settlement staff, storage of land records,
office-cum-residential accommodation for grass root level staff etc.
However, the existing survey and settlement organizations have not
completed their job of periodic resurveys for updating land records.
Records are outdated or not in good shape in most States. In some
North-Eastern States, even the original survey work has not taken
place in many districts. A similar situation prevails in some UTs and
also in some parts of other States. The earlier technology of lattha and
chains for survey is cumbersome, painfully time-taking and costly, and
there is need for adopting modern technology across the country on
a large scale to accomplish the task in a timely and efficient manner.
Under the scheme of CLR, good progress has been made in some
States, but not consistently across the country. Many States have
digitized basic land records data and have started the process of
effecting mutations and distribution of Records of Rights (RoRs) through
computers. Some States have stopped manual issue of RoRs. A few
States have also placed land records data on the Internet websites for
easy access and dissemination of this information.

33
Some achievements under the scheme of CLR
(A) States which have completed RoR data entry:
Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu,
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal
(B) States which have stopped manual issue of RoRs:
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal
(C) States which have placed RoR data on websites:
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand
However, the emphasis of CLR so far, has been more on
computerization and digitization of records, and less on having a
system that maintains accurate and up-to-date records of rights and
securely generates such records on demand. Also lacking, are the
integration of textual and spatial data on RoRs, linkage of registration
with mutation and updating of RoRs, backend reconciliation of village
records, and a comprehensive and standard database of land records
across the country that is necessary for understanding land and
immovable property markets and for efficient administration and policy
making in a modern economy .
Computerization of the property registration process is another
area where some progress has been made in a number of States, largely
on their own initiative, and not covered under the schemes of CLR or
SRA&ULR. However, the prime focus of these initiatives has been on
automation of the deed registration procedures, and there is hardly
any linkage with the land records management system.
With this backdrop, a National Land Resource Management
Programme (NLRMP) has been formulated to replace the two schemes
of CLR and SRA&ULR from the year 2007-08. The programme will
integrate and harmonize three layers of data: (a) spatial data from
satellite imagery/aerial photography, (b) topographic maps and other
data from the Survey of India and Forest Survey of India, and
(c) revenue records – cadastral maps and records of rights (RoRs)
details, on a geographic information system (GIS) platform to facilitate
citizen services based on land data as well as a comprehensive tool
for planning, developmental, regulatory and other activities where

34
location-specific information is needed, to benefit both public and
private sector stakeholders.
The main focus of the Programme will be on delivering citizen
services such as providing records of land titles with maps; other
land-based certificates such as caste certificates, income certificates
(particularly in rural areas), domicile certificates; information on
eligibility for development programmes; land passbooks with the
relevant land information; and facility for easy access to land-based
credit for agriculture, rural development, livelihood and other
programmes (by providing access to land records data to Cooperative
and other financial institutions). The citizen services will also include
points of service such as, touch screens, kiosks, common service centres,
etc.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Paragraph No. 4.13)
Besides the convergence of the activities related to watershed
development at the Union Government level, the Committee have been
recommending convergence of watershed activities at the State level
as well as at the ground level. The Secretary during the course of the
evidence has acknowledged the need for some Centralized agency at
the State level. The Secretary has further emphasized on the need for
Centralized agency at the State level by giving a typical example of
the number of cases which have to be dealt with at the National level.
He has stated that at present 500 hectare proposals are coming to the
Ministry at the National level and as such 45,000 live files are there
with the Department of Land Resources. Once the State level
organization is established, the power to look into the various projects
can be delegated. The Central level agency will development a small
programme for a block or a mini watershed kind of programme and
bring it at the State level where the representatives of the Department
of Land Resources can go and the projects can be sanctioned. On the
PMGSY model the funds can be released to State level agency and
State level agency can do the day to day management with district
level interaction. The Committee feel that the aforesaid mechanism is
on the lines suggested by the Committee in their respective reports
and therefore, emphasize for an early decision in this regard. The
Committee feel that with the Centralized agency in every State the
national level authority can concentrate more on the policy issues as
well as evaluating the different programmes which may eventually

35
bring noticeable impact on the implementation of various schemes of
watershed management. The Committee while endorsing the decision
of the Department in this regard recommend for early constitution of
State level agencies and some district level mechanism to coordinate
the ground level activities.
Reply of the Government
At the National level, National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA)
has been constituted under the aegis of Ministry of Agriculture, to
bring watershed programmes implemented by different Ministries under
one umbrella. There will also be organizations at the State and District
level to implement the programme. Further action in the matter will
be taken as per recommendations of NRAA as and when their
recommendations are received.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 12 (Paragraph No. 4.21)
The Committee find that even when the Atlas (2000) and updated
Atlas (2005), is available with the Government which contains the
Scientific data of wastelands in the country mapped in collaboration
with National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), different data of
wastelands/untreatable land are indicated in various documents of
the Government. Untreatable land as per the Atlas is 12.65 million
hectares, whereas the Department has indicated it as 12.12 million
hectares at one place. The Committee fail to understand how the
untreatable land can further increase or decrease. The Department may
explain the position in this regard.
Reply of the Government
According to the Wastelands Atlas of India – 2005, the extent of
untreatable wastelands in the country is 1,21,172.65 sq. km., which is
equal to 12.117 or 12.12 million hectares. The untreatable wastelands
are comprised of baron rocky/stony waste area (57747.11 sq. km.),
steep sloping area (9097.38 sq. km.) and snow covered and/or glacial
area (54328.16 sq. km.).
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]

36
Recommendation Serial No. 16 (Paragraph No. 4.25)
The Committee further note that as per the planning made by the
Department 5 million hectares was proposed to be covered during
Ninth Plan, 15 million hectares during Tenth Plan and 20 million
hectares during Eleventh Plan. Now the targets for Eleventh Plan have
been revised to 25 million hectares. The Committee may like to be
clarified whether the aforesaid targets include the targets fixed for
rainfed/degraded land other that wastelands areas. The Committee
further observe that the Department is drawing the conclusion/making
strategy with regard to the achievement/development of the wastelands
keeping in view the efforts being made by the Department of Land
Resources. However, besides the Department of Land Resources , the
other Departments viz. the Department of Rural Development under
NREGA and SGRY, the Department of Agriculture, the Department of
Forest and Environment and the various State Governments are making
substantial allocation and doing considerable work for the treatment
of wastelands. With the setting up of the National Rainfed Area
Authority, there is an urgent need to study the impact of the schemes
at the ground level. Perhaps there is an urgent need to have district
based planning. The achievements need to be reflected districts wise
while noting the actual work done in each State. Such district-wise
data should be merged to know the State plans which should ultimately
lead to the National Plan. Such district based monitoring of the data
should be an annual exercise so as to have the exact idea of the
ground position. The Committee would like the Department to convey
the concerns of the Committee in this regard to the National Rainfed
Area Authority and do the national planning on the lines suggested
by the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The concerns of the Hon’ble Standing Committee have been
conveyed to the National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA).
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 17 (Paragraph No. 4.30)
The Committee note that the cost of development of wastelands at
the rate of Rs. 6,000 per hectare was fixed way back during the year
2001. With the increase in costs, there is an urgent need to hike the
existing cost of development and make projections accordingly. In this
regard, the Committee find that the Department has made projections

37
for Eleventh Plan at the rate of Rs. 12,000 per hectare. However, the
Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan has indicated the estimated
requirement of outlay on the basis of Rs. 10,000 per hectare. Besides,
another noticeable fact is that the projections, of the Department are
based on the Parthasarthy Committee Report. While noting the contents
of the Parthasarthy Committee Report, the Committee find that
Rs. 12,000 per hectare cost is a maximal figure. The Department has
further clarified that the figure of Rs. 12,000 per hectare has been used
in order to prepare a credible projection. As far as, the question of
actual costing is concerned, it will be done on project to project basis.
In this regard the Committee would like to be informed about the
existing practice indicating clearly whether the allocation is being made
on project to project basis or at the existing rate i.e. Rs. 6,000 per
hectare. Besides, the Committee may also be informed whether there
is any noticeable cost difference between the development of wastelands
and the rainfed area. The Committee feel that the major portion of the
cost of wastelands/rainfed area goes towards the wages of labourers,
since these are labour intensive work. As such another fact which
needs to be considered while fixing the cost of treatment of wastelands
is the hike in the wages of labourers in different State.
The Committee would like all the aforesaid observations to be
taken into consideration while arriving at the decision on revised per
hectare cost norms.
Reply of the Government
In the Area Development Programmes (IWDP , DPAP and DDP),
the present cost norm is Rs.6000/- per hectare. This is applicable both
for development of wastelands and the rainfed areas. The cost is
divided among the following components in the following manner in
each case–
1. Watershed Treatment/Development works/ Activities 85%
2. Community Mobilization & Training  5%
3. Administrative overheads 10%
The observations/suggestions made by the Standing Committee
about fixation of cost of treatment of wastelands will be duly taken
into account
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]

38
Recommendation Serial No. 18 (Paragraph No. 4.41)
The committee find that during each year of Tenth Plan, the
Department has achieved almost 100 per cent physical as well as
financial achievements as compared to the allocation made and the
targets fixed under different schemes of wastelands development.
Further during each year of the Tenth Plan, the Department has been
allocated nearly the same amount as proposed to Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance. However, during the first year of
Eleventh Pan, the Department has been provided a little over 50 per
cent of the proposed outlay. Not only that, during each year of Tenth
Plan, there has been some enhancement in outlay as compared to
previous year, however, the outlay provided during first year of
Eleventh Plan has been pegged at the outlay provided during the
terminal year of Tenth Plan i.e. 2006-2007. The Committee strongly
recommend the Government to enhance the allocation during the year
2007-2008 specifically when the Department has achieved 100 percent
physical and financial targets and the year 2007-2008 is the first year
of Eleventh Plan which will reflect the priorities of the Government
during the Plan.
Reply of the Government
It has been decided to have a single Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWMP) from 2007-2008 by merging IWDP ,
DPAP and DDP . For IWMP an allocation of Rs.1201.00 crore has been
made. During 2006-07, the total allocation for the three programmes
merged into IWMP was of Rs.1195.00 crore. Thus, the allocation for
these programmes during 2007-08 is slightly higher. However, keeping
in view the absorption capacity of the States, the Department will
make proposals for allocation more funds in the Revised Estimates
2007-08.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 19 (Paragraph No. 4.42)
As regards the strategy of the Department during Eleventh Plan,
Rs. 11,700 crore has been proposed for Eleventh Plan. The proposed
allocation during Eleventh Plan is more than double the projections
made during Tenth Plan. Further the Parthasarthy Committee has
projected the requirement of outlay of Rs. 1,50,000 crore to complete
the target of wastelands development by the year 2020. The Parthasarty
Committee has projected the annual allocation of Rs. 10,000.00 crore.

39
To meet this Rs. 10,000 crore, it has been proposed that the current
outlay should be doubled and another Rs. 5,000 crore would be
dovetailed from NREGS. Against the proposed allocation of Rs. 1,50,000
crores, Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan has estimated the requirement
of Rs. 80,000 crores. Perhaps the difference between the projections
made in the Approach Paper and Parthasarthy Committee report is
due to the difference in per hectare cost of wastelands development.
While Approach Paper has estimated Rs. 10,000 as the projected per
hectare cost of development, the Parthasarty Committee has projected
Rs. 12,000 as the per hectare cost of development. Besides, the
projections made in regard to the total work ahead in the Approach
Paper and Parthasarthy Committee Report also differ. The aforesaid
issues have been dealt in the proceeding part of the report where the
Committee has emphasized the need to resolve the aforesaid issues.
Here the Committee would like to emphasize that the development of
wastelands/degraded land is the top most priority area of the
Government as indicated in the President’s Address to Parliament and
as indicated in the Approach Paper. However, from the allocation made
during 2007-08, it seems that adequate priority has not been given to
this sector. The Committee also note that in the present scenario of
mismatch between the demand and availability of food grains, it is
extremely necessary to increase the area of agriculture in the country.
Beside, with the pressure on land for industries etc. there is pressure
on the Government to develop the area of wastelands. The aforesaid
issues have been adequately addressed in the third chapter of the
report. Here the Committee strongly recommend the Government to
provide adequate outlay under the different schemes after the detailed
planning to be made at the national level by the Centralized agency
viz. National Rainfed Area Authority.
Reply of the Government
The financial requirement for the XI Plan has been projected for
the enhanced and reformed watershed programme and also taking
into account the committed liabilities and the physical targets to be
covered. An amount of Rs.2000.00 crore was proposed for the first
year of the plan, but it was not agreed to by the Planning Commission.
The Department is, however, optimistic about getting more funds from
the Planning Commission for the remaining plan period.
The recommendation of the Committee is noted for future
compliance.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]

40
Recommendation Serial No. 22 (Paragraph No. 4.76)
The Committee note that the existing area development
programmes viz. IWDP , DPAP and DDP have been converged into a
comprehensive scheme Integrated Watershed Management Programme
(IWMP) w.e.f. 2007-2008. The Committee hope that the revised scheme
would look into the various aspects with regard to monitoring of
programme at the ground level and the issue of convergence as raised
by the Committee from time to time in the earlier reports and re-
emphasized in the preceding chapters of the report.
Reply of the Government
It has now been decided to have a single Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWMP) from 2007-08 by merging IWDP ,
DPAP and DDP . The consolidation will be for the purpose of co-
ordination between the three programmes for the sake of integrated
planning and optimum use of resources. The programme will continue
to be monitored as at present.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 23 (Paragraph No. 4.77)
The Committee note that under the ambitious programme’ National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, most of the permissible activities
relate to land development. As indicated in the earlier part of the
report, Parthasarthy Committee while projecting the annual allocation
of the Department has suggested that out of the annual requirement
of Rs. 10,000 crore, Rs. 5,000 crore would be dovetailed from NREGS.
In this context, the Committee find that perhaps there is an urgent
need to consider allowing development of wastelands as an activity
under NREGS. This would further ensure sufficient works under the
Guarantee Legislation to provide minimum 100 days of employment
to each family who demand work as per the provision made under
the Act. The Development of Land Resources in this regard should
discuss this matter with the sister Department of Rural Development
and the outcome arrived at should be indicated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
As per Schedule-I of the National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, the focus of the scheme shall be inter-alia, on water conservation
and water harvesting, drought proofing, irrigation canals, renovation

41
of traditional water bodies and land development, which are the
activities of wasteland development. However, Department of Rural
Development has been requested to ask the concerned district
authorities that the activities relating to wasteland development may
also be taken up under the scheme.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 26 (Paragraph No. 4.80)
The Committee further find that as many as 28,500 projects under
IWDP , DDP and DPAP are continuing at present. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to ensure that the issue of
committed liabilities for these ongoing projects is handled carefully
while switching on from the earlier programmes to the new
programmes so as to have meaningful utilization of the outlays spent
on these projects.
Reply of the Government
It is proposed to meet the committed liabilities for the ongoing
projects under IWDP , DPAP and DDP from the funds allocated for
IWMP . Approval of the competent authority has already been obtained
to release funds for the ongoing projects of IWDP , DPAP and DDP on
the existing pattern. Funds are being released for implementation of
ongoing projects, out of the allocation made for IWMP for 2007-08.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 27 (Paragraph No. 4.83)
The Committee note that a laudable initiative has been taken by
the Department to strengthen the professional support for the successful
implementation of various area development programmes. The Secretary
has informed the Committee about the dedicated team of professionals
so as to provide the technical support for these programmes. In some
of the State like Andhra Pradesh, Orissa there is a dedicated team of
professionals at the State level. Besides, at the district level also some
professional support is there. The Secretary has assured that the
experience of having dedicated team at State and district levels would
be replicated in all the districts where the size of the programmes
reasonable. While appreciating the idea given by the Secretary in this
Regard, the Committee would like that it should be implemented

42
expeditiously so as to ensure the successful implementation of various
programmes.
Reply of the Government
The observation/suggestion made by the Standing Committee
will be duly taken into account for future compliance.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 28 (Paragraph No. 5.24)
The Committee observe that the existing Centrally Sponsored
Schemes relating to Land records viz. (i) Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR) and (ii)
Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) have been integrated into a
comprehensive programme ‘ National Programme for Comprehensive
Land Resources Management (NPCLRM)’ w.e.f. 2007-08. The new
feature of the restructured programme consists of emphasis on
computerization of whatever land records are available with
professional input at States as well as Central level and the time bound
approach to complete the task on a mission mode within three years.
The Committee appreciate the firm resolve of the Department to
computerize the existing maps and land records with a time bound
period of three years and hope that the various shortcomings of the
existing programmes which include the matching share to be provided
by the State Governments, training etc. would be properly addressed
in the restructured programme.  The Committee would like that the
observation/recommendations made by the Committee in various
reports, year after year should be considered while finalizing the
modalities of the programme. Besides, the Committee would like to
emphasise that the modalities of the programme which include the
outsourcing of certain activities should be finalized expeditiously. The
guidelines of the programme should be framed at the earliest. The
Committee may be kept apprised of the same.
Reply of the Government
The National Land Resource Management Program (NLRMP),
conceptualized as a major system and reform initiative that  is concerned
not merely with computerization, updating and maintenance of land
records and validation of titles, but also as a programme that will add
value and facilitate and support delivery of citizen services based on
land data as well as provide a comprehensive tool for development
planning wherever location-specific information is required.

43
To begin with, the Programme is proposed to be piloted in several
districts across the country. These districts will be selected carefully in
consultation with the States and UTs. The experience of these pilots
will help in refining the methodology and approach, following which
the Programme will be scaled up to cover the entire country over a
period of time.
Since the States and UTs are at different levels of development
and preparedness, a detailed sizing exercise has been undertaken to
assess the magnitude of the problem and to design State-specific
strategies and approaches atomized to the local situations
With a view to imparting a clear understanding of the components
and activities to be taken up under the Programme, the roles and
responsibilities of the various stakeholders, the technological options,
availability of resources, the expected outcomes and deliverables, etc.,
a National workshop was organized on 14th-15th June, 2007 at
New Delhi with participation from the State Governments, UT
Administrations, domain experts and specialized agencies, such as the
NRSA, Survey of India, NIC, etc.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 29 (Paragraph No. 5.25)
As regards the transition from the existing programme to the
restructured programme, the Committee strongly recommends that the
various issues related to the existing projects including committed
liability and unspent balances should be taken care of very carefully
by the Department and the Committee may be kept apprised of the
modalities finalized in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The issues related to the existing projects including the unspent
balances would be taken into account by the Department, and the
Committee would be kept informed of the action taken/proposed to
be taken in this regard.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]

44
Recommendation Serial No. 30 (Paragraph No. 5.26)
The Committee further observes that at present two schemes are
being undertaken for land records viz. SRA&ULR to supplement the
efforts made by the State Governments to monitor/update land records
and the other for Computerisation of Land Records. Maintenance and
updation of land records are inter-related issues and no purpose can
be served by computerization unless the land records are properly
maintained. Thus the core data is the essential input for the success of
the computerization programme. The Committee also agree that it is
of utmost importance to save in whatever way the information of
maps/land records as available with the Revenue Departments so as
to ensure that these maps do not decay further. The restructured
programme would be addressing the aforesaid system. The Committee
while supporting the Department in this regard strongly recommend
to the Government to provide adequate outlay so as to enable the
Department to complete the task in the country within the envisaged
time frame of three years.
Reply of the Government
As indicated above, to begin with, the National Land Resource
Management Programme (NLRMP) is proposed to be piloted in several
districts across the country. These districts will be selected carefully in
consultation with the States and UTs. The experience of these pilots
will help in refining the methodology and approach, following which
the Programme will be scaled up to cover the entire country over a
period of time. Implementation and completion of activities under the
NLRMP across the country would take more than three years and
accordingly adequate budget provisions would be sought for
implementation of the Programme by their inclusion in Annual Plan
proposals in respect of the Programme.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 32 (Paragraph No. 5.28)
The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the
previous year had been informed that some of the States viz Goa,
Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have amended the
necessary revenue rules/regulations to stop issue of manual copies of
Record of Rights (RoR) and to provide legal sanctity to computerized
copies of RoR. The Committee had recommended persuading the
remaining States through various seminars, conferences to amend the

45
revenue rules/regulations so that the computerized system of land
records may be given legal sanctity.  The Committee feel that the real
purpose of the computerization of land records can be achieved only
when the legal sanctity to computerized copies of RoR is provided by
the various State Governments. While reiterating the earlier
recommendation of the Committee, the Committee strongly recommend
to the Government to pursue further with the remaining State
Governments to amend the revenue rules/regulations to provide legal
sanctity to computerized RoRs.
Reply of the Government
States/UTs are being persuaded from time-to-time to provide legal
sanctity to the computerized copies of Records-of-Rights (RoR) by
amending necessary rules/regulations and stop manual distribution of
RoR. The States of Goa, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal
have provided legal sanctity to computerized copies of RoR. During
the workshop organized by this Department on 14-15th June, 2007, the
remaining States have again been requested to take necessary action
in this regard.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 33 (Paragraph No. 5.29)
The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the
previous year was also informed that some thinking was being given
to link the data of land records with the computers of the lending
bankers so that the bankers can access the land records directly without
any charge.  The Committee feel that such a move can not only reduce
the transaction cost but also would be a great relief to the poor persons
whose applications are rejected by the banks due to non-availability of
proper copy of land records. Besides, the loan can easily be made
available under various schemes of the Government as well as State
Governments relating to housing agriculture self-help groups etc. The
Committee strongly recommend to the department to evolve some
modalities whereby the aforesaid proposed initiative can be transformed
into reality.
Reply of the Government
The scheme of NLRMP does envisage to cover providing facility
for need-based access to land data to cooperative and other credit

46
institutions, so as to facilitate credit operations for agriculture, rural
development and other livelihood activities.
 [Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Recommendation Serial No. 34 (Paragraph No. 6.3)
The Committee note that a new initiative viz. development of Bio-
fuel has been undertaken by the Government with the ultimate
objective of producing bio-diesel to be blended with diesel to the extent
of 20 per cent. To achieve this objective under the first phase i.e.
demonstration phase, it is proposed to take up over a period of five
years plantation of jatropha and pongamia in five lakh hectares. The
basic emphasis in the demonstration phase is on the development of
quality seed material for wide scale plantation through convergence of
R&D efforts. The Committee also note that different Ministries/
Departments/agencies are involved in the R&D efforts and the
Department of Land Resources has been given the responsibility to
coordinate these efforts in the demonstration phase. The Committee
recommend that the efforts of the Department in this regard should
be intensified with a view to achieve the desired objectives. The
Committee further note that out of Rs. 50 crore allocated during the
year 2005-06, Rs. 49 crore were actually utilized. The Committee note
from the various documents and have been informed during the course
of oral evidence that the aforesaid project has not been cleared by the
Group of Ministers. The Committee would like to know the expenditure
to the tune of Rs. 49 crore was done even when the programme has
not been finalized so far. The Committee would like the Department
to clarify the position in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In July, 2002, the Planning Commission had set up a Committee
on the development of Bio-fuels chaired by the then Member, Planning
Commission, which in its report of April, 2003, recommended the
launch of a National Mission on Bio-diesel with special focus on the
plantation of jatropha curacas in two phases, as demonstration project
in the first phase and as a self sustaining full-fledged programme in the
second—the first phase to be implemented at a cost of Rs. 1496.16 crores.
In the first phase, promotion of jatropha curacas cultivation in forest
and non-forest areas, especially on wastelands was proposed over a
period of five years.

47
The Planning Commission made a presentation to the
Prime Minister on the report of the Committee on 11.7.2003 and it
was decided that the Ministry of Rural Development would act as the
nodal Ministry for processing its recommendations. A draft DPR for
the National Mission on Bio-diesel and implementing the demonstration
project was prepared and submitted to the Planning Commission for
‘in principle’ approval in March, 2005. The Planning Commission has
accorded ‘in principle’ approval to the DPR for the bio-diesel project
in December, 2005, subject to conditions relating to pricing policy for
seed, land allocation by States for cultivating jatropha, bank financing
for plantations, fiscal policy for bio-diesel, etc.
As it was not felt feasible to obtain approval of Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) for launching the demonstration project in the
remaining period of 2005-06, a contingency plan was proposed to take
up jatropha nurseries so that requisite planting material would be
available by the next planting season. Planning Commission was
requested to permit utilization of Rs. 50 crore available in the
B.E. 2005-06 under the bio-fuels head.
Planning Commission permitted utilization of Rs. 50 crore available
in the B.E. 2005-06 for raising jatropha nurseries as proposed by the
Department of Land Resources. The Departmental EFC Chaired by
Secretary, Rural Development met on 25th January, 2006 and approved
utilization of Rs. 49 crore in 9 States for raising 18 crore seedlings for
planting on Government lands.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]

48
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation Serial No. 10 (Paragraph No. 4.12)
The Standing Committee have persistently been recommending in
their respective reports since the year 1998-1999 to bring all the activities
related to wastelands being undertaken by different Ministries of Union
Government under one umbrella. Pursuant to the aforesaid
recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Rural Development
initially transferred DDP , DPAP and watershed component of erstwhile
Employment Assurance Scheme from the Department of Rural
Development to the Department of Land Resources to bring
convergence of the activities related to watershed schemes in their
own Ministry. The Committee continued pursuing the issue of bringing
the watershed activities of the different Ministries under one umbrella
and the Government have now finally agreed to the recommendation
of the Committee and the National Rainfed Area Authority has been
constituted under the Ministry of Agriculture with the initial allocation
of Rs. 100 crore for the year 2007-2008. With regard to the composition
of the aforesaid authority, the Committee note that the authority has
a two-tier structure consisting of a Governing Board and an Executive
Committee. The Minister of Agriculture is the Chairman of Governing
Board and Minister of Rural Development, Water Resources and
Environment & Forests are Members of the Board. Further the
Secretaries of various Ministries are also members of the aforesaid
Board. As regards the Executive Committee, on the top is Chief
Executive Officer, National Reinfed Area Authority. Besides, five eminent
experts in the field of Water Management, Agriculture/Horticulture,
Animal Husbandry & Fisheries, Forestry and Watershed Development
are also in the Executive Committee. One representative each from
various concerned Ministries are also in the Executive Committee.
Besides, Advisor, Agriculture, Planning Commission, Director (CAZRI),
Director (CRIDA) and Subject matter Specialists are also in the
Executive Committee. The Committee also note from the information
furnished by the Department of Land Resources that with the
implementation of National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
under which bulk of the works under watershed development would

49
be undertaken, the Ministry of Rural Development is the largest
implementing agency of the watershed programme. The Committee
appreciate the convergence of activities related to watershed
development under one Central Authority i.e. National Rainfed Area
Authority and hope that tangible results would be seen in the coming
years. The Committee feels that the said Authority should best have
been located under the Ministry of Rural Development being the largest
implementing agency of the watershed activities. The Committee would
like to know from the Department of Land Resources the initiatives
taken in this regard so as to analyze the position and comment further.
Reply of the Government
As decided by the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 10.8.2006,
the National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) has been set up under
the Union Ministry of Agriculture. The Minister of Rural Development
is the Co-Chairman of the Governing Board. The Secretary , Ministry of
Rural Development is also one of the members of the Board.
Representation has also been given to the Ministry of Rural
Development in the Executive Committee of NRAA. The representation
given to Ministry of Rural Development in the Governing Board and
Executive Committee seems adequate and the Ministry may take up
relevant matters effectively in these forums. No action has been initiated
to modify the decision of the Union Cabinet.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]

50
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation Serial No. 3 (Paragraph No. 3.17)
On the issue of bringing two legislations, one for the purpose of
land acquisition and the other for rehabilitation, the Department has
informed that the Law Ministry and Attorney General have strongly
advised to have two separate legislations in this regard because the
rehabilitation policy is going beyond land acquisition. The Committee
feel that the issues of land acquisition and rehabilitation are inter-
linked and as such need to be addressed in a single legislation. The
Committee would like the Department to furnish the details of the
interactions and deliberations held with the Law Ministry and Attorney
General in this regard so as to understand the matter in detail and
recommend further in this respect.
Reply of the Government
As already stated in reply to Para 3.15 that the draft National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy-2007, Resettlement and
Rehabilitation Bill, 2007 and the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill,
2007 prepared by this Department in consultation with the Ministry of
Law & Justice are being considered by the GoM.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 4 (Paragraph No. 3.18)
The erstwhile standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development during Tenth Lok Sabha had examined various provisions
made under Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and presented Eighth Report
on ‘ Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ to Lok Sabha on 15 December, 1994.
Thereafter, the Standing Committee on Rural Development pursued
various issues related to land acquisition and rehabilitation of the

51
persons whose land is being acquired, in their various Reports
presented to Parliament. The Committee would like that their various
observations/recommendations made in the respective reports should
be taken into consideration while making amendments to Land
Acquisition Act and bringing in a new law related to the issue of
rehabilitation.
Reply of the Government
Wide consultations have been held for revising the R&R policy. A
draft Cabinet Note on revision of the NPRR-2003 and formulation of
the National Rehabilitation Policy-2006 (NRP-2006) was circulated to
concerned Ministries/Departments for their comments. The draft NRP-
2006 was also placed in the public domain on the websites of the
Department of Land Resources and Ministry of Rural Development
and at the Facilitation Counter of the Ministry of Rural Development,
Krishi Bhavan for public comments, and, for which, a Public Notice
was also published in the prominent National and Regional
newspapers. Comments received from States/UTs and Ministries/
Departments of GoI as well as a number of public comments have
been suitably incorporated in the revised R&R policy , 2007. The various
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee would also
be taken into consideration in this regard before finalizing the drafts.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 7 (Paragraph No 3.30)
The Committee would like to point out an interesting situation
whereby on the one hand land is being acquired for setting up
industries, Special Economic Zones and urbanization, on the other hand,
the emphasis is being given to distribute the land to landless persons.
The Committee also feel that the agenda of distribution of land to the
landless persons would have got a backseat due to the current priorities
of acquisition of land for setting up industries etc. The Committee
would like the Department to furnish the data with regard to
distribution of land/wastelands year-wise so as to understand the
aforesaid change of priorities and comment further in this regard.

52
Reply of the Government
As indicated above, land and its management falls within the
administrative jurisdiction of the State Governments as provided under
the Constitution of India. Accordingly, land is distributed to the eligible
poor by the State Govts./UT Administrations under their various
programmes. This Department is monitoring only distribution of ceiling
surplus land by the States/UTs, which becomes available as a result
of implementation of ceiling laws, by preparation of Quarterly Progress
Reports. Ceiling laws are not in all the States/UTs. Further, in spite of
requests, QPRs are not being received regularly from all States/UTs
having ceiling legislations. As per information received from the State/
UT Governments, the cumulative figures of distribution of ceiling
surplus land at the end of last five years was as under:
As on Area distributed
(in lakh acres)
31.3.2007 50.34
31.3.2006 49.40
30.6.2005** 49.18*
31.3.2004 54.03
31.3.2003 52.94
*The difference in area distributed was due to the fact that during May, 2005 Govt. of
J&K informed that their figure of area distributed viz. 4.50 lakh acres being shown in
the QPRs is incorrect. It was informed by the State Govt. that an area of 8836 acres
has been declared surplus in the State, possession of the same has not been taken and
it remains with ex-owners.
**QPR as on 31.3.2005 not available.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 13 (Paragraph No. 4.22)
As regards the projections for treating the wastelands, it is
imperative to have the exact information about the task ahead so as
to have proper planning. In this regard different data of wastelands
are given in different documents. Whereas, the Approach Paper to

53
Eleventh Plan has estimated requirement of Rs. 80,000 crore for
treatment of 80 million hectares of wastelands, as per the Parthasarthy
Committee Report the projections have been made based on the data
of 125 million hectares of wastelands. Further, the updated Atlas
indicates the area of wastelands as 55.27 million hectares. Further
clarifying the position the Secretary informed the Committee that
estimates of 125 million hectares include area of DDP and DPAP land.
As regards the estimates of Approach Paper, the Department at one
place has indicated that they are not aware of this data whereas at
another place it has been stated that when the draft of Approach
Paper came to the Department for comments, it has clarified that there
may be an estimated 125 million hectare degraded land in rainfed
area including 80 million hectares of land under dryland farming. The
Committee conclude from what has been stated above that perhaps
there is no clarity of the exact area which is rainfed area under DDP
and DPAP blocks as well as dryland farming in the country. As regards
wastelands since the district-wise data is available as per the
scientifically obtained data in updated Atlas, perhaps the data can be
relied upon. However, there is too much confusion when the data of
wastelands is combined with data of other degraded/rainfed land
which need treatment. In this scenario the Committee would like the
Department to clarify whether the separate district based data of
rainfed/degraded land other than the wastelands data of Atlas is
available with the Government and whether the outlays required for
degraded/rainfed area are different from those for the wastelands.
Reply of the Government
In the Draft Approach Paper to the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the
Planning Commission have stated as under:—
“With an estimated 80 million hectares needing treatment, and
average expenditure of Rs. 10,000 per hectare, the total requirement
of funds is about Rs. 80,000 crore. For this magnitude of funding
to be feasible during the 11th Plan, it is absolutely essential that
these programmes be converged with or at least supplemented
by the Employment Guarantee Programme funding local level
schemes which conserve moisture and recharge ground water”.
The Planning Commission had sent the Approach Paper at the
Draft Stage to the Ministry of Rural Development for its comments. In
response to the para mentioned above, the Department of Land
Resources had made the following specific comment:
“There may be an estimated 125 million hectares of degraded
land in rainfed areas including 80 million hectares of land under

54
dryland farming which may actually need to be developed.
Ministry of Rural Development had set up a Technical Committee
on Watershed Programmes under the Chairmanship of Shri S.
Parthasarthy which in its report has recommended an investment
of Rs. 1,50,000 crore over a period of next 15 years to completely
develop this 125 million hectares of rainfed areas in convergence
with National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme”
Thus, it will be seen that the Department of Land Resources had
categorically mentioned a figure of 125 million hectares as indicated in
the Parthasarthy Committee Report.
In the Wastelands Atlas of India–2005, details of the wasteland
available in each district have been given. The outlay of Rs. 1,50,000 crore
has been estimated for development of 125 million hectares of degraded
land in rainfed areas including 80 million hectares of land under
dryland farming which also needs development.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 14 (Paragraph No. 4.23)
The Committee further note that whereas wastelands is spread all
over the country, DDP/DPAP blocks are area specific and identified in
various States. DDP blocks have been identified in seven States/UTs
and DPAP blocks have been identified in sixteen States/UTs whereas
wastelands are there in almost every State. However, the extent of
wastelands may vary from State to State. Besides, the DDP , DPAP
blocks may vary with the passage of time. Such frequent change may
not be there in wastelands. In this scenario perhaps, there is a need
to set targets separately for wastelands/other degraded areas. Otherwise
there will be utter confusion. The Committee would like the clarification
from the Department on the aforesaid observation so as to analyse the
position further.
Reply of the Government
The DPAP and DDP are implemented in specified Blocks and the
programmes are meant for drought proofing and to combat
desertification to tackle the special problem faced by fragile eco-systems

55
in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid regions constantly affected by
severe drought conditions and desertification. Since the proposed new
single programme aims at holistic development of watershed areas by
merging all related area development programmes, the requirements
of individual programmes would also be taken into account during
implementation of the integrated programme.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No.19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 15 (Paragraph No. 4.24)
As regards the claim of the Department that 8.6 million hectares
of wastelands was covered as reported in the updated Atlas, the
Committee would like to be informed of the States where the extent
of wastelands has considerable come down. Besides, as per the data
indicated by the Department in Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Kerala,
Mizoram, Nagaland, considerable part of the wastelands have been
covered. The Committee would also like to be informed whether the
achievements reflected in these States match with the position of
wastelands coming down in the updated Atlas which contained district-
wise data obtained through Satellite imagery so as to draw the
meaningful conclusion about the progress of work with regard to
development of wastelands in the country and to chalk out further
strategy in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In the Wasteland Atlas of India-2000, an area of about 63.85 million
hectare was estimated as wasteland. According to Wasteland Atlas of
India-2005, the wasteland is 55.27 million hectare. Thus, a reduction of
8.58 million hectare (63.85–55.27) of wasteland has been noticed.
The information made available by this Department was relating
to the area in various States covered under IWDP since 1995. No data
relating to the achievements made by various States was furnished.
Besides, in the Wasteland Atlas, the area developed under various
watershed programmes has not been given.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]

56
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 20 (Paragraph No. 4.59)
The Committee have reviewed the physical and financial
achievement during each year of the Tenth Plan in the preceding
chapter of the report whereby it has been noted that Department have
achieved almost 100 per cent physical and financial targets. While
examining the Demands for Grants of the previous years, the
Committee have noted that the position is not so favourable if the
ground situation in this regard is analyzed. The various Budget
documents of the Department indicate that the releases to the State
Governments/implementing agencies are considered as spending.
Besides, the area covered by different projects is considered to be
developed without analyzing the ground situation. There is no
mechanism to analyze the performance of projects being undertaken
under different schemes due to long gestation period. The data
indicated with regard to unspent balances to the tune of Rs. 969.15
crore under the three major schemes Desert Development Programme
(DDP), Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP) and Integrated
Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP) further substantiates the
aforesaid observation of the Committee. As many as 1764 projects under
DPAP , 300 projects under DDP and 7 projects under IWDP have been
foreclosed by now. The Committee have repeatedly been recommending
to the Department to indicate the position of unspent balances as well
as foreclosure of projects in the various Budget documents so as to
know the position with regard to real achievement at the ground level.
The Committee express strong exception as the information is not being
furnished in the Outcome Budget of the Department in spite of the
insistence by the Committee in the respective Reports.
The Standing Committee on Rural Development while examining
the Demands for Grants 2005-2006 of the Department [refer Para 2.16
of Tenth Report (14th Lok Sabha)] had suggested a mechanism to
evaluate the performance of different projects under the aforesaid three
major schemes at various stages of implementation. The
recommendation of the Committee in this regard is reproduced below.
“The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to evolve some
sort of mechanism for evaluating the performance of different
projects. Some sort of grading indicating poor, satisfactory or
very good may be indicated against the number of projects being

57
undertaken in various States. Besides, another mechanism can be
to have some system indicating the projects at First stage, Second
stage, Third stage etc. Such type of analysis would enable a critical
evaluation of the projects. The Committee would like the
Department to consider the said aspect and apprise the Committee
accordingly.”
The Committee note with satisfaction from the written replies that
the Department has agreed to adopt the monitoring system suggested
by the Committee. To conclude, the Committee again emphasize the
strict monitoring of the projects being undertaken under the major
schemes related to wastelands through various systems of monitoring
viz. monitoring of projects at various stages, grading of projects,
monitoring through area officers schemes. Besides, another mechanism
to evaluate the performance of the project is through Vigilance
Committees. The Committee strongly recommend to strengthen the
monitoring mechanism as suggested above. Besides, the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation to indicate the data with regard
to unspent balances and foreclosure of projects in the various Budget
documents. The aforesaid data may also be made available on the
website of Department to bring transparency as well as to put pressure
on the implementing agencies to perform better in this regard. Besides,
the data and outcome of the meetings of Vigilance Committees as well
as the area officers’ schemes should also be given in the Budget
documents. Besides the Department should categorically inform the
Committee the reasons for huge under-spending under the three major
schemes DDP , DPAP and IWDP and take corrective action to ensure
that the allocation made under different programmes is meaningfully
utilized. The Committee may also be kept apprised about this.
Reply of the Government
While noting the concern of Hon’ble Standing Committee on
unspent balances, it is submitted that all schemes presently
implemented by the Department are demand driven. The annual
allocation made for different schemes in the budget of the Department
are not released to States or to the Programmes Implementing Agencies
on allocation basis, but on the basis of demand for further installment
in case of ongoing projects or for sanction of new Projects. In IWDP ,
DPAP and DDP , the releases are made to ZPs/DRDAs in 5 installments
over a period of five years as per the prescribed procedure. Successive
installments are released only after 50% of the funds released in the
previous installment have been utilized.

58
The Department has taken various measures involving the State
Rural Development Department to monitor the performance of the
projects so that delay in implementation of the project is arrested, the
funds are utilized fully within the stipulated period and unspent
balance with the States/PIAs may be minimum. Some of the measures
taken by the Department are elaborated below–
(1) Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development takes monthly
meeting in which the Nodal Officers from each State furnish
monthly progress reports which are reviewed and ways and
means are suggested to achieve the physical/financial
targets.
(2) A web-based online system has been launched for
monitoring of the projects by direct on line entry of the
watershed projects related data at three levels i.e. DoLR,
State and DRDA/ZP . The quarterly physical and financial
progress reports are to be entered by the DRDA/ZP and
entry for release of central share and state share is to be
done by DoLR and State Government respectively. The on-
line application aims at generating periodically performance
linked updated data on project details and physical and
financial achievements.
(3) The Department has modified the proforma of Utilization
Certificate, which has necessitated the implementing agency
to furnish the details of outputs and outcomes as
incorporated in the outcome budget along with the usual
details of fund utilization. This will ensure that fund
expenditure is commensurate with the physical achievements
and indicate the performance of the project while releasing
the next installment.
(4) Since the project funds are released to the DRDAs/ZPs, the
role of Rural Development Departments of the States was
hitherto limited. The Department has taken the initiative to
involve the Rural Development Departments of the States
in monitoring the performance at all the three stages of the
projects through a State level Committee.
(5) The Department monitors performance of the projects on
the basis of quarterly progress reports. Mid-term evaluation
of the projects by an independent evaluator is mandatory
after release of 45% of project cost. The Mid-term Evaluation

59
Report reveals the physical outputs and outcomes of the
project and only after analyzing and ascertain the positive
outputs commensurate with the project objectives, the next
installment of funds is released for the project.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 21 (Paragraph No. 4.63)
The Committee find that out of total geographical area of
2,62,179 Sq. Kms. Of North-Eastern States including Sikkim,
62,106.64 Sq.Kms. i.e. 23.69 per cent of the total area in wastelands. In
the North-Eastern States, out of the three schemes DDP , DPAP and
IWDP related to watershed development, only one scheme i.e. IWDP
is being implemented since these States have no DPAP and DDP blocks.
As regards the achievement made with regard to the various projects
being implemented in these areas, so far 558 projects were taken up
during Eight, Ninth and Tenth Plan under IWDP covering 2.76 million
hectares of land. Out of this 2.76 million hectares only 1,19, 324 hectares
i.e. around 4 per cent of the total land could actually, be treated as per
the information provided by the Department. Another noticeable fact
is that the strategy for Eleventh Plan is being chalked out based on
the data of coverage i.e. 2.76 million hectares and as such the
Department is very optimistic to cover the remaining 2.50 million
hectares during the Eleventh Plan thus leaving only 0.95 million
hectares in North-Eastern States. Further Rs. 20.85 crores is lying
unspent with various North-Eastern States. The Committee have dealt
with in detail the issue of releases being considered as spending as
well as coverage being treated as really developed by the Department
in the preceding chapter of the report. Similar trends are noticeable in
the case of North Eastern States. The Committee disapproved the way
the projections are being made without noting the ground situation.
There is an urgent need to understand the ground situation with regard
to the implementations of various project so as to know the read
impact of these programmes. The Committee strongly recommend to
the Department to review the policy of monitoring as given in detail
in earlier part of the report and give adequate emphasis on the
development of wastelands in North Eastern States which have a
sizable area of wastelands.

60
Reply of the Government
IWDP is a demand driven scheme. The annual allocation made
for the scheme for NE Region in the budget of the Department is not
released to the concerned States or to the Programmes Implementing
Agencies on allocation basis, but on the basis of demand for further
instalment in case of ongoing projects or for sanction of new projects.
The funds are released to the DRDAs in 5 instalments over a period
of five years as per the prescribed procedure. Successive instalments
are released only after 50% of the funds released in the previous
instalment have been utilized.
The Department has taken various measures to monitor the
performance of the projects involving the State Rural Development
Departments. Some of the measures taken are as under—
(1) Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development takes monthly
meeting in which the Nodal Officers from each State furnish
monthly progress reports which are reviewed and ways and
means are suggested to achieve the physical/financial
targets.
(2) The Department has accorded priority status to all those
projects which are near completion for the sake of
monitoring their progress and processing for release of
funds.
(3) In order to give thrust to timely completion of the projects,
Department has taken steps to periodically inform through
notices to the States for assessment of the projects delayed
in claiming the second installment to ensure timely
completion of preparatory stage of the project and the
projects delayed for Mid-Term Evaluation to ensure timely
completion of Execution stage.
(4) A web-based online system has been launched for
monitoring of the projects by direct on line entry of the
watershed projects related data at three levels i.e. DoLR,
State and DRDA/ZP . The quarterly physical and financial
progress reports are to be entered by the DRDA/ZP and
entry for release of Central share and State share is to be
done by DoLR and State Government respectively. The on
line application aims at generating periodically performance
linked updated data on project details and physical and
financial achievements.

61
(5) The Department has modified the proforma of Utilization
Certificate, which has necessitated the implementing agency
to furnish the details of outputs and outcomes as
incorporated in the outcome budget along with the usual
details of fund utilization. This will ensure that fund
expenditure is commensurate with the physical achievements
and indicate the performance of the project while releasing
the next installment.
(6) Since, the project funds are released to the DRDAs/ZPs,
the role of Rural Development Departments of the States
was hitherto limited. The Department has taken the initiative
to involve the Rural Development Departments of the States
in monitoring the performance at all the three stages of the
projects through a State level Committee
(7) The Department monitors performance of the projects on
the basis of quarterly progress reports. Mid Term evaluation
of the projects by an independent evaluator is mandatory
after release of 45% of project cost. The Mid Term Evaluation
Report reveals the physical outputs and outcomes of the
project and only after analyzing and ascertain the positive
outputs commensurate with the project objectives, the next
installment of funds is released for the project.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 24 (Paragraph No. 4.78)
The committee note that although the new programme IWMP has
been proposed to be implemented from the year 2007-08, the modalities
of revised programme has so far not been finalized. The Committee
have repeatedly been recommending to the Ministry of Rural
Development to have the detailed homework done before launching a
new scheme or restructuring a programme. It is difficult to understand
how the subsumed programme would be implemented in the absence
of the detailed guidelines and pending the finalization of the detailed
modalities. The year 2007-08 has already commenced w.e.f. 1st April,
2007 and the Committee fail to understand how the revised programme
would be implemented in this year in the absence of the detailed

62
modalities. In view of the aforesaid scenario the Committee strongly
recommend expeditious finalization of the guidelines and the detailed
modalities.
Reply of the Government
Action has already been initiated to get the IWMP approved from
the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). Approval of the competent
authority has also been obtained to release funds for the ongoing
projects of IWDP , DPAP and DDP on the existing pattern. Accordingly,
funds are being released for implementation of ongoing projects of
IWDP , DPAP and DDP out of the allocation made for IWMP for
2007-08.
The task of preparing of the common guidelines has been
undertaken and it is proposed to submit the common guidelines to
the National Rainfed Area Authority for approval shortly .
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Paragraph No. 4.79)
The Committee note that DDP and DPAP are being implemented
in the specified identified DDP and DPAP blocks in various States of
the country. Although the Department has informed that the operational
identity of different programmes would be maintained in the revised
programme, the Committee would strongly recommend to provide
adequate priority to the DDP and DPAP block in the revise4d
programme.
Reply of the Government
In the new programme (IWMP), the consolidation will be for the
purpose of co-ordination between the three programmes for the sake
of integrated planning and optimum use of resources. The
requirements/priorities of individual programmes would also be taken
into account during implementation of the integrated programme.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]

63
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No.19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 31 (Paragraph No. 5.27)
The Committee while supporting the Department on the issue of
restructuring the programme find that another area of concern is having
correct land records. The proposed restructured scheme of
computerization of land records on the basis of the existing records
would only serve the purpose of saving the decaying maps/land
records but the real purpose of land records can be achieved only
when the land records are correct and reflect the true ground position
in this regard. In this regard, the State Governments’ efforts were
being supplemented by the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for
Strengthening of revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records. The Secretary has informed that under the restructured
programme, there is no proposal for taking up any survey. He has
also stated that preparation of land records is basically the task of
State Governments and the original work has to be done by the States.
The Secretary has also observed that SRA & ULR has been reduced
into a building programme i.e.  strengthening of land revenue
administration which is not the genuine priority of the programme.
The Committee differ here from the observation of the Secretary and
note that very good work has been done under the programme by
some of the States as admitted by the Department in the various
documents. Goa, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal have been
stated to be the States which have completed RoR data entry work
with the assistance provided under the programme. It has also been
mentioned that Orissa and Andhra Pradesh have also done good work.
In this scenario, the Committee express strong concern over
discontinuing the programme meant for maintenance and updating of
land record  i.e. SRA & ULR. While agreeing that there may be some
problems in the implementation of the programme in some of the
States, the Committee feel that the same can be addressed through
bringing reforms in the various modalities of the programme. Since
some States could do very good work, other States can also be
motivated to emulate the good performing States. Besides, the
Committee observe that with the proposed restructured programme
only the States who could do something to have very good land records
can be benefited. Again the worst performing States would be at a
disadvantageous situation since these States have land records in a
form which will serve no purpose after computerization.

64
The Committee further observe that in North Eastern States, the
position of land records is further worse. In this regard, it is pertinent
to highlight the observation of the Committee while examining the
Demands for Grants 2006-07 that the system of land records and land
administration prevalent in the rest of the country does not exist in
the hilly and tribal areas of North Eastern States. In most of the States
even the cadastral survey has not been done and so no land records
exist. The Committee had been informed at that stage that under the
existing schemes some of the North Eastern States have done some
work like Arunachal Pradesh has some land records and Manipur has
land records for five valley districts and these States have started data
entry work. The State Government of Meghalaya has no proper land
records and has been requested to carry out survey and settlement.
State Governments of Mizoram and Nagaland have already started
survey and settlement with the financial support from Government of
India under the scheme of SRA & ULR. The Committee find that the
restructured scheme of Computerization of Land Records would be of
no help to North Eastern States because these States have no land
records. Some initiatives were being undertaken by these States under
the existing SRA & ULR Scheme and with the closure of that support,
there is no hope of having proper land records in these States. In
view of the aforesaid observation, the Committee strongly recommend
to the Government to continue SRA & ULR. However, the shortcomings
of the existing scheme can be addressed by restructuring some of its
components.
Keeping in view the existing position of land records in North
Eastern States, the Committee strongly recommend as under :
1. Detailed survey of the land resources including watershed
areas, catchments areas, drainage, forest areas, arable land
areas etc. of each village through satellite and remote sensing
devices should be carried out;
2. Nodal authorities at the State and District level for
coordinated functioning among the departments, engaged
for the enlistment of rural economy through the use of land
and its resources should be set up;
3. The Expert Committee on land management of the hill areas
at the State and district level should be set up;
4. The recommendations of the Expert Committee should be
mandatory followed by all the Departments.

65
5. The detailed survey of District and Sub-Divisional
headquarter areas for maintaining land records of
government office plots, individual plots, public land etc.
should be carried out.
The Committee further observe that there is an urgent need to
assure the people in North-East that the aforesaid Schemes are meant
for the upkeep and maintenance of existing land records and in no
way proposed to change the age old traditions and customs. Such an
assurance is altogether required keeping in view the peculiar position
of land records in North-East.
Reply of the Government
It is stated that the RoR data entry work has been taken up/
completed by the State Governments/UT Administrations under the
scheme of Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) under which 100%
Central assistance is provided to States/UTs and not under the Scheme
of Strengthening of Revenue Administration & Updating of Land
Records (SRA & ULR) where the funding pattern is 50:50 between the
Centre and the States. However, UTs are provided 100% Central
assistance. Central assistance on 100% basis will be provided to the
States/UTs where this work is still remains to be done.
As far as sanction/implementation of NLRMP in the States and
UTs is concerned, the States and UTs are at different levels of progress
in respect of computerization of land records, adoption of modern
survey technology, computerization of property registration, and
modernization of the revenue administration. A detailed proforma for
data collection has been developed and circulated among the States
and UTs. Based on the responses, a sizing exercise is being carried out
to have a clear understanding of the size of the problem. The
Programme requirements would be worked out according to the state
of preparedness of each State and UT and the activities customized.
The necessary “hand holding” support will be provided under the
programme to them. Outsourcing for critical gaps in technology and
human resources will be allowed. Further, support will be provided to
the States/UTs for outsourcing and procurement management.
Training activities will also be supported under the Programme
for capacity building of the functionaries at the various levels. This
will include training needs analysis (TNA), training of trainers/master
trainers, strengthening of the State revenue training set up, induction
of modern equipment and technology, consultancies, workshops, etc.
Setting up National and State Resource Centres is also envisaged to
support the activities under the Programme on an ongoing basis.

66
To begin with, the Programme will be piloted in a number of
districts across the country. These districts will be selected carefully in
consultation with the States and UTs. The experience of these pilots
will help in refining the methodology and approach, following which
the Programme will be scaled up to cover all the districts in the
country.
The requirements of the NE States would be taken into account
under the NLRMP . Land management including survey, settlement,
etc; being a State subject, the above mentioned recommendations of
the Committee would be shared with the concerned States, so that
concerted action could be taken from their end as well.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 31 of Chapter-I of the Report)

67
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation Serial No. 5 (Paragraph No. 3.19)
As stated earlier, there is an urgent need to ensure that there is no
reduction in total agricultural land in the country. In this regard, the
Committee note the stand of the Department according to which
industries, Special Economic Zones should be established preferably
on wastelands. Degraded forestland could also be considered but with
higher than the usual norms for compensatory afforestation or
reforestation. To the extent agricultural land is used for industries etc.,
there should be compensatory development of wastelands for the sake
of food security of the country. The Committee also note that the data
with regard to the land acquired for special Economic Zones as far is
being collected by the Department from the concerned Ministry of
Commerce and Industry.  The Committee also note that legislative
provisions restricting use of agricultural lands for non-agricultural
purposes exist in most of the States. Further the Committee note that
land is a non-renewable resource and is finite. It cannot be further
extended. In view of this, there is an urgent need to ensure a balanced
use of land for different purposes viz agriculture, industries, forestation,
housing etc. while noting the stand of the Department that industries,
SEZs should preferably be set up on wasteland/degraded forest land,
the Committee recommend that the Government should permit
acquisition of land cautiously keeping in view the limited land
resources of the country. In this scenario, perhaps there is an urgent
need to have a National Land use Policy which can guide the various
state Governments in having laws with regard to the use of land for
different purposes with the objective of balanced and harmonious use
of land for different purposes.  In this regard, the Committee also note
that the Department has requested the Ministry of Agriculture to
convene the meeting of the National Land use and Conversion Board
to discuss the issues related to acquisition of agricultural lands for
non-agricultural purposes. The aforesaid concerns of the Committee
should specifically be brought before all concerned. Besides, the concern
of Committee to have a national Land use Policy should also be
brought to the knowledge of the concerned Ministries/Departments .
The Committee should also be kept apprised about the follow up of
the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee.

68
Reply of the Government
The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Agriculture.
Other Ministries/Departments will also be involved as and when
necessary. The Committee will be kept apprised of the progress in this
regard.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No.Z-11014/2/2007-GC Dated 27 August, 2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
26 February, 2008 Chairman,
07 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

69
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 18 FEBRUARY 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
 Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
 Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Balihari Babu
11. Shri Jayantilal Barot
12. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
13. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
14. Dr. Chandan Mitra
15. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
16. Shrimati Kanimozhi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II
3. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary-II

70
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 2 regarding draft action taken report on Twenty-
seventh report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of
the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development).
The Committee after deliberations adopted the draft report with a
slight modification.
3. **** **** ****
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft action taken report on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
5. **** **** ****
6. The Committee then decided to hold next sitting on Monday,
25 February, 2008 at 1500 hrs onwards for consideration and adoption
of remaining two draft action taken reports of Department of Rural
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) and Ministry of
Panchayati Raj on Demands for Grants (2007-08).
The Committee then adjourned.
****Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately .

71
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY
SEVENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 34
II. Recommendations which have been accepted 21
by the Government :
Para Nos.: 3.15, 3.16, 3.29, 3.31, 3.32, 4.13,
4.21, 4.25, 4.30, 4.41, 4.42, 4.76, 4.77, 4.80,
4.83, 5.24, 5.25, 5.26, 5.28, 5.29 and 6.3
Percentage to the total recommendations (61.77%)
III. Recommendation which the Committee do not 1
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply :
Para No.: 4.12
Percentage to the total recommendations (2.94%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies 11
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee :
Para Nos.: 3.17, 3.18, 3.30, 4.22, 4.23, 4.24, 4.59,
4.63, 4.78, 4.79 and 5.27.
Percentage to the total recommendations (32.35%)
V. Recommendation in respect of which final reply 1
of the Government is still awaited :
Para No. : 3.19.
Percentage to the total recommendations (2.94%)

THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Twenty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 037
Price : Rs. 77.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2007-08) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government .................................................. 25
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 48
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 50
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 67
APPENDICES
I. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 18 February, 2008................ 69
II. Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Seventh Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 71
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri George Fernandes
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari*
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
12. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
17. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
18. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
#
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari, MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 30 August, 2007, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4022
dated August 30, 2007.
#
Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Energy to Standing Committee on Rural Development w.e.f. 12
December, 2007 as intimated  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4366 dated 12
December, 2007.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Dr. Ram Prakash
28. Shri P .R. Rajan
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
31. Shrimati Kanimozhi
@
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
@Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha nominated Shrimati Kanimozhi, MP (RS) to Standing
Committee on Rural Development w.e.f. 15 September, 2007  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin
Part-II, Para No. 4096, dated 19 September, 2007.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-first Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2006-07) on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Twenty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
14 May, 2007. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 27 August, 2007.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
18 February, 2008.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the
Committee is given in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
26 February, 2008 Chairman,
07 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

31
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Twenty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI