46
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-second Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Rural Housing]
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-second Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Rural Housing]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.2.2009
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 25.2.2009
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2009/Phalguna, 1930 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 052
Price : Rs. 114.00
© 2009 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2008-09) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 39
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 69
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 71
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 97
APPENDICES
I. Status of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2003 on Rural
Housing (as on 17.11.2008) .................................... 99
II. Status of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2003 on Rural
Housing (as on 13.1.2009) ...................................... 101
III. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 24 February, 2009................ 102
IV . Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-second Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 104
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Vacant*
6. Vacant @
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
12. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
17. Vacant
@@
18. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
19. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
20. Vacant
$
21. Vacant
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
24. Shri Prabhat Jha
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P . R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Shrimati Kanimozhi
31. Smt. Kusum Rai
#
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri V .K. Gupta — Under Secretary
*V acancy caused due to the resignation given by Shri George Fernandes, MP from the
membership of Lok Sabha and accepted by the Hon’ble Speaker w.e.f. 11 November,
2008 vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 6205 dated 11 November, 2008.
$V acancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Dharmendra Yadav, MP ,
Lok Sabha by Hon’ble Speaker from Standing Committee on Rural Development to
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice w.e.f. 5 December, 2008
vide Bulletin Part-II Para No. 6267 dated 5 December, 2008.
@ Vacancy caused due to the resignation given by Smt. Kiran Maheswari, MP (LS)
from the membership of Lok Sabha and accepted by the Hon’ble Speaker w.e.f.
23 December, 2008 vide Notification No. 21/3/2008/T dated 23 December, 2008.
@@Vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Smt. Susmita Bauri, MP (LS) by
Hon’ble Speaker from Standing Committee on Rural Development to Standing
Committee on Energy w.e.f.  9 January, 2009 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II,
Para No. 6426 dated 9 January, 2009. Earlier, Hon’ble Speaker had changed the
nomination of Shrimati Susmita Bauri, MP (LS) from Standing Committee on Energy
to Standing Committee on Rural development in place of Shri Tarit Baran Topdar,
MP (LS),  w.e.f. 18 December, 2008 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 6373
dated 18 December, 2008.
# Chairman, Rajya Sabha has nominated Smt. Kusum Rai, MP , Rajya Sabha
w.e.f.  18 February, 2009 vide Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II,
Para No. 45865 dated 18 February , 2009.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2008-2009) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Forty-sixth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-second Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Rural Housing.
2. The Twenty-second Report was prsented to Lok Sabha on
3 August, 2006. The Ministry furnished their replies on 31st July, 2007.
Since most of the replies of the Government furnished on 31st July,
2007 were of interim nature and replies to 6 recommendations were
not received, the Ministry on 1 September, 2008 informed that the
revised action taken replies would be sent to Lok Sabha Secretariat
shortly. The revised replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
19 November, 2008. The Ministry again furnished revised replies in
respect of two recommendations viz. 2.69 and 2.70 on 13 January, 2009.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
24th February, 2009.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-IV .
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
24 February, 2009 Chairman,
5 Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2008-2009)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Twenty–second Report on Rural Housing of the
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Twenty–second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
3 August, 2006 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 3 August,
2006. It contained 56 recommendations/observations.
3. Action taken notes in respect of all the 56 recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government and categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.32, 2.47, 2.50, 2.73, 2.81, 2.82, 3.28, 3.31, 3.32,
3.45, 3.69, 3.72, 3.82, 3.83, 3.84, 3.96, 3.97, 3.98, 3.101, 3.105,
4.22, 4.23, 4.24 and 4.36
Total : 24
Chapter–II
(ii) Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s reply:
Para No. 3.33
Total : 1
Chapter–III
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.12, 2.13, 2.15, 2.16, 2.33, 2.48, 2.49, 2.51, 2.69,
2.70, 2.71, 2.72, 2.77, 2.83, 3.25, 3.26, 3.27, 3.29, 3.30, 3.70,
3.71, 3.73, 3.99, 4.25, 4.26, 4.27, 4.35 and 4.37
Total : 28
Chapter–IV
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.5, 2.14 and 3.100
Total : 3
Chapter–V

2
4. While examining the action taken notes furnished by the
Department, the Committee have noted that the replies to some of
the recommendations do not indicate the latest status with regard to
various issues raised in the recommendations and responded to in
the action taken note. For example, even when per unit assistance
under IAY has already been enhanced from Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 35,000
in plain areas and from Rs. 27,500 to Rs. 38,500 in hilly/difficult
areas w.e.f. 1st April, 2008, the reply furnished by the Department
on 19 November, 2008 indicates that the matter is being considered
by the Ministry. However, the Department in their updated reply
dated 13th January, 2009 has indicated the latest status mentioned
above. Further on the issue of Land Acquisition (Amendment)
legislation, it has been indicated in the action taken note that the
amendment to the aforesaid legislation is under consideration of the
Government, even when the aforesaid legislation was introduced in
Lok Sabha and referred to the Standing Committee and on which
the Committee have already presented the report on 21st October,
2008. The Committee disapprove the way the Department has
responded to the recommendations more so when the revised replies
were furnished by the Department on 19 November, 2008. It is
strongly recommended that utmost care should be taken before
furnishing the information to the Committee and such instances of
furnishing outdated information should not be repeated in future.
5. The Committee trust that utmost seriousness will be shown
by the Department while implementing the recommendations/
observations accepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not
possible for the Department to implement the recommendations in
letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the
Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/
observations contained in Chapter–I and final action taken replies
to the recommendations contained in Chapter–V of this report should
be furnished to them at an early date.
6. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Rural Housing—Constitutional position
Recommendation Serial No. 1
(Paragraph No. 2.5)
7. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that the Union Ministry of Rural Development
i.e. the nodal Ministry for dealing with the subject Rural Housing,

3
in response to some of the issues raised by the Committee with
regard to the subject has stated that rural housing is a State subject
and as such it is the responsibility of the State Government. The
Committee find from the position as indicated above that rural
housing as such do not find place in either of the three lists viz
Union List, State List and Concurrent List of Seventh Schedule of
the Constitution. Various items related to rural housing have been
dealt with in a fragmented manner in the State and Concurrent
List. Further the Committee also note that rural housing finds
place only in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution as one of
the 29 subjects that need to be devolved to Panchayats in pursuance
of Article 243G of the Constitution. The Committee observe that
whereas various sources of revenue like land revenue, stamp duty,
taxes of land and buildings etc. find place in State and Concurrent
List, as indicated above, the rural housing has been indicated as
the responsibility of Panchayati Raj Institutions as per the
Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. The Committee further
observe that a lot has to be done for financial empowerment of a
Panchayats by various State Governments. In this scenario, the
Committee share the observation of the erstwhile Standing
Committee on Urban and Rural Development whereby the
Committee had observed that such kind of fragmented arrangement
of power has posed question about the nature of functioning and
necessity of coordination in the field of housing. Housing for the
poor, weaker and disadvantageous sections of the society is the
responsibility of State as well as Union Government. Union
Government is supplementing the efforts made by State
Governments in this regard. The Committee feel that there is a
need to review the Constitutional position with regard to rural
housing and would like to reiterate the recommendation made by
the earlier Committee. The Committee would like the Government
to explore the possibility to include housing as a subject in the
Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution through
the Constitutional amendment.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.5)
8. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:-
“The Ministry of HUPA have conveyed their ‘no objection’ to
the initiative of the Standing Committee of the Ministry of Rural
Development to put Housing in the Concurrent List provided
the same is endorsed by the Ministry of Rural Development. The
matter is under consideration.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.5)

4
9. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has conveyed their ‘no
objection’ to the initiative of the Committee to put Housing in the
Concurrent List provided the same is endorsed by the Ministry of
Rural Development. The issue is under consideration of the
Department of Rural Development. The Committee desire that the
Department should take immediate steps for inclusion of Housing
as a subject in the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution through a Constitutional Amendment so that adequate
emphasis is given on the subject by the Union and State
Governments and proper coordination is ensured.
B. National Housing Policy
Recommendation Serial Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6 and 13
(Para Nos. 2.12, 2.13, 2.15, 2.16 and 2.51)
10. The Committee had recommended as under:
The Committee understand from the position as indicated above
that at present there is a combined policy for rural and urban
areas in the country. The Committee are concerned to note the
response of the Department whereby the Department has simply
stated that various objectives set under the housing policy viz
removing legal, financial and administrative barriers for facilitating
access to land, finance and technology, creation of surplus in
housing stock, forming strong partnership between private, public
and cooperative sectors to enhance the capacity of the construction
industry, modernization are not concerned with rural housing.
The Committee find that as per the existing position, the housing
in rural areas means only kutcha and pucca minimum required
jhopri type structure. It seems as if there is no vision to reform
the position of housing in rural areas. On the one hand initiatives
like ‘Providing Urban Amenities to Rural Areas (PURA)’ are being
taken by the Government, on the other hand, there is least
concern to improve the housing position in rural areas.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
The rural housing is perceived to be people’s responsibility. The
role of the Government is limited to grant based schemes like
Indira Awaas Yojana under which some sort of financial assistance
is provided to the beneficiary without ensuring the other pre-
requisites required for construction of a house. The quality of
construction is the least concern of the Government. Housing in

5
rural areas is considered to be simply construction of a house by
the user himself with the traditionally known technologies.
Adequate attention is not being paid to facilitate various resources,
lending facility, infrastructure etc. by the Government in this
regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
While examining the various aspects related to rural housing,
the Committee note that foremost issue to be considered is what
is a house. The Committee are constrained to note the definition
of the house according to which houses constructed with
permanent concrete material is pucca house whereas houses
constructed with some of the traditional temporary material is
kutcha house and houses constructed with the mixed permanent
and temporary material is the semi-pucca house. The Committee
are of the view that the aforesaid definition of housing considers
a house only as a structure of four walls and a roof for a family.
It ignores the fact that the residents of a house need various
facilities like infrastructure facilities, water, sanitation, sewage
disposal arrangements, transport, security etc. In the rural context
it is much more important to relate the housing with the work
place because in rural areas most of the population is dependent
upon agriculture. Housing need to be integrated with the habitat
development. Besides providing a place to live for the family,
the house in the rural areas acts as an additional place for the
livelihood work of the family. It is a place where agricultural
implements are kept and crops/seeds stock is stored. Besides it
is much more important to ensure the structural safety of the
building in which the families live. It is important to integrate
housing with all these related issues.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
The Committee further find that as per the definition of a house
as given by the Government pucca house is a house constructed
with concrete material etc. i.e. the permanent material and a kutcha
house is a house constructed with some of the traditional material
like thatch, bamboo etc. i.e. temporary material for construction.
The Committee note that with the advancement of technology, it
has become possible to construct durable house with the
traditional material of construction, the detailed analysis in this
aspect has been done in the later part of the report. Here the
Committee may like to state that this definition of the house is

6
responsible for the mind set of the people in rural areas according
to which only the concrete houses are considered to be as durable
houses and least attention is being paid to construct houses with
low cost locally available material. Besides there is an urgent
need to consider housing in the light of the structure of
Panchayati Raj Institutions as envisaged under Part IX of the
Constitution. Housing need to be integrated with various
developmental programmes of the Government specifically the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Legislation and Bharat
Nirman. Keeping all these aspects in view there is an urgent
need to change the definition of the housing in the context of
rural areas. The Committee urge the Department to take the
desired action in this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
The Committee further find that there is a strong relation between
the construction activity and employment generation and
economic development of an area. Moreover, there is a relation
between the economic standard of a family and the type of house
that it occupies. Housing activity in a way triggers employment
opportunity which may enhance the per capita income of a family
in an area which further may improve the demand of housing.
Not only that effective housing activity can be instrumental to
arrest migration of population from rural to urban areas. Thus
the Committee perceive that there is an urgent need for effective
Government funding along with other initiatives like improving
lending for rural housing which has been addressed in detail in
the later part of the report. Here the Committee may like to
emphasize to the Government to pay more attention to rural
housing since it can be a major instrument for providing
employment to unemployed persons in rural areas. The housing
activity can be a major source of providing employment under
the ambitious programme of the Government i.e. National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.51)
11. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
It is with an objective to provide pucca houses with plinth area
of at least 20 sq. mts. in the rural areas that the scheme of IAY
is being implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development.
Under the scheme, assistance is provided to rural BPL families

7
for both new construction of houses and for upgradation of
existing houses. Also as per the existing guidelines, the State
Governments/ZPs/DRDAs need to make an effort to encourage
use of appropriate technology.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
It is felt that houses taken up by the beneficiaries themselves
will be constructed with more concern for quality and with usage
of appropriate technology. Hence there is a ban on involving
contractors or Government Departments in the construction of
IAY houses. However, the Government Departments/ZPs/DRDAs
can give technical assistance or arrange for coordinated supply
of raw materials if the beneficiary so desires. The Government
also has to make efforts to utilise to the maximum possible extent,
local materials and cost effective disaster resistant and
environment friendly technologies developed by various
institutions. In addition to this, provision has also been made in
the IAY guidelines that dwelling units are built in the main
habitation of the village in a cluster so as to facilitate the
development of the infrastructure such as internal roads, drainage,
drinking water supply etc. and other common facilities. Besides,
construction of sanitary latrine and smokeless chullas is an integral
part of construction of IAY houses. Existing guidelines also
provide for construction of houses under Credit-cum-Subsidy
scheme.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
As already stated under recommendation 2.12, under IAY
guidelines, provision has been made that dwelling units be built
in the main habitation of the village in a cluster so as to facilitate
the development of the infrastructure such as internal roads,
drainage, drinking water supply etc., and other common facilities.
Construction of sanitary latrines and smokeless chulhas is an
integral part of construction of IAY houses. An understanding
with the M/o Power has been reached to provide free electricity
connection to the IAY houses. Hence there is an attempt to
provide various facilities to the extent possible.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.15 )
The Rural Housing component of Bharat Nirman is being
implemented through IAY. Under IAY, the beneficiary is expected
to build the house by contributing his own unskilled labour.
 Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)

8
As per IAY guidelines, the beneficiary is expected to construct
his house by contributing his own labour. Thus linking the house
construction programme with NREGA may not have much
impact. As regards lending, the existing guidelines provide for
construction of houses under Credit-cum-subsidy scheme which
involves loan from the Banks. The need for other financial
products and the feasible options has been examined by the
‘Working Group on Rural Housing’.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.51)
12. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had observed
that the existing definition of a house i.e. pucca and kutcha house
according to the material used for construction of houses, needs to
be revised so as to integrate housing with the habited development.
Besides, the Committee had also desired to integrate rural housing
with various development programmes of the Government. The
Department, instead of addressing the issue in the context of scenario
of housing in rural areas as a whole has limited the reply to the
grant based scheme Indira Awaas Yojana. In fact, the Committee in
the earlier recommendation had expressed concern over the attitude
of the Department to restrict the housing in rural areas to
Indira Awaas Yojana. Inspite of that, the routine reply indicating the
details of the Indira Awaas Yojana has been reproduced in the action
taken replies. The Committee again emphasize that there is a need
to change this attitude of the Government and housing needs to be
viewed in a comprehensive way so as to include the various issues
related to housing in rural areas irrespective of BPL/APL status.
Besides the Central grant based schemes, the responsibility of the
Union Government is also to act as a facilitator so that quality houses
are constructed in rural areas in the country. In this context, the
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like
that the definition of rural house should be revised and housing
integrated with various infrastructural facilities as well as with the
welfare schemes as recommended earlier. Besides, more emphasis
needs to be given by the Government to provide quality houses in
rural areas and the issue needs to be looked into comprehensively
particularly when housing can be instrumental in providing
employment opportunities to the rural poor and as such result into
economic growth of rural areas.

9
C. Action Plan to end the shelterlessness in the Country
Recommendations Serial No. 8, 10 and 11
(Paragraph Nos. 2.33, 2.48 and 2.49)
13. The Committee had recommended as under :
As regards the methodology to find out the number of shelterless
persons in rural areas in the country, the Committee note that
the Department relies on the data of 2001 Census. To find out
the status of shelterlessness in the years after 2001, the method
for finding out the data is that the number of houses constructed
under IAY are subtracted from the initial shortage as per 2001
Census whereas the additional requirement of houses i.e. around
9 lakh shelterless households is added to this figure. The
Committee note that besides Indira Awaas Yojana as indicated
above, the houses are being constructed for shelterless persons
under various other schemes of Union Government as well as
the schemes of the State Governments. Various financial
institutions, NGOs etc. may also be contributing in this regard.
The system of calculating the data of shelterlessness after 2001
Census solely depends upon the Indira Awaas Yojana. In this
scenario, the Committee find that there is an urgent need to
have some system whereby the position of shelterlessness is
calculated at the ground level. Panchayati Raj Institutions can
play an important role in this regard. The Committee would like
to emphasize that there should be some system of periodic
calculation of data with regard to shelterlessness at the village
level so as to have some authentic information about the ground
situation in this regard. The said data may help the Government
to analyse the performance of various schemes as well as this
can be helpful in future planning.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
To add to what has been stated above, the Committee note that
as per the Government planning, the instrument to end the
shelterlessness is Indira Awaas Yojana, which targets to provide
houses to BPL category of persons. The following factors
substantiate how difficult it is to achieve the objectives of
shelterlessness depending only upon the flagship programme
Indira Awaas Yojana since the Yojana targets shelterlessness in a
partial way:
(i) Under Indira Awaas Yojana, 20 per cent of the outlay can
be used for upgradation. Actually, around one third of the

10
total number of houses constructed under IAY are upgraded
houses, the analysis of which has been given in the
subsequent part of the Report.
(ii) 5 per cent of the outlay under IAY can be earmarked for
natural calamities. Thus the effective outlay to end
shelterlessness in further reduced by 5 per cent.
(iii) IAY targets certain disadvantaged category of BPL persons.
As per the data furnished by the Department only
32.99 per cent of the houses were provided to non-SC/ST
category. Under non-SC/ST category too 88,527 houses were
provided to some disadvantaged category of persons viz.
freed bonded labourers, physically mentally challenged, ex-
servicemen and war-widows.
(iv) The Committee have repeatedly been recommending in their
respective Reports about the faulty system of preparing list
of BPL persons by various State Governments. Not only
that the recent data of BPL persons are not available as the
results of BPL Census 2002 are still to be made available by
the various State Governments. The arbitrary cut off limits
imposed by Planning Commission further aggravates the
position and the genuine poorest of the poor are being
deprived of the benefits envisaged under different Schemes
of the Department.
(v) There is no methodology to coordinate the data at the
ground level with regard to number of houses constructed
for poor with the assistance provided by various sources
viz. State Governments, financial institutions, NGOs etc.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.48)
In view of the aforesaid scenario, the Committee deplore the way
the planning with regard to providing houses to all in rural areas is
being done under the different Five Year Plans. The Committee would
like to emphasize that while formulating the strategy for Eleventh
Plan the Department first of all should get the data of shelterlessness
as well as action plans from the different State Governments. The
plans of the different State Governments should be chalked out from
bottom to top approach i.e. the data as well as action plan of village
Panchayats should be combined to get the district plans and the district
level plans should be combined to have the State level plan.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.49)

11
14. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as under:—
The States/UTs have already been asked to prepare the Permanent
IAY Waitlists based on the BPL Census 2002, involving Panchayati
Raj Institutions which is likely to give a more accurate estimate
of the housing shortage in rural areas.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
As per IAY guidelines, up to 20% of the funds available under
IAY can be utilized for upgradation of existing kutcha houses
and toward subsidy for construction of houses with credit from
Banks/Financial Institutions. However, during the year 2006-07,
out of the total funds utilized under IAY, only Rs. 275.51 crore
were utilized for upgradation which comes to 6.48%. Further,
out of 14.98 lakh houses constructed during the year, 2.06 lakh
houses were upgraded which is 13.75% only. Further, out of the
5% funds kept for natural calamities, only Rs. 11.60 crore were
released during the year 2006-07 which come to 0.4%. It is also
submitted that upgradation and release of funds under 5% IAY
are also a part of construction of houses under IAY and this also
helps in mitigating the rural housing shortage.
As regards construction of houses for non-SC/STs, IAY guidelines
provide that at least 60% of the total IAY allocation during a
financial year should be utilized for construction/upgradation of
dwelling units for SC/ST BPL households and a maximum of
40% for non-SC/ST BPL rural households. However, it has been
clarified therein that if any particular category is exhausted or
not available in a district, allocation can be utilized for other
categories as per priorities given in the guidelines after it has
been certified to this effect by the Zilla Parishad/DRDA
concerned. Accordingly, during the year 2006-07, the utilization
of funds was less than 60% for SC/STs by the States of Assam
(55%), Bihar (58%), Goa (28%), Himachal Pradesh (56%), J & K
(50%), Karnataka (57%), Kerala (59%), Sikkim (51%) Uttarakhand
(40%) and Pondicherry (29%).
As regards houses constructed by State Governments, financial
institutions, NGOs, etc. it is submitted that around 27 lakh houses
were constructed by various States during the last five years
under their State-run Schemes, as per the information furnished
by them.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.48)

12
The preparation of Permanent IAY Waitlist is going on, as
indicated in reply to para 2.33 above. This would help for a
bottom to top approach.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.49)
15. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had observed
that Indira Awaas Yojana can partially address the issue related to
rural housing keeping in view the objective of the Yojana to provide
assistance to the targeted poor. To address the issue of shelterlessness
there is an urgent need to have the authentic data of shelterlessness
which further needs to be updated periodically through a structured
mechanism having bottom to top approach. The Committee are
constrained to observe that the Department has again restricted the
reply to the waitlist being prepared for IAY. The Committee feel
that even APL persons who are just above the poverty line may also
be shelterless. Besides BPL list is not foolproof. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate that there is an urgent need to find out the ground
situation with regard to shortage of housing in rural areas through
some structured mechanism. Concrete action in this regard should
be taken by the Department and the Committee informed accordingly.
D. Evaluation of Indira Awaas Yojana
Recommendation Serial No. 14
(Paragraph No. 2.69)
16. The Committee had recommended as under:
The Committee find that various initiatives have been taken by
the Government since Independence to address the housing
problem of poorest of the poor in rural areas in the country.
Since 1985-86 one of the important programmes Indira Awaas
Yojana was launched as a sub-scheme of RLEGP. Massive
investments have been made under Indira Awaas Yojana under
different plans. The plan-wise allocation as given above indicates
that there is considerable enhancement in each plan as compared
to the previous plan. Although there is considerable enhancement
of allocation during each plan the percentage enhancement has
decreased since Ninth Plan. The percentage enhancement which
was 397.02 per cent during Eighth Plan reduced to 147.38 per
cent during Ninth Plan and then during Tenth Plan the percentage
enhancement is 55.68 per cent. The Committee further note that
the existing per unit assistance under Indira Awaas Yojana is
Rs. 25,000 in normal and Rs. 27,500 in hilly and difficult areas.

13
As regards the pace of enhancement of allocation, the Committee
note that during 21 years of implementation of Indira Awaas
Yojana (since 1985-86) the per unit allocation has merely been
enhanced a little more than double of the assistance. The
Department has stated that the basis of fixed rate of assistance
is cost of material etc. The Committee note that the enhancement
in per unit of assistance is much lower than the rate of inflation
in terms of cost of material etc. The Committee find that the
existing Rs. 27,500 per unit assistance is not sufficient to construct
a durable house. The Committee also note that National Housing
Bank has estimated the minimum cost of construction of a house
in rural areas as Rs. 1,50,000. They also note that as per the
Department of Rural Development’s own estimates, minimum
required outlay is Rs. 40,000-50,000 in plain areas and Rs. 50,000-
60,000 in hilly/difficult areas for construction of a durable house.
The Committee feel that one of the major reasons for lower
quality of construction of IA Y houses is the inadequate assistance
provided i.e. far below than the cost of construction. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to the Government to
enhance the per unit assistance from the existing rate to Rs. 50,000
in plain areas and Rs. 60,000 in hilly/difficult areas. Besides the
assistance provided for upgradation of a house should be
enhanced from Rs. 12,500 to Rs. 20,000. While recommending for
almost doubling the existing rate of per unit assistance, the
Committee would like to strongly recommend to the Government
to enhance the allocation during Eleventh Five Year Plan
considerably so that the number of houses constructed during
each year of the plan do not in any case reduce to the number
of houses constructed during the previous years and further the
construction of houses should match to the targets fixed under
the ambitious programmes of the Department.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.69)
17. The Department in the action taken reply dated 17.11.2008
stated as follows:
The matter is already being pursued by the Ministry.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.69)
The Department in its updated action taken reply dated 13.1.2009
has now stated as under:—
The matter for enhancement of 11th Plan allocation is still being
pursued. However, the unit assistance provided under IAY has

14
since been enhanced w.e.f. 1.4.08 from Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 35,000 in
plain areas and from Rs. 27,500 to Rs. 38,500 in hilly/difficult
areas. Unit assistance for upgradation of kutcha house into pucca/
semi pucca house has been enhanced from Rs. 12,500 to Rs. 15,000
across the Country. In addition an IAY beneficiary can avail a
loan of upto Rs. 20,000 under Differential Rate of Interest (DRI)
at interest rate of 4% with the change of unit cost. An additional
allocation of Rs. 350 crore has also been provided at
supplementary stage to keep the physical target at the level of
last year.
Further, an additional allocation of Rs. 3050 crore has also since
been made available at 2nd supplementary stage for 2008-09
under Rural Housing, as a stimulus package to the economy.
The amount is sufficient for providing first instalment for
additional 22.40 lakh houses during the current financial year.
Updated Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.69)
18. The Committee had earlier recommended to enhance the per
unit assistance provided under Indira Awaas Yojana from the existing
Rs. 25,000 in plain areas and Rs. 27,500 in hilly and difficult areas
to Rs. 50,000 in plain areas and Rs. 60,000 in hilly/difficult areas
keeping in view the rate of inflation in terms of cost of material etc.
The Committee had also recommended to enhance per unit assistance
for upgradation from Rs. 12,500 to Rs. 20,000. The Finance Minister
in his Budget Speech for the year 2008-09 had announced in the
Parliament that the Government have proposed enhancement in the
per unit subsidy from Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 35,000 in plain areas and
from Rs. 27,500 to Rs. 38,500 in hilly/difficult areas. Besides, the
upgradation assistance was proposed to be enhanced from Rs. 12,500
to Rs. 15,000. The Secretary at the time of evidence had informed
the Committee that Cabinet had already approved the aforesaid
proposal. It is also understood that the enhanced per unit subsidy
is being implemented by the Government w.e.f. 1.4.2008. Even after
the passage of more than 7 months, it has been stated that the
matter of enhancement of per unit subsidy is being pursued by the
Ministry. Though the Department in their updated reply dated
13th January, 2009 has now reflected the factual position, yet the
Committee deplore the casual way the Department has furnished
the action taken replies. The Committee would like to have a
justification from the Department in this regard.
The Committee also note the fact that during the course of
examination of the subject ‘Rural Housing’, the Department itself

15
had informed that as per its own estimate, minimum required outlay
for housing is Rs. 40,000-50,000 in plain areas and Rs. 50,000-60,000
in hilly/difficult areas for construction of a durable house. In view
of this, the Committee feel that even the enhanced outlay is not
sufficient to enable the beneficiary to construct a durable house. As
such the per unit assistance should be further increased to Rs. 50,000
in plain areas and Rs. 60,000 in hilly/difficult areas and upgradation
assistance to Rs. 20,000 as recommended earlier.
Recommendation Serial No. 15 and 16
(Paragraph No. 2.70 and 2.71)
19. The Committee had recommended as under:
The Committee further note that there are serious irregularities
in implementation of Indira Awaas Yojana as pointed out in
Comptroller and Auditor General of India Report 3 of 2003. The
irregularities include diversion of funds, overlapping the objectives
of multiple rural housing schemes, misdirecting targeting of
beneficiaries, construction of houses through contractors etc. The
details of the various irregularities pointed out by have been
indicated at Appendix VII. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken on each of the issue pointed out by
CAG so as to enable them to review the position and comment
further in this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.70)
Besides one of the irregularities as pointed out by CAG Report
is that construction of smokeless chulahs and sanitary latrines
were found in respect of 50 per cent and 57 per cent of houses
respectively. The Committee are constrained to note the comment
of the Department on the aforesaid irregularities as pointed out
by CAG. The Department has shifted the responsibility to DRDAs
who are supposed to persuade the beneficiary in this regard.
The Committee are further unhappy to note the provision made
in the guidelines whereby in case the beneficiary does not
construct a latrine or install a smokeless chulah, a meager amount
of Rs. 600 for latrine and Rs. 100 for chulah is deducted from the
total subsidy provided to such beneficiary. The Committee while
examining the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department
of Drinking Water Supply have been informed that only 38 per
cent of the rural households could so far been provided with
sanitation facilities. The Committee were also informed that only
80 per cent of the toilets constructed under Government schemes

16
are actually being used. The Committee conclude that no efforts
are being made to ensure the quality houses under the
Government schemes. The Committee also take strong objection
to the provisions made in the guidelines whereby the defaulter
has merely to pay a meager penalty and can easily forgo the
provisions made in the guidelines for smokeless chulahs and
toilets. The Committee strongly recommend to the Department
to ensure that the provisions of smokeless chulahs and toilets are
mandatorily followed by the beneficiaries failing which the
beneficiary should be deprived of the allocation made under
Indira Awaas Yojana. The existing provision in the guidelines
should suitably be revised.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.71)
20. The Department in the action taken replies dated 17.11.2008
has stated as under:
Replies to the irregularities indicated in Appendix IV have already
been submitted before the Committee. The latest position of
settlement of these paras is at Appendix-I.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.70)
In order to facilitate the construction of sanitary latrines, IAY
guidelines have been recently revised to provide for additional
amounts out of total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) programme over
and above the IAY assistance for the purpose of construction of
sanitary latrines. Those who construct sanitary latrine and
smokeless chulah will get additional funds under TSC. However,
it may not be justifiable to recover full amount of IAY assistance
from the beneficiary for not constructing sanitary latrine and
smokeless chulah.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.71)
The Department in its updated reply dated 13.1.2009 to
Recommendation (Para 2.70) has stated as under:
The latest position of settlement of these paras is at Appendix–II.
Updated reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.70)
21. The Committee are unhappy at the very slow pace of action
being taken by the Government on the irregularities in

17
implementation of Indira Awaas Yojana as pointed out by the C&AG
and would like an expeditious action on all the audit paras. Out of
283 Audit Paras, clarification/supplementary information on 30 audit
paras was still pending with respective States according to further
update provided by the Department on 13 January, 2009. This
indicates the lackadaisical attitude of the Department while
responding to the Committee’s recommendations. Similarly, instead
of taking action to suitably revise the IAY guidelines to make
provision of Smokeless Chulahs and sanitary latrines mandatory as
per recommendation of the Committee, the Department has taken
half hearted action to provide additional amount out of Total
Sanitation Campaign (TSC) programme over and above the IAY
assistance for the purpose of construction of sanitary latrines. The
Committee feel that besides providing financial assistance, it is
imperative to ensure that smokeless Chulhas and sanitary latrines
are actually constructed and used by the beneficiaries. As such the
Committee would like to reiterate their recommendation to suitably
revise the existing IAY guidelines to make smokeless Chulahs and
sanitary latrines mandatory.
Recommendations Serial Nos. 17, 54 and 56
(Paragraph Nos. 2.72, 4.35 and 4.37)
22. The Committee had recommended as under:
The Committee are further constrained to note the replies of the
Department whereby the onus of use of appropriate construction
technologies and land material, use of disaster proof technology
in the calamity prone areas has been shifted to beneficiaries. As
regards infrastructure the onus has again been shifted to the
beneficiaries or the line departments in that area. It is really a
matter of concern that safety and securities of families and houses
have not been accorded any importance in the disaster prone
areas. Safe individual houses can minimize disaster losses to a
great extent. The Committee also find that whereas houses
constructed with HUDCO assistance have to mandatorily use the
disaster proof technology/material no such provision exists under
IAY houses. The Committee are unable to understand the rationale
behind leaving the responsibility of using disaster proof
technology to the beneficiaries. If this is the condition of the
houses constructed with the 100 per cent Government assistance
(Central + State Government’s assistance in the ratio of 75:25),
the fate of the remaining housing stock can be well imagined.
The Committee strongly recommend to the Government to revise

18
the guidelines and make the use of disasters proof material/
technology as mandatory for the IAY houses. Besides as regards
the infrastructure arrangement, the Committee feel that there
should be some sort of linkage between the various schemes of
the Government rural schemes like Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY), Employment Guarantee Scheme, SGSY etc. The
proper coordination can ensure the adequate infrastructure to the
houses constructed under IAY scheme. The Committee disapprove
the tendency of the Department to shift the onus to the
beneficiaries or to some other agency whereas the houses are
being constructed with the Government assistance. The Committee
urge the Department to take the desired action in this regard
and apprise the Committee accordingly.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.72)
The Committee are alarmed to note that over 67.4 per cent area
of the country is vulnerable to natural disasters like earthquakes
(54 per cent), cyclonic winds and storms (8.4 per cent) and by
floods (5 per cent). As such house, buildings and infrastructure
in these regions are prone to such vagaries of nature. The
Committee find that under the guidelines of Indira Awaas Yojana
(IAY) the site of IAY houses, to the extent possible should not be
located in the disaster prone areas for example floodable areas.
The Committee further note that as per the guidelines the
beneficiary is required to construct the house on the land available
with him. However if the land is not available with the
beneficiary the State Government are required to provide land at
a place which is not a disaster prone area. The committee find
that as per the guidelines of IAY the onus of using disaster
proof technology has been shifted to the beneficiaries or the State
Government. The committee are at a loss to understand how the
State Government would ensure that the land provided for IAY
houses do not fall in the vulnerable category when the 67.4 per
cent area of the country is vulnerable to natural disaster. The
Committee feel that the aforesaid guidelines do not address to
the issue of threat to house by natural disasters in a right way.
The answer to this issue is to make the use of disaster proof
technology compulsory for the houses constructed with the
Government assistance. The issue has been dealt in details in the
preceding part of the report where the Committee have
recommended to make the use of disaster proof technology
mandatory as has been done by HUDCO. The Committee may
here like to recommend to review the existing policy in this

19
regard in consultation with other institutions working in this field
and take the desired action.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.35)
The Committee find that the BMTPC has done a commendable
work for ensuring suitable policy initiatives by the State
Governments and dissemination of disaster proof technology to
the post disaster areas. In pursuance of the issue with the State
Governments, several States have amended their building by laws
by incorporating disaster resistant features. The Council has done
a laudable work in post earthquake area of Gujarat and as well
as post Tsunami areas in Tamil Nadu. The Committee feel that
similar initiatives to set up the Disaster Management Centers at
local level in all the disaster prone areas are necessary. The
Department in consultation with BMTPC should find out ways
and means to ensure dissemination of technology available with
regard to construction of disaster proof houses as well as
retrofitting of existing housing stock in the vulnerable areas.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.37)
23. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as under:-
Existing guidelines already provide for use of cost-effective,
disaster resistant, technologies but as far as making it mandatory
is concerned, it is stated that the Department is not able to accept
this recommendation of the Committee because the basic feature
of the scheme is that the beneficiary has the choice to construct
the house as per her/his needs and desires. Moreover, even
though Indira Awaas Yojana is termed as full subsidy scheme,
the fact is most of the beneficiaries have to put in money/
contribution from other sources. Secondly, the Government gives
a very limited amount and if the Ministry has to make the use
of disaster proof material/technology as mandatory for the IAY
houses, then it may be necessary for the Government to provide
actual cost to the beneficiaries which may not be possible at
present considering the constraints of funds.
Regarding linkage to the various schemes, it is submitted that all
programmes do not have a direct linkage with IAY. However,
scheme having a complementarity will be linked. We have already
linked Total Sanitation Campaign closely to the IA Y scheme.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.72)

20
Existing guidelines already provide for use of cost-effective,
disaster resistant, technologies but as far as making it mandatory
is concerned, the Department is not able to accept this
recommendation of the Committee because the basic feature of
the scheme is that the beneficiary has the choice to construct the
house as per her/his needs and desires. Moreover, even though
Indira Awaas Yojana is termed as full subsidy scheme, the fact
is most of the beneficiaries have to put in money contribution
from other sources. Secondly, the Government gives a very limited
amount and if the Ministry has to make the use of disaster proof
material/technology as mandatory for the IAY houses, then it
may be necessary for the Government to provide actual cost to
the beneficiaries which may not be possible at present considering
the constraints of funds.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.35)
BMTPC have replied that, Active Rural Building Centres may act
as nodal hub for dissemination of disaster resistant construction
technologies and training of masons and other artisans in disaster
resistance construction technologies.
Further, as per Indira Awaas Yojana guidelines, DRDAs are
empowered and authorized to disseminate information in this
regard.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.37)
24. The Committee disapprove the way the Department has
addressed one of the important recommendations of the Committee
whereby it has been emphasised to pay attention to provide disaster
proof houses particularly in the disaster prone areas. In this regard,
the Committee had strongly recommended to make the use of disaster
proof technology/material mandatory for IAY houses. The Department
in a casual way has cited the financial constraints as the reason for
not agreeing to the recommendation of the Committee. The
Committee cannot appreciate the reasons given by the Department
particularly when efforts have not been made to know about the
cost of earthquake proof houses under IAY. More so no reason
whatsoever can justify the construction of unsafe houses for the
rural poor with the Government assistance. As such the Committee
would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation to revise the
IAY guidelines to make the use of disaster proof technology/material
mandatory. Besides, the Committee would also like to be apprised

21
of the cost difference between a normal IAY house constructed
without earthquake proof technology/material and that constructed
with the use of such technology/material to understand the
financial implications of agreeing to the recommendation of the
Committee.
Recommendation Serial No. 19
(Paragraph No. 2.77)
25. The Committee had recommended as under:
The Committee find that various schemes meant to achieve the
different objectives were initiated during 1999 and 2000-01 the
details of which have been indicated as above. The schemes could
not achieve the desired objectives and as such have been
discontinued/merged with IAY. The Committee find that the
objectives of different schemes as envisaged were quite different
than IAY, Innovative Stream for Rural Housing and Habitat
Development was launched with an objective of promoting and
propagating cost effective technologies and upto Rs. 50 lakh was
to be provided to NGOs, Development Institutions, Corporate
Bodies, State Government etc. Rural Building Centre Scheme was
launched for setting up Rural Building Centres and Samagra
Awaas Yojana aimed at convergence of activities such as
construction of house, sanitation, drinking water etc. Credit-cum-
subsidy Scheme was for rural households having annual income
upto Rs. 32 thousand per year. The Committee fail to understand
how the objectives set under different schemes would be achieved
with the merger with IAY without changing the basic parameters
of IAY. In this scenario, the Committee deplore the way new
schemes with different objectives are being launched and then
discontinued. The Committee have repeatedly been recommending
in the respective reports for proper planning before launching
new schemes. The Committee while disapproving the way new
schemes are launched without proper planning would like to be
apprised of the efforts made by the Department for the effective
implementation of these schemes. Besides, the Committee may
like to be informed how the laudable objectives set under the
different schemes are now planned to be achieved as the merger
with IAY without changing the basic parameter cannot yield the
set objectives under these schemes.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.77)

22
26. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:
For effective implementation of IAY, both Government of India
and State Government monitor the performance by reviewing
periodical reports from Zilla Parishads/DRDAs. In addition, field
visits are made by the concerned Officers. Besides, the
performance is also reviewed by the Area Officers at Centre Level.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.77)
27. Deploring the way in which new schemes with different
objectives were being launched and then discontinued, the Committee
had desired to be informed how the laudable objectives set under
different schemes were planned to be achieved by merging these
schemes with IAY without changing the basic parameters. The
Department in its reply has failed to show how objectives of different
schemes are now being achieved under IAY. The Committee would
like to have a specific reply in the matter.
Availability of land for construction of houses for BPL persons
Recommendation Serial No. 21
(Paragraph No. 2.82)
28. The Committee had recommended as under:
The Committee are at a loss to understand how the houses as
per the priority list of BPL persons could be provided in case
the beneficiary does not have land. In view of this scenario, the
Committee are of the opinion that there is an urgent need to
explore the possibility of providing land to landless persons for
construction of a shelter. The Committee feel that most of the
land in rural areas might be belonging to Gram Panchayat State
Governments and as such the possibility of providing land to
BPL persons for the purpose of housing may be examined.
Besides, the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee with
regard to using wasteland may also be examined in consultation
with the State Governments, the Department of Land Resources
and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the viable solution in
this regard should be arrived at. Further, as regards the solution
by acquiring private land, the Committee may like to recommend
to the Government to explore the possibility of inviting private
sector in the field of rural housing with the condition that a
certain percentage of houses are mandatorily provided for the
BPL category of persons.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.82)

23
29. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as
under:-
Every State has its own scheme for providing land to landless
for construction of IAY house. However, keeping in view the
recommendation of the Committee, Ministry has initiated a
Homestead plot scheme for landless rural people. The draft
guidelines have been prepared and are being submitted to EFC
for approval. Planning Commission has already sanctioned
Rs. 100 crore for the scheme during 2008-09. The role of Private
Sector in construction of houses in rural areas, has been included
in the draft “National Rural Housing & Habitat Policy”.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No.2.82)
30. The Committee are happy to note that the Department has
initiated a homestead plot scheme for landless rural people in
pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee
also note with satisfaction that the role of private sector in
construction of houses in rural areas has been included in the draft
“National Rural Housing & Habitat Policy”. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the follow up action in the matter on regular
basis.
Recommendation Serial No. 22
(Paragraph No. 2.83)
31. The Committee had recommended as under:
Besides, the Committee note that Land Acquisition Act which
addresses to various issues related to acquisition of land for public
purpose is an old Act of 1894. The Committee have repeatedly
been recommending to amend the aforesaid legislation in their
respective reports. The Committee reiterate at their earlier
recommendation to expedite the amendment of the aforesaid
legislation so that the process of acquisition of land may be much
easier and it may facilitate the process of acquisition of land by
various State Governments for making the land available for
construction of houses for BPL persons. Besides, the Committee
may emphasise that by taking the aforesaid initiatives State
Governments may be persuaded to have the land banks from
where land could be allocated for construction of houses for BPL
persons. The such a mechanism would help the State
Governments to address the problem of shelterlessness in a
planned and systematic way. Necessary guidelines in this regard

24
should be issued to the State Governments. Besides, suitable
provisions may be made in the housing policy, which the
Department has proposed to formulate in the near future.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.83)
32. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
Department of Land Resources has informed that to make the
land acquisition process time-bound and effective, proposal for
amendment in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 has been under
consideration in consultation with the State Governments for some
time past. However, a draft Land Acquisition (Amendment) bill,
2007 has been prepared. This, along with the draft of the National
Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy, 2007, is under consideration
of Group of Ministers (GoM), which is in the process of finalizing
the drafts.
Meanwhile, Ministry has taken the initiative and a draft
Homestead Scheme has been formulated to which Planning
Commission has also approved and sanctioned Rs. 100 crore for
implementation of the scheme. As soon as guidelines of the
scheme are finalized, State Government would be requested to
provide land for the landless.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.83)
33. The Committee are constrained to note the casual way in
which the Department has responded to their recommendation and
given an obsolete reply. Even when the Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007 was introduced in Lok Sabha and referred
to the Committee and on which the Committee have already
presented the report on 21 October, 2008, the Government’s reply
(given on 18 November, 2008) indicates that the proposed amendment
is under consideration of the Government. The Committee would
like to have a justification from the Department for not furnishing
the updated information to the Committee.
E. Rural Housing Finance
Recommendation Serial No. 23, 24 and 25
(Paragraph No. 3.25, 3.26 and 3.27)
34. The Committee had recommended as under :
As stated in the earlier part of the Report, 161 lakh of houses
would be needed during Eleventh Plan period to end the

25
shelterlessness in rural areas in the country. As per the
Government’s own estimates, Rs. 55,000 crore would be required
to tackle the problem. Further as per the NHB estimates, only
36 per cent housing stock in the rural areas are pucca houses
which means 64 per cent require frequent maintenance and
eventual replacement over a period of 5 to 10 years. The real
problem to be addressed with regard to housing in rural areas
may be much grim. To tackle this problem the grant based
schemes like Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) are not sufficient. Besides
in rural areas the problem of housing needs to be addressed
keeping in view the overall position of the population in rural
areas. There may be three sections of Society viz (i) Affluent rich
farmer; (ii) Middle Class; and (iii) Rural poor i.e. BPL persons in
rural areas
Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)
Indira Awaas Yojana to some extent addresses the problem of
shelterlessness in rural areas in the country. As stated in the
earlier part of the Report even Indira Awaas Yojana, addresses to
the housing problem of BPL category of persons in a partial
way. To take care of the needs of the other sections of the society
affordable lending for housing can play an important role.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26)
From the data made available by National Housing Bank the
Committee find that although during the period 2001-05, the
housing loan disbursed by PLIs has doubled from Rs. 3246.03
crore in 2001-02 to Rs. 6440.95 crore during 2004-05, it is much
below as compared to the boom in housing lending witnessed in
urban areas. The data indicated by NHB is self evident according
to which out of Rs. 75,000 crore, lending to rural areas during
the period 2001-05 is just 10-11 per cent. The Committee
understand that even today, the rural people depend on the mercy
of the landlords who charge heavy rate of interest on the
borrowings and exploit the rural people.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.27)
35. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as under:
At present, Government’s efforts are to help the poorest of the
poor/shelterless household to get a pucca house of their own to
lead life with dignity. Other sections of the rural society can

26
avail themselves of various financial instruments available through
Banks to get credit.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)
Housing finance is available through Banks for all sections of the
society. Government will also look into the matter to initiate action
to make credit more easily accessible in rural areas.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.26)
At present, Government’s efforts are to help the poorest of the
poor/shelterless household to get a pucca house of their own to
lead life with dignity. Other sections of the rural society can
avail themselves of various financial instruments available through
;Banks to get credit. Government will also look into the matter
to initiate action to make credit more accessible in rural areas.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.27)
36. Since the grant based schemes like IA Y cater to the housing
problems of BPL category of persons in a partial way, the Committee
in their 22nd report had felt that the rural housing problem should
be addressed by taking care of the needs of the other sections of
the society for which affordable lending for housing could play an
important role. Instead of taking concrete action in the matter, the
Department has given a very general reply. The Committee reiterate
their recommendation and desire that the Department should take
immediate steps to provide affordable lending for housing in rural
areas to all sections of the society. The Committee would like to be
informed of the action initiated by the Department to make credit
more accessible to all sections of the Society in rural areas.
Recommendation Serial No. 27
(Paragraph No. 3.29)
37. The Committee had recommended as under:
The Committee find that NHB and NABARD are the main
agencies of Government of India involved in refinancing of
houisng loan to different financial institutions. NABARD is
refinancing at the lowest rate of interest i.e. 6 per cent upto
50,000 and 6.25 per cent for the amount exceeding 50,000.
However in case of North-Eastern States, Sikkim, Mizoram,
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, the rate of refinance is 6 per cent

27
even above Rs. 50,000. In case of NHB, the main agency which
has the mandate for rural housing, the rate of refinance is 6.25
per cent. The Committee find that the problem of shelterlessness
is highest in North Eastern States. The issue has been examined
in detail in the preceding part of the report. Whereas NABARD
is providing 0.25 per cent lower rate of refinance to North-Eastern
States and Sikkim and also to Andaman & Nicobar Islands, no
such benefit has been given by NHB to these States by NHB.
The Committee feel that the relaxation at the rate of refinance to
North Eastern and aforesaid States should also be provided by
NHB on the lines of NABARD.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.29)
38. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:
Ministry of Finance have informed that taking into account cost
of its resources, NABARD periodically effects revisions in the
interest rates for all purposes. The present rate of interest on
refinances for the North Eastern States has been fixed at 9.0 %
which continues to be less by 50 basis points over the rate
applicable for the rest of the country. As regards NHB, with the
withdrawal of Capital Gains Bond Schemes by the Govt., in 2006,
it does not have access to low cost funds & is, therefore, not in
a position to provide concessional rate of refinance for rural
housing as suggested by the Committee. However, in the Central
Budget for 2008-09, there is a proposal to set up a Rural Housing
Development Fund under NHB which should help it to extend
refinance for housing purposes at cheap rates.
According to NHB, NHB had been providing concession of 0.50%
(later on reduced to 0.25%) to primary lending institutions
providing housing loans in rural areas under the Golden Jubilee
Rural Housing Finance Scheme. With the withdrawal of Capital
Gain Bonds Scheme by the Government in 2006, NHB does not
have access to low cost funds and is therefore not in a position
to provide concessional rate of refinance for rural housing and
hence the earlier concessions have been withdrawn.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.29)
39. The Committee fail to understand the reasons due to which
National Housing Bank (NHB) is unable to relax the rate of refinance
for North-eastern and certain other States, while NABARD is
refinancing at the lowest rate of interest. NHB and NABARD, both

28
are the main agencies of the Government of India involved in
refinancing of housing loan to different financial institutions. The
Committee recommend that NHB should also be provided access to
low cost funds by the Government of India on the lines of NABARD
in order to enable it to provide concessional rate of refinance for
rural housing.
Recommendation Serial No. 28
(Paragraph No. 3.30)
40. The Committee had recommended as under:
As regards the rate of interest charged by various financial
institutions with regard to lending for rural housing, the
Committee find that there is sharp variation. The rate of interest
varies between 7.5% to 10.75% (fixed) and between 7% to 9%
(floating) in case of Public Sector Banks. With regard to other
housing finance companies, the rate varies between 8% to 10.5%
(fixed). Further, for private sector and foreign banks, the rate of
interest varies between 8% to 11% (fixed) and 7.5% to 8.5%
(floating). The Committee find from the position of rate of interest
and refinance as indicated above that whereas refinance at lower
rate of interest is being made available to certain financial
institutions by NHB and NABARD, the benefit of getting refinance
at lower rate is not being percolated to the poorest of the poor
in rural areas in the country. Besides the Committee also note
that there is variation of around 3% of rate of interest between
the minimum and the maximum rate of interest charged for
housing from the poor in rural areas. The Committee find that
even 1% of rate of interest matters a lot to the poorest of the
poor in the country. In this scenario, while appreciating the policy
of the Government to move away from administered interest
rates, the Committee feel that some sort of regulation is necessary
in case of the housing loan made available to the poor in rural
areas in the country specifically when these institutions are getting
the benefit of lower rate of refinance from certain Government
Institutions like NHB and NABARD.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.30)
41. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:
Ministry of Finance have stated that since October 18, 1994, the
interest rates on advances by scheduled commercial banks have
been gradually deregulated. At present, individual banks

29
determine interest rates to be charged to a particular borrower
subject to BPLR & spread guidelines, except in the case of small
loans upto Rs. 2 lakhs, which carry the prescription of not
exceeding the BPLR. In respect of loans covered under refinancing
schemes of term-lending institutions, banks are free to determine
the rates of interest as per the stipulations of refinancing agencies,
without reference to BPLR. The variation in interest rates offered
by different banks could be attributed to the differences in their
BPLR (reflecting cost of funds, operating expenses & a minimum
margin to cover regulatory requirement of provisioning/capital
charges & profit margins) as also the credit ratings of borrowers.
It may not be possible to introduce the regulations in interest
rates for just the housing sector which will be anomalous to
existing interest rate regime in the country. However, measures
are taken by the Government to enable loans to be available to
the poor for housing purposes at low rates as described in answer
to para 3.29.
According to NHB, as regards rate of interest to be charged by
primary lending institutions (PLIs) on housing loans provided to
the borrowers, NHB has not prescribed any ceiling. In this context,
it may be mentioned that PLIs determine the rate of interest on
the basis of their cost of funds and other parameters adopted by
them from time to time. However, it may be mentioned that rate
of interest being charged from borrowers both in urban and rural
areas are at par and there is no difference in lending rates in
urban and rural areas.
To encourage PLIs to increase their lending for housing in rural
areas, NHB had provided concession of 0.25% in the then
applicable interest rates, on its refinance scheme known as
“Golden Jubilee Rural Housing Finance Scheme”. However, no
ceiling on the interest rates was prescribed by NHB as the said
scheme was envisaged and based upon the market principles.
As a result of the above incentivisations, there has been marked
improvement in the housing loan portfolio of PLIs in the rural
areas resulting in financing of more than 20 lakh houses by PLIs
in rural areas during the period 1997-2007.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.30)
42. The Committee are not inclined to accept the helplessness
shown by the Government on the issue of providing affordable
lending for housing in rural areas. The Committee during the course

30
of examination of the subject had found that there is variation in
rate of interest between the minimum and maximum rate of interest
charged for housing by different Commercial Banks and as such
recommended for some sort of regulation in case of housing loan
made available for rural poor. Without consulting the matter with
the Commercial Banks and the Ministry of Finance, the Department
has expressed its inability to accept the recommendation of the
Committee. Various reasons highlighting the administered interest
rates policy of the Government which are already known to the
Committee had been reproduced. The Committee further during the
course of examination of Demands for Grants and in the action
taken note to the Demands for Grants report of the Department of
Rural Development had been informed that the Ministry of Finance
had written to the Reserve Bank of India to include IAY houses
under the differential rate of interest scheme for lending upto
Rs. 20,000 per unit at the interest rate of 4 per cent. The Committee
feel that similar concession in interest rates also needs to be provided
also to the rural poor who are unable to get the benefit under Indira
Awaas Yojana. Such persons may not be covered under BPL but yet
are not financially sound to bear the burden of rate of interest
charged by Commercial Banks. In view of this, the Committee while
reiterating their earlier recommendation would like the Department
to consult the Ministry of Finance and Commercial Banks and apprise
the Committee about their reaction in the matter.
Recommendation Serial No. 34
(Paragraph No. 3.70)
43. The Committee had recommended as under:
The Committee further find that equity support was being
provided to HUDCO since 1998-99 and up to the year 2004-05,
Rs. 415 crore was provided as subsidy by the Department of
Rural Development. Against this subsidy, HUDCO was to garner
and mobilize additional resources (approximately 8 times the size
of the equity contribution from the market). The funds so
leveraged were to be utilized exclusively for financing the
construction of additional rural housing units over and above
what HUDCO normally finances through their existing resources.
The Committee further observe that HUDCO has now been
declared as ‘Navratna’ and as such Government has stopped
providing subsidy. The Committee apprehend that the stoppage
of the equity support may adversely affect the activities of
HUDCO in the field of rural housing for the poorest of the poor

31
in the country. In view of this, the Committee would like the
Department to analyze the position and find out ways and means
to support HUDCO’s programme for rural housing.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.70)
44. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:
In case any proposal for supporting the rural housing programme
is received from HUDCO, it will be appropriately examined and
desirable support will be extended.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.70 )
45. Apprehending that the stoppage of equity support may
adversely affect the activities of HUDCO in the field of rural housing,
the Committee had desired the Department to analyze the position
and find out ways and means to support HUDCO’s programme for
rural housing. In a vague manner, the Department has tried to shift
the responsibility to HUDCO by stating that any proposal from
HUDCO was to be given due consideration. The Committee cannot
understand the reasons for giving low priority for rural housing by
the Government and HUDCO. The Committee emphasise that the
Department on its own should take up the matter urgently with
HUDCO so that rural areas are benefited by this premier organisation
and the Navratna status of HUDCO does not come in the way of
the organisation in extending its activities in the rural areas.
Recommendation Serial No. 35
(Paragraph No. 3.71)
46. The Committee had recommended as under:
The Committee further find that HUDCO has been entrusted
with the responsibility of providing loan assistance under various
ambitious programmes of the Department of Rural Development.
Under the housing programmes of Government in providing
13 lakh dwelling units in rural areas and 7 lakh units in urban
areas, HUDCO has been entrusted with the responsibility of
providing loan assistance for construction of 6 lakh houses in
rural areas. Further, out of 60 lakh houses to be constructed
under Bharat Nirman, HUDCO has been given a quota of
6 lakh. As regards the performance of HUDCO with regard to
targets provided under different ambitious programmes up to
2004-05, HUDCO has sanctioned 68.39 lakh dwelling units out of

32
which 29.84 lakh dwelling units are for normal and 38.55 units
for natural calamities. The Committee observe that the major
portion of the dwelling units sanctioned by HUDCO related to
natural calamities and as such HUDCO’s contribution to the task
of addressing to the problem of shelterlessness is limited. Keeping
in view this scenario, the Committee recommend to the
Department to review the position in this regard so that the goal
set under different ambitious programmes are achieved.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.71)
47. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
In case of any calamity so as to meet immediate requirement of
huge funds, HUDCO’s assistance has been sought for by State
Governments. In the past few years, it has also been observed
that international funding at cheaper rate is available to support
the programmes for natural calamities affected areas leading to
less demand for funds from State Governments e.g. funding by
ADB, World Bank in Tsunami affected areas at very low interest
rates, backed by Sovereign Guarantees, thereby reducing demand
for HUDCO loan.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.71)
48. Since HUDCO had been entrusted with the responsibility of
providing loan assistance for construction of 6 lakh houses in rural
areas under Bharat Nirman, the Committee had asked the Department
to review the position in this regard so as to ensure achievement of
goals set under different programmes. The reply of the Department
is restricted to only houses in natural calamities affected areas.
Nothing has been indicated with regard to the measures proposed
to achieve the set targets for HUDCO. The Committee would like a
categorical reply of the Department in this regard. Besides, the year-
wise details of rural housing loans provided by HUDCO for rural
housing during the last three years should also be furnished.
Recommendation Serial No. 37
(Paragraph No. 3.73)
49. The Committee had recommended as under:
HUDCO has informed that there is a lack of participation by a
number of States resulting in uneven geographical distribution
of HUDCO’s loan assistance. The States of Andhra Pradesh,

33
Kerala, Karnataka, Orissa, Tamilnadu, West Bengal, Gujarat,
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and
Rajasthan have taken up the programme in a big way. Further,
HUDCO has informed that poor recovery rate of loan by
Government agencies has led to declining demand. Interesting
point raised by HUDCO is lack of interest of the State
Government/Government agencies HUDCO’s loan based rural
housing programme in view of the ongoing Indira Awaas Yojana
which is 100% subsidy based programme and under which 75%
of the allocation is being provided by the Union Government.
The Committee would like the Department to analyze the
aforesaid issues as pointed out by HUDCO and analyze the
position critically. The Committee may be informed about the
reaction of the Department in this regard so as to enable the
Committee to recommend further in this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.73)
50. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:—
Even though HUDCO has schemes/funds for Rural Housing,
financial assistance is based on States demand and it has found
that there is a lack of participation by a number of States in
taking up rural housing programmes, resulting in uneven
geographical distribution of HUDCO loan assistance. It is seen
that States of A P , Kerala, Karnataka, Orissa, TN and WB have
taken up the programme in a big way. Other States like Gujarat,
H P , Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh have
also taken up rural housing programme with HUDCO’s assistance.
Loan recovery from BPL families is a problem without creating
income for repayment. Hence, draft “National Rural Housing &
Habitat Policy” has suggested various other means for funding
Rural Housing.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.73)
51. On being pointed out by HUDCO about the lack of interest
shown by the State Governments/Government agencies in its loan
based rural housing programmes, the Committee had asked the
Department to analyze the issue. Instead of analyzing the issue State-
wise, the Department has tried to circumvent the issue and has
furnished a vague reply. The Committee would like the Department
to analyze the issue in detail and furnish a specific reply in the
matter.

34
Recommendation Serial No. 44
(Paragraph No. 3.99)
52. The Committee had recommended as under :
The Committee further note that in the context of rural areas the
issue of security for lending for housing need to be analysed in
a different way specifically for the poorest of the poor. This
category of persons need much lesser amount as compared to
the housing loan in urban areas. Some sort of security provision
other than mortgage of land can be explored for getting loan for
housing in rural areas. The Committee may also like to highlight
here that whereas for the purchase of costly movable items like
air conditioners, cars, banks and other financial institutions are
providing loan without any security, in case of meagre loan for
construction of a house in rural areas these institutions require
mortgage. There is an urgent need to relax these requirements
on a loan upto some limit which may be say Rs. 1 lakh or so.
The Committee appreciate the fact that banks and other financial
institutions are Commercial organisations and the risk of
repayment may be the major argument by these institutions. In
this regard also the Committee may like to highlight almost
100 per cent recovery rate in case of lending made available by
some of the Commercial Banks in rural areas as has been stated
in the earlier part of the report. The linking of housing loan
with certain employment generating Government schemes may
be another solution in this regard. In case of SGSY the saving of
groups may be considered as security for the loan to be extended
to an individual member of the group whereas the liability to
repay the loan should rest with the individual member. Such
initiatives need to be deliberated with Commercial Banks and
other financial institutions. The Committee would like the
Department to undertake desired consultation with the all
concerned and inform the Committee about the follow up action
in this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.99)
53. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:
Financing Institutions will not agree to this as this is against
prudential norm. Department is not able to accept this
recommendation.
 Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.99)

35
54. Instead of broaching the alternatives on the issue of security
for lending for housing with Commercial Banks, as suggested by
the Committee, the Department has flatly refused to accept the
recommendation. The Committee are dismayed at the Department’s
such approach and would like the Department to take up the matter
with the Commercial Banks and afterwards furnish a reply on the
basis of the deliberations.
Recommendation Serial No. 46
(Paragraph No. 3.101)
55. The Committee had recommended as under :
The Committee recommend to analyse the aforesaid scheme in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance and NHB and inform
the Committee about the final outcome to enable them to analyse
the position further and comment in this regard. NHB during
the course of deliberations with the Committee has informed
that they have taken up the issue of rationalisation of stamp
duty charges for creation of mortgage with various State
Governments. A few States have reduced these charges to a
nominal level whereas most of the States are yet to accede to
this request of NHB. NHB has suggested that the stamp duty
charges on creation of simple mortgages be reduced to 0.50 per
cent (as prevalent in the State of Maharashtra, Gujarat and
Karnataka) across the States with a maximum cap of registration
fee to be fixed at nominal rates say Rs. 200. The Committee
appreciate the initiatives taken by NHB and would like if to
continue further in persuading the State Governments in this
regard. Besides the Committee feel that the Department of Rural
Development has also the responsibility to persuade the State
Government to bring the land reforms and the issue of
rationalization of stamp duty and registration charges should be
taken up with the State Governments vigorously.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.101)
56. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:
Ministry of Finance has responded and stated that :
As per information provided by NHB the following States have
reduced duty on creation of simple mortgage of housing
property:—
(i) Maharashtra :
Previous–1% subject to maximum of Rs. 5 lakh
Present–0.5% subject to minimum of Rs. 100/- & maximum
of Rs. 10 Lakh.

36
(ii) Karnataka :
Previous–Rs. 3 for every hundred rupees or part thereof for
the amount secured by such deed subject to a maximum of
Rs. 3 lakh.
Present–50 paise for every hundred rupee or part thereof
for amount secured by such deed.
(iii) Delhi :
Previous–Bifurcated value.
Present–2% with a monetary ceiling of Rs. 2 lakh.
(iv) Tamil Nadu :
Previous–Rs. 4 for every hundred rupees or part thereof.
Present–1% subject to maximum of Rs. 20,000/-.
(v) Rajasthan :
Present–5% of the amount of value secured.
As regards, problems faced by the borrowers in title deed, it is
observed that in cases of old properties, the problem of title
deeds is in existence in almost all the States as these properties
have undergone divisions & sub-divisions due to partitions in
the family without any proper format documentation. Hence, there
is difficulty in availability of title deeds. However, in some cases,
entry is available in Municipal/Local Bodies records but that is
not regarded as evidence of title in the court.
As far as State Governments are concerned, Govt. of Bihar,
Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh and A&N
Islands have furnished the reply. It has been opined by the States
that if land provided by Government is free of cost to the
beneficiaries there is no need for any stamp duty.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.101)
57. The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the various
State Governments to reduce the stamp duty and would like the
Department to pursue the matter further with the remaining State
Governments vigorously. The Committee may be apprised of the
outcome in the matter.

37
Recommendation Serial Nos. 51, 52 and 53
(Paragraph Nos. 4.25, 4.26 and 4.27)
58. The Committee had recommended as under :
The Committee further find that as per guidelines of the flagship
programme Indira Awaas Yojana, Zila Parshid/DRDAs should
contact various organizations/institutions for seeking expert
opinion on innovative technologies material design etc. Besides it
has been indicated in guidelines that State Governments may
also arrange to make available information on cost effective
environment friendly technology material design etc. It has further
been mentioned by the Department that this information should
only be guidance and any suitable location specific technology
can be adopted by the beneficiaries. The Committee note that
whereas 75 per cent assistance under IAY is being provided by
the Union Government the onus of constructing quality houses
has been shifted to State Governments/Zila Parishads/DRDAs
or beneficiaries. There is no way whereby the beneficiaries could
be made aware of the technology options available for them. The
Committee find that as per the Concurrent Evaluation, close to
55 per cent of the houses constructed under IAY in Kerala and
Maharashtra have not used the local material for construction of
houses. The Committee feel that the aforesaid provision in the
guidelines responsible for not use of cost effective and
environment friendly technology by the beneficiaries. Under IAY
guidelines it should be made mandatory to use the cost effective
and environment friendly technology.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.25)
While recommending for compulsory use of cost effective
technology the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to
make technical skill/material available to the beneficiaries. Besides
Technology Resource Center at district level as recommended
above there should be one cost effective material Mart at the
block level so as to help the beneficiaries. The Committee
recommend to the Department to take the necessary action in
this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)
The Committee further note that under the ‘Rural Building Center
Scheme’, rural building centers are to be established under the
guidance of HUDCO. 85 RBCs were approved against which
54 RBCs could become functional by September, 2005 in the
aforesaid scheme. However the Department has informed that
the aforesaid scheme has been merged/discontinued from

38
April 1, 2004. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
status of the remaining RBCs which were approved but could
not become functional. Besides the Committee may be apprised
how the objective of the scheme would be achieved by merging
or discontinuing the scheme.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.27)
59. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as
under:
As per existing guidelines, we can only encourage the usage of
cost effective and environment friendly technology and not make
it mandatory.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.25)
Though the scheme of Rural Building Centres (RBCs) has been
discontinued as per the existing guidelines the State
Governments/ZPs/DRDAs have to encourage usage of cost
effective materials.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.26)
Out of 79 RBCs sanctioned, 3 were closed because those could
not fulfil initial required documentation. Out of the remaining
76, 23 have been completed, 24 and 29 are due for release of 2nd
and 3rd instalment respectively.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.27)
60. The Committee are unable to understand why use of the
cost effective and environment friendly technology cannot be made
mandatory that too when the Union Government is providing 75%
assistance and State Government is providing 25% assistance under
IAY. The Committee persist with its earlier recommendations in the
matter and would like the Department to take necessary steps
accordingly. The Committee would also like to know the specific
reasons for discontinuation of Rural Building Centres (RBCs) by
HUDCO.
The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by the State
Governments/ZPs/DRDAs to encourage usage of cost effective
materials in the absence of RBCs which have been discontinued by
HUDCO. The Committee may also be informed of the steps taken
by the Department for setting up of cost effective material Marts at
Block level.

39
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.32)
The Committee find from the data provided by the Department
that so far 146 lakh houses could be constructed under the flagship
programme of the Department i.e. Indira Awaas Yojana with an
expenditure of Rs. 26669.64 crore. In addition to it, a small number of
houses have been constructed under different small schemes of the
Department like credit-cum-subsidy scheme, Innovative Stream for
Rural Housing and Habitat Development etc. Besides, State
Governments have their own schemes to provide houses to shelterless
persons in rural areas. In spite of the massive investment made so far
the Government’s data indicate that housing shortage in rural areas is
148.25 lakh as per 2001 Census. The housing shortage is maximum in
Assam and North-Eastern States. Further if the estimated annual
incremental shortage is added the data of shelterlessness would be to
the tune of Rs. 161 lakhs during Eleventh Plan. Not only that the
position of available housing stock is also not very good. As per the
estimates of National Housing Bank only 36 per cent houses in rural
areas are pucca houses which means 64 per cent houses require
frequent maintenance and eventual replacement over a period of 5 to
10 years. The Committee also note that against 36 per cent of the
pucca houses in rural areas, in urban areas the position is much more
better where 77 per cent houses have been reported to be pucca houses.
In this scenario, the Committee conclude that there is a great challenge
before the Government to end shelterlessness in the country particularly
in rural areas. The Department has to work in a mission mode with
the effective planning and strategy for implementation to meet this
challenge. Besides, there is an urgent need to chalk out a strategy to
deal with the problem in the States particularly Assam and North
Eastern States where the shortage is maximum.
Reply of the Government
While noting the recommendations of the Committee for further
action, it is submitted that to end the shelterlessness in the country
particularly in rural areas including States like Assam and NE States

40
where the shortage is maximum, some of the steps already taken up
are as follows:
(i) In order to directly address the problem of the housing in
rural areas, the criteria for allocation of fund under IAY has
been revised from the year 2005-06 to assign a greater, 75%
weightage to housing shortage and 25% to poverty ratio as
against equal weightage earlier being given.
(ii) Bharat Nirman Programme is a business plan of the
Government of India and Rural Housing is one of the six
components for augmenting the rural infrastructure base of
the country. Under this programme 60 lakh houses are to
be constructed during the four years from 2005-06 to
2008-09 under IAY programme. Hence, 15 lakh houses are
to be constructed every year. During the first two years i.e.
2005-06 and 2006-07, the target has been achieved with the
construction of 30.5 lakh houses.
(iii) At present around 15 lakh houses are being constructed
under IAY. Ministry is seeking enhancement of budgetary
allocation for IAY to aim to construct 30 lakh houses every
year during 11th plan. The budgetary allocation for rural
housing has been enhanced to Rs. 4040 crore in 2007-08 as
compared to Rs. 2920 crore in 2006-07.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 2.47)
The Committee find that the targets to end the shelterlessness in
rural areas in the country were earlier fixed during 9th Plan in
pursuance of the objectives set under National Housing and Habitat
Policy of 1998. The targets could not be achieved and further spilled
over to 10th Plan and now to 11th Plan. Further under the ambitious
programme Bharat Nirman, housing is one of the component and
60 lakh houses are planned during four years starting from the year
2005-06. Even if the Government succeeds to construct 60 lakh houses
by 2008-09 i.e. the target period of Bharat Nirman, 101 lakh houses would
still be left to be constructed as per the Government’s own data. To
achieve the objective of eradicating shelterlessness, the Government
thus needs to construct balance 101 lakh houses during the remaining
three years of Eleventh Plan period (excluding Bharat Nirman period

41
of two years). The annual backlog which needs to be cleared is to the
tune of more than 30 lakh houses.
Reply of the Government
The Planning Commission have since agreed in principle to provide
funds for construction of 159.5 lakh houses for rural BPL families
during the 11th Plan period. During the 1st year of the 11th Plan i.e.
2007-08, 21.27 lakh houses have been targeted for construction and
thus 138.23 lakh houses would be required to be constructed during
the next four years. Accordingly, a budgetary outlay of Rs. 7923.97
crore has been projected to the Planning Commission in the Annual
Plan 2008-09 which is sufficient for construction of 34.56 lakh houses
@ Rs. 30,000/-per unit in plain areas and Rs. 35,000/-in hilly/difficult
areas.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.50)
The Committee further note that as per the estimates made by
National Housing Bank to end shelterlessness by the end of Eleventh
Five Year Plan, Rs. 1,86,000 crore would be required. NHB has estimated
an average cost of construction of a dwelling unit as Rs. 1.50 lakh.
Further as per the estimates of NABARD Rs. 1,46,000 would be needed
to meet the shortfall in rural houses. The Department consider the
average cost of construction of per dwelling unit as Rs. 1.50 lakh in
rural areas as estimated by NHB on a higher side. The Committee
note that even if the estimates of Department of Rural Development
are taken into consideration, Rs. 55,000 crore would be required by
the end of Eleventh Plan. Thus the annual requirement of funds as
per the Government’s own estimates will be around 11,000 crore per
year. The existing allocation of resources is merely Rs. 2920 crore i.e.
the allocation made during 2006-07. The Committee find that with the
meagre allocation of resources, it is not possible to end the
shelterlessness in the country. Further the Committee note the trend of
percentage allocation of GDP in rural housing in the country as
indicated above. Percentage allocation of GDP for rural housing which
was 0.17 per cent during the year 1998-99, increased to 0.19 per cent
during 1999-2000 and then decreased to 0.18 and subsequently to
0.17 per cent during the following two years. Then, it is stagnating at
0.17 per cent since 2001-02 to 2003-04 (upto which the data is made
available to the Committee). The Committee feel that to achieve the

42
targets there is an urgent need to accord priority to substantially step
up the allocation for rural housing. Besides, a multi pronged strategy
involving the different institutions involved with the task, the detailed
analysis of which is made in the subsequent part of the report is the
only answer to tackle the problem of shelterlessness in the rural areas.
Reply of the Government
The requirement of higher allocation has been made to the Planning
Commission repeatedly. There has been an increase of allocation from
Rs. 2920 crore last year to Rs. 4040 crore in 2007-08. The multi-pronged
strategy has been examined by the ‘Working Group on Rural Housing
for the 11th Plan’.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 2.73)
The Committee further note that IAY was launched during the
year 1985-86. Since the 21 years of its inception, no village based
impact assessment study of different rural housing schemes have been
done by the Department. Besides, the Committee while examining the
Demands for Grants of the year 2004-05 had found that no attempt
has been made to verify the houses constructed under IA Y since
inception. The Committee had recommended (refer Para 3.93 of Third
Report—14th Lok Sabha ) to initiate a study without further wastage
of time. The Committee deplore the way the Yojana is being
implemented and strongly recommend to initiate a village based impact
assessment study under which different aspects viz. the existing
condition of houses constructed under IAY and other Government
schemes, satisfaction level of beneficiaries, condition of infrastructure,
the comparative analysis of the houses constructed with the help of
different agencies viz. NGOs, Banks, IAY etc. should be done. Such a
study would help the Government to analyse the realistic position
with regard to the houses constructed with the assistance provided by
the Government.
Reply of the Government
Research and Impact Studies covering most of the aspects indicated
in the recommendation have been undertaken to assess the different
aspects of the programme. A concurrent study done in 1998 indicated
that 85 percent of the beneficiaries were satisfied with the house. It
may be stated here that construction of the house is done by

43
beneficiaries themselves according to their own choice. The process to
evaluate the implementation of the scheme is continuous and Ministry
keeps on assigning Research Studies in various States. Nevertheless it
will be ensured that aspects mentioned above are incorporated in future
too.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 2.81)
The Committee find from the position as indicated above that the
benefits of Government grant based schemes meant for rural housing
are being taken by the persons who have land. However, the landless
persons who may be the poorest of the poor in the area are being
deprived of the benefits of the schemes specifically Indira Awaas Yojana.
As admitted by the Department and revealed by Concurrent Evaluation,
around 90% of the Indira Awaas Yojana houses are built on the land
owned by beneficiaries. Providing land to the landless persons is the
biggest challenge to address the problem of shelterlessness in rural
areas in the country. While appreciating the fact that land is a State
subject and it is the responsibility of the State Government to provide
land to the landless poorest of the poor for the construction of a
minimum required shelter, the Committee feel that there is an urgent
need to provide some sort of guidelines through the national policy of
the Government.
The Committee would in this regard like to draw the attention of
the Department on various recommendations made in report on
Demands for Grants for the year 2006-07 of the Department of Rural
Development. The Committee had appreciated the initiative taken by
the Department to instruct the State Governments to prepare the waitlist
of Indira Awaas Yojana as per the rank of BPL list and display it at
the prominent places (para 3.106 of 18th Report). Further, while
examining the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of
Land Resources, the Committee had recommended to explore the
possibility of using wastelands for setting up agricultural universities
and for constructing houses under Government schemes for the landless
persons in consultation with various State Governments.
Reply of the Government
The Central Government provides financial assistance for
construction of houses by rural BPL families. Land being the State

44
subject, it is for the State Governments to provide house sites by
acquiring land or allotting government land including wastelands.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 2.82)
The Committee are at a loss to understand how the houses as per
the priority list of BPL persons could be provided in case the
beneficiary does not have land. In view of this scenario, the Committee
are of the opinion that there is an urgent need to explore the possibility
of providing land to landless persons for construction of a shelter. The
Committee feel that most of the land in rural areas might be belonging
to Gram Panchayat State Governments and as such the possibility of
providing land to BPL persons for the purpose of housing may be
examined. Besides, the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee
with regard to using wasteland may also be examined in consultation
with the State Governments, the Department of Land Resources and
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the viable solution in this regard
should be arrived at. Further, as regards the solution by acquiring
private land, the Committee may like to recommend to the Government
to explore the possibility of inviting private sector in the field of rural
housing with the condition that a certain percentage of houses are
mandatorily provided for the BPL category of persons.
Reply of the Government
Every State has its own scheme for providing land to landless for
construction of IAY house. However, keeping in view the
recommendation of the Committee, Ministry has initiated a Homestead
plot scheme for landless rural people. The draft guidelines have been
prepared and are being submitted to EFC for approval. Planning
Commission has already sanctioned Rs. 100 crore for the scheme during
2008-09. The role of Private Sector in construction of houses in rural
areas, has been included in the draft “National Rural Housing and
Habitat Policy”.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report)

45
 Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 3.28)
The Committee observe that to some extent the Government is
responsible for this plight of the rural people. Even when the recovery-
rate for the lending in rural areas is almost hundred per cent which
has been admitted by Commercial Banks, Banking Division and NHB,
the Department of Rural Development which is the nodal Department
to deal with the various aspects for rural housing has doubted the
creditworthiness of rural poor. The Department has stated that rural
people are poor and cannot avail of loan from Banks or financial
institutions. The Committee fail to understand, if that is the position
why the rural poor is borrowing from the lenders at exorbitant rate of
interest. The real problem is the mindset of the financial institutions.
Even when the rural poor have proved their trustworthiness as is
evident from the excellent rate of recovery, the financial institutions
are not coming forward to help the rural poor. The Committee are
moved by the instance quoted by the representative of SBI. The simple
query of an honest rural helpless customer, (why the Banks was not
giving housing loan when they are repaying the loan honestly) was
instrumental in launching a housing scheme for housing by SBI i.e.
SBI Sahyog Niwas. The Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to take this matter seriously with Reserve Bank of India,
Ministry of Finance (Banking Division), NHB, Commercial banks and
all other concerned and take all the desired action to extend the formal
lending and make housing loan affordable to the rural poor.
Reply of the Government
The Govt. has noted the concerns from various quarters of credit
availability for rural housing including those raised by this Hon’ble
Committee and has taken the following measures recently to extend
housing loans at affordable rates to the rural poor. With effect from
June, 2007 the credit limit for housing under the Differential Rate of
Interest (DRI) scheme was enhanced from Rs. 5,000/-to Rs. 20,000/-.
The Department of Financial Services has advised the RBI to include
the IAY loans in the Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) scheme for
providing loan upto Rs. 20,000/-per IA Y house at 4% interest rate.
Priority sector is an important instrument for influencing allocation of
credit in the banking system to certain sectors including the housing
sector. To give a fillip to credit flow to this sector, housing loans upto
Rs. 20 lakh are covered under priority sector advances.
In a recent report on Finance for Rural Housing by NHB
(December, 2006) a number of suggestions were made for increasing

46
the flow of institutional loans to rural housing including the option of
using title guarantee. These suggestions are under consideration to
further ease the flow of credit to the housing sector.
The draft “National Rural Housing and Habitat Policy” recognizes
the need to take all necessary action for ensuring greater credit flow
for rural housing and has suggested ways to do so.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 29, Para No. 3.31)
The Committee also find that on the issue being raised during the
course of oral evidence with the representatives of Department of Rural
Development, the Department has informed that the Government is
examining the proposal of National Housing Bank in providing 3%
subsidy in the rate of interest to banks and financial institutions to
introduce greater credit flow in rural housing and to provide housing
loans to rural poor at comparative and lower rates. The Committee
appreciate the aforesaid gesture of the National Housing Bank and
would like the Department to finalize the issue in consultation with
National Housing Bank, Reserve Bank, Banking Division and all other
concerned expeditiously. The observations made by the Committee in
the preceding para with regard to the differential rate of interest of
refinance and rate of interest charged from individuals may also be
kept in view while taking decision in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Finance has stated that in the Budget Announcement
for 2008-09, a fund of Rs. 1200 crore is to be created in NHB to
enhance its refinance operations in rural housing sector at cheaper
rates. The guidelines for the facility to make housing refinance available
at cheaper rates is being finalized by the Govt. in consultation with
the RBI.
Ministry has included the provision of interest subsidy scheme as
part of draft “National Rural Housing and Habitat Policy”.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

47
Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 3.32)
Some of the experts who appeared before the Committee were of
the view that there should be a separate National Housing Bank for
rural areas. The mandate of NHB has been to promote housing finance
institutions and to provide financial and other support to such
institution in the field of housing. The data given by NHB indicates
that only 10 to 11 per cent of the housing lending could be made
available to rural areas. The role played by the Public Sector Banks
who have wider coverage in rural areas is also not to the desired
extent. Keeping in view the scenario of shelterlessness in rural areas
in the country there is an urgent need to give more focused attention
to the issue related to institutional finance. The suggestions given by
NHB for creation of a National Shelter Fund and National Risk Fund to
augment the resources of NHB may be critically analysed by the Department .
In view of this the Committee recommend to the Government to
analyse the role of NHB critically in the context of housing in rural
areas and consider either to extend the activities of NHB in the rural
sector or set up separate National Housing Banks for rural areas. The
Department of Rural Development should deliberate this issue in
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and Ministry of Finance
(Banking Division). The Committee may be kept informed about the
decision taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Finance has stated that NHB was created for the
purpose of promoting housing finance institutions and extending credit
support to such institutions for on lending to borrowers including in
rural areas. However, with the phasing out of low cost resources as
also structural changes in the housing finance sector observed in recent
years, the business model of NHB is becoming unviable. Under these
circumstances, a separate NHB, exclusively for rural areas, cannot be
expected to be commercially viable. It would be appropriate that the
existing institutions reorients its focus for rural lending. In fact, NHB
envisages increase in its financial disbursements towards poor, EWS
and LIG segments of rural and urban areas from 36 % to about 56%
over a period of the next three years. The focus areas of the Medium
Term Business Strategy (MTBS) for 2006-09 of NHB for rural housing
include:
• Supplementing on-going Central and State Govt. schemes
for poor and EWS segments e.g. top-up loans.
• Launching new schemes like Composite Loan in partnership
with PLIs, Insurance Linked Housing Products in

48
consultation/arrangements with LIC, SBI Life, HDFC Std.
Life &/or any other such institutions.
• Using “Neighbourhood Concept” to provide housing micro
credit to members of SHGs through PLIs.
• Involving select State & District Co-operative Banks, NGOs/
MFIs & other local institutions like PACS , Dairy
Co-operatives, APMCs including industrial corporates both
in rural & urban centre through partnership arrangement
for origination & servicing of loan e.g. Escrow mechanism
route for capturing of payments effectively.
• Encouraging direct finance through Public Private
Partnership &/integrated rural development projects.
• Act as catalyst for increased flow of credit & investment in
rural housing to help in generating employment & thereby,
the income through housing activities.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 32, Para No. 3.45)
The Committee find that the Golden Jubilee Rural Housing Finance
Scheme (GJRHFS) was formulated in the year 1997 and the scheme
aims to address the problem of housing shortage in the rural areas
through improved access to institutional housing finance. The scheme
is being implemented through Scheduled Public Sector Commercial
Banks, Scheduled State Co-operative Banks, Regional Rural Banks,
dedicated housing finance institutions viz. Housing Finance Companies
(HFCs), Apex Cooperative Housing Finance Societies (ACHFS) as also
through the Agriculture Rural Development Banks (ARDBs). The
scheme is applicable in a rural area, the population of which does not
exceed 50,000 as per 1991 census. As regards the performance of the
scheme, the achievement as compared to the targets is more than 100%
since 1997 till date. Under the scheme, Rs. 6621.18 crore has been
disbursed to legible primary lending institutions. The Committee note
that GJRHFS is the only scheme of the Government of India related
to lending for housing. Although the performance of the scheme
vis-a-vis targets is quite satisfactory, as indicated in the datas given by
NHB, the targets fixed under the scheme are quite low. A total number
of 13,25,000 dwelling units have been fixed from 1997 to 2004-05.
During the year 2005-06, the targets were fixed for 2,75,000 dwelling

49
units. As informed by NHB, Government of India sets the national
targets under the scheme. The Committee are of the view that the
targets set under the scheme are too low keeping in view the scenario
of shelterlessness in the country. The Committee strongly recommend
to the Government to enhance the targets under the scheme
considerably specifically when the achievement of targets has been
quite impressive. The enhancement of targets would further put
pressure on different Public Sector Banks, Cooperative and RRBs and
other financial institutions involved with the scheme to extend more
loans for housing in rural areas. This will help to address the problem
of rural housing to some extent.
Reply of the Government
The targets under the GJRHFS are set by the Government of India
& the NHB. These targets have been increased in a phased manner
over the last nine years of operation of the Scheme from a modest
50,000 units in 1997-98 to 2,75,000 units during 2005-06.
Keeping in mind the observations, the target for the year 2006-07
was set at financing 3,30,000 units i.e. enhanced by 20% over the
previous years limit which is substantially higher than in the previous
years. The target for 2007-08 was further enhanced to 3.5 lakh units.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 3.69)
The Committee note that HUDCO started rural housing activity
from 1977-78 and since then HUDCO has sanctioned 2473 schemes
with loan amounting to Rs. 7089.17 crore for construction of 93.04
lakh dwelling units in various States of the country up to 31st July
2005. Further, the data indicated by HUDCO for the work done during
8th, 9th and 10th Plan indicate that there is sharp decline in the number
of schemes during 10th Plan up to the year 2004-05. Against 823
schemes taken up during 9th Plan, during the first 3 years of 10th
Plan, only 30 schemes have been taken by HUDCO. Further, the
Committee note that there is sharp difference between the loan amount
sanctioned and loan amount released during different plans. During
10th Plan, whereas 3024.89 crore has been indicated as loan amount
sanctioned, the amount released for the said period is Rs. 922.90 crore.
The Committee would like the Department to explain the reasons for
decline in the activities of HUDCO during 10th Plan and also the

50
difference between the loan amount sanctioned and released during
different plans.
Reply of the Government
Though, HUDCO has been extending financial assistance for rural
housing scheme, in recent years, there has been a gradual decline in
borrowings by the Government agencies because of Poor recovery of
loans from the EWS beneficiaries, non-availability of Government.
Guarantee and Budgetary provision for repayment of HUDCO loan,
lack of interest of State Government/Government agencies towards
HUDCO’s loan based Rural Housing Programme in view of subsidy
based schemes promoted by the Ministry of Rural Development, etc.
From HUDCO’s past performance, it may be seen that loan release
effected in each year is not more than 50% of sanctions made. This is
because loan releases are made on completion of legal documentation
and seeing the progress/utilization in each scheme. Details of past 3
years loan sanctions and loan releases in housing sector are indicated
below:
(Rs. in cores)
Year  Sanctions Releases
2003-2004 2974 1135
2004-2005 3567 992
2005-2006 1487 1053
It has been observed that during the 10th Plan, the gap between
loans sanctioned and released is even more, which is mainly because
of one scheme sanctioned to Bihar State Housing Board in the year
2004-2005 for a total loan amount of Rs. 1250.00 crore, the scheme was
subsequently withdrawn. Details of the scheme are underlined below:
Name of the Scheme Agency Loan No. of Sanction
Amount Dwellings Date
Programme loan for EWS BSHB 1250 crore 500000 12.10.2004
Housing Scheme for flood
affected areas
Due to poor recoveries from EWS families, HUDCO insists on
Government Guarantee from the State Government towards security
for its loan. Most State Governments are reluctant to provide such

51
guarantees since their own financial health is adversely affected due
to poor recoveries from the beneficiaries. State Government/State level
agencies are availing financial assistance from other Banks/HFIs at
lower rate of interest as compared to HUDCO as many State
Governments viz. Government of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka etc. are
finding HUDCO’s interest rates on higher side. Finance is being
provided by Banks in a big way towards housing sector now as it is
covered under their mandate of priority sector lending (which was
not there earlier) on comparatively easier terms and lower rate of
interest.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 36, Para No. 3.72)
Another problem pointed out by HUDCO is that in most of the
States there are no separate State level agency for taking up rural
housing schemes. The Committee recommend to have consultation with
State Governments and find out wage and means to address the various
difficulties encountered by HUDCO. In this regard, the Department
first of all should get the information of States where State level
agencies for taking up housing activity do not exist. Such States should
be persuaded to constitute State level agencies so as to give focused
attention to rural housing. The Committee may be kept apprised about
the action taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA),
HUDCO has reported that States of Gujarat, Karnataka, Orissa, U.P &
Tamil Nadu are having Rural Housing Boards as State Level agencies
for takingup rural housing activities. In rest of the States, rural housing
activities are being generally undertaken through other nodal agencies
like housing boards/rural departments/industrial Department etc. as
no specific agency exists for taking up rural housing activities.
According to the replies received from the States, the most of the
States stated that they do not have substantial dealings with HUDCO.
However, Meghalaya State has informed that Meghalaya State Housing
Board has taken quite a substantial amount of loan from HUDCO for
implementation of Loan-cum-Subsidy Scheme, but due to poor recovery
of loan from the laonee, the Government have stopped further availing
of loan since the year 2000.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

52
Recommendation (Serial No. 38, Para Number 3.82)
The Committee note that Commercial, Co-operative and Regional
Rural Banks have great access to rural masses in the rural areas as
these banks have a large number of branches in these areas. As stated
by the NHB, these banks are very much engaged in agricultural finance.
However, in the field of rural housing, these banks are not doing so
well. The Committee also note that as regards the data with regard to
credit flow to rural housing, the Ministry of Finance Banking Division
has informed that the number of accounts which were 7,47,972 during
March 2002 have enhanced to 20,48,318 during March 2005. The
Committee during deliberations with some of the leading Commercial
Banks have found that some of the laudable initiatives have been
taken by these banks to make the housing loan attractive for rural
areas. Under State Bank of India Gram Niwas Scheme, there is waiver
of security requirement upto Rs. 0.50 lakh. Under State Bank of India
Sahyog Niwas home loan, concessional interest rate @ 0.25% below
applicable home loan interest rates, have been provided and loan
amount up to 10 times the savings of the corpus of self help groups
subject to a maximum of Rs. 0.50 lakh per member of SHG is provided.
Another scheme of the State Bank of India i.e., SBI Tribal Plus has
been formulated keeping in view the peculiar property rights in tribal
areas and the provision of loan against other securities including third
party guarantee has been made. Similarly, the representatives of Bank
of Maharashtra informed that during festival season, the rate of interest
charged from housing loan is 1% below the existing rate of interest.
Despite these laudable initiatives taken by the various Commercial
Banks, the data of loan amount sanctioned during different years is
not very impressive. For example, Punjab National Bank, a leading
bank in North India has disbursed only 184 crore during the year
2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively.
Reply of the Government
Disbursal of loan by commercial Bank is demand driven and so
Banks are not in a position to force loan on individuals. However,
Ministry will pursue the matter with banking authorities to request
them to generate awareness among the people about loan facilities
one can avail of.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

53
Recommendation (Serial No. 39, Para No. 3.83)
The various aspects limiting institutions credit flow for housing in
rural areas have been analyzed in the following chapter of the Report.
Here the Committee observe that there is an urgent need to enhance
the credit flow for housing in rural areas and banks can play a very
important role in this regard. There is an urgent need to deliberate on
the various issues involved in the housing finance in consultation with
Reserve Bank, Banking Division and Commercial Banks, National
Housing Banks and all other concerned. Besides, housing loan need to
be linked with credit schemes to various other centrally sponsored
schemes which ensure income of the rural poor like SGSY, Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme etc. Besides, the recovery schedule
should be drawn according to crop cycle of the farmers. There is an
urgent need to take the necessary steps for publicity of the various
schemes of these banks. The illiterate people in rural areas residing in
interior and backward areas need different publicity campaigns to
inform them about the various aspects of the housing scheme. As
done in urban areas, housing melas could be arranged in rural areas
where people could be informed of these schemes. To make the schemes
more popular and effective, there is an urgent need for a proper
coordination between District/Block Level Officials and the Panchayti
Raj institutions. The Committee strongly recommend to take the desired
action in consultation with the all concerned to ensure a greater role
of these banks in the field of landing in rural areas.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Finance has stated that the income limits as well as
the limit for housing loans have been recently been enhanced under
the DRI scheme. The subsidy limit for IAY houses has also been
increased. Banks have been advised to give top up loan upto
Rs. 20,000/-for IAY house at 4% interest rate. However, greater
awareness needs to be generated about the provisions under various
schemes at the District/Block/Village levels in a manner that would
be easily understood by illiterate persons in rural areas.
To generate awareness among the people, all DRDAs/Block Level
officials etc. have been informed about the new initiatives, who further
pass on this information to the beneficiaries. Advertisements are also
issued in National as well as vernacular newspapers to disseminate
information.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

54
Recommendation (Serial No. 40, Para No. 3.84)
The Committee find from the Information provided by the Bank
of Maharashtra that on the Kisan Gold Card one of the components
embedded is rural housing and Rs. 50 thousand can be provided
without any collateral security. Further, the representative of Reserve
Bank has informed the Committee that RBI has recently advised the
banks to introduce a General Purpose Card for all customers in rural
areas. Any person having this card can draw money upto Rs. 50
thousand and when he repays he can again drawback. The Committee
find that the aforesaid guidelines if implemented by banks on the
lines of Bank of Maharashtra can provide a great relief to the rural
poor and the amount of Rs. 50 thousand drawn by virtue of credit
card, if used for housing purpose can solve the problem of housing to
some extent. As stated by the representatives of RBI said provision
will overcome the problem of documentation procedure. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Government to instruct the RBI to pursue
these guidelines with Commercial Banks and the said provision should
be made mandatory for all the banks. The Committee may be informed
about the follow up action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
M/o Finance had advised the banks to introduce a General Credit
Card (GCC) Scheme for issuing GCC to their constituents in rural &
semi-urban areas, based on the assessment of income & cash flow of
the household similar to that prevailing under normal credit card.
Under the scheme, there would not be any insistence on security &
the purpose or end-use of the credit. Interest rate on the facility may
be charged, as considered appropriate & reasonable. The limit may be
periodically reviewed & revised/cancelled depending on track record
of the account holder. With a view to targeting women as beneficiaries
of bank credit, they may be given a preferential treatment under the
GCC Scheme. Banks may utilize the services of local post offices,
schools, primary health centers, local Govt. functionaries, farmers’
association/club, well-established community-based agencies & civil
society organizations for sourcing of borrowers for issuing GCC.
NABARD has agreed to the recommendation.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

55
Recommendation (Serial No. 41, Para No. 3.96)
The Committee find that to get the credit from Banks and other
financial institutions, the customer has to mortgage his property . The
clear title of the land on which the customer desires to construct house
is required to avail of housing loan from the bankers/financial
institutions. Lack of clear title is the basic impediment for extending
housing loan in rural areas as has been highlighted by NHB and
other organizations who appeared before the Committee. In abadi areas,
the problem is still worse as in these areas there are no land records
and people are living in the ancestral houses for centuries without
any title deed. The people pay house tax which in some way serve as
token title. Further, in North Eastern States the position of land records
is quite different where the land is in the name of Community.
To solve the aforesaid problems various land reforms initiatives
need to be taken by the various State Governments. In case of abadi
land the State Governments need to be persuaded to give the clear
title to the owners of the land who have been living there for centuries.
Further to address this problem NHB, various organization, experts
and Commercial Banks who appeared before the Committee have made
reference to an act of West Bengal in which the provision has been
made to create a charge by declaration for agricultural land. Besides,
the reference has also been made to an act of Uttar Pradesh wherein
the construction of a house for personal use in rural areas on abadi
land or repair, modernization or alternate energy plan and machinery
or matters connected therewith shall be deemed to be an agricultural
purpose for this act. NHB and other organizations and experts were
of the view that similar initiatives need to be taken by other State
Governments. The Committee while noting the aforesaid position
strongly recommend to the Department to study the position of various
States acts which provide a solution to the problem of title for the
purpose of getting loan in rural areas. The initiatives taken by some
of the State Governments need to be replicated in other State
Governments. While noting that land is a State subject and the
initiatives need to be taken by the State Governments, the Committee
find that the Union Government has to persuade to the State
Governments and provide guidelines and model laws after studying
the various State laws in light of the aforesaid observations made by
the Committee. The initiatives taken in this regard may be informed
to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
As rightly pointed out by the Committee, in the absence of clear
title of the land, the landholders are facing problems to avail credit

56
from the banks/financial institutions. This has primarily been due to
neglect of revenue and land records administration in the country
which suffers from inadequate staff with large jurisdictions, poor
infrastructure and office facilities, lack of equipment and other office
aids, dearth of office and residential accommodation, lack of training
facilities etc.
With a view to assisting the States/UTs in the task of strengthening
their revenue administration, updating of land records &
computerization of land records, two Centrally-sponsored schemes of
Computerization of Land Records (CLR) & Strengthening of Revenue
Admn. and Updating of Land Records (SRA&ULR) are under
implementation since 1988-89 & 1987-88 respectively. Since inception,
funds to the tune of Rs. 545.36 crores & Rs. 373.88 crores have been
released to the States/UTs under the Schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR
respectively. While significant progress has been made under the two
schemes of CLR & SRA&ULR, the desirable outcomes are yet to be
achieved.
Under the scheme of SRA&ULR, the States and UTs have made
progress towards adopting modern technology for survey and resurvey
of land, training of survey and settlement staff, storage of land records,
office-cum-residential accommodation for grass root level staff etc.
However, the existing survey and settlement organizations have not
completed their job of periodic resurveys for updating land records.
Records are outdated or not in good shape in most States. In some
North Eastern States, even the original survey work has not taken
place in many districts. A similar situation prevails in some UTs and
also in some parts of other States. The earlier technology of lattha and
chains for survey is cumbersome, painful time-taking and costly, and
there is need for adopting modern technology across the country on
a large scale to accomplish the task in a timely and efficient manner.
Under the scheme of CLR, good progress has been made in some
States, but not consistently across the country. Many States have
digitized basic land records data and have started the process of
effecting mutations and distribution of Records of Rights (RoRs) through
computers. Some States have stopped manual issue of RoRs. A few
States have also placed land records data on the Internet websites for
easy access and dissemination of this information.
Some achievements under the scheme of CLR
(A) States which have completed RoR data entry:
AP , Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, TN, Chhattisgarh, MP ,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, UP , Uttarakhand & WB.

57
(B) States which have stopped manual issue of RoRs:
Karnataka, TN, Gujarat, MP , Maharashtra, UP , Uttarakhand
& WB.
(C) States which have placed RoR data on websites:
Gujarat, MP , Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan & Uttarakhand.
However, the emphasis of CLR so far, has been more on
computerization & digitization of records, and less on having a system
that maintains accurate & up-to-date records of rights & securely
generates such records on demand. Also lacking, are the integration of
textual & spatial data on RoRs, linkage of registration with mutation
& updating of RoRs, backend reconciliation of village records, and
a comprehensive & standard database of land records across the country
that is necessary for understanding land & immovable property markets
& for efficient administration & policy making in a modern economy.
Computerization of the property registration process is another
area where some progress has been made in a number of States, largely
on their own initiative, and not covered under the schemes of CLR or
SRA&ULR. However, the prime focus of these initiatives has been on
automation of the deed registration procedures, and there is hardly
any linkage with the land records management system.
With this backdrop, a National Land Resource Management
Programme (NLRMP) has been formulated to replace the two schemes
of CLR and SRA&ULR from the year 2007-08. The programme will
integrate and harmonize three layers of data (a) spatial data from
satellite imagery/aerial photography, (b) topographic maps and other
data from the Survey of India and Forest Survey of India, and
(c) revenue records—cadastral maps and Records of Rights (RoRs)
details, on a Geographic Information System (GIS) platform to facilitate
citizen services based on land data as well as a comprehensive tool
for planning, developmental, regulatory and other activities where
location-specific information is needed, to benefit both public and
private sector stakeholders.
The main focus of the programme will be on delivering citizen
services such as providing records of land titles with maps; other
land-based certificates such as caste certificates, income certificates
(particularly in rural areas), domicile certificates; information on
eligibility for development programmes; land passbooks with the
relevant land information; and facility for easy access to land-based
credit for agriculture, rural development, livelihood and other

58
programmes (by providing access to land records data to Cooperative
and other financial institutions). The citizen services will also include
points of service such as, tough screens, kiosks, common service centres,
etc.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 42, Para No. 3.97)
The Committee further note that laudable initiatives have been
taken by the Union Government under the two schemes (i) Centrally
Sponsored Schemes viz. Strengthening of Revenue Administration and
Updation of Land Records (SRA&ULR), and (ii) Computerisation of
Land Records. The land records maintained properly and updated
periodically can make the lending for housing in rural areas much
smoother. The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing on
ensuring the basic data with regard to land records in rural areas.
Unless the core information with regard to land records is made
available no purpose will be served by computerizing the land records
under the said schemes. The Committee have repeatedly been stressing
for some sort of coordination between these two schemes. The
Committee while reiterating their earlier observations in this regard
would like the Department to continue these efforts in a bigger way
which may be quite helpful in solving the various impediments for
lending for housing in rural areas.
Reply of the Government
Although significant progress has been made under the two
schemes of CLR and SRA&ULR, the desirable outcomes are yet to be
achieved. Accordingly, it has been decided to go for a comprehensive
revision of the schemes from the 11th Plan period in the shape of the
National Land Resource Management Programme (NLRMP),
conceptualized as a major system & reform initiative that is concerned
not merely with computerization, updating & maintenance of land
records & validation of titles, but also as a programme that will add
value & facilitate & support delivery of citizen services based on land
data as well as provide a comprehensive tool for development planning
wherever location-specific information is required.
The programme will take various land data/information & integrate
them in a comprehensive framework. Three layers of data, viz., satellite
imagery/aerial photography data, Survey of India & Forest Survey of

59
India maps, and land records—plot details and cadastral maps—will
be integrated on a Geographic Information System (GIS) platform.
All cadastral maps in the country will be digitized and data
included with plot numbers and unique id for each land parcel.
Administrative unit boundaries from village level upwards (including
panchayat, block, tehsil, circle, sub-division, district, division, State &
national boundaries), forest, water bodies & other physical attributes
of land and land use details will be overlaid, and other developmental
layers (e.g., watersheds, road networks, etc.) added to the core GIS.
The activities proposed to be supported under the Programme,
inter alia , include completion of computerization of the Records of
rights (RoRs), digitization of maps, computerization of mutation data
and updating of land records, adoption of modern survey technology,
computerization of registration, automatic generation of mutation
notices, and training & capacity building of the concerned officials &
functionaries. Connectivity amongst the land records & registration
offices & data centres at various levels (e.g., district, State & National
data centres) may also be supported. Access to land records data may
also be provided to Cooperative & other financial institutions for
facilitating credit operations. The necessary data security protocols,
authentication and access control mechanisms will be put in place.
The primary focus of the Programme will be on citizen services,
such as providing records of rights (RoRs) with maps, land-based
certificates such as caste certificates, income certificates (particularly in
rural areas), domicile certificates; information for eligibility for
development programmes; land passbooks, etc.
In addition, the Programme will be of immense usefulness to the
Governments—both Central & State Government—in modernizing and
bringing efficiency to the land revenue administration as well as
offering a comprehensive tool for planning various land-based
developmental activities, e.g., locating schools, hospitals, tourism
circuits, etc; development of roads, bridges, highways, rail lines,
airports, telecommunication networks, and other utility mapping.
Usefulness will also be there in civic amenities planning, watershed
management, requisition & acquisition of land, and resettlement &
rehabilitation of displaced persons. Land resources management in
general & Rural Development programme in particular (such as rural
connectivity and road networks under the PMGSY; watershed
management & other development works under the NREGS, SGSY,
etc.) will benefit from the Programme. Regulatory & disaster

60
management activities will also get the needed location-specific
information through the Programme.
The knowledge base created through the programme would be
available to private enterprises also.
The programme will be managed professionally, with multi-
disciplinary teams at district, State & National levels. The programme
will be implemented in a mission mode.
To begin with, the programme is proposed to be piloted in several
districts across the country. These districts will be selected carefully in
consultation with the States and UTs. The experience of these pilots
will help in refining the methodology and approach, following which
the Programme will be scaled up to cover the entire country over a
period of time.
Since the States and UTs are at different levels of development &
preparedness, a detailed sizing exercise has been undertaken to assess
the magnitude of the problem and to design State-specific strategies
and approaches automized to the local situations.
With a view of imparting a clear understanding of the components
and activities to be taken up under the Programme, the roles &
responsibilities of the various stakeholders, the technological options,
availability of resources, the expected outcomes & deliverables etc., a
national workshop was organized on 14th-15th June, 2007 at
New Delhi with participation from the State Governments,
UTs Administration, domain experts & specialized agencies, such as
the NRSA, Survey of India, NIC etc. The Programme has since been
renamed as National Land Records Management Programme and
approved by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 21.8.2008. Guidelines
are being formulated for release of funds to the States.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 43, Paragraph No. 3.98)
The Committee further would like to draw the attention of the
Department to their recommendation made with regard to laudable
idea given by the Secretary , Department of Rural Development during
the course of oral evidence held in connection with the examination of
Demands for Grants (2006-07). The Secretary had suggested to link up

61
the land record information with the computers with lending bankers
so that the rural people do not even need to procure the copy of the
land records every time. The bankers can access the land records
directly without any charge. The Committee strongly recommend to
the Department to see how this idea can be made practicable under
the existing schemes of land records. If implemented it can make the
lending process easier and cheaper. While recommending in this regard,
the Committee may like to highlight their observations with regard to
updation of land records as made above. Unless the land records are
correct and reflect the actual ground situation, no system of
computerization or linking the computerized data with the lending
banks can work. The Committee would like the Department to pay
more emphasis on updation of land records so that the benefits of the
schemes meant to computerize the land records can actually be availed
of by the rural people. Keeping in view the aforesaid observation, the
Department may take the necessary action and apprise the Committee
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Reply as per para 3.97.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 46, Para No. 3.101)
The Committee recommend to analyse the aforesaid scheme in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance and NHB and inform the
Committee about the final outcome to enable them to analyse the
position further and comment in this regard. NHB during the course
of deliberations with the Committee has informed that they have taken
up the issue of rationalisation of stamp duty charges for creation of
mortgage with various State Governments. A few States have reduced
these charges to a nominal level whereas most of the States are yet to
accede to this request of NHB. NHB has suggested that the stamp
duty charges on creation of simple mortgages be reduced to 0.50 per
cent (as prevalent in the State of Maharashtra, Gujarat and Karnataka)
across the States with a maximum cap of registration fee to be fixed
at nominal rates say Rs. 200. The Committee appreciate the initiatives
taken by NHB and would like if to continue further in persuading the
State Governments in this regard. Besides the Committee feel that the
Department of Rural Development has also the responsibility to
persuade the State Government to bring the land reforms and the

62
issue of rationalization of stamp duty and registration charges should
be taken up with the State Governments vigorously.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Finance has responded and stated that:
As per information provided by NHB the following States have
reduced duty on creation of simple mortgage of housing property:—
(i) Maharashtra:
Previous—1% subject to maximum of Rs. 5 lakh
Present—0.5% subject to minimum of Rs. 100/- and maximum
of Rs. 10 Lakh.
(ii) Karnataka:
Previous—Rs. 3 for every hundred rupees or part thereof
for the amount secured by such deed subject to a maximum
of Rs. 3 lakh.
Present—50 paise for every hundred rupee or part thereof
for amount secured by such deed.
(iii) Delhi:
Previous—Bifurcated value.
Present—2% with a monetary ceiling of Rs. 2 lakh.
(iv) Tamil Nadu:
Previous—Rs. 4 for every hundred rupees or part thereof.
Present—1% subject to maximum of Rs. 20,000/-.
(v) Rajasthan:
Present—5% of the amount of value secured.
As regards, problems faced by the borrowers in title deed, it is
observed that in cases of old properties, the problem of title deeds is
in existence in almost all the States as these properties have undergone
divisions & sub-divisions due to partitions in the family without any
proper format documentation. Hence, there is difficulty in availability
of title deeds. However, in some cases, entry is available in Municipal/
Local Bodies records but that is not regarded as evidence of title in
the court.
As far as State Governments are concerned, Govt. of Bihar,
Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh and A&N

63
Islands have furnished the reply. It has been opined by the States that
if land provided by Government is free of cost to the beneficiaries
there is no need for any stamp duty.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 57 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 47, Para No. 3.105)
The Committee note that whereas there is some improvement in
the flow of credit by housing finance companies in the field of rural
housing, credit flow by cooperatives is reducing drastically as could
be seen from the data indicated above. The credit flow of housing
finance companies has almost doubled during the year 2004-05 as
compared to the year 2001-02. However, in case of cooperative sector
institutions, the credit flow has reduced from Rs. 171.03 crore in year
2001-02 to a negligible amount of Rs. 3.86 crore during the year 2004-
05. Further, with regard to the number of housing cooperatives
operating in different States, the Committee find that in some of the
States like Gujarat, Maharashtra and Rajasthan a good number of
cooperatives are working. As regards the role of nodal Department of
Rural Development for the purpose of housing, the Committee are
constrained to note the vague reply on the issue of involving
cooperatives, that excepting DRDA no other agency is involved under
IAY. It seems that for the Department of Rural Development the only
responsibility is towards Indira Awaas Yojana. The Committee feel that
being the nodal Ministry/Department it is the responsibility of the
Department of Rural Development to coordinate the activities being
undertaken by different agencies in the field of rural housing so as to
have an overall scenario of the subject. The Committee recommend to
the Department to analyse the performance of cooperatives in the
aforesaid States where these are functioning well. There is an urgent
need to study how more cooperatives can be involved in rural areas.
Besides, more stress need to be given to housing finance companies.
These issues should be dealt with in tandem with the initiatives taken
by the Government to bridge the urban rural divide particularly the
initiatives being taken through PURA.

64
Reply of the Government
NABARD being an Apex Financial Institution, does not provide
credit directly to the borrowers, but has been extending refinance at
concessional rates to banks for financing Rural Housing from the year
2001-02 onwards. Details of agency-wise refinance provided by
NABARD for rural housing during the period from 2001-02 to
2005-06 is showing in the statement below.
It may be observed from the Table below that the refinance off-
take by banks for rural housing has been steadily increasing since
NABARD started extending refinance for this purpose in 2001-02
(except a marginal decline during 2005-06). The total refinance availed
by Cooperative banks under rural housing has shown steady increase
from Rs. 278.37 crore in 2001-02 to Rs. 758.51 crore in 2005-06. Further,
the share of Cooperative Banks in the total refinance provide by
NABARD for rural housing is more than 50% consistently. Since
NABARD refinance forms only a portion of the actual ground level
lending for this purpose, the actual quantum of loan disbursed by
cooperative banks/other banks for rural housing is presumed to be
much higher.
No. of units constructed out of NABARD’s Refinance
 (Rs. in crore)
Purpose 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
Units Amt. Units Amt. Units Amt. Units Amt. Units Amt.
New 43,856 370.16 53,849 457.48 44,018 563.70 86,207 895.75 80,544 1003.92
Repairs 23,333 131.70 64,512 312.05 34,354 466.53 86,258 381.19 48,341 238.88
Total 67,189 501.86 118,361 769.53 78,372 1030.23 172,465 1276.94 128,886 1242.80
Details of State-wise disbursements of refinance under rural housing
to cooperative banks during the years 2004-05 and 2005-06 are given
below. It may be observed therefrom that during 2004-05 cooperative
banks in three States viz. Punjab, West Bengal & Kerala have availed
Rs. 186 crore, Rs. 100 crore & Rs. 209 crore refinance respectively from
NABARD under rural housing. The other major States, in which the
performance of cooperative banks is comparatively better are
Haryana(Rs. 59.46 crore) and HP (Rs. 59.30 crore), similarly, during
2005-06 cooperative banks in two States viz. Punjab & Kerala have
also availed Rs. 245 crore & Rs. 146 crore refinance under rural housing.
Cooperative banks in four States viz. Haryana, HP , Orissa & WB have

65
availed more than Rs. 50 crore. In the case of Gujarat, Rajasthan &
Karnataka, it ranges between Rs. 18 crore to Rs. 33 crore. As regards
cooperative banks in Maharashtra the amount of refinance availed
under rural housing during the year declined to Rs. 5.06 crore. While
a good number of cooperative banks are working in Gujarat,
Maharashtra & Rajasthan, their performance of cooperatives in the
matter of dispensation of credit for rural housing cannot be considered
as satisfactory.
(Rs. in crore)
Agency 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 Cumulative
as on
31.3.2006
CBs 99.39 40.83 138.47 109.09 291.64 679.42
(19.80) (5.30) (13.44) (8.54) (23.47) (14.09)
RRBs 124.10 270.56 295.21 401.51 192.65 1284.03
(24.73) (35.16) (28.66) (31.44) (15.50) (26.63)
Coop. 278.37 458.14 596.56 766.34 758.51 2857.91
Banks (55.47) (59.54) (57.80) (60.02) (61.03) (59.28)
Total 501.86 769.53 1030.23 1276.94 1242.80 4821.36
(Figures in bracket show percentage to total)
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 48, Para No. 4.22)
The Committee deliberated the issues related to appropriate an
cost effective and environment friendly technology for rural housing
with various institutions like BMTPC, CBRI, CAPART, HUDCO and
various experts. The Committee during the deliberations have found
that laudable work is being done by these institutions. Some of the
NGOs like Development Alternatives are also doing commendable work
in this field. Besides, CSIR the premier institute for industrial research,
I.I.Ts. and other bodies of Government are doing research in this field
and have developed various innovative technologies in the field of
rural housing. BMTPC is an inter-Ministerial organization and personnel
working in different Ministries which include the Ministry of Rural
Development work on deputation with BMTPC. The research done by
various research laboratories is upgraded either through a prototype

66
development center or a mini manufacturing unit by CAPART. Various
popular projects have been developed by BMTPC with joint efforts of
Research and Development Institutions. As regards, the system of
dissemination of information CAPART identifies the technologies and
after identifying the NGOs, the CAPART send them for training. So
far, only 644 persons identified by 10, NGOs who have experience on
housing have been trained in various building construction technologies
by these NGOs. The Building Construction Technology was
disseminated in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttaranchal,
Jharkhand, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Rajasthan and
West Bengal with the efforts of CAPART. As per the information
provided by CAPART only 995 houses have been constructed by the
initiatives of CAPART.
Besides, the aforesaid mechanism to disseminate the technology
there are 22 Technology Resource Centers which act like mother NGOs.
The Committee feel that inspite of having the mechanism of
dissemination of information through CAPART adequate work has not
been done in this regard. The data furnished by CAPART i.e. only
995 houses could be constructed by the dissemination process, speaks
volume about the inadequacy of dissemination process.
Reply of the Government
CAPART has taken note of the suggestions given by the Committee
and efforts are being made to establish Technology Resource Centres
in the States not covered earlier and gradually at the district level.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 49, Para No. 4.23)
On the issue of dissemination Strategy, the Committee feel that
different agencies are working independently and the commendable
work done by these agencies could not be used for the benefit of
rural poor. The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to
analyse the scenario of dissemination of technology in the country
and take the desired steps in this regard. Besides there is an urgent
need to set up Technology Resource Center at district level. The
publicity with regard to activities of Technology Resource Centres
should be given so that the rural people are aware of the technology
options available and can take benefit of these options.

67
Reply of the Government
CAPART has taken note of the suggestions given by the Committee
and efforts are being made to establish Technology Resource Centers
in the States not covered earlier and gradually at the district level.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 50, Para No. 4.24)
The Committee note that there is no system to review the work
done by various agencies in the field of R&D in housing for rural
areas. The Department of rural Development which is the nodal
Department for rural housing and CAPART which has the mandate
for advancement of rural technology have no mechanism to review
the work done by these agencies in the field of R&D. The Committee
feel that there is an urgent need to have some mechanism to review
the work done by various agencies in the field of R&D so that the
strategy to transfer the technology from lab to land can be evolved for
the benefit of rural people. The Committee would like to recommend
to the Department to take action in this regard and inform the
Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
As suggested, seminars and workshops would be organized to
publicize the R&D work.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 55, Para No. 4.36)
Another area that has attracted to attention of the Committee is
lack of awareness among the masses especially the rural poor about
disaster proof technology developed by HUDCO and details regarding
Vulnerability Atlas brought out by BMTPC. The Committee are
constrained to find that whatever awareness drive launched by
institutions like HUDCO with State Governments, local bodies, housing
boards, rural housing corporations have been made hardly adequate
to accomplish the benefits arising out of such Disaster Proof Technology
and Vulnerability Atlas details. The Committee therefore recommend
that administrative Ministry of Rural Development should take up the
issue with the BMTPC and HUDCO so that benefits of disaster proof
technology can be availed of by rural poor.

68
Reply of the Government
In order to create awareness among the masses especially the rural
poor about disaster proof technology, 78 rural building centres in rural
areas have been sanctioned along the length and breadth of the country
by Ministry of Rural Development in collaboration with HUDCO with
grant assistance of Rs. 11.49 crore out of which Rs. 7.29 crores have
been released to these centres. Out of 78 more than 55 are doing good
work in the field of technology transfer production of cost effective
energy efficient and environment friendly building components,
construction of affordable and acceptable houses and generation of
employment opportunities through training to the local artisans. These
building centres have so far trained more then 11,112 artisans in various
cost effective building trades and works executed/production for more
than Rs. 3730 lakhs.
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation/HUDCO has
reported to have adopted a comprehensive approach in dealing with
earthquake rehabilitation based on community participation, grass root
planning & design with skill upgradation & employment generation
through the network of Building Centres in urban areas. Revival of
the Building Centre Scheme after suitable improvements is being
contemplated again during the Eleventh Five Year Plan for urban areas.
These Building Centres can also be used for training personal who
work in rural areas.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

69
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF
THE GOVERNMET’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 31, Para No. 3.33)
The Committee find from the deliberations with the Commercial
Banks that the existing limit of refinance to each financial institution
is Rs. 1,000 crore. As per the Reserve Bank of India such limit has
been fixed to diversify the risk. The Committee further note that
whereas some of the Public Sector Banks are not availing of the
refinanced facility the refinance is falling short in case of other Banks.
State Bank of India which has the largest number of Branches in India,
has requested to extend this limit. The Committee while appreciating
the policy of the Government not to give the refinance to one basket
and to diversify the risk, feel that some consideration should be given
to the size of the Bank i.e. the network of Branches it has in rural
areas. Besides, when some of the Banks are not availing of the refinance
facility, the other Banks who are availing of and fall short of the
refinance can be provided more refinance. The Committee also note
that the interest rates which have been at the lowest in the recent past
have started moving upwards. In view of the rising interest scenario
the financial institutions may lack liquidity and their own resources
may be costlier and may need more refinance facility from the
Government agencies like NHB and NABARD. The Government should
analyse the position in view of the recent scenario, keeping in view
the aforesaid observation of the Committee regarding limit of refinance.
The Committee may be kept apprised of the decision taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Comments of M/o Finance were called and they have stated that
the limits of refinance are fixed by FIs based on their risk perception.
From the prudential perspective, the refinancing institutions have been
advised to evolve their own credit exposure limits, with the approval
of their Board of Directors, even in respect of their refinancing portfolio.
Such limits could, inter alia , be related to the capital funds/regulatory
capital of the institution. Reserve Bank agrees with the suggestion
made by the Committee that some consideration should be given to

70
the size of the bank ( i.e., network of its rural branches) while fixing
the limits for refinance.
However, any relaxation/deviation from such limits, if permitted,
should be only with the prior approval of the Board. However,
NABARD has reported that it does not foresee that the extant risk
exposure norms in respect of any Agency or sector will hinder flow
of refinance from NABARD.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

71
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.12)
The Committee understand from the position as indicated above
that at present there is a combined policy for rural and urban areas
in the country. The Committee are concerned to note the response of
the Department whereby the Department has simply stated that various
objectives set under the housing policy viz removing legal, financial
and administrative barriers for facilitating access to land, finance and
technology, creation of surplus in housing stock, forming strong
partnership between private, public and cooperative sectors to enhance
the capacity of the construction industry, modernization are not
concerned with rural housing. The Committee find that as per the
existing position, the housing in rural areas means only kutcha and
pucca minimum required jhopri type structure. It seems as if there is
no vision to reform the position of housing in rural areas. On the one
hand initiatives like ‘Providing Urban Amenities to Rural Areas (PURA)’
are being taken by the Government, on the other hand, there is least
concern to improve the housing position in rural areas.
Reply of the Government
It is with an objective to provide pucca houses with plinth area of
at least 20 sq. mts. in the rural areas that the scheme of IAY is being
implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development . Under the
scheme, assistance is provided to rural BPL families for both new
construction of houses and for upgradation of existing houses. Also as
per existing guidelines, the State Governments/ZPs/DRDAs need to
make an effort to encourage use of appropriate technology .
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)

72
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.13)
The rural housing is perceived to be people’s responsibility. The
role of the Government is limited to grant based schemes like Indira
Awaas Yojana under which some sort of financial assistance is provided
to the beneficiary without ensuring the other pre-requisites required
for construction of a house. The quality of construction is the least
concern of the Government. Housing in rural areas is considered to be
simply construction of a house by the user himself with the traditionally
known technologies. Adequate attention is not being paid to facilitate
various resources, lending facility, infrastructure etc by the Government
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
It is felt that houses taken up by the beneficiaries themselves will
be constructed with more concern for quality and with usage of
appropriate technology. Hence there is a ban on involving contractors
or government departments in the construction of IAY houses. However,
the Government departments/ZPs/DRDAs can give technical assistance
or arrange for coordinated supply of raw materials if the beneficiary
so desires. The Government also has to make efforts to utilise to the
maximum possible extent, local materials and cost effective disaster
resistant and environment friendly technologies developed by various
institutions. In addition to this, provision has also been made in the
IAY guidelines that dwelling units are built in the main habitation of
the village in a cluster so as to facilitate the development of the
infrastructure such as internal roads, drainage, drinking water supply
etc. and other common facilities. Besides, construction of sanitary latrine
and smokeless chullas is an integral part of construction of IAY houses.
Existing guidelines also provide for construction of houses under
Credit-cum-Subsidy scheme.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.15)
While examining the various aspects related to rural housing, the
Committee note that foremost issue to be considered is what is a
house. The Committee are constrained to note the definition of the

73
house according to which houses constructed with permanent concrete
material is pucca house whereas houses constructed with some of the
traditional temporary material is kutcha house and houses constructed
with the mixed permanent and temporary material is the semi-pucca
house. The Committee are of the view that the aforesaid definition of
housing considers a house only as a structure of four walls and a roof
for a family. It ignores the fact that the residents of a house need
various facilities like infrastructure facilities, water, sanitation, sewage
disposal arrangements, transport, security etc. In the rural context it is
much more important to relate the housing with the work place because
in rural areas most of the population is dependent upon agriculture.
Housing need to be integrated with the habitat development. Besides
providing a place to live for the family, the house in the rural areas
acts as an additional place for the livelihood work of the family. It is
a place where agricultural implements are kept and crops/seeds stock
is stored. Besides it is much more important to ensure the structural
safety of the building in which the families live. It is important to
integrate housing with all these related issues.
Reply of the Government
As already stated under recommendation 2.12, under IAY
guidelines, provision has been made that dwelling units be built in
the main habitation of the village in a cluster so as to facilitate the
development of the infrastructure such as internal roads, drainage,
drinking water supply etc., and other common facilities. Construction
of sanitary latrines and smokeless chulhas is an integral part of
construction of IAY houses. An understanding with the M/o Power
has been reached to provide free electricity connection to the IAY
houses. Hence there is an attempt to provide various facilities to the
extent possible.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.16)
The Committee further find that as per the definition of a house
as given by the Government pucca house is a house constructed with

74
concrete material etc. i.e. the permanent material and a kutcha house
is a house constructed with some of the traditional material like thatch,
bamboo etc. i.e. temporary material for construction. The Committee
note that with the advancement of technology, it has become possible
to construct durable house with the traditional material of construction,
the detailed analysis in this aspect has been done in the later part of
the report. Here the Committee may like to state that this definition
of the house is responsible for the mind set of the people in rural
areas according to which only the concrete houses are considered to
be as durable houses and least attention is being paid to construct
houses with low cost locally available material. Besides there is an
urgent need to consider housing in the light of the structure of
Panchayati Raj Institutions as envisaged under Part IX of the
Constitution. Housing need to be integrated with various developmental
programmes of the Government specifically the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Legislation and Bharat Nirman. Keeping all
these aspects in view there is an urgent need to change the definition
of the housing in the context of rural areas. The Committee urge the
Department to take the desired action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Rural Housing component of Bharat Nirman is being
implemented through IAY. Under IAY, the beneficiary is expected to
build the house by contributing his own unskilled labour.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Paragraph No. 2.33)
As regards the methodology to find out the number of shelterless
persons in rural areas in the country, the Committee note that the
Department relies on the data of 2001 Census. To find out the status
of shelterlessness in the years after 2001, the method for finding out
the data is that the number of houses constructed under IAY are
subtracted from the initial shortage as per 2001 Census whereas the
additional requirement of houses i.e.  around 9 lakh shelterless
households is added to this figure. The Committee note that besides
Indira Awaas Yojana as indicated above, the houses are being

75
constructed for shelterless persons under various other schemes of
Union Government as well as the schemes of the State Governments.
Various financial institutions, NGOs etc. may also be contributing in
this regard. The system of calculating the data of shelterlessness after
2001 Census solely depends upon the Indira Awaas Yojana. In this
scenario, the Committee find that there is an urgent need to have
some system whereby the position of shelterlessness is calculated at
the ground level. Panchayati Raj Institutions can play an important
role in this regard. The Committee would like to emphasize that there
should be some system of periodic calculation of data with regard to
shelterlessness at the village level so as to have some authentic
information about the ground situation in this regard. The said data
may help the Government to analyse the performance of various
schemes as well as this can be helpful in future planning.
Reply of the Government
The States/UTs have already been asked to prepare the Permanent
IAY Waitlists based on the BPL Census 2002, involving Panchayati Raj
institutions which is likely to give a more accurate estimate of the
housing shortage in rural areas.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.48)
To add to what has been stated above, the Committee note that as
per the Government planning, the instrument to end the shelterlessness
is Indira Awaas Yojana, which targets to provide houses to BPL category
of persons. The following factors substantiate how difficult it is to
achieve the objectives of shelterlessness depending only upon the
flagship programme Indira Awaas Yojana since the Yojana targets
shelterlessness in a partial way:
(i) Under Indira Awaas Yojana, 20 per cent of the outlay can
be used for upgradation. Actually, around one third of the
total number of houses constructed under IAY are upgraded
houses, the analysis of which has been given in the
subsequent part of the Report.

76
(ii) 5 per cent of the outlay under IAY can be earmarked for
natural calamities. Thus the effective outlay to end
shelterlessness is further reduced by 5 per cent.
(iii) IAY targets certain disadvantaged category of BPL persons.
As per the data furnished by the Department only 32.99
per cent of the houses were provided to non SC/ST category.
Under non SC/ST category to 88,527 houses were provided
to some disadvantaged category of persons viz. freed bonded
labourers, physically mentally challenged, ex-servicemen and
war-widows.
(iv) The Committee have repeatedly been recommending in their
respective Reports about the faulty system of preparing list
of BPL persons by various State Governments. Not only
that the recent data of BPL persons are not available as the
results of BPL Census 2002 are still to be made available by
the various State Governments. The arbitrary cut off limits
imposed by Planning Commission further aggravates the
position and the genuine poorest of the poor are being
deprived of the benefits envisaged under different Schemes
of the Department.
(v) There is no methodology to coordinate the data at the
ground level with regard to number of houses constructed
for poor with the assistance provided by various sources
viz. State Governments, financial institutions, NGOs etc.
Reply of the Government
As per IAY guidelines, up to 20% of the funds available under
IAY can be utilized for upgradation of existing kutcha houses and
toward subsidy for construction of houses with credit from Banks/
Financial Institutions. However, during the year 2006-07, out of the
total funds utilized under IAY, only Rs. 275.51 crore were utilized for
upgradation which comes to 6.48%. Further, out of 14.98 lakh houses
constructed during the year, 2.06 lakh houses were upgraded which is
13.75% only. Further, out of the 5% funds kept for natural calamities,
only Rs. 11.60 crore were released during the year 2006-07 which come
to 0.4%. It is also submitted that upgradation and release of funds
under 5% IAY are also a part of construction of houses under IAY and
this also helps in mitigating the rural housing shortage.
As regards construction of houses for non-SC/STs, IAY guidelines
provide that at least 60% of the total IAY allocation during a financial
year should be utilized for construction/upgradation of dwelling units

77
for SC/ST BPL households and a maximum of 40% for non-SC/ST
BPL rural households. However, it has been clarified therein that if
any particular category is exhauisted or not available in a district,
allocation can be utilized for other categories as per priorities given in
the guidelines after it has been certified to this effect by the Zilla
Parishad/DRDA concerned. Accordingly, during the year 2006-07, the
utilization of funds was less than 60% for SC/STs by the States of
Assam (55%), Bihar (58%), Goa (28%), Himachal Pradesh (56%), J & K
(50%), Karnataka (57%), Kerala (59%), Sikkim (51%) Uttara Khand (40%)
and Pondicherry (29%).
As regards houses constructed by State Governments, financial
institutions, NGOs, etc. it is submitted that around 27 lakh houses
were constructed by various States during the last five years under
their State-run Schemes, as per the information furnished by them.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.49)
In view of the aforesaid scenario, the Committee deplore the way
the planning with regard to providing houses to all in rural areas is
being done under the different Five Year Plans. The Committee would
like to emphasize that while formulating the strategy for Eleventh
Plan the Department first of all should get the data of shelterlessness
as well as action plans from the different State Governments. The
plans of the different State Governments should be chalked out from
bottom to top approach i.e. the data as well as action plan of village
Panchayats should be combined to get the district plans and the district
level plans should be combined to have the State level plan.
Reply of the Government
The preparation of Permanent IAY Waitlist is going on, as indicated
in reply to para 2.33 above. This would help for a bottom to top
approach.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report)

78
 Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.51)
The Committee further find that there is a strong relation between
the construction activity and employment generation and economic
development of an area. Moreover, there is a relation between the
economic standard of a family and the type of house that if occupies.
Housing activity in a way triggers employment opportunity which
may enhance the per capita income of a family in an area which
further may improve the demand of housing. Not only that effective
housing activity can be instrumental to arrest migration of population
from rural to urban areas. Thus the Committee perceive that there is
an urgent need for effective Government funding along with other
initiatives like improving lending for rural housing which has been
addressed in detail in the later part of the report. Here the Committee
may like to emphasize to the Government to pay more attention to
rural housing since it can be a major instrument for providing
employment to unemployed persons in rural areas. The housing activity
can be a major source of providing employment under the ambitious
programme of the Government i.e. National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme.
Reply of the Government
As per IAY guidelines, the beneficiary is expected to construct his
house by contributing his own labour. Thus linking the house
construction programme with NREGA may not have much impact. As
regards lending, the existing guidelines provide for construction of
houses under credit-cum-subsidy scheme which involves loan from
the banks. The need for other financial products and the feasible options
has been examined by the ‘Working Group on Rural Housing’
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.69)
The Committee find that various initiatives have been taken by
the Government since Independence to address the housing problem
of poorest of the poor in rural areas in the country. Since 1985-86 one
of the important programmes Indira Awaas Yojana was launched as a

79
sub-scheme of RLEGP . Massive investments have been made under
Indira Awaas Yojana under different plans. The plan-wise allocation as
given above indicates that there is considerable enhancement in each
plan as compared to the previous plan. Although there is considerable
enhancement of allocation during each plan the percentage enhancement
has decreased since Ninth Plan. The percentage enhancement which
was 397.02 per cent during Eighth Plan reduced to 147.38 per cent
during Ninth Plan and then during Tenth Plan the percentage
enhancement is 55.68 per cent. The Committee further note that the
existing per unit assistance under Indira Awaas Yojana is Rs. 25,000 in
normal and Rs. 27,500 in hilly and difficult areas. As regards the pace
of enhancement of allocation, the Committee note that during 21 years
of implementation of Indira Awaas Yojana (since 1985-86) the per unit
allocation has merely been enhanced a little more than double of the
assistance. The Department has stated that the basis of fixed rate of
assistance is cost of material etc. The Committee note that the
enhancement in per unit of assistance is much lower than the rate of
inflation in terms of cost of material etc. The Committee find that the
existing Rs. 27,500 per unit assistance is not sufficient to construct a
durable house. The Committee also note that National Housing Bank
has estimated the minimum cost of construction of a house in rural
areas as Rs. 1,50,000. They also note that as per the Department of
Rural Development’s own estimates, minimum required outlay is
Rs. 40,000-50,000 in plain areas and Rs. 50,000-60,000 in hilly/difficult
areas for construction of a durable house. The Committee feel that one
of the major reasons for lower quality of construction of IAY houses
is the inadequate assistance provided i.e. far below than the cost of
construction. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to the
Government to enhance the per unit assistance from the existing rate
to Rs. 50,000 in plain areas and Rs. 60,000 in hilly/difficult areas.
Besides the assistance provided for upgradation of a house should be
enhanced from Rs. 12,500 to Rs. 20,000. While recommending for almost
doubling the existing rate of per unit assistance, the Committee would
like to strongly recommend to the Government to enhance the allocation
during Eleventh Five Year Plan considerably so that the number of
houses constructed during each year of the plan do not in any case
reduce to the number of houses constructed during the previous years
and further the construction of houses should match to the targets
fixed under the ambitious programmes of the Department.
Reply of the Government
The matter is already being pursued by the Ministry.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

80
The matter for enhancement of 11th Plan allocation is still being
pursued. However, the unit assistance provided under IAY has since
been enhanced w.e.f. 1.4.08 from Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 35,000 in plain areas
and from Rs. 27,500 to Rs. 38,500 in hilly/difficult areas. Unit assistance
for upgradation of kutcha house into pucca/semi pucca  house has been
enhanced from Rs. 12,500 to Rs. 15,000 across the Country. In addition
an IAY beneficiary can avail a loan of upto Rs. 20,000 under Differential
Rate of Interest (DRI) at interest rate of 4% with the change of unit
cost. An additional allocation of Rs. 350 crore has also been provided
at supplementary stage to keep the physical target at the level of last
year.
Further, an additional allocation of Rs. 3050 Crore has also since
been made available at 2nd supplementary stage for 2008-09 under
Rural Housing, as a stimulus package to the economy. The amount is
sufficient for providing first instalment for additional 22.40 lakh houses
during the current financial year.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.70)
The Committee further note that there are serious irregularities in
implementation of Indira Awaas Yojana as pointed out in Comptroller
and Auditor General of India Report 3 of 2003. The irregularities
include diversion of funds, overlapping the objectives of multiple rural
housing schemes, misdirecting targeting of beneficiaries, construction
of houses through contractors etc. The details of the various
irregularities pointed out by CAG have been indicated at
Appendix VII. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken on each of the issue pointed out by CAG so as to enable them
to review the position and comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Replies to the irregularities indicated in Appendix IV have already
been submitted before the Committee (copy enclosed). The latest
position of settlement of these paras is at Appendix-I.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]

81
The latest position of settlement of these paras is at
Appendix-II.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.71)
Besides one of the irregularities as pointed out by CAG Report is
that construction of smokeless chulahs and sanitary latrines were found
in respect of 50 per cent and 57 per cent of houses respectively. The
Committee are constrained to note the comment of the Department on
the aforesaid irregularities as pointed out by CAG. The Department
has shifted the responsibility to DRDAs who are supposed to persuade
the beneficiary in this regard. The Committee are further unhappy to
note the provision made in the guidelines whereby in case the
beneficiary does not construct a latrine or install a smokeless chulah,
a meagre amount of Rs. 600 for latrine and Rs. 100 for chulah is
deducted from the total subsidy provided to such beneficiary. The
Committee while examining the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Drinking Water Supply have been informed that only
38 per cent of the rural households could so far been provided with
sanitation facilities. The Committee were also informed that only 80
per cent of the toilets constructed under Government schemes are
actually being used. The Committee conclude that no efforts are being
made to ensure the quality houses under the Government schemes.
The Committee also take strong objection to the provisions made in
the guidelines whereby the defaulter has merely to pay a meagre
penalty and can easily forgo the provisions made in the guidelines for
smokeless chulahs and toilets. The Committee strongly recommend to
the Department to ensure that the provisions of smokeless chulahs and
toilets are mandatorily followed by the beneficiaries failing which the
beneficiary should be deprived of the allocation made under Indira
Awaas Yojana. The existing provision in the guidelines should suitably
be revised.
Reply of the Government
In order to facilitate the construction of sanitary latrines, IAY
guidelines have been recently revised to provide for additional amounts
out of total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) programme over and above

82
the IAY assistance for the purpose of construction of sanitary latrines.
Those who construct sanitary latrine and smokeless chullah will get
additional funds under TSC. However, it may not be justifiable to
recover full amount of IAY assistance from the beneficiary for not
constructing sanitary latrine and smokeless chullha.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 2.72)
The Committee are further constrained to note the replies of the
Department whereby the onus of use of appropriate construction
technologies and land material, use of disaster proof technology in the
calamity prone areas has been shifted to beneficiaries. As regards
infrastructure the onus has again been shifted to the beneficiaries or
the line departments in that area. It is really a matter of concern that
safety and securities of families and houses have not been accorded
any importance in the disaster prone areas. Safe individual houses can
minimize disaster losses to a great extent. The Committee also find
that whereas houses constructed with HUDCO assistance have to
mandatorily use the disaster proof technology/material no such
provision exists under IAY houses. The Committee are unable to
understand the rationale behind leaving the responsibility of using
disaster proof technology to the beneficiaries. If this is the condition
of the houses constructed with the 100 per cent Government assistance
(Central + State Government’s assistance in the ratio of 75:25), the fate
of the remaining housing stock can be well imagined. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Government to revise the guidelines and
make the use of disasters proof material/technology as mandatory for
the IAY houses. Besides as regards the infrastructure arrangement, the
Committee feel that there should be some sort of linkage between the
various schemes of the Government rural schemes like Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMSGY), SGSY, Employment Guarantee Scheme,
SGSY etc. The proper coordination can ensure the adequate
infrastructure to the houses constructed under IAY scheme. The
Committee disapprove the tendency of the Department to shift the
onus to the beneficiaries or to some other agency whereas the houses
are being constructed with the Government assistance. The Committee
urge the Department to take the desired action in this regard and
apprise the Committee accordingly.

83
Reply of the Government
Existing guidelines already provide for use of cost-effective, disaster
resistant, technologies but as far as making it mandatory is concerned,
it is stated that the Department is not able to accept this
recommendation of the Committee because the basic feature of the
scheme is that the beneficiary has the choice to construct the house as
per her/his needs and desires. Moreover, even though Indira Awaas
Yojana is termed as full subsidy scheme, the fact is most of the
beneficiaries have to put in money/contribution from other sources.
Secondly, the Government gives a very limited amount and if the
Ministry has to make the use of disaster proof material/technology as
mandatory for the IAY houses, then it may be necessary for the
Government to provide actual cost to the beneficiaries which may not
be possible at present considering the constraints of funds.
Regarding linkage to the various schemes, it is submitted that all
programmes do not have a direct linkage with IA Y. However, scheme
having a complimentarity will be linked. We have already linked Total
Sanitation Campaign closely to the IAY scheme.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 2.77)
The Committee find that various schemes meant to achieve the
different objectives were initiated during 1999 and 2000-01 the details
of which have been indicated as above. The schemes could not achieve
the desired objectives and as such have been discontinued/merged
with IAY. The Committee find that the objectives of different schemes
as envisaged were quite different than IAY , Innovative Stream for Rural
Housing and Habitat Development was launched with an objective of
promoting and propagating cost effective technologies and upto Rs. 50
lakh was to be provided to NGOs, Development Institutions, Corporate
Bodies, State Government etc. Rural Building Centre Scheme was
launched for setting up Rural Building Centres and Samagra Awaas
Yojana aimed at convergence of activities such as construction of house,

84
sanitation, drinking water etc. Credit-cum-subsidy Scheme was for rural
households having annual income upto Rs. 32 thousand per year. The
Committee fail to understand how the objectives set under different
schemes would be achieved with the merger with IAY without changing
the basic parameters of IAY. In this scenario, the Committee deplore
the way new schemes with different objectives are being launched
and then discontinued. The Committee have repeatedly been
recommending in the respective reports for proper planning before
launching new schemes. The Committee while disapproving the way
new schemes are launched without proper planning would like to be
apprised of the efforts made by the Department for the effective
implementation of these schemes. Besides, the Committee may like to
be informed how the laudable objectives set under the different schemes
are now planned to be achieved as the merger with IAY without
changing the basic parameter cannot yield the set objectives under
these schemes.
Reply of the Government
For effective implementation of IAY, both Government of India
and State Government monitor the performance by reviewing periodical
reports from Zilla Parishads/DRDAs. In addition, field visits are made
by the concerned Officers. Besides, the performance is also reviewed
by the Area Officers at Centre Level.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 2.83)
Besides, the Committee note that Land Acquisition Act which
addresses to various issues related to acquisition of land for public
purpose is an old Act of 1894. The Committee have repeatedly been
recommending to amend the aforesaid legislation in their respective
reports. The Committee reiterate at their earlier recommendation to
expedite the amendment of the aforesaid legislation so that the process
of acquisition of land may be much easier and it may facilitate the
process of acquisition of land by various State Governments for making
the land available for construction of houses for BPL persons. Besides,

85
the Committee may emphasize that by taking the aforesaid initiatives
State Governments may be persuaded to have the land banks from
where land could be allocated for construction of houses for BPL
persons. The such a mechanism would help the State Governments to
address the problem of shelterlessness in a planned and systematic
way. Necessary guidelines in this regard should be issued to the State
Governments. Besides, suitable provisions may be made in the housing
policy, which the Department has proposed to formulate in the near
future.
Reply of the Government
Deptt. of Land Resources has informed that to make the land
acquisition process time-bound and effective, proposal for amendment
in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 has been under consideration in
consultation with the State Govts. for some time past. However, a
draft Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 has been prepared.
This, along with the draft of the National Rehabilitation & Resettlement
Policy, 2007, is under consideration of Group of Ministers (GOM), which
is in the process of finalizing the drafts.
Meanwhile, Ministry has taken the initiative and a draft Homestead
Scheme has been formulated to which Planning Commission has also
approved and sanctioned Rs. 100 crore for implementation of the
scheme. As soon as guidelines of the scheme are finalized, State
Government would be requested to provide land for the landless.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 33 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 3.25)
As stated in the earlier part of the Report, 161 lakh of houses
would be needed during Eleventh Plan period to end the shelterlessness
in rural areas in the country. As per the Government’s own estimates,
Rs. 55,000 crore would be required to tackle the problem. Further as
per the NHB estimates, only 36 per cent housing stock in the rural
areas are pucca houses which means 64 per cent require frequent
maintenance and eventual replacement over a period of 5 to 10 years.
The real problem to be addressed with regard to housing in rural

86
areas may be much grim. To tackle this problem the grant based
schemes like Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) are not sufficient. Besides in
rural areas the problem of housing needs to be addressed keeping in
view the overall position of the population in rural areas. There may
be three sections of Society viz
(i) Affluent rich farmer,
(ii) Middle Class, and
(iii) Rural poor i.e. BPL persons in rural areas
Reply of the Government
At present, Government’s efforts are to help the poorest of the
poor/shelterless household to get a pucca house of their own to lead
life with dignity. Other sections of the rural society can avail themselves
of various financial instruments available through Banks to get credit.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 36 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 3.26)
Indira Awaas Yojana to some extent addresses the problem of
shelterlessness in rural areas in the country. As stated in the earlier
part of the Report even Indira Awaas Yojana, addresses to the housing
problem of BPL category of persons in a partial way. To take care of
the needs of the other sections of the society affordable lending for
housing can play an important role.
Reply of the Government
Housing finance is available through Banks for all sections of the
society. Government will also look into the matter to initiate action to
make credit more easily accessible in rural areas.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 36 of Chapter-I of the Report)

87
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 3.27)
From the data made available by National Housing Bank the
Committee find that although during the period 2001-05, the housing
loan disbursed by PLIs has doubled from Rs. 3246.03 crore in 2001-02
to Rs. 6440.95 crore during 2004-05, it is much below as compared to
the boom in housing lending witnessed in urban areas. The data
indicated by NHB is self evident according to which out of Rs. 75,000 crore,
lending to rural areas during the period 2001-05 is just 10-11 per cent.
The Committee understand that even today, the rural people depend
on the mercy of the landlords who charge heavy rate of interest on
the borrowings and exploit the rural people.
Reply of the Government
At present, Government’s efforts are to help the poorest of the
poor/shelterless household to get a pucca house of their own to lead
life with dignity. Other sections of the rural society can avail themselves
of various financial instruments available through Banks to get credit.
Government will also look into the matter to initiate action to make
credit more accessible in rural areas.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 36 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 3.29)
The Committee find that NHB and NABARD are the main agencies
of Government of India involved in refinancing of housing loan to
different financial institutions. NABARD is refinancing at the lowest
rate of interest i.e. 6 per cent upto Rs. 50,000 and 6.25 per cent for the
amount exceeding Rs. 50,000. However in case of North-Eastern States,
Sikkim, Mizoram, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, the rate of refinance is
6 per cent even above Rs. 50,000. In case of NHB, the main agency
which has the mandate for rural housing, the rate of refinance is
6.25 per cent. The Committee find that the problem of shelterlessness
is highest in North Eastern States. The issue has been examined in
detail in the preceding part of the report. Whereas NABARD is
providing 0.25 per cent lower rate of refinance to North-Eastern States
and Sikkim and also to Andaman & Nicobar Islands, no such benefit
has been given by NHB to these States by NHB. The Committee feel

88
that the relaxation at the rate of refinance to North Eastern and
aforesaid States should also be provided by NHB in the lines of
NABARD.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Finance have informed that taking into account cost of
its resources, NABARD periodically effects revisions in the interest
rates for all purposes. The recent rate of interest on refinances for the
North Eastern States has been fixed at 9.0% which continues to be less
by 50 basis points over the rate applicable for the rest of the country.
As regards NHB, with the withdrawal of Capital Gains Bond Schemes
by the Govt., in 2006, it does not have access to low cost funds and
is, therefore, not in a position to provide concessional rate of refinance
for rural housing as suggested by the Committee. However, in the
Central Budget for 2008-09, there is a proposal to set up a Rural
Housing Development Fund under NHB which should help it to extend
refinance for housing purposes at cheap rates.
According to NHB, NHB had been providing concession of 0.50%
(later on reduced to 0.25%) to primary lending institutions providing
housing loans in rural areas under the Golden Jubilee Rural Housing
Finance Scheme. With the withdrawal of Capital Gain Bonds Scheme
by the Government in 2006, NHB does not have access to low cost
funds and is therefore not in a position to provide concessional rate
of refinance for rural housing and hence the earlier concessions have
been withdrawn.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 39 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 3.30)
As regards the rate of interest charged by various financial
institutions with regard to lending for rural housing, the Committee
find that there is sharp variation. The rate of interest varies between
7.5% to 10.75% (fixed) and between 7% to 9% (floating) in case of
Public Sector Banks. With regard to other housing finance companies,
the rate varies between 8% to 10.5% (fixed). Further, for private sector
and foreign banks, the rate of interest varies between 8% to 11% (fixed)

89
and 7.5% to 8.5% (floating). The Committee find from the position of
rate of interest and refinance as indicated above that whereas refinance
at lower rate of interest is being made available to certain financial
institutions by NHB and NABARD, the benefit of getting refinance at
lower rate is not being percolated to the poorest of the poor in rural
areas in the country. Besides the Committee also note that there is
variation of around 3% of rate of interest between the minimum and
the maximum rate of interest charged for housing from the poor in
rural areas. The Committee find that even 1% of rate of interest matters
a lot to the poorest of the poor in the country. In this scenario, while
appreciating the policy of the Government to move away from
administered interest rates, the Committee feel that some sort of
regulation is necessary in case of the housing loan made available to
the poor in rural areas in the country specifically when these
institutions are getting the benefit of lower rate of refinance from certain
Government Institutions like NHB and NABARD.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Finance have stated that since October 18, 1994, the
interest rates on advances by scheduled commercial banks have been
gradually deregulated. At present, individual banks determine interest
rates to be charged to a particular borrower subject to BPLR & spread
guidelines, except in the case of small loans upto Rs. 2 lakhs, which
carry the prescription of not exceeding the BPLR. In respect of loans
covered under refinancing schemes of term-lending institutions, banks
are free to determine the rates of interest as per the stipulations of
refinancing agencies, without reference to BPLR. The variation in
interest rates offered by different banks could be attributed to the
differences in their BPLR (reflecting cost of funds, operating expenses
& a minimum margin to cover regulatory requirement of provisioning/
capital charges & profit margins) as also the credit ratings of borrowers.
It may not be possible to introduce the regulations in interest rates for
just the housing sector which will be anomalous to existing interest
rate regime in the country. However, measures are taken by the Govt.
to enable loans to be available to the poor for housing purposes at
low rates as described in answer to para 3.29.
According to NHB, as regards rate of interest to be charged by
primary lending institutions (PLIs) on housing loans provided to the
borrowers, NHB has not prescribed any ceiling. In this context, it may
be mentioned that PLIs determine the rate of interest on the basis of
their cost of funds and other parameters adopted by them from time
to time. However, it may be mentioned that rate of interest being
charged from borrowers both in urban and rural areas are at par and
there is no difference in lending rates in urban and rural areas.

90
To encourage PLIs to increase their lending for housing in rural
areas, NHB had provided concession of 0.25% in the then applicable
interest rates, on its refinance scheme known as “Golden Jubilee Rural
Housing Finance Scheme”. However, no ceiling on the interest rates
was prescribed by NHB as the said scheme was envisaged and based
upon the market principles.
As a result of the above incentivisations, there has been marked
improvement in the housing loan portfolio of PLIs in the rural areas
resulting in financing of more than 20 lakh houses by PLIs in rural
areas during the period 1997-2007.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 42 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34, Para No. 3.70)
The Committee further find that equity support was being provided
to HUDCO since 1998-99 and up to the year 2004-05, Rs. 415 crore
was provided as subsidy by the Department of Rural Development.
Against this subsidy, HUDCO was to garner and mobilize additional
resources (approximately 8 times the size of the equity contribution
from the market). The funds so leveraged were to be utilized
exclusively for financing the construction of additional rural housing
units over and above what HUDCO normally finances through their
existing resources. The Committee further observe that HUDCO has
now been declared as ‘Navratna’ and as such Government has stopped
providing subsidy . The Committee apprehend that the stoppage of the
equity support may adversely affect the activities of HUDCO in the
field of rural housing for the poorest of the poor in the country. In
view of this, the Committee would like the Department to analyze the
position and find out ways and means to support HUDCO’s
programme for rural housing.
Reply of the Government
In case any proposal for supporting the rural housing programme
is received from HUDCO, it will be appropriately examined and
desirable support will be extended.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 45 of Chapter-I of the Report)

91
Recommendation (Serial No. 35, Para No. 3.71)
The Committee further find that HUDCO has been entrusted with
the responsibility of providing loan assistance under various ambitious
programmes of the Department of Rural Development. Under the
housing programmes of Government in providing 13 lakh dwelling
units in rural areas and 7 lakh units in urban areas, HUDCO has been
entrusted with the responsibility of providing loan assistance for
construction of 6 lakh houses in rural areas. Further, out of 60 lakh
houses to be constructed under Bharat Nirman, HUDCO has been
given a quota of 6 lakh. As regards the performance of HUDCO with
regard to targets provided under different ambitious programmes up
to 2004-05, HUDCO has sanctioned 68.39 lakh dwelling units out of
which 29.84 lakh dwelling units are for normal and 38.55 units for
natural calamities. The Committee observe that the major portion of
the dwelling units sanctioned by HUDCO related to natural calamities
and as such HUDCO’s contribution to the task of addressing to the
problem of shelterlessness is limited. Keeping in view this scenario,
the Committee recommend to the Department to review the position
in this regard so that the goal set under different ambitious programmes
are achieved.
Reply of the Government
In case of any calamity so as to meet immediate requirement of
huge funds, HUDCO’s assistance has been sought for by State
Governments. In the past few years, it has also been observed that
international funding at cheaper rate is available to support the
programmes for natural calamities affected areas leading to less demand
for funds from state Governments e.g. funding by ADB, World Bank
in Tsunami affected areas at very low interest rates, backed by
Sovereign Guarantees, thereby reducing demand for HUDCO loan.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 48 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 37, Para No. 3.73)
HUDCO has informed that there is a lack of participation by a
number of States resulting in uneven geographical distribution of
HUDCO’s loan assistance. The States of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala,
Karnataka, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Gujarat, Himachal
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan have
taken up the programme in a big way . Further, HUDCO has informed
that poor recovery rate of loan by Government agencies has led to
declining demand. Interesting point raised by HUDCO is lack of interest

92
of the State Government/Government agencies HUDCO’s loan based
rural housing programme in view of the ongoing Indira Awaas Yojana
which is 100% subsidy based programme and under which 75% of the
allocation is being provided by the Union Government. The Committee
would like the Department to analyze the aforesaid issues as pointed
out by HUDCO and analyze the position critically. The Committee
may be informed about the reaction of the Department in this regard
so as to enable the Committee to recommend further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Even though HUDCO has schemes/funds for Rural Housing,
financial assistance is based on States demand and it has found that
there is a lack of participation by a number of states in taking up
rural housing programmes, resulting in uneven geographical
distribution of HUDCO loan assistance. It is seen that states of Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have
taken up the programme in a big way. Other States like Gujarat,
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh have also taken up rural housing programme with HUDCO’s
assistance.
Loan recovery from BPL families is a problem without creating
income for repayment. Hence, draft “National Rural Housing and
Habitat Policy” has suggested various other means for funding Rural
Housing.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 51 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 44, Para No. 3.99)
The Committee further note that in the context of rural areas the
issue of security for lending for housing need to be analysed in a
different way specifically for the poorest of the poor. This category of
persons need much lesser amount as compared to the housing loan in
urban areas. Some sort of security provision other than mortgage of
land can be explored for getting loan for housing in rural areas. The
Committee may also like to highlight here that whereas for the
purchase of costly movable items like air conditioners, cars, banks and
other financial institutions are providing loan without any security , in
case of meagre loan for construction of a house in rural areas these
institutions require mortgage. There is an urgent need to relax these
requirements on a loan upto some limit which may be say Rs. 1 lakh
or so. The Committee appreciate the fact that banks and other financial
institutions are Commercial organisations and the risk of repayment

93
may be the major argument by these institutions. In this regard also
the Committee may like to highlight almost 100 per cent recovery rate
in case of lending made available by some of the Commercial Banks
in rural areas as has been stated in the earlier part of the report. The
linking of housing loan with certain employment generating
Government schemes may be another solution in this regard. In case
of SGSY the saving of groups may be considered as security for the
loan to be extended to an individual member of the group whereas
the liability to repay the loan should rest with the individual member.
Such initiatives need to be deliberated with Commercial Banks and
other financial institutions. The Committee would like the Department
to undertake desired consultation with the all concerned and inform
the Committee about the follow up action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Financing Institutions will not agree to this as this is against
prudential norm. Department is not able to accept this recommendation.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 54 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 51, Para No. 4.25)
The Committee further find that as per guidelines of the flagship
programme Indira Awaas Yojana, Zila Parshid/DRDAs should contact
various organizations/institutions for seeking expert opinion on
innovative technologies material design etc. Besides it has been
indicated in guidelines that State Governments may also arrange to
make available information on cost effective environment friendly
technology material design etc. It is has further been mentioned by
the Department that this information should only be guidance and
any suitable location specific technology can be adopted by the
beneficiaries. The Committee note that whereas 75 per cent assistance
under IAY is being provided by the Union Government the onus of
constructing quality houses has been shifted to State Governments/
Zila Parishads/DRDAs or beneficiaries. There is no way where by the
beneficiaries could be made aware of the technology options available
for them. The Committee find that as per the Concurrent Evaluation,
close to 55 per cent of the houses constructed under IA Y in Kerala
and Maharashtra have not used the local material for construction of
houses. The Committee feel that the aforesaid provision in the
guidelines responsible for not use of cost effective and environment
friendly technology by the beneficiaries. Under IAY guidelines it should
be made mandatory to use the cost effective and environment friendly
technology.

94
Reply of the Government
As per existing guidelines, we can only encourage the usage of
cost effective and environment friendly technology and not make it
mandatory.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 60 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 52, Para No. 4.26)
While recommending for compulsory use of cost effective
technology the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to make
technical skill/material available to the beneficiaries. Besides Technology
Resource Center at district level as recommended above there should
be one cost effective material Mart at the block level so as to help the
beneficiaries. The Committee recommend to the Department to take
the necessary action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Though the scheme of Rural Building Centres (RBCs) has been
discontinued as per the existing guidelines the State Governments/
ZPs/DRDAs have to encourage usage of cost effective materials.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 60 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 53, Para No. 4.27)
The Committee further note that under the ‘Rural Building Center
Scheme’, rural building centers are to be established under the guidance
of HUDCO. 85 RBCs were approved against which 54 RBCs could be
become functional by September, 2005 in the aforesaid scheme. However
the Department has informed that the aforesaid scheme has been
merged/discontinued from April 1 , 2004. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the status of the remaining RBCs which were
approved but could not become functional. Besides the Committee
may be apprised how the objective of the scheme would be achieved
by merging or discontinuing the scheme.

95
Reply of the Government
Out of 79 RBCs sanctioned, 3 were closed because those could not
fulfil initial required documentation. Out of the remaining 76, 23 have
been completed, 24 and 29 are due for release of 2nd and 3rd
instalment respectively.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 60 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.54, Para No. 4.35)
The Committee are alarmed to note that over 67.4 per cent area of
the country is vulnerable to natural disasters like earthquakes
(54 per cent), cyclonic winds and storms (8.4 per cent) and by floods
(5 per cent). As such house, buildings and infrastructure in these
regions are prone to such vagaries of nature. The Committee find that
under the guidelines of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) the site of IAY
houses, to the extent possible should not be located in the disaster
prone areas for example floodable areas. The Committee further note
that as per the guidelines the beneficiary is required to construct the
house on the land available with him. However if the land is not
available with the beneficiary the State Government are required to
provide land at a place which is not a disaster prone area. The
committee find that as per the guidelines of IAY the onus of using
disaster proof technology has been shifted to the beneficiaries or the
State Government. The committee are at a loss to understand how the
State Government would ensure that the land provided for IAY houses
do not fall in the vulnerable category when the 67.4 per cent area of
the country is vulnerable to natural disaster. The Committee feel that
the aforesaid guidelines do not address to the issue of threat to house
by natural disasters in a right way. The answer to this issue is to
make the use of disaster proof technology compulsory for the houses
constructed with the Government assistance. The issue has been dealt
in details in the preceding part of the report where the Committee
have recommended to make the use of disaster proof technology
mandatory as has been done by HUDCO. The Committee may here
like to recommend to review the existing policy in this regard in
consultation with other institutions working in this field and take the
desired action.
Reply of the Government
Existing guidelines already provide for use of cost-effective, disaster
resistant, technologies but as far as making it mandatory is concerned,
the Department is not able to accept this recommendation of the

96
Committee because the basic feature of the scheme is that the
beneficiary has the choice to construct the house as per her/his needs
and desires. Moreover, even though Indira Awaas Yojana is termed as
full subsidy scheme, the fact is most of the beneficiaries have to put
in money contribution from other sources. Secondly, the Government
gives a very limited amount and if the Ministry has to make the use
of disaster proof material/technology as mandatory for the IAY houses,
then it may be necessary for the Government to provide actual cost to
the beneficiaries which may not be possible at present considering the
constraints of funds.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 56, Para No. 4.37)
The Committee find that the BMTPC has done a commendable
work for ensuring suitable policy initiatives by the State Governments
and dissemination of disaster proof technology to the post disaster
areas. In pursuance of the issue with the State Governments, several
States have amended their building by laws by incorporating disaster
resistant features. The Council has done a laudable work in post
earthquake area of Gujarat and as well as post Tsunami areas in Tamil
Nadu. The Committee feel that similar initiatives to set up the Disaster
Management Centers at local level in all the disaster prone areas are
necessary. The Department in consultation with BMTPC should find
out ways and means to ensure dissemination of technology available
with regard to construction of disaster proof houses as well as
retrofitting of existing housing stock in the vulnerable areas.
Reply of the Government
BMTPC have replied that, Active Rural Building Centres may act
as nodal hub for dissemination of disaster resistant construction
technologies and training of masons and other artisans in disaster
resistance construction technologies.
Further, as per Indira Awaas Yojana guidelines, DRDAs are
empowered and authorized to disseminate information in this regard.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)

97
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.5)
The Committee find that the Union Ministry of Rural Development
i.e. the nodal Ministry for dealing with subject Rural Housing, in
response to some of the issues raised by the Committee with regard
to the subject has stated that rural housing is a State subject and as
such it is the responsibility of the State Government. The Committee
find from the position as indicated above that rural housing as such
do not find place in either of the three lists viz Union List, State List
and Concurrent List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Various
items related to rural housing have been dealt with in a fragmented
manner in the State and Concurrent List. Further the Committee also
note that rural housing finds place only in the Eleventh Schedule of
the Constitution as one of the 29 subjects that need to be devolved to
Panchayats in pursuance of Article 243G of the Constitution. The
Committee observe that whereas various sources of revenue like land
revenue, stamp duty, taxes of land and buildings etc. find place in
State and Concurrent List, as indicated above, the rural housing has
been indicated as the responsibility of Panchayati Raj Institutions as
per the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. The Committee further
observe that a lot has to be done for financial empowerment of a
Panchayats by various State Governments. In this scenario, the
Committee share the observation of the erstwhile Standing Committee
on Urban and Rural Development whereby the Committee had
observed that such kind of fragmented arrangement of power has
posed question about the nature of functioning and necessity of
coordination in the field of housing. Housing for the poor, weaker
and disadvantageous sections of the society is the responsibility of
State as well as Union Government, Union Government is
supplementing the efforts made by State Governments in this regard.
The Committee feel that there is a need to review the Constitutional
position with regard to rural housing and would like to reiterate the
recommendation made by the earlier Committee. The Committee would
like the Government to explore the possibility to include housing as
a subject in the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution through the Constitutional amendment.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of HUPA have conveyed their ‘no objection’ to the
initiative of the Standing Committee of the Ministry of Rural
Development to put Housing in the Concurrent List provided the same

98
is endorsed by the Ministry of Rural Development. The matter is under
consideration.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 2.14)
The Committee understand that the Department is in the process
of formulating a separate policy for rural areas. The Committee strongly
recommend that while formulating the policy, it should be ensured
that the role of the Government is not limited to grant based schemes
and the policy addresses to the needs and aspirations of all sections
of the society in rural areas in the country. The policy should address
to the various areas related to housing which have been examined in
detail in the subsequent chapters of the Report.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation is accepted. These issues are being addressed in
Working Group Report on the 11th Plan. The programme size, however,
will be limited by resources available.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 45, Para No. 3.100)
The Committee further note that NHB has suggested the ‘Title
Insurance Scheme’ to safeguard the creditors interest for any dispute/
default in title deeds. It has also been proposed that the premium for
this scheme can be shared by the Government and the primary lending
institutions since it would attract one time premium.
Reply of the Government
NHB has reported that it is in the process of studying the feasibility
of the “Title Insurance Scheme” taking into account international
experience.
This Ministry has sought the updated information from NHB on
this study.
[O.M.No.H-11024/9/2005-RH(Pt.I), Dated: November 17, 2008 of
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)]
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
24 February, 2009 Chairman,
5 Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

99
APPENDIX I
(As on 17.11.2008)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
RURAL HOUSING DIVISION
Status of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2003 on Rural Housing
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India, in his Report No.
3 of 2003, had pointed out their observations regarding implementation
of Rural Housing Scheme for the period from 1997-98 to 2001-2002.
This Para is in the form of a Chapter in which the progress of Rural
Housing Schemes, with special emphasis on IAY, covering 171 districts
in 28 States and 3 Union Territories, has been reviewed. The specific
comments of the Audit were forwarded to the concerned States/Union
Territories and sought Action Taken Notes/replies from the concerned
State Governments.
Based on the replies/comments received from the States/Union
Territories, the Action Taken Notes of 230 Paras have been forwarded
to the Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic and Service
Ministries, AGCR Building, for vetting, after the same had been got
vetted from the Integrated Finance Division of the Ministry.
There are 54 Audit Paras, which were examined in the Section
and some of them were also examined by the IFD. It is submitted that
additional information/clarifications are needed for further processing
of these Paras. The IFD have also viewed that without additional
information/clarification, these Paras could not be processed further.
All these Audit Paras have been sent to the States/UTs concerned,
incorporating the views expressed by IFD. The necessary clarifications/
documents as called for are awaited from the respective States/Union
Territories.
The respective States/Union Territories have been reminded vide
letters dated the 7th August, 2006 followed by reminders dated the
26th September, 2006 and the 15th May, 2007. Further, 64 paras which
have been finalized by the Audit are sent to the Monitoring Division
of the Ministry of Finance vide letter dated the 25th April, 2007. In the
meantime, the Office of the Principal Director of Audit had returned
the second batch of Audit Paras (77 numbers) requesting to furnish

100
some additional information/further clarification in respect of 25 Paras
out of the 77 Audit Paras which was also sent to the respective States
requesting to furnish the information as called for vide letter dated the
15th May, 2007.
Total Number of Audit Paras 284 numbers
Number of Paras sent to Monitoring Cell, Ministry of 120 numbers
Finance
Number of Paras sent for vetting to Director (Audit), 50 numbers
AGCR
Number of Paras pending with repsective States for 114 numbers
further clarification/additional information

101
APPENDIX II
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
RURAL HOUSING DIVISION
Status of C&AG Paras—C&AG Report No. 3 of 2003 on Rural
Housing (As on 13.1.2009)
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India, in its Report
No. 3 of 2003, had made some observations regarding implementation
of Rural Housing Scheme for the period from 1997-98 to 2001-2002.
The Para is in the form of a Chapter in which the progress of Rural
Housing Schemes, with special emphasis on IAY, covering 171 districts
in 28 States and 3 Union Territories, has been reviewed. The specific
comments of the Audit were forwarded to the concerned States/Union
Territories and sought Action Taken Notes/replies from the concrned
State Governments.
In all there were 283 Paras out of which 228 Paras have since
been settled by sending Action Taken Notes to the Monitoring Cell of
the Ministry of Finance duly vetted by Audit. Besides, other 22 Paras
have also been vetted by Audit but certain supplementary informations
are to be received from the concerned States. Meanwhile, replies to
other 25 Paras are being finalized in the Ministry based on the
information furnished by the concerned State Governments.
An abstract showing the present status of these Paras is also given
in the following Table:
Total No. of Audit sub-paras 283
(Earlier 284 Paras were indicated)
No. of Audit Paras sent to 228
Monitoring Cell
No. of Paras being finalized in the 25
Ministry
No. of Paras pending with States 22—Suppl. information desired by
Audit
8—Information sought by this
Ministry
Total-30

102
APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE, HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 24 FEBRUARY, 2009
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Shri D. Narbula
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
6. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
7. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Balihari Babu
9. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
10. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
11.D r. Chandan Mitra
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary
4.  Shri Vinod Gupta — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee.

103
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the
Memorandum No. 5 regarding draft action taken report on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-second report on the subject
‘Rural Housing’ of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of
Rural Development). After consideration the Committee adopted the
aforesaid draft report witthout any modifications.
*4. ** ** **
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
aforesaid draft Reports and present/lay the same to the respective
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*not related to the report.

104
APPENDIX IV
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY
SECOND REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (14th LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 56
II. Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government
Para Nos. 2.32, 2.47, 2.50, 2.73, 2.81, 2.82,
3.28, 3.31, 3.32, 3.45, 3.69, 3.72, 3.82, 3.83,
3.84, 3.96, 3.97, 3.98, 3.101, 3.105, 4.22, 4.23,
4.24 and 4.36
Total 24
Percentage to the total recommendations  (42.86%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies
Para No. 3.33
Total 1
Percentage to total recommendations  (1.78%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos. 2.12, 2.13, 2.15, 2.16, 2.33, 2.48,
2.49, 2.51, 2.69, 2.70, 2.71, 2.72, 2.77, 2.83,
3.25, 3.26, 3.27, 3.29, 3.30, 3.70, 3.71, 3.73,
3.99, 4.25, 4.26, 4.27, 4.35 and 4.37
Total 28
Percentage to total recommendations  (50%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos. 2.5, 2.14 and 3.100
Total 3
Percentage to total recommendations  (5.36%)