5
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ……………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 008
Price : Rs. 25.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2004-2005) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ....................................................... 11
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .......................................................................... 42
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .................................................... 44
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited .... 49
APPENDICES
I. Statement   showing  9th  Plan  Outlay  &
Expenditure................................................................ 50
II. Extract of the minutes  of  the  tenth  sitting
of the Committee held on 14.2.2005 .................. 52
III. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Second
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ..... 56

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
12. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
14. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
15. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
24. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
25. Shri Penumalli Madhu
26. Shri Stephen Marandi
(iii)

(iv)
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Shri Keshubhai S. Patel
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Fifth Report on the action taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Second
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 August,
2004. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 29 December, 2004.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
14 February, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Second Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix III.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
24 February, 2005 Chairman,
5 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2004-05)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Second Report on the subject Demands for Grants
(2004-2005) of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 August, 2004.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 41 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 2.17, 2.24, 2.25, 2.26,
2.37, 2.38, 2.41, 2.44, 2.51, 2.58, 2.69, 2.70, 2.71, 3.14, 3.15,
3.36, 3.37, 3.38, 3.40, 3.41, 3.54, 3.56, 3.65, 3.79, 3.80, 3.81,
3.92, 3.93 and 3.94.
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 2.52 and 3.20.
(iii) Recommendation in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.32, 2.33, 2.56, 3.39 and 3.55.
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Nil
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Realistic projections of the outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
4. The Committee had noted as below:
“As could be seen from the aforesaid analysis, the under spending
of the outlay is the recurring feature during Ninth Plan as well as
during the first two years of Tenth Plan. However, the Committee
note with satisfaction that Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance have enhanced the allocation of the Department
considerably due to the additional responsibilities given to the
Department. The Department, during Tenth Plan, has got
Rs. 926 crore more than what was proposed. While appreciating
the increased allocation of the Department, the Committee would
like to emphasise the proper and effective utilization of the scarce
resources earmarked for each of the schemes of the Department.
In no case there should be underspending and efforts should be
made to go deep at the root of underspending and create a positive
ground for optimum utilization of the scarce resources. The
Committee would also like to emphasise that while projecting
outlay to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission, it should
be ensured that projections are neither on the higher side nor on
the lower side. The projections to the extent possible should be
realistic.”
5. The Government have replied as below:
“The Department is making all efforts for effective utilisation of
the funds earmarked for each of the schemes. The underspending
is a concern mainly in the Integrated Wastelands Development
Programme (IWDP). There is 100 percent utilization in respect of
funds earmarked for non-North Eastern (NE) States, but it is lower
in case of NE States. This is mainly due to poor absorption capacity
of NE States. It may also be mentioned that due to non-applicability
of Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP) and Desert
Development Programme (DDP) in NE States, the funding under
the single programme, IWDP has considerably increased.
Nevertheless, all efforts are being made for enhancing the utilization
of funds by NE States.”
6. Since 2000-2001, 10 per cent of the outlay under different
schemes is earmarked for North-Eastern States. Almost five years
have passed since this concept of exclusive allocation was started.

3
The major area of concern in this regard is the non-utilisation of
resources earmarked for such States. In case of the Department of
Land Resources, the major factor responsible for under utilization is
10 per cent allocation of outlay under DPAP and DDP , although
these schemes are not applicable there. The resources earmarked for
these schemes are to be utilized under one watershed scheme being
implemented in such areas  i.e. IWDP . The Committee have no
objection on allocating enhanced outlay for North-Eastern States, but
the fact that outlay earmarked for the last five years could not be
meaningfully utilized due to poor absorption capacity need to be
probed. The Committee for the last several years have been
expressing their concern on this issue. They would again like the
Department to request the North-Eastern States to send their annual
projections so that the scarce resources are meaningfully utilised.
B. Development of wastelands through corporate sector/private sector
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.32 & 2.33)
7. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee find that there is no clarity with regard to
objectives of launching Investment Promotional Scheme. On the
one side, the Department states that the scheme was started to
stimulate involvement of corporate sector/financial institutions; on
the other hand, it has been mentioned that the scheme was meant
to help poor land owners who own small wastelands by way of
subsidy. The Committee would like to be apprised about the clear
position in this regard so as to enable them to comprehend the
position with regard to discontinuation of the scheme by Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance”.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.32)
“The Committee in their earlier reports had repeatedly been
emphasizing to take certain steps to attract private sector/corporate
sector in the field of development of wastelands. As regards, the
steps taken by the Department in this direction, the Committee
feel that these are not sufficient. Only one correspondence was
made with the Chairman/Chief Executive of user industries/major
corporate houses in the country. In this direction, the Committee
further find that as per the Government’s own admission, the
representatives of Ministry, National Bank of Agriculture and Rural
Development (NABARD), private sector, corporate sector,

4
Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), Associated Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM), in the various workshops/
seminars had assured that they would submit proposals within a
short time. It has also been mentioned that nothing came of it
later on. The Committee find from the aforesaid position that some
sort of enthusiasm was expressed by the corporate sector during
the meetings but the need was to further pursue with them and
convince them with the appropriate strategy as given by the
Committee in their earlier report as stated above so as to really
motivate them to this sector.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
8. The Government have replied as below:
“Investment Promotional Scheme (IPS) is a Central Sector Scheme
launched in 1994-95 to stimulate involvement of corporate sector,
financial institutions and private landowners in the development
of wastelands. Under the Scheme, Central promotional subsidy to
the extent of 25 percent project cost subject to ceiling of
Rs. 25 lakh was available. It was envisaged that private landowners
would come up to avail this provision for development of their
follow wastelands while the corporate sector, with such attractive
subsidy rate, would also be stimulated to lease in large chunks of
Government wastelands for commercial cultivation. However, in
the 8 years of its operation (upto 2002-03), the Scheme could not
generate the expected enthusiasm, which was evident from the
poor response it got in terms of proposals received under the
Scheme. The reasons for this are different for the two categories of
target groups viz., landowners and corporate bodies. In case of
private land owners, experience has shown that due to the large
investments required, substantial loan component and relative
attractiveness of other land development schemes like the
watershed development programmes which provide more subsidy
than the IPS, they had not taken up the scheme in a big way as
originally envisaged. On the other hand, though the subsidy under
the Scheme was attractive to the corporate sector, interested agencies
could not come up with suitable proposals due to bottlenecks in
obtaining long term lease rights form the concerned State
Governments and the risk and uncertainty involved in wastelands
development involving huge expenditures. In view of these facts,
the IPS was discontinued from 2003-04.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.32)

5
“The IPS, initiated in 1994-95, was implemented for 8 years before
its closure from 2003-04. During the 8 years of its operation, only
41 proposals covering an area of 1435 hectares with a total cost of
Rs. 16.88 crore including a subsidy component of Rs. 1.09 crore
only had been taken up. The poor performance was due to the
reasons already explained in Para 2.32 above. Though the corporate
sector is interested in availing of the provisions of the Scheme, it
is handicapped by the lack of suitable means of obtaining long-
term lease rights on Government wastelands. Since land is a State
subject, the Central Government can only provide a policy direction
but cannot force the State Governments for allotment of wastelands
to the corporate sector. These issues need to be sorted out at the
State level before the corporate sector could take up wastelands
development in a big way.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
9. The Committee are concerned to note that the Investment
Promotional Scheme launched with the objective of attracting
corporate sector/private sector in the task of development of
wastelands in the country was discontinued without addressing the
various bottlenecks being faced in this regard. The Committee find
that although corporate sector is interested in availing of the
provision of the scheme, the major hurdle is lack of suitable means
for obtaining long term lease rights on Government wastelands. The
Committee would like that the Union Government should find out
some solution in consultation with State Governments and corporate/
private sector and the Committee should be apprised accordingly so
as to enable them to appreciate the decision of the Government to
close Investment Promotional Scheme (IPS) and comment further in
this regard.
C. Conversion of various watershed and other related programmes
under Department of Land Resources
Recommendation (Para No. 2.56)
10. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee for the last six years have been recommending
strongly to bring the various schemes meant for the development
of wastelands at present being handled by different Ministries of
Government of India under one umbrella. By noting the latest
position in this regard, the Committee feel that ‘in principle’ issue

6
of convergence has been agreed to by the concerned Ministries.
However, the main reservation expressed by the Ministries is their
unwillingness to transfer area of activity being undertaken by them
in this regard. The Committee also find that Department of Land
Resources, has again submitted a Cabinet Note on setting up of
‘Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan Watershed Mission’ under which
all the activities related to watershed and soil conversion would
be brought. They also note that the matter for the time being has
been deferred. The Committee further note that in the absence of
convergence, the Government has not been able to make some
integrated planning on the huge task of developing wastelands in
the country. In view of this scenario, the Committee again
emphatically recommend to take this issue seriously and the matter
regarding various reservations of respective Ministries should be
sorted out by discussing the matter across the table and the issue
should be finalised expeditiously. The Committee would also like
that their concerns in this regard should be brought to the notice
of the Cabinet Secretariat”.
11. The Government have replied as below:
“Ministry of Rural Development submitted a Cabinet Note on
setting up of ‘Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan Watershed Mission’
to the Cabinet Secretariat on 1 October, 2003. A decision in this
regard is yet to be taken. The concern of the Committee has been
noted for compliance.
An inter-Ministerial Task-Group has also been set up by Planning
Commission to examine the convergence of various watershed and
other related programmes being implemented by different
Ministries.”
12. The Committee find that the decision on an important issue
of convergence of various watershed and other related programmes
being implemented by different Ministries is long pending. While
expressing their concern on the undue delay being done in the matter,
the Committee in their earlier reports had desired that their concerns
should be brought to the notice of the Cabinet Secretariat. The
Department in the reply has simply stated that the concerns of the
Committee have been noted for compliance. The Committee while
expressing their unhappiness on the way such a serious issue is
being taken up by the Government, would like to be clearly informed

7
whether the Cabinet Secretariat was informed about the concerns of
the Committee. The Committee would also like to be informed when
the inter-Ministerial Task Force to examine the matter was set up by
Planning Commission and the details of the meetings held by the
Task Force so far.
D. Performance of the State and District Level Vigilance Committees
Recommendation (Para No. 3.39)
13. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee also find that one aspect suggested by the
Department to strengthen the monitoring mechanism is the
establishment of State Level and District Level Vigilance Committees
comprising of MPs and MLAs to critically assess the monitoring
of the projects. The Committee, would like to be apprised in how
many States/Districts Vigilance Committees have so far been
constituted. The Committee would also like to be apprised about
the work done by such Vigilance Committees.”
14. The Government have replied as below:
“The State level and District level Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees are meant to monitor and review all the programmes
of Ministry of Rural Development and not specifically DPAP . No
reference with regard to implementation of DPAP in any District/
State has so far received by Department of Land Resources (DoLR)
from any such Committee.”
15. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had desired
to know about the status and work done by the State and District
Level Vigilance Committees. The Department instead of submitting
the information categorically has tried to sidetrack the issue by stating
that these Committees are meant to review all programmes and not
specifically DPAP . The Committee are constrained to note the way
the Department has addressed such an important issue which directly
falls under the jurisdiction of the Department. They, while expressing
their unhappiness, would like to be informed about the status
alongwith the work done by such Committees so as to enable them
to analyse the position of their usefulness in monitoring and
reviewing rural development programmes.

8
E. Reasons for foreclosure of Desert Development Programme (DDP)
Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 3.55)
16. The Committee had noted as below:
“While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee feel that
emphasis has to be given in strengthening the monitoring
mechanism so as to improve the implementation of the Programme.
From the position of implementation as given by the Department,
it seems that there are certain problems. Foremost is the issue of
foreclosing projects. They find that during Ninth Plan, full allocation
for 217 projects was made. Out of that, 36 projects were foreclosed.
To enable the Committee to comprehend the position of foreclosure
further, they would like to be apprised about the reasons for such
foreclosure. The Committee would also like to be apprised about
the number of projects foreclosed during each of the years of Tenth
Plan. The Committee feel that there is some serious lacuna in
implementation of such a priority Scheme due to which after
making such heavy investments on projects, some are being
foreclosed, thus wasting the valuable resources.”
17. The Government have replied as below:
“As has been clarified earlier only 1st instalment is released to
Zila Parishad (ZP)/District Rural Development Agency (DRDA)
with the sanctioning of new projects each year and since the
programme is demand driven, subsequent instalments are released
over the project period only on receipt of proposals from these
agencies fulfilling the release criteria. Hence, the total central share
of the project cost is not released at one go at the time of their
sanction as apprehended by the Committee.
It is stated that implementation of DDP projects is generally
satisfactory. During the Ninth Plan  i.e. 1997-98 to 2001-02, a total
of 4,954 projects were sanctioned to the States. Of these, central
funding has been stopped for 36 projects because of excessive delay
in implementation. In case of 217 projects, entire central share in
7 instalments has been released. The rest of the projects are at
various stages of implementation.”
18. The Committee in their earlier recommendation while
expressing their concern on the foreclosure of DDP projects had

9
desired to know the basic data stating the number of projects
foreclosed in each of the year of Tenth Plan alongwith the reasons
for such foreclosure. The Department has furnished a vague and
incomplete reply. Not only that inspite of the fact that number of
projects are being foreclosed thereby wasting the heavy investments
made on the projects, the impression given by the Department in
the reply is that the implementation of DDP projects is generally
satisfactory. While expressing their unhappiness over the way the
Department has responded to their recommendation, the Committee
would like the categorical reply of the Government in this regard.
F. Revision of the existing funding pattern of the scheme
Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records (SRA & ULR)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.94)
19. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note that the Government had a proposal to revise
the existing funding ratio of 50 : 50 to 75 : 25 between the Centre
and the States and 90 : 10 for the North-Eastern States. They also
find that Planning Commission has not agreed to the said proposal.
The Committee feel that the States which could not come forward
for the Programme may have the main problem of providing 50
percent of the State’s share. In view of this, the Committee would
like the Department to interact with the under performing States
and accordingly place the position before Planning Commission so
as to enable them to appreciate the proposals of the Department
in this regard. The Committee should also be apprised about the
final decision taken in this regard.”
20. The Government have replied as below:
“It has been apprised to the Planning Commission that the States
of Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal
and most of the North-Eastern States are finding it difficult to
provide matching share due to financial constraints which has
adversely affected the implementation of the scheme of SRA &
ULR. The Planning Commission has once again been requested to
reconsider the proposal of the Department of Land Resources for
enhancement of funding pattern from 50 : 50 to 75 : 25 between
the Centre and the States and 90 : 10 for North-Eastern States
under the scheme of SRA & ULR”.

10
21. The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation,
the Planning Commission has been requested to reconsider the issue
of revising the existing funding ratio of 50:50 to 75:25 between the
Centre and the States and 90:10 for North-Eastern States under the
scheme of SRA & ULR. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the decision taken in this regard.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that the Government has furnished two
different types of information with regard to BE and actual expenditure
during 9th Plan. By examining the two different types of data, the
underspending according to one type of data comes to Rs. 184.33 crore
whereas according to other type of information given, the
underspending is around Rs. 300 crores. While examining Demands of
the previous year, the Committee were informed that the
underspending was Rs. 184.33 crore. The Committee would like the
Department to furnish the accurate data with regard to 9th Plan outlay,
revised estimates and actual expenditure, so as to enable the Committee
to come to the right conclusions. Besides, the Committee would also
emphasise that while furnishing information before Parliament as well
as before the Standing Committee, utmost care should be taken to
ensure that the data furnished is accurate.
Reply of the Government
As suggested by the Committee the instructions are noted for
compliance. The utmost care would be taken while furnishing
information to the Standing Committee. The accurate data with regard
to 9th Plan Outlay , Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure is given
at Appendix I. According to this statement, the underspending during
Ninth Plan was Rs. 290.38 crore under Plan.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
As could be seen from the aforesaid analysis, the underspending
of the outlay is the recurring feature during 9th Plan as well as during
the first two years of Tenth Plan. However, the Committee note with
satisfaction that the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance have
enhanced the allocation of the Department considerably due to the
11

12
additional responsibilities given to the Department. The Department,
during Tenth Plan, has got Rs. 926 crore more than what was proposed.
While appreciating the increased allocation of the Department, the
Committee would like to emphasise the proper and effective utilization
of the scarce resources earmarked for each of the schemes of the
Department. In no case there should be underspending and efforts
should be made to do deep at the root of underspending and create
a positive ground for optimum utilization of the scarce resources. The
Committee would also like to emphasise that while projecting outlay
to the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission, it should be ensured
that projections are neither on the higher side nor on the lower side.
The projections to the extent possible should be realistic.
Reply of the Government
The Department is making all efforts for effective utilisation of the
funds earmarked for each of the schemes. The underspending is a
concern mainly in the IWDP . There is 100% utilization in respect of
funds earmarked for non-NE States, but it is lower in case of NE
States. This is mainly due to poor absorption capacity of NE States. It
may also be mentioned that due to non-applicability of DPAP and
DDP in NE States, the funding under the single programme, IWDP
has considerably increased. Nevertheless, all efforts are being made
for enhancing the utilization of funds by NE States.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)
Further analysis of the data indicate that whereas the overall
position of the outlay indicates more than proposed allocation as has
been mentioned above, the individual schemes of the Departments
indicate another picture. In the major schemes of the Department like
IWDP , DPAP , DDP , CLR, SRA & ULR, the allocation is Rs. 100 crore
less than what was proposed to Planning Commission. Similarly, under
TDET and others the Department has got the reduced allocation. The
Committee find that Tenth Plan allocation has been enhanced due to
Rs. 1000 crore earmarked for ‘New Initiatives’.

13
While analyzing the position of expenditure under ‘New Initiatives’
the Committee find that Rs. 210 crore were allocated during 2004-2005
to implement special projects that would be required to meet certain
objectives that otherwise would not have been made through the
regular Watershed Development Projects. The Committee are unable
to comprehend the reasons for making separate allocations for
Watershed Development Projects, when three comprehensive schemes
IWDP , DDP , DPAP are the regular schemes of the Department. Not
only that, DDP , DPAP cater to the special requirement of DDP , DPAP
areas. The Committee fail to understand why a plethora of schemes
have been launched by the Department to achieve a single objective.
The Committee are of the view that this approach of the Department
should be discouraged. The emphasis should be more on the
strengthening of the delivery mechanism in the existing schemes and
to get better results by more allocation as well as effective monitoring
of the implementation.
Reply of the Government
Commonality of approach has been attempted in the department
through Common Guidelines for implementation of DPAP , DDP &
IWDP . While the former two are implemented in 972 and 235 identified
blocks respectively in semi arid/dry sub humid and arid climatic zones
in the country, IWDP is implemented in the rest of the blocks and
also in Moist Sub Humid & Humid Zones.
Under new initiatives, two new schemes, namely, (i) renovation of
traditional water bodies, and (ii) development of bio-fuel were proposed
and the annual allocation of Rs. 200 crore and Rs. 10 crore respectively
made in the Annual Plan (2004-2005). However, after consideration, it
was decided that instead of launching a new scheme for renovation of
traditional water bodies, it would be appropriate to enhance the
budgetary provision of the existing watershed programmes, which has
a major component of rainwater harvesting and conservation, and
further action is being taken accordingly.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
Further the Committee note that under ‘New Initiatives’ two
schemes like (i) Renovation of Traditional Water Bodies and
(ii) Development of Bio-Fuel are proposed to be launched but no

14
expenditure has been incurred under this head. The Committee
appreciate the launching of the aforesaid schemes specifically when
the ground water is fast depleting and the Government has to think
over reviving the traditional water bodies. However, they note that no
planning on the part of the Government is being made before launching
a new scheme for which Rs. 1000 crore has been allocated during
Tenth Plan and almost half of the time has already elapsed and no
expenditure could be made for the ‘New Initiatives’. The Committee
would like the Department to finalise the guidelines of the scheme
expeditiously. They would also like that in future, proper planning
should be made before launching and earmarking allocation for the
new schemes so that the existing schemes do not suffer in the resources
starved economy of the country.
Reply of the Government
Under New Initiatives, two new schemes namely (i) Renovation of
Traditional Water Bodies and (ii) Development of bio-fuel were
proposed to be launched during the year. In case of the first scheme
of renovation of traditional water bodies, subsequent to the Finance
Minister’s announcement in his Budget Speech, the Ministry of Water
Resources, which has been made the nodal agency for launching the
scheme for renovation of traditional water bodies, has been pursuing
this matter. The Planning Commission as well as the Ministry of
Finance were of the view that strengthening the water resource
development component of watershed development programmes of
the Department of Land Resources by supplementing the budget
provisions of these programmes would be a better proposition rather
than launching a separate scheme with the same objective. Accordingly,
it is proposed to utilize the funds available for this purpose in
supplementing the budgetary allocations to DPAP , DDP and IWDP .
A provision of Rs. 10 crore has been made in the current financial
year for the new scheme for the National Mission on Bio-Fuel. It is
expected that the DoLR would be in a position to launch this scheme,
after obtaining the requisite clearances and approvals on the DPR from
the Planning Commission, Department of Expenditure/EFC and the
Cabinet.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]

15
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
The Committee have analysed the performance of each of the
schemes in detail in the subsequent chapters of the Report. The
Committee would like to highlight here that in major schemes of the
Department like IWDP , DDP and DPAP , there is shortfall in
achievement of targets as may be seen from the position given in
Appendix-II. Not only in 9th Plan, but also in the two years of
Tenth Plan that have passed, the performance of the schemes is not
very satisfactory. For example, under IWDP , against the target of
68 lakh hectares, the actual covered area is 13.42 lakh hectares during
the half of the time that has passed since the Tenth Plan was launched.
The Committee would like the Department to analyse the reasons for
the shortfall in targets and take the corrective steps expeditiously. The
Committee further note that under DPAP , DDP , CLR, SRA&ULR during
9th Plan and under SRA, ULR and CLR during 10th Plan, no targets
could be fixed by the Department. The Committee fail to understand
how the achievements under the schemes could be assessed in the
absence of targets fixed for the schemes. The Committee would like
the Department to indicate the reasons for not fixing the targets under
the aforesaid schemes.
Reply of the Government
During the Ninth Plan, against the financial target of Rs. 2393.60 crore
under DPAP , DDP and IWDP the actual expenditure was
Rs. 2150.33 crore, which is 89.84% of BE. The physical achievement
was 8 million ha. Thus both physical and financial targets were
substantially achieved during the Ninth Plan.
During the first two years of the Tenth Plan, against the financial
target of Rs. 1796 crore under DPAP , DDP and IWDP , the achievement
was Rs. 1726 crore which is 96% of BE. The physical achievement is
5.4 million ha. against the target of 18 million ha. The outlay under
these programmes is utilized towards meeting the liabilities of ongoing
projects and sanctioning of new projects. Hence, the actual achievement
of physical target depends on the availability of funds for sanctioning
of new projects. The Department is making all efforts to achieve the
Tenth Plan target substantially.
The schemes of Computerization of Land Records (CLR) and
Strengthening of Revenue Administration & Updating of Land Records
(SRA & ULR) are demand-driven and proposals are received from the
Revenue Department of the State as per their requirements and capacity

16
to utilize the available funds. The activities involved under these
schemes take lot of time to complete them in a particular year.
Therefore, available funds are carried over to the next financial year.
Keeping in view the nature of these schemes and facts stated above,
State-wise allocation could not be done.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.17)
The Committee note that a new scheme is proposed to be launched
for renovation of traditional water bodies on a pilot basis, the estimated
cost of which is Rs. 100 crore. They also find that funds for pilot
projects would be drawn from the existing programme such as SGRY,
PMGJSY, DPAP , DDP & IWDP . While the Committee appreciate the
proposal of launching the scheme for renovation of traditional water
bodies which is the need of the hour, they do not approve of the
implementation of the scheme at the cost of the other major schemes
of the Department. The Committee deplores the way the planning on
the part of the Government is made. They would like that before
launching any new schemes, the financial implications should be
properly ascertained so that the allocation for other schemes is not
disturbed.
Reply of the Government
Consequent upon the announcement of a new scheme for
renovation of traditional water bodies in the Finance Minister’s Budget
Speech, the Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) have initiated the
process of formulating and launching a new scheme for renovation of
traditional water bodies with a command area of more than 40 ha.
Since a huge percentage of small water bodies (less than 40 ha.
command) are under the control of Gram Panchayats, which are not
being considered for renovation under the MoWR Scheme, the DoLR
proposed a new scheme for renovation of these structures as well, for
which budgetary allocation available under the PMGJSY was proposed
to be utilized.
However, after consideration at a later stage, it is proposed that
instead of launching a new scheme for renovation of traditional water
bodies, it would be appropriate to enhance the budgetary provision of
existing watershed development programmes, which also have a major
component of rainwater harvesting and conservation.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]

17
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
The Committee are happy to note that the Department could exceed
the projected targets during 9th Plan period. Against the target of
5 million hectares, the Department could achieve 8.02 million hectares
of wasteland during 9th Plan. The Committee further note that during
Tenth Plan, the Department has projected to cover 15 million hectares.
They find that during the first two years of Tenth Plan 5,460 million
hectares could be covered. Similarly, the committee note that although
the targets during Tenth Plan are three times of the targets of
9th  Plan, the commensurate allocation during Tenth Plan has not
been provided.
Reply of the Government
The budget available for watershed projects is utilized towards
sanctioning of new projects and meeting the liabilities of ongoing
projects. Hence, the actual achievement of the physical target will
depend on the availability of funds for sanctioning new projects. The
targets of the Ninth Plan have been substantially achieved and it is
expected that by the end of Tenth Plan, the targets would be met.
Planning Commission is also being pursued to allocate adequate funds
to meet the Tenth Plan targets.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25)
During 9th Plan under the three area development schemes of the
Department i.e. DDP , DPAP and IWDP , Rs. 1605 crore were earmarked.
Against this during Tenth Plan Rs. 4,400 crore have been allocated
which is less than three times of what was given during 9th Plan.
They also find that the cost of treating wastelands has increased and
allocation of the Department has also been enhanced from Rs. 4000 to
Rs. 6000 per hectare. In view of this scenario, the Committee find that
it will not be possible to achieve the targets set during Tenth Plan.
The Committee strongly recommend to convince the Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission to provide the adequate allocation to the
Department so as to enable them to achieve the set targets during
Tenth Plan. While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee
would also like the Department to gear up their pace of implementation
as the physical achievement during the first two years is not up to the
mark. The Committee note that the Department has itself admitted

18
that the physical annual targets of 2.5 million hectares of wastelands
have to be doubled in the coming years to achieve the desirable level
and as such, doubling of the financial allocation for the area
development programmes would be required.
Reply of the Government
The budget available for watershed projects is utilized towards
sanctioning of new projects and meeting the liabilities of ongoing
projects. Hence, the actual achievement of the physical target will
depend on the availability of funds for sanctioning new projects. The
targets of the Ninth Plan have been substantially achieved and it is
expected that by the end of Tenth Plan, the targets would be met.
Planning Commission is also being pursued to allocate adequate funds
to meet the Tenth Plan targets.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.26)
The Committee are surprised to note that the Government has
never tried to analyse the position of wastelands development and
technology being used by the other countries for the wastelands
development for the reasons best known to them. In Committee’s
opinion, such a review can help in evolving cost effective and efficient
technologies for wastelands development in years to come. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to undertake a
review of development of wastelands and technologies being used in
other countries in the context of wastelands development within the
country and apprise the committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Committee’s suggestions is noted and the Department with
the involvement of NIRD is taking necessary steps to study
international experiences in the field of wasteland development.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.37)
From the survey results, the Committee find that in some of the
States the survey indicates positive trends by way of availability of

19
fuel, fodder, increase in vegetative cover and above all in generation
of wage employment. The studies reveal that 60 per cent of the
expenditure in the execution of watershed projects generate wage
employment. The Committee also find that as per the Minimum Needs
Programme of UPA Government to the assurance of 100 days wage
employment to each bread earner of the family has been given. The
Committee conclude from the aforesaid position that development of
wastelands is an option to provide wage employment to the poor
strata of society. The need of the hour is to chalk out a strategy in
coordination with all the Ministries involved in the task and after
interaction with State Governments, Panchayats and through them
public at large, private sector etc., involved in the task. The Committee
would like the Government to ponder over it and chalk out the
strategies expeditiously. The Committee should be kept informed about
the steps taken.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Land Resources in the Ministry of Rural
Development has been emphasizing for convergence of different Govt.
of India schemes at the field level, which would enhance the sustainable
economic development of village community. Accordingly, a provision
has been made in the Hariyali Guidelines for implementation of
watershed development programmes. The Para 39 of Hariyali
Guidelines is reproduced below:—
“As the Watershed Development Programmes aim at holistic
development of watershed areas, the convergence of all other non-
land based programmes of Government of India, particularly those
of the Ministry of Rural Development would enhance the ultimate
output and lead to sustainable economic development of the village
community. The ZP/DRDA, therefore, shall take all possible
measures to ensure convergence of other programmes of the
Ministry of Rural Development such as the Sampoorna Grameen
Rozgar Yojana (SGRY), the Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
(SGSY), the Indira Awas Yojana (IAY), the Total Sanitation
Campaign (TSC) and the Rural Drinking Water Supply Programme
in the villages chosen for the implementation of the watershed
development projects. It would also be worthwhile to converge
programmes of similar nature of the other Ministries e.g. Health
& Family Welfare, Education, Social Justice and Empowerment
and Agriculture, as also of the State Governments, in these
villages.

20
The State Governments, while implementing programmes, have to
ensure convergence of schemes at field level.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
The Committee further find that a survey to know about the impact
of assessment studies by State Governments is being undertaken. The
Committee would like to be informed about the results of the said
survey. Besides the Committee feel that after the survey results are
available, the same should be revalidated by some independent
evaluator and the follow up action with the suitable strategy and
corrective action should be undertaken so that the big challenge of
developing huge wastelands in the country can be successfully met.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development had commissioned nation-wide
studies on the impact of watershed development programmes i.e. DPAP ,
DDP and IWDP . For this purpose 230 districts in 16 States were covered
on a sample basis and 20 independent Field Agencies were engaged.
The major findings of these Impact Assessment Studies of watershed
development programmes are as follows:
•D rought proofing measures have contributed to better
availability of irrigation facilities and increased ground water
table.
• Increase in net area sown, area sown more than once, gross
cropped area, land under miscellaneous crops and
availability of fodder and fuel wood.
• Increase in milk production.
• Plantations are in good condition and efforts for maintenance
of assets are being made.
• Positive impact on control of soil erosion, arrest of runoff
water and improvement in in-situ soil and moisture
conservation.
• Improvements in cropping pattern.
• Community mobilization activities are visible.

21
• Increase in annual income of the beneficiaries from
agricultural production and increase in average annual
income were observed.
• Out migration of non-agricultural labour has reduced.
Defects pointed out in these studies are communicated to the States
for taking corrective action.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.41)
The Committee feel that to analyse the problem related to
development of wastelands in the country, it is imperative to know
about the ownership status of wastelands. They note that no steps
have been taken to maintain the data with regard to wastelands under
Common Property Resources. The Committee recommend the
Government to take steps to collect the necessary data on ownership
basis so as to enable them to address the specific problems of
Government CPRs, privately owned land etc.
Reply of the Government
The exercise is carried out by the concerned DRDAs/ZPs and the
PIAs in the areas which are taken up under the projects. District-wise
wastelands data is available in the Wastelands Atlas prepared by the
Department in collaboration with NRSA, Hyderabad, which is sufficient
for undertaking planning upto district level.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)
The Committee note that important observations have been made
by the Planning Commission with regard to functioning of watershed
development projects for wastelands development in the country. From
the reply furnished by the Government the Committee feel that in
some States like Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Orissa and Tamilnadu, real work on watershed
development projects is already under way. The Committee feel that
the work done by these States needs to be emulated by other States
in order to address the concerns of the Planning Commission

22
adequately. The Committee hope that the Department of Land
Resources being nodal Department will take necessary action in this
regard. The Committee are informed that under the guidelines for
Hariyali, PRIs have been given a pivotal role to secure greater
participation of the people. The Committee would like to know the
achievements made in this regard. Mere assignment of the role is not
enough. The concerns expressed by Planning Commission with regard
to watershed programmes need serious introspection. The reply of the
Ministry is not adequate. They need to address the observation of
Planning Commission categorically to have the remedies.
Reply of the Government
At the national level, Ministry organises All India Project Directors
Conference every year to share the experience as well dissemination
of best practices in different programmes of Ministry of Rural
Development. In addition, the States do organize workshops/seminars
involving different States for the purpose of experience sharing and
dissemination of best practices in the implementation of watershed
programme.
Watershed Development Programmes have been included in the
list of subjects to be devolved to the PRIs and the State Governments
are in the process of devolving necessary financial and administrative
powers to the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). Institutional
frameworks of Watershed Development Associations and Watershed
Committees for implementation of Watershed Development Programmes
are being gradually replaced by Gram Panchayats/Gram Sabhas. To
strengthen the Panchayati Raj Institutions, the State Governments are
linking field functionaries of departments responsible for execution of
watershed projects with PRIs as reported recently in Rajasthan. The
Watershed projects under Hariyali Guidelines have been sanctioned
from 2003-04 onwards for execution through PRIs. NIRD is studying
the performance of PRIs in implementation of the programmes and it
is premature to make any comment at this stage.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.51)
The Committee are happy to note that in major wastelands
development schemes of the Department, there is an in-built mechanism
for the capacity building of Panchayats. Five per cent of outlay under
IWDP , DDP and DPAP is earmarked for the purpose. The Committee

23
feel that besides making provision in this regard, there is an urgent
need to monitor that the earmarked outlay is spent for the desired
purpose for which strict monitoring by the Department is required.
The Committee hope that State Government would come forward in
this regard and after taking the benefit of this allocation and pooling
in other Union and State resources meant for Panchayati Raj
empowerment, the schemes will be implemented by PRIs in the true
spirit of the Constitution.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Zilla
Parishads/District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs) supervise the
programmes for capacity building of PRIs to ensure better formulation
and execution of the watershed projects. The Government of India
also calls regular meetings of the Secretaries and senior officers of
State Governments for sharing views and reviewing progress towards
training and capacity building of PRIs.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.58)
The Committee find that even the enhanced allocation of Rs. 6,000
per hectare being provided for the development of wastelands under
IWDP , DDP and DPAP is not justified keeping in view the actual
higher per hectare cost involved in this task. To appreciate the position
further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the actual rate of
expenditure involved in developing per hectare of land. Further, the
Committee find that due to regional imbalances, the cost of developing
wastelands in hilly areas may be much more. As such the Committee
may also like to be apprised of the actual cost of developing land per
hectare in such difficult areas so as to enable the Committee to come
to the right conclusion and to recommend for higher outlay.
Reply of the Government
In a watershed, it is not necessary that every piece of land requires
treatment. For example, for water harvesting through check dams, there
is a catchment area and command area. The expenditure incurred on
structures is in the catchment area only and for related developments
required there. In a micro-watershed of 500 ha., the cost is
Rs. 30.00 lakhs. Within this project cost, a micro plan is prepared

24
depending on the site specific requirements and various activities as
provided for in the watershed guidelines are suggested.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.69)
The Committee find that the allocation for North Eastern States
has considerably been increased since 2000-2001, when the concept of
10 per cent exclusive allocation to North Eastern States was started.
They also note that DDP , DPAP Schemes are not applicable in North
Eastern States since no such districts were considered as such areas as
per the Hanumantha Rao Committee constituted for identification of
DDP and DPAP  Projects in the country. The Committee find that
even then the allocation for these two area specific programmes is
being made to the North Eastern States. The Committee in their earlier
Reports had raised this issue and they find from the reply furnished
by the Department that if the DDP and DPAP allocation is excluded,
North Eastern States allocation for watershed projects will be
considerably reduce. The Committee appreciate the considerable
attention and allocation made to North Eastern States. Further, they
would also like that the resources allocated for the development of
wastelands should be meaningfully utilized. To appreciate the releases
made to North Eastern States, the Committee would like to be apprised
about the task being handled in each of the areas of North Eastern
States and would like to be apprised about the information in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
State-wise information on number of watershed projects sanctioned
under IWDP in the North Eastern Region since 1995-96 till 30.11.2004,
total cost of these projects and funds released towards implementation
of these projects is as follows:
Name of State No. of No. of Total Total Total Central Total Central
Districts Projects Project Project Share Releases
Covered Sanctioned Area Cost (Rs. in lakh) (Rs. in lakh)
(in ha.)
12 3 4 5 6 7
Aruanchal Pradesh 14 20 95971 5728.26 5255.91 905.280
Assam 23 74 473688 27735.7 25538.66 6904.878

25
12 3 4 5 6 7
Manipur 9 19 148968 7608.72 7169.22 2368.650
Meghalaya 7 14 62725 3543.28 3284.71 763.000
Mizoram 8 22 193803 11628.18 10659.17 2769.580
Nagaland 9 34 315930 17435.8 16236.15 7185.980
Sikkim 4 12 96006 4649.78 4450.40 1505.950
Tripura 4 4 19423 1165.38 1068.27 322.440
Total 78 199 1406514 79495.10 73689.47 22725.758
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.70)
The Committee find from the information furnished by the
Department that there are certain problems resulting in lesser utilization
of funds in North Eastern region, like difficult weather conditions,
delay in release of State’s share etc. The Committee would like that
the specific problems from each of the North Eastern States, should be
ascertained expeditiously after interacting with them and proper
strategy to take the desired steps in this regard, should be chalked
out.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance. In this regard it may be informed that the Minister, Rural
Development had reviewed the implementation of IWDP in the NE
States with the respective State Ministers at Guwahati on 30.11.2004.
He also had another review meeting with the MPs from the NE Region
on 8.12.2004 at New Delhi. In order that the programme be
implemented effectively, it was emphasized that the States should come
up with a Perspective Plan for Wasteland Development, which could
form the basis for the implementation of IWDP in a time-bound
manner. All the States were also requested to expedite submission of
Priority List of IWDP projects to be taken up.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]

26
Recommendation (Para No. 2.71)
The Committee note that out of 78.52 lakh hectares, the Department
could cover only 6.87 lakh hectares during 9th Plan under IWDP
Scheme in North Eastern States. Similarly, during the first two years
of 10th Plan, 5.59 lakh hectares could be developed. Keeping in view
the slow pace of coverage, the Committee feel that effective steps
need to be taken to cover the total wastelands in North Eastern States.
The Committee in their earlier Reports had recommended to chalk
out an Action Plan to cover the total wastelands in North Eastern
States. They would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation and
would like that the desired action in this regard should be taken
expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance. In this regard it may be informed that the Minister, Rural
Development had reviewed the implementation of IWDP in the NE
States with the respective State Ministers at Guwahati on 30.11.2004.
He also had another review meeting with the MPs from the NE Region
on 8.12.2004 at New Delhi. In order that the programmes be
implemented effectively, it was emphasized that the States should come
up with a Perspective Plan for Wasteland Development, which could
form the basis for the implementation of IWDP in a time-bound
manner. All the States were also requested to expedite submission of
Priority List of IWDP projects to be taken up.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development),
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
The Committee conclude from the position of allocation made
under IWDP that in North-Eastern States, there is huge underspending.
The Committee have dealt with, in detail, the position of wastelands
in North-Eastern States and the issue of under utilization in the
proceeding para of the Report. The Committee would like to highlight
that with regard to implementation of IWDP , efforts should be made
by interacting with various State  Governments so that more and more
projects from these States are proposed which could result in full
utilization of scarce resources.

27
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance. In this regard it may be informed that the Minister, Rural
Development had reviewed the implementation of IWDP in the NE
States with the respective State Ministers at  Guwahati on 30.11.2004.
He also had another review meeting with the MPs from the NE Region
on 8.12.2004 at New Delhi. In order that the programme be
implemented effectively, it was emphasized that the States should come
up with a Perspective Plan for Wasteland Development, which could
form the basis for the implementation of IWDP in a time-bound
manner. All the States were also requested to expedite submission of
Priority List of IWDP projects to be taken up.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)
As regards the physical achievement under IWDP , the Committee
note that during 9th Plan, there was shortfall of 1,148 hectares. They
also note that most of the funds available under IWDP are being
released to meet the committed liabilities of projects under IWDP
thereby resulting in sanctioning of lesser new projects. The Committee
are concerned to note that on an average 65 to 70 per cent of allocated
funds are utilized towards committed liabilities. To understand the
problem of committed liabilities, the Committee would like that the
detailed position with regard to committed liabilities for ongoing
projects should be analysed and data placed before the Committee.
The Committee find that if the existing position with regard to
committed liabilities stands, the Department would not be able to
achieve the targets set during Tenth Plan. As such the Committee
would like the Department to analyse the matter critically and inform
the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Since the project period is for 5 years and funds are released in 7
instalments for projects sanctioned prior to 31.3.2003 and 5 instalments
for projects sanctioned after 1.4.2003, first instalment amounting to
15% is released along with Sanction Order of each project. Every
subsequent instalment is released on receipt of Utilization Certificate
showing utilization of more than 50% of previous instalment and full
amount of earlier instalments released. Since projects are demand driven

28
and based on participatory approach, next installment is released as
and when demanded by implementing agency (ZP/DRDA) fulfilling
requirements of UC and other documents. Therefore, funds are required
each year to account for projects of earlier four or more years (in case
not completed in time due to the reasons stated above). The committed
liability worked out for next five years is as given below:
Instalments for Sanctioned projects 1995-2004
(Rs. in Crore)
Programme 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
IWDP (on-going) 285.50 339.42 286.20 292.46 224.80
IWDP-new (1st (82.50) (82.50) (82.50) (82.50) (82.50)
instalment)
Subsequent instalments — — (165.00) (330.00) (330.00)
Total for IWDP 368.000 421.920 533.700 704.960 637.300
*From the above table, it is evident that on-going liability is on actual based on timely
further release of instalment under ongoing projects. New Projects to be sanctioned
have been worked out for treatment of 10.00 lakh Ha. area each year, and instalments
due for this has been indicated above.
If more than 30-35% of the annual outlay is utilized for new
projects, it may lead to parking of funds and manifold  increase in
subsequent liability.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.36)
The Committee find that a laudable Programme i.e. Drought Prone
Areas Programme (DPAP) was started in 1973-74 to  tackle special
problems in the districts which are constantly affected by severe
drought conditions. The objective of the Programme was to provide
long term solution through watershed projects for land development,
water resources development and afforestation, pasture development,
besides promoting overall economic development and improving the
socio-economic conditions of the covered areas. From the data indicated
above, the Committee note that the Department has tried to project a
very bright picture about the releases of the money , accordingly to

29
which there was 100 per cent expenditure of the allocated amount
during the first two years of the 10th Plan, but the analysis of the
implementation of the projects indicates another scenario.
Reply of the Government
The implementation of DPAP and DDP is by and large underway
as per the goals set within the available resources. Impact assessment
studies have also shown that these programmes have had a positive
impact in the project areas.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.37)
The Committee are constrained to note that during 1995-96 to 1997-
98 as much as 1637 projects were foreclosed. Further, the Department
targets to close non-performing projects during 1998-99. The Committee,
while expressing their concern over the closure of non-performing
projects where huge investments are being made, would like to be
informed about the status of the closure of the projects since the Scheme
was started to comprehend the position in a better way. Besides, the
Committee would also like to be apprised of the reasons for poor
performance of the projects along with the corrective steps taken by
the Department so far. They would also like to recommend here that
before sanctioning the projects, the viability of the projects should be
ascertained so as to avoid foreclosing of such a great number of
projects.
Reply of the Government
From 1973-74 to 1994-95, the DPAP was being implemented on
sectoral basis where major activities like soil-moisture conservation,
water resource development, afforestation, pasture development etc.
were taken up in sectoral manner by different line departments. Isolated
implementation of wide ranging sectoral activities over widely
disjointed areas of very small size failed to bring about any noticeable
impact and programme objectives were not achieved. It is only since
the adoption of the watershed approach in 1995-96, when the
implementation of DPAP was revamped in project mode that these
activities are taken up together in the selected micro-watershed of
about 500 hectare i.e. the project area. The project is to be completed
over a period of 5 years. The central funds are released in

30
7 instalments. Out of the total 5209 such projects sanctioned in 1995-
96, 1996-97 & 1997-98,  i.e. 4523, 280 & 406 respectively, 1637 projects
did not claim the entire central share during the project period. The
slow implementation of projects sanctioned in the initial 2-3 years may
be understandable as time is required for the programme States &
DRDAs/ZPs to get acquainted with the newly introduced scientific
watershed approach and for identification and selection of micro-
watersheds for project implementation. Thereafter, the implementation
picked up as out of the total 880 projects of IV batch sanctioned in
1998-99 only 25-30 projects are slow in implementation. Sometimes,
the slow implementation may not be due to any technicality  but due
to village level conflicts. The selection of village(s) for watershed
treatment is done by ZP/DRDA. As per the guidelines only such
villages should be chosen by them for project implementation that
have a known history of coming together for common causes and
have shown concern for resource conservation.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.38)
The Committee find that the Department has taken a positive step
of mid-term evaluation which has been entrusted to the State
Governments. The Committee, would like to apprised of the status of
the survey along with the findings where the survey has been
completed.
Reply of the Government
The programme States for projects sanctioned in a particular Batch
to a district, before claiming the 4th instalment of central funds, conduct
the Mid-Term Evaluation. These evaluation studies are carried out as
and when the batch reaches the stage of claiming the 4th instalment
and evaluation reports are submitted to DoLR along with the proposal
for release of funds. Only if the reports are satisfactory funds released
otherwise they are withheld till the action taken reports are received
on the recommendations/observations of the evaluator to plug the
deficiencies in project implementation. The Mid Term Evaluation
Reports, by and large indicate positive impact in rejuvenating the
natural resource base of the project areas and socio-economic upliftment
of the project villages.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]

31
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40)
The Committee note that DPAP is being implemented in districts
identified by High-Level Technical Committee under the Chairmanship
of Prof. C.H. Hanumantha Rao, Ex-Member, Planning Commission.
The said Committee submitted its Report in 1994. The Committee note
that as per the said Report, the Programme is being implemented in
all the identified 972 DPAP Blocks in the country. The Committee find
that identification of DPAP Blocks   was done a decade back and
since then more and more areas would have become drought prone
areas. Further, they also note the State Governments are demanding
the Programme for additional districts. In view of the aforesaid position,
the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to identify additional
DPAP Blocks that would have converted into drought prone areas
after 1994. As such, they would like that further identification of DPAP .
Projects should be undertaken by the Department. Not only that, a
comprehensive Plan indicating the outlay desired for coverage should
be drawn.
Reply of the Government
DPAP was launched during 1973-74 to cover 54 districts together
with parts of another 18 districts contiguous with these. In 1994, a
high level Technical Committee reviewed the  extent of drought prone
areas, through an exhaustive countrywide exercise by adopting scientific
criteria such as moisture index, evapo-transpiration, precipitation,
irrigation facility etc. It identified 746 lakh hectares of such area for
treatment spread over 182 districts in 16 States. Since 1995-96, only
about 94.02 lakh hectares of this area,  i.e. 12-13% of the total targeted
coverage, has so far been sanctioned for treatment with the available
budgetary resources. That more areas may have become drought prone
in the interregnum can not be ruled out. However, in view of the
achievement against the already enormous target and limited financial
resource, it may not be a rational step to further enlarge the extent of
DPAP coverage at this stage.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41)
The Committee, note that DPAP is being extended in 972 blocks,
since 1994. The Committee, would like to be apprised about the number
of blocks which could be provided a permanent solution and which

32
need no further Central Assistance under the Programme so as to
enable the Committee to analyse the performance of the Programme
in real terms.
Reply of the Government
The performance of DPAP may not be visualized in terms of
number of blocks totally covered and for which a permanent solution
has been provided. Every year, DoLR has been sanctioning projects to
almost every block corresponding to the DPAP area and for ongoing
projects subject to the available budget. The new watershed projects
sanctioned to the blocks may be selected by the District Agencies in
contiguity to another watershed that has already been developed for
a composite impact on the area. The Department has laid emphasis to
adopting a cluster approach in choosing and treating the watersheds.
A total of 18803 projects for treating an area of 94.02 lakh hectares
have been sanctioned to these identified blocks.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.54)
The Committee find that in spite of their recommending strongly
to enhance outlay, the status-quo with regard to Budget Estimates during
2004-05 has been maintained as compared to the previous year. The
Committee, feel that there is an urgent need to provide adequate
allocation to DDP areas and as such would like that their concerns in
this regard should be brought before the Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has pursued this issue with the Planning Commission
and the Commission is well aware of the need to enhance the
investment/funding under DDP . However, the States also need to
ensure timely utilization of the funds released by the Centre.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.56)
The Committee also feel that viability of the projects is not being
ascertained by Implementing Agencies. The Committee, would also

33
like the Department to have a detailed analysis of the position and
explain the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Following the approach of community empowerment and peoples’
participation in planning, implementation and benefit sharing,
Department of Land Resources (DoLR) sanctions the projects, each of
500 hectares which is to be planned and implemented in the watershed
village by the peoples‘ elected bodies. The location/village for
implementation of the project is approved by ZP/DRDA, which is the
administering agency. Guidelines of Watershed Development have
provided the criteria for selection of such villages, which have the
social requisites and commitment to ensure the viability and timely
implementation of the projects. The department has been persistently
pursuing with the States to follow the guideline in letter and spirit.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.65)
The Committee in their Report on Demands for Grants of the year
2003-04 had recommended for enhanced outlay keeping in view the
objectives of the programme i.e., technology development, extension
and training to farmers, extension officials of the State Departments,
etc. The Committee find from the information furnished by the
Department that they are satisfied with the existing allocations. To
enable the Committee to appreciate the position of the Department,
the Committee would like the Department to furnish the  information
with regard to the work done under the scheme indicating inter-alia,
the number of farmers or extension officials trained so far,
demonstration of the technologies undertaken in the field, etc. The
Committee would like to know categorically the achievements made
with regard to the objectives enshrined under this programme in the
Performance Budget 2004-2005 (P . 28) so as to assess the viability and
effectiveness of the scheme in future and to forestall the reasons for
closure of the projects.
Reply of the Government
Technological support is recognized to be one of the critical inputs
for the development of wastelands. In order to fill this gap, the TDET
Scheme was launched in 1993-94 with the objective of supporting

34
extension of cost effective and proven technological interventions that
improve the productive capacity of the wastelands of various categories
that are otherwise lying fallow and unutilized. This is done through
taking up of small pilot projects to test, validate and demonstrate the
efficacy of relevant technologies on community/Government wastelands
as well as on privately owned wastelands. These pilot projects are
sanctioned to research and training organizations of proven track record
such as ICAR Institutes, Agricultural Universities and such other
agencies. On completion of the project, it is expected that successful
technologies/practices will be adopted by the neighbouring farmers. It
is expected that the State’s Extension machinery would also take up
the task of extending these interventions on a large scale in wasteland
development projects. In the process of executing the pilot project,
emphasis is also placed on proper training of the project functionaries
as well as the beneficiary farmers for effective implementation of the
project and its post-project management by the users. It may be pointed
out that such training is imparted only to those officers and farmers
who are directly concerned with the TDET pilot project, but not to all
the staff of the State’s extension machinery and all farmers. No separate
training projects are sanctioned under TDET and so, information on
number of personnel trained is not available separately. Since training
is a compulsory component of a TDET project, it can be said with
certainty that all concerned extension officers and farmer beneficiaries
are being trained with respect to that particular project.
So far 148 projects have been sanctioned under TDET since its
inception. Details on the technology models tested/being tested, projects
completed and foreclosed are given below.
Sl.No. Technology Model/Project Projects Ongoing Completed Foreclosed
sanctioned
12 3 4 5 6
1. Agro-forestry/Plantation Models 59 27 16 16
2. Fishery/Duckry based AF Models 2020
3. Watershed Models 16 7 7 2
4. Wastelands development through 7700
Hydrams
5. Fertility regeneration model using 8440
bio-fertilisers
(vermicompost/mycorrhiza/bio-
pesticides/feed stock)

35
12 3 4 5 6
6. Plantation of medicinal/aromatic 5221
species
7. Surface/sub-surface/bio-drainage 19 18 1 0
for waterlogged/saline wastelands
8. Development of mine spoil 4211
wastelands
9. Development of shifting cultivation 6501
areas through AF/SALT Model
10. Propagation of Jojoba cultivation 5230
11.P ropagation of Jatropha cultivation 3201
12. Database generation on wastelands 6330
using RS and GIS
13. Preparation of Action Plan (Land 7520
and Water Resource Development)
using RS and GIS
14. Landslide and Land Erosion 1100
Control
Total 148 85 41 22
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.79)
The Committee in their earlier Reports on Demands for Grants
had expressed their concern over the under utilization of outlay under
the Computerization of Land Records (CLR). They find that no progress
seems to have been made in the under performing States as has been
admitted by the Department. The Committee are constrained to note
that the underspending is a recurrent feature as noticed year after
year. They find from the data furnished by the Department that since
inception of the Scheme, only 68 percent of the funds could be utilized.
Similar is the position in the North-Eastern States, where out of
Rs. 17.19 crore, Rs. 10.88 crore could be utilized. The Committee, further
note that the Evaluation Study Report in case of Karnataka has revealed
the positive impact of the Programme, whereby it has resulted in

36
accountability in the revenue administration, checking corruption and
reducing harassment to the extent possible. In view of the aforesaid
scenario, the Committee would like the Department to analyze the
position State-wise and find the difficulties being experienced by them
in the  implementation of the Programme and apprise the Committee
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Scheme of Computerization of Land Records is being reviewed
from time to time through Conferences of Revenue Ministers/Revenue
Secretaries of States and feedback received during the field visits of
Programme Division officers & Area Officers. The following difficulties
were experienced by some  of the States in the implementation of the
Scheme:
(i) Lack of political and administrative will to take up this
scheme at State & District level.
(ii) Lack of guidance from State level authority to implementing
authorities because of instability of tenure of Head of the
Department.
(iii) Not fixing interim milestones for different activities under
the Scheme to complete it in a time bound manner.
(iv) Lack of awareness at District level on how to implement
the Scheme.
(v) Wherever data entry work has been completed, there is
resistance from Revenue officials to take up the task of
verification & validation of computerized data entry due to
fear of losing their importance because the effective
implementation of the Scheme will bring transparency &
fix accountability.
(vi) Lack of motivation and training to Revenue officials who
are involved in this project.
(vii) Lack of effective monitoring & review of the Scheme at
State as well as District level.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]

37
Recommendation (Para No. 3.80)
The Committee further note that Lal Bahadur Shastri National
Academy of Administration, Mussourie has been entrusted with the
evaluation of the Scheme in the States of Karnataka, Rajasthan, West
Bengal, Haryana and Tamil Nadu. They also note that in the case of
Karnataka, the Evaluation Study Report has been received. The
Committee, would like that similar evaluation in the remaining States
should be undertaken and they should be apprised about the findings
of the Study, when completed.
Reply of the Government
The Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration,
Mussourie has recently completed the Evaluation Study  in the State
of West Bengal and submitted the Report to this Department. The
main findings of the Study Report are given below:
• The Study Report indicates that 79% of the respondents
were aware of the computerization of land records through
interaction with Revenue Officials. Therefore, report suggests
the need to raise the awareness on computerization of land
records amongst the users.
• 70.3% respondents knew that the Block has one computer
kiosk at which they can apply for computerized Record of
Rights (RoR) and plot information.
• 44% respondents stated that RoR was available without
delay whereas 49.1% respondents could not definitely say
whether the availability of RoR was easier after the
computerization of land records.
• Many respondents stated that regular updation of mutation
is not being done through computer centers. Distribution of
copies of RoR are being done manually and through block
level computer centers. This parallel system of distribution
of RoR should be stopped and all mutations should be
carried out through mutation/updation software at block
level computer centers which will reflect the correct picture
of land transactions.
• The software does not have in-built work flow automation,
where transactions can move from one revenue official to
another on the system itself. However, recently the State

38
introduced on line mutation which has also not been
adopted by revenue staff.
•P resently, data backup is taken weekly, fortnightly and
monthly from the Block usually in a floppy. Recently in
some cases CD ROM‘s have been used for storing backup
data but this is not sufficient for security of data. Therefore,
it is necessary to take daily backup data in DAT or in CD-
ROM when changes to the data base are being made on a
daily basis.
• Security is provided by traditional password system, which
is prone to hacking. Moreover, computer provided for CLR
work is being used for other purposes. Therefore, there is
a real danger of compromising security of data and system
and also the possibility that the system will be infected
with virus.
• The lack of computer literacy among land and Land Reforms
Revenue Office staff has been a major challenge. Till the
time of study only 350 Revenue Officers have been trained.
Since only one Revenue Officer from each Block had
received computer training if the concerned officer is away
then it delays issue of computerized copy to the farmers.
Therefore, it was suggested that every Revenue Official
should be trained for computerized system in phases.
• The problem of erratic power is prevalent in West Bengal,
which causes problems in issuing RoR to farmers. Presently
UPS with 10 minutes power backup only is available and
this is not sufficient to deal with the problems of power
failure. Therefore, it is suggested that this UPS system be
replaced or generator provided.
• Study Report also reveals that site preparation is not good
in some of the blocks and in a few blocks computer rooms
are damp.
The evaluation study in the remaining States is being entrusted to
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD).
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]

39
Recommendation (Para No. 3.81)
The Committee also note that the Department is in the process of
revising the guidelines of Computerization of Land Records. The
Committee, would like that their recommendations made in the
respective Reports should be considered while revising the aforesaid
guidelines.
Reply of the Government
The revised Guidelines on the implementation of the scheme of
CLR has not yet been finalized and the recommendations of the
Committee will be considered while finalizing the revised guidelines
of CLR.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.92)
The Committee note that although during the years 2002-2003,
2003-2004, the allocation available at RE stage could be fully utilized,
there was huge cut at RE stage. The Committee, further note that out
of the allocation of Rs. 265.97 crore, so far under the Scheme
Rs. 174.58 crore  i.e. 66 per cent could be utilized. The Committee, feel
that under spending is a recurrent feature for which the allocation has
been reduced at RE stage. The Committee, would like that the
Department should find out the reasons for under spending from each
of the States/Union Territories and take the corrective action in this
regard. The Committee should be intimated about this.
Reply of the Government
The Scheme of SRA & ULR is being reviewed from time to time
during the Conferences of Revenue Ministers/Secretaries of States and
field visits of Programme Division Officers. Recently the progress of
the scheme was reviewed in the Conference of Revenue Ministers of
States held on 22.11.2004. The main reason for under-spending  by the
States is that some States are finding it difficult to provide their
matching share due to financial constraints and some activities like
construction work of survey & settlement training institutes, patwar
ghars, record rooms, undertaking survey & settlement operations take

40
a lot of time to complete. The spillover of work is carried over to the
next financial year. Therefore, the funds released are not utilized fully
and remain unutilized with the State Govt.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.93)
The Committee have repeatedly been expressing their concern over
the sorry state of affairs of land records in North-Eastern States, where
even the cadastral survey has not been done so far. They are
constrained to note that in North-Eastern States, no land records exist.
Further alarming is the situation that there is no legislation regarding
land and land related matters. In spite of repeatedly recommending,
the North Eastern States have yet to come forward to maintain the
land records. The Committee feel that the Union Government has to
play a pro-active role in this regard after consultation with the North
Eastern States. They should be impressed upon the urgency of having
land records.
Reply of the Government
North-Eastern States have once again been requested to chalk out
an action plan for carrying out survey & settlement work for proper
maintenance  of updated land records and forward the Action Taken
Report to this Department at the earliest.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.94)
The Committee note that the Government had a proposal to revise
the existing funding ratio of 50 : 50 to 75 : 25 between the Centre and
the States and 90 : 10 for the North-Eastern States. They also find that
Planning Commission has not agreed to the said proposal. The
Committee feel that the States which could not come forward for the
Programme may have the main problem of providing 50 per cent of
the State’s share. In view of this, the Committee would like the
Department to interact with the under performing States and
accordingly place the position before the Planning Commission so as
to enable them to appreciate the proposals of the Department in this
regard. The Committee should also be apprised about the final decision
taken in this regard.

41
Reply of the Government
It has been apprised to the Planning Commission that the States
of Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and
most of the North-Eastern States are finding it difficult to provide
matching share due to financial constraints which has adversely affected
the implementation of the scheme of SRA & ULR. The Planning
Commission has once again been requested to re-consider the proposal
of the D/o Land Resources for enhancement of funding pattern from
50 : 50 to 75 : 25 between the Centre and the States and 90 : 10 for
North-Eastern States under the scheme of SRA & ULR.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 21 of Chapter I of the Report).

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‘S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 2.52)
The Committee also like that the similar in-built provision in other
schemes of the Department meant for updation of Land Records be
made and the Committee informed accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Land Reforms Division is implementing two centrally   sponsored
schemes viz., (i) Computerization of Land Records (CLR) and
Strengthening of Revenue Administration & Updating of Land Records
(SRA & ULR). Under these schemes, funds are released to the Revenue
Department of the State for implementation in various districts and
not to the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). Moreover, these Schemes
are not directly linked to capacity building of Panchayats as in the
case of IWDP , DDP & DPAP . These Schemes are being monitored by
the State Level Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary,
Revenue Department and at District level by District Level Monitoring
& Implementing Committee under the chairmanship of District
Collector/DM/Deputy Commissioner of concerned Districts. At
National Level, the progress of these Schemes is being reviewed by
this Ministry through Quarterly Progress Reports and organizing
Conferences of Revenue Ministers/Secretaries of States from time to
time.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
The Committee in their earlier Reports had drawn the attention of
the Department towards the committed liability for the EAS Watershed
projects being implemented earlier by the Department of Rural
Development and transferred to the Department of Land Resources
during 1999-2000. The Committee in their 53rd Report on Demands
for Grants (2003-2004) had recommended to critically assess the
42

43
implementation of EAS Watershed Projects and urged the Government
to tighten monitoring mechanism in the States where the
implementation of projects was slow. The Committee are dismayed to
note that instead of taking the earnest steps in the right direction, the
Department has decided to terminate the above scheme. The Committee
find that funds required for completion of EAS watershed projects
were Rs. 1,485.26 crore, out of that from 1999-2000 to 2003-2004,
Rs. 900.68 crore could be released by the Department. They are further
alarmed to note the reply of the Department that the committed liability
has been filled in those cases in which claims were made within
stipulated and extended period. The Committee are unable to
comprehend from the replies the fate of the projects, which were
ongoing and for which the State Governments could not come forward
to demand for the outlay. The Committee are anguished to note how
the different schemes are transferred from one Department to another
and the various ongoing projects are being handled by them. The
Committee deplore the lackadaisical approach of the Department and
would like to know the fate of the incomplete EAS projects so as to
enable them to analyse the position further.
Reply of the Government
In August/September 1999, an assessment of the requirement of
fund for completion of EAS watershed projects was made for each
State. Accordingly, Central share of funds were released in the next
three years, i.e. 1999-2000, 2000-01 and 2001-02. The status of completion
of these projects was again reviewed in 2001-02. As some districts
could not complete these projects in the stipulated period, the period
was extended by one more year (2002-03). In July 2004, all State
Governments were requested to submit the relevant completion reports
and in cases where some works were incomplete for want of more
funds,these were required to be completed expeditiously from the
sources of the concerned State Governments. Subsequently , unutilized
funds/savings were also returned to the DoLR by some States like
Madhya Pradesh.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.32)
The Committee find that there is no clarity with regard to objectives
of launching Investment Promotional Schemes. On the one side, the
Department states that the scheme was started to stimulate involvement
of corporate sector/financial institutions; on the other hand, it has
been mentioned that the scheme was meant to help poor land owners
who own small wastelands by way of subsidy. The Committee would
like to be apprised about the clear position in this regard so as to
enable them to comprehend the position with regard to discontinuation
of the scheme by the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.
Reply of the Government
Investment Promotional Scheme is a Central Sector Scheme
launched in 1994-95 to stimulate involvement of corporate sector,
financial institutions and private landowners in the development of
wastelands. Under the Scheme, Central promotional subsidy to the
extent of 25% project cost subject to ceiling of Rs. 25.00 lakh was
available. It was envisaged that private landowners would come up to
avail this provision for development of their fallow wastelands while
the corporate sector, with such attractive subsidy rate, would also be
stimulated to lease in large chunks of government wastelands for
commercial cultivation. However, in the 8 years of its operation (upto
2002-03, the Scheme could not generate the expected enthusiasm, which
was evident from the poor response it got in terms of proposals
received under the scheme. The reasons for this are different for the
two categories of target groups viz., land owners and corporate bodies.
In case of private land owners, experience has shown that due to the
large investments required, substantial loan component and relative
attractiveness of other land development schemes like the watershed
development programmes which provide more subsidy than the IPS,
they had not taken up the scheme in a big way as originally envisaged.
On the other hand, though the subsidy under the Scheme was attractive
to the corporate sector, interested agencies could not come up with
44

45
suitable proposals due to  bottlenecks in obtaining long term lease
rights from the concerned State Governments and the risk and
uncertainty involved in wastelands development involving huge
expenditures. In view of these facts, the IPS was discontinued from
2003-04.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
The Committee in their earlier reports had repeatedly been
emphasizing to take certain steps to attract private sector/corporate
sector in the field of development of wastelands. As regards, the steps
taken by the Department in this direction, the Committee feel that
these are not sufficient. Only one correspondence was made with the
Chairman/Chief Executive of user industries/major corporate houses
in the country. In this direction, the Committee further find that as
per the Government’s own admission, the representatives of Ministry,
NABARD, private sector, corporate sector, CII, ASSOCHAM, in the
various workshops/seminars had assured that they would submit
proposals within a short time. It has also been mentioned that nothing
came of it later on. The Committee find from the aforesaid position
that some sort of enthusiasm was expressed by the corporate sector
during the meetings but the need was to further pursue with them
and convince them with the appropriate strategy as given by the
Committee in their earlier report as stated above so as to really
motivate them to this sector.
Reply of the Government
The IPS, initiated in 1994-95, was implemented for 8 years before
its closure from 2003-04. During the 8 years of its operation, only
41 proposals covering an area of 1435 hectares with a total cost of
Rs. 16.88 crore including a subsidy component of Rs. 1.09 crore only
had been taken up. The poor performance was due to the reasons
already explained in Para 2.32 above. Though the corporate sector is
interested in availing of the provisions of the Scheme, it is handicapped
by the lack of suitable means of obtaining long-term lease rights on
Government wastelands. Since land is a State subject, the Central

46
Government can only provide a policy direction but cannot force the
State Governments for allotment of wastelands to the corporate sector.
These issues need to be sorted out at the State level before the corporate
sector could take up wastelands development in a big way.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 28th December 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 2.56)
The Committee for the last six years have been recommending
strongly to bring the various schemes meant for the development of
wastelands at present being handled by different Ministries of
Government of India under one umbrella. By noting the latest position
in this regard, the Committee feel that ‘in principle’ issue of
convergence has been agreed to by the concerned Ministries. However,
the main reservation expressed by the Ministries is their unwillingness
to transfer area of activity being undertaken by them in this regard.
The Committee also find that Department of Land Resources, has again
submitted a Cabinet Note on setting up of ‘Lok Nayak Jayaprakash
Narayan Watershed Mission’ under which all the activities related to
watershed and soil conversion would be brought. They also note that
the matter for the time being has been deferred. The Committee further
note that in the absence of convergence, the Government has not been
able to make some integrated planning on the huge task of developing
wastelands in the country. In view of this scenario, the Committee
again emphatically recommend to take this issue seriously and the
matter regarding various reservations of respective Ministries should
be sorted out by discussing the matter across the table and the issue
should be finalised expeditiously. The Committee would also like that
their concerns in this regard should be brought to the notice of the
Cabinet Secretariat.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Rural Development submitted a Cabinet Note on setting
up of ‘Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan Watershed Mission’ to the
Cabinet Secretariat on 1 October, 2003. A decision in this regard is yet
to be taken. The concern of the Committee has been noted for
compliance.

47
An inter-Ministerial Task-Group has also been set up by the
Planning Commission to examine the convergence of various watershed
and other related programmes being implemented by different
Ministries.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated: 28th December 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.39)
The Committee also find that one aspect suggested by the
Department to strengthen the monitoring mechanism is the
establishment of State Level and District Level Vigilance Committees
comprising of MPs and MLAs to critically assess the monitoring of
the projects. The Committee, would like to be apprised in how many
States/Districts Level Vigilance Committees have so far been
constituted. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the
work done by such Vigilance Committees.
Reply of the Government
The State level and District Level Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees are meant to monitor and review all the programmes of
Ministry of Rural Development and not specifically DPAP . No reference
with regard to implementation of DPAP in any District/State has so
far received by Department of Land Resources (DoLR) from any such
Committee.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated: 28th December 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report.)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.55)
While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee feel that
emphasis has to be given in strengthening the monitoring mechanism
so as to improve the implementation of the Programme. From the
position of implementation as given by the Department, it seems that
there are certain problems. Foremost is the issue of foreclosing projects.

48
They find that during Ninth Plan, full allocation for 217 projects was
made. Out of that, 36 projects were foreclosed. To enable the Committee
to comprehend the position of foreclosure further, they would like to
be apprised about the reasons for such foreclosure. The Committee
would also like to be apprised about the number of projects foreclosed
during each of the years of Tenth Plan. The Committee feel that there
is some serious lacuna in implementation of such a priority scheme
due to which after making such heavy investments on projects, some
are being foreclosed, thus wasting the valuable resources.
Reply of the Government
As has been clarified earlier only 1st instalment is released to Zila
Parishad (ZP)/District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) with the
sanctioning of new projects each year and since the programme is
demand driven, subsequent instalments are released over the project
period only on receipt of proposals from these agencies fulfilling the
release criteria. Hence, the total central share of the project cost is not
released at one go at the time of their sanction as apprehended by the
Committee.
It is stated that implementation of DDP projects is generally
satisfactory. During the Ninth Plan i.e. 1997-98 to 2001-02, a total of
4,954 projects were sanctioned to the States. Of these, central funding
has been stopped for 36 projects because of excessive delay in
implementation. In case of 217 projects, entire central share in 7
instalments has been released. The rest of the projects are at various
stages of implementation.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated: 28th December 2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report.)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—Nil—
   N EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
24 February, 2005 Chairman,
5 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
49

50
APPENDIX I
STATEMENT SHOWING 9TH PLAN OUTLAY & EXPENDITURE
(Rs. in Crore)
9th Plan Outlay and Expenditure
1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 9th Plan (1997-2002)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual
Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp.
12 3 4
56 7 8 9 1 01 1 1 2 1 3 1
41 5 1 6 1 71
81 9 2 0
1. Drought Prone  Areas Programme 115.00 100.75 100.75 95.00 73.00 73.00 95.00 95.00 94.99 190.00 190.00 190.00 210.00 210.00 209.52 705.00 668.7
5
668.26
2. Desert Development Programme 70.00 70.00 70.00 90.00 80.00 79.80 85.00 85.00 85.00 135.00 135.00 135.00 160.00 150.00 150.00 540.00 520.00 519.
80
3. Computerisation of Land Records 20.00 20.00 20.19 30.00 25.00 24.75 33.00 33.00 32.69 50.00 48.00 47.85 45.00 45.00 44.36 178.00 171.00 169.844. SRA&ULR 18.80 18.80 18.97 8.80 8.80 9.05 10.00 10.00 10.25 25.00 25.00 24.99 30.00 25.00 23.94 92.60 87.60 87.205. Consolidation of Land Holdings — — — — — — — — — 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 0.006. I.W.D.P . 74.50 50.00 53.95 82.10 62.10 62.00 82.00 82.00 83.07 480.00 387.00 386.90 430.00 405.00 376.35 1148.60 986.10 962.277. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 8.00 7.50 5.60 8.00 8.00 8.05 8.00 8.00 8.70 12.00 10.87 10.98 15.00 12.00 9.93 51.00 46.37 43.268. Support to NGOs/Vas Scheme 4.00 4.00 2.60 2.00 2.00 2.02 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.00 0.40 0.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.00 8.40 7.029. Wasteland Development Task Force 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.98 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 2.98

51
12 3 4
56 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1
41 5 1 61 7 1
81 9 2 0
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 1.00 0.20 0.00 1.60 0.60 0.04 2.00 2.00 0.23 0.50 0.10 0.10 0.50 0.20 0.12 5.60 3.10 0.4911.
Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation 1.00 0.30 0.04 1.00 0.25 0.16 1.00 1.00 0.99 1.00 0.26 0.20 5.00 0.20 0.05 9.00 2.01 1.44
12. Communication 4.00 1.50 1.42 3.00 0.75 0.37 3.00 3.00 2.99 2.00 0.92 0.86 0.50 0.50 0.26 12.50 6.67 5.9013. Board Secretariat 1.50 1.50 1.27 2.00 2.00 1.42 2.00 2.00 1.71 2.50 2.45 2.38 3.00 2.10 1.68 11.00 10.05 8.46
TOTAL PLAN 318.80 275.55 275.79 324.50 263.50 261.66 324.00 324.00 323.60 900.00 800.00 799.66 900.00 850.00 816.21 2767.30 2513..05 2476.92NON PLAN Secretariat Economic Services 0.20 0.19 0.14 0.25 0.24 0.20 0.26 0.25 0.17 0.90 0.89 0.84 0.99 0.97 0.84 2.60 2.54 2.19TOTAL PLAN & NON PLAN 319.00 275.74 275.93 324.75 263.74 261.86 324.26 324.25 323.77 900.90 800.89 800.50 900.99 850.97 817.05 2769.90 2515.59 24
79.11

APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 14TH FEBRUARY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1220 hrs. in Committee Room
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Mohan Jena
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
6. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
7. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
8. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
9. Shri Mohan Singh
10. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
11. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
13. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
14. Shri Penumalli Madhu
15. Shri Kalraj Mishra
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
52

53
2. As the Chairman was stranded on account of delay of train, the
Committee chose Shri Mohan Singh, MP to act as Chairman for the
sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha. He was in the Chair till 1200 hrs., when the
Chairman came and presided over the sitting.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 2 alongwith the draft action taken report on Demands for Grants
(2004-2005) of the Department of Land Resources. After deliberations
the Committee adopted the report with slight modification as given in
Annexure.
4. *** *** ***
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
said draft reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministry/Department and to present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

ANNEXURE
(See Para 3 of Minutes dated 14.2.2005)
Sl. Page Para Line Modifications/
No. No. No. No. Additions
12 3 4 5
1. 5 9 6 from below For:
The Committee are concerned
to note that the Investment
Promotional Scheme launched
with the objective of attracting
corporate sector/private sector
in the task of development of
wastelands in the country was
discontinued without
addressing the various
bottlenecks being faced in this
regard. The Committee find
that although corporate sector
is interested in availing of the
provision of the scheme, the
major hurdle is lack of suitable
means for obtaining long term
lease rights on Government
wastelands.
The Committee   note that
instead of taking the earnest
steps to consult and convince
the State  Governments to
come forward in this regard,
the Department has tried to
justify the position by simply
stating that land is a State
subject. The Committee in
their earlier reports have
stressed on the need for
involvement of corporate
sector due to the inadequate
Government funding to take
up the gigantic task of
development of wastelands in
the country. Inspite of that
54

55
12 3 4 5
nothing concrete seems to
have been done in this regard.
The Committee would again
like to recommend to the
Government to reconsider the
matter and after due
consultation with the State
Governments and corporate
sector try to restructure the
earlier scheme or launch a
new scheme with the objective
of involving private sector/
corporate sector, so that the
task of development of
wastelands can be taken up in
a stipulated time-frame.
Read:
The Committee are concerned
to note that the Investment
Promotional Scheme launched
with the objective of attracting
corporate sector/private sector
in the task of development of
wastelands in the country was
discontinued without
addressing the various
bottlenecks being faced in this
regard. The Committee find
that although corporate sector
is interested in availing of the
provising of the scheme, the
major hurdle is lack of suitable
means for obtaining long term
lease rights on Government
wastelands. The Committee
would like that the Union
Government should find out
some solution in consultation
with State Governments and
corporate/private sector and
the Committee should be
apprised accordingly so as to
enable them to appreciate the
decision of the Government to
close Investment Promotional
Scheme (IPS) and comment
further in this regard.

APPENDIX III
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 41
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 2.17, 2.24, 2.25, 2.26,
2.37, 2.38, 2.41, 2.44, 2.51, 2.58, 2.69, 2.70, 2.71,
3.14, 3.15, 3.36, 3.37, 3.38, 3.40, 3.41, 3.54, 3.56,
3.65, 3.79, 3.80, 3.81, 3.92, 3.93 and 3.94 34
Percentage to the total recommendations (82.93%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 2.52 and 3.20 2
Percentage to total recommendations (4.88%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.32, 2.33, 2.56, 3.39 and 3.55 5
Percentage to total recommendations (12.19%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
56