CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2006-07)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Twenty-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-
08) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 14 May, 2007.
2. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 58 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos.: 2.22, 2.46, 2.47, 2.48, 2.54, 2.55, 2.56, 3.31, 3.32,
3.33, 3.57, 3.58, 3.59, 3.60, 3.61, 3.62, 3.76, 3.101, 3.102, 3.103,
3.104, 3.105, 3.106, 3.113, 3.114, 3.135, 3.142, 3.143, 3.154, 3.155
and 3.169
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No.: 2.13
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos.: 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 2.35, 2.36,
2.37, 2.38, 2.39, 2.42, 2.43, 3.25, 3.26, 3.27, 3.28, 3.73, 3.82,
3.83 and 3.115
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.: 3.29, 3.30, 3.74 and 3.136
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations at Para Nos. 3.29, 3.30, 3.74 and 3.136 for which
interim replies have been furnished by the Government should be
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation
of the Report.

2
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Comparative position of allocation made for the Department of
Rural Development under different Plan schemes
Recommendation Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3 & 4
(Para Nos. 2.9, 2.10, 2.11 & 2.12)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Indian economy has been in a robust
condition for the last couple of years and has been acknowledged
as the booming economy world-wide. The approach paper for
the Eleventh Plan aims at a sustainable growth with a growth
rate of ten per cent by the end of the Tenth Plan. To achieve the
growth in real terms it is imperative that the poorest of the poor
share the benefit of growing economy. In this regard, the
Department of Rural Development has launched various centrally
sponsored programmes which aim at alleviating poverty by
providing guarantee of employment and self employment. Various
schemes SGRY, SGSY and particularly NREGA aim to achieve
the aforesaid objective. Besides, the other schemes of the
Department, PMGSY and IAY aim to improve quality of life for
the rural population. The objectives of the various schemes can
be achieved only with the adequate allocation during different
Plans.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.9)
“The Committee find that the percentage hike in allocation of
outlay has declined after 2005-06. As against the hike of
37.62 per cent during 2005-06 and 23.69 per cent during 2006-07,
the hike is just 13.28 per cent during the year 2007-08. Besides,
the outlay allocated is 33 per cent less than the projected outlay
of the Department. Not only that, there is reduction of outlay
under some of the schemes like SGRY, CAPART and DRDA
Administration.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
“Another trend noticed by the Committee is that whereas during
the year 2006-07, the percentage growth in tax revenue is
28.01 per cent, the additional resources being made available

3
through favourable tax collection have not been shared
correspondingly in the social sector. The hike of just 13.28 per
cent in the outlay of the Department of Rural Development
substantiates the aforesaid observation. The aforesaid hike of the
outlay of the Department of Rural Development is not adequate
particularly when NREGA would be applicable in additional 130
districts thereby increasing the number of districts from 200 to
330.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
“The scheme-wise analysis of the position of outlay has been
made in the subsequent Chapters of the report. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Government to enhance the outlay
under different schemes so as to achieve the set objectives.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
6. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The mandate of the Ministry is to reduce poverty, development
of infrastructure and to provide amenities in the rural areas. There
have been consistent efforts to get the enhanced central allocation
for the programmes of Ministry of Rural Development. This is
evident from the Budget Estimates of 2007-08 as compared to
the Budget Estimates of the 2006-07 of the Ministry. The Budget
Estimates were Rs. 31443.62 crore in 2006-2007 and it has now
been enhanced to Rs. 41060.00 crore during 2007-08 reflecting an
increase of 30.6 per cent.
The Budget Estimates for Department of Rural Development is
Rs. 32,000 crore which is higher by 33.19 per cent over previous
year. The allocation for PMGSY is Rs. 11,000 crore (including
Rs. 4500 crore loan from NABARD) i.e. 110.50 per cent higher as
against Rs. 5225.62 crore during 2006-07. Similarly other
programmes which have been provided higher allocations are
Rural Housing, Rs. 4040 crore against Rs. 2920 crore of previous
year 2006-07 i.e. 38.36 per cent higher of the previous year. SGSY
budget estimate is Rs. 1800 crore as against Rs. 1200 crore which
is 50 per cent higher than that of previous year 2006-07. Since
130 districts have been added under NREGA, number of districts
under SGRY has declined hence lower outlay . NREGA is demand
based programme, allocation has no implication as funds will be
made available whenever needed.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.9)

4
“The trend of Budget Estimates during the last four years in
respect of Department of Rural Development indicates that there
has been a consistently significant increase in allocation of funds.
During 2004-05, the Budget Estimates were Rs. 11437.40 crore
which was increased to Rs. 18334 crore representing an increase
of 60.30 per cent. During 2006-07, the BE was Rs. 24025.62 crore
which reflected an increase of 31.04 per cent over 2005-06 and
during 2007-08, the BE have been provided as Rs. 32000 crore
(including Rs. 4500 crore NABARD loan) reflecting an increase
of 33.19 per cent over the BE of 2006-07. The reduction of outlay
under SGRY during 2007-08 is mainly on account of the fact that
NREGA has been extended to another 130 districts where the
SGRY has been subsumed with NREGA. The NREGA being a
demand based programme, BE has no implication as funds will
be provided as and when required for it. There has been an over
all increase in the Central allocation, however, there has been
marginal decrease in respect of Council for Advancement of
People’s Action and Rural Technology (CAPART) and District
Rural Development Agency (DRDA) Administration which are
the supporting components.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)
“Generally, there is no direct co-relation between the growth and
tax revenue and the outlay of Department of Rural Development.
However, the concern of the Committee regarding the
enhancement of social sector outlay in proportion to tax revenue
collection is appreciated. The programmes of the Ministry of Rural
Development are part of social sector development. There are
other Ministries such as Ministry of HRD, Social Justice &
Empowerment, Health and so on which are also implementing
the programmes relating to social sector. The Department of Rural
Development had proposed higher allocation. However keeping
in view funds constraints and other issues, funds of rural
development programmes have been provided. The size of budget
allocation at the beginning of the year may not have any impact
on the implementation of NREGA as it is not an allocation based
programme and adequate funds will be provided as and when
required. As mentioned in reply to Recommendation No. 2.9,
there is 30.6 per cent increase in the Central outlay for the
schemes of Department of Rural Development during 2007-08 as
compared to the Budget allocation of the previous year 2006-07.
The Ministry has initiated action to step up implementation of
programmes during the year and utilize funds as early as possible.

5
A meeting of Secretaries of Rural Development Programmes of
all States was held on 12-13 April, 2007 to chalk out strategy for
this purpose.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
“As mentioned in reply to Recommendation No. 2.9, there is
30.6 per cent increase in the Central outlay for the schemes of
Ministry of Rural Development during 2007-08 as compared to
the Budget allocation of the previous year 2006-07. The Ministry
has initiated action to step up implementation of programmes
during the year and utilize funds as early as possible. A meeting
of Secretaries of Rural Development Programmes of all States
was held on 12-13 April, 2007 to chalk out strategy for this
purpose.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
7. While analyzing the Demands for Grants 2007-2008 of the
Department of Rural Development, the Committee had expressed
concern over the decrease in percentage of allocation in subsequent
years during the Tenth Plan period. However, the Department of
Rural Development has tried to justify the position by stating that
the Budget Estimate of the Ministry of Rural Development during
2006-2007 was Rs. 31,443.62 crore while during 2007-2008, it has been
enhanced to Rs. 41,060 crore thus reflecting an increase of 30.6 per cent.
As per the earlier information furnished by the Department, the
allocation for the Department of Rural Development during 2007-08
was Rs. 27,500 crore which is only 13.28 per cent higher over the
pervious year allocation of Rs. 24,275.62 crore. The Committee feel
that their observation has not been taken in the right perspective.
While the Committee in their report have analysed the allocation of
funds over subsequent years of the Tenth Plan period only of the
Department of Rural Development, the Department has furnished
the data with regard to the entire Ministry which include other
Departments also like the Department of Land Resources and the
Department of Drinking Water Supply. Not only that the Department
has tried to justify the allocation made under different schemes/
programmes during 2007-08, irrespective of the fact that the allocation
is 33 per cent less than the projected outlay of the Department and
there is reduction in the outlay earmarked under SGRY, CAPART
and DRDA administration as observed by the Committee.

6
Further, in response to the Committee’s observation regarding
sharing of tax revenue among the social sector in a way that it is
proportionate to the percentage growth in tax revenue collection, the
Department has stated that generally, there is no co-relation between
the growth and tax revenue and the outlay of Department of Rural
Development. Besides the Ministry of Rural Development, other
Ministries such as the Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Social Justice and Empowerment, Health etc. are also implementing
the programmes related to the social sector. The Committee observe
that the Department of Rural Development has a great role to play
in the development of the social sector when compared to the other
Departments. The schemes being implemented by the Department
of Rural Development have tremendous impact on the social sector
especially in the rural areas by providing drinking water, housing,
employment, alleviating poverty, increasing capacity building,
improving rural infrastructure, sanitation, encouraging group activity
etc. In view of this, the Committee feel that although there may not
be any direct co-relation between the growth in tax revenue collected
and the outlay of the Department, the enhancement in allocation for
the Department of Rural Development should be at least
proportionate to the growth in tax revenue collection so that the
benefit of rural development schemes reaches a larger group of rural
population especially the poorest of the poor. In view of the aforesaid
position, the Committee reiterate that the issue of enhancement of
allocation under different schemes should be taken up with the
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance and they be apprised
of the concerns of the Committee in this regard.
B. Expediting the finalisation of BPL List
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 5, 6 & 7,
Para Nos. 2.19, 2.20 & 2.21)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the BPL list based on 2002 census has
been delayed for a long time. The Committee in their various
reports of previous years have been repeatedly emphasizing on
the expeditious finalisation of BPL list. But even after so many
years, the Committee find that the results of the BPL survey
have not been finalized. Initially the results were delayed due to
the imposition of stay by Hon’ble Supreme Court. Now when
the stay has been vacated by the Supreme Court w.e.f.
14th February 2006, the results are further being delayed by

7
various State and Union Territory Administrations. The Committee
find that the BPL list so far has been approved only in six States
by the Gram Sabhas viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradsesh,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. In other
States, the process of getting the mandatory approval from Gram
Sabhas is still going on. In some States like Gujarat, Haryana,
Bihar, Rajasthan large number of objections were filed with the
appellate authorities to resolve the objections filed by people in
connection with the BPL list which means that there would be
further delay in finalization of BPL list. On the part of the
Ministry, they have repeatedly discussed the issue in every
Performance Review Committee (PRC) besides taking up the
matter with the Chief Secretaries of the defaulting States. The
Committee further note that a lot of efforts are being made by
the Department to put pressure on the State Governments to
finalise the BPL list. The issue has been discussed in each
Performance Review Committee meeting held during the current
year. The matter was particularly discussed in the meeting held
on 20-21 December, 2006. States have also been informed that
release of funds can be tied up with finalization of BPL list. A
meeting of the Performance Review Committee is scheduled to
be held in April, 2007 where the issue would be discussed with
the State Secretaries and the timeframe finalized.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
“The Committee find that crores of rupees are being allocated by
the Union Government through various welfare schemes meant
for the poorest of the poor. Unless, the BPL list is finalized, the
benefit envisaged under these schemes can not reach to the
intended beneficiaries. In spite of best of efforts made by the
Department, the results are not forthcoming and the fate of the
genuine poor is hanging and thus they are being deprived of the
benefits of the various developmental schemes. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to take up this matter at
the highest level. The State Governments should be strictly told
to finalise the BPL lists without further delay through meetings
with State Secretaries/Chief Secretaries/Minister of State
Governments etc. Besides, the matter needs to be deliberated at
the Chief Ministries level. There is an urgent need to fix a
deadline. The Committee strongly recommend the Department to
take all the desired steps so that the BPL list is finalized and
displayed at Gram panchayat headquarters so that every
household knows its status in the survey list and feels secured
that he would get the benefit envisaged under the various
programmes.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.20 )

8
“Further, the Committee do not understand the logic of the
mandatory cut imposed on the number of households to be
identified under the BPL Census 2002 in accordance with the
mandatory cut off limit imposed by Planning Commission
according to which the number of BPL families cannot exceed
the limit of 10 per cent of BPL families identified in 1999-2000
BPL survey. The Department has stated that since the resources
of the country are limited and thinly distributed, the intention of
imposing the mandatory cut off is to ensure that the poorest of
the poor in the rural areas are able to avail the benefit of the
schemes. The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing in
the various reports that such a cut off limit can be a source of
corruption and other malpractices. The Committee had strongly
recommended that such cut off limit should not be applicable
while finalizing the BPL list for Eleventh Plan. The Department
has stated that the ranking of the poorest of the poor as decided
by the Gram Sabha would address to the concerns of the
Committee. The Committee fail to understand the logic of putting
unnecessary limitation on BPL persons specifically when the
benefit of the schemes has to be provided on the basis of the
scores, a BPL family gets in the BPL list. In such a situation the
logic of available resources being thinly distributed cannot be
understood. Further, the Committee are of the firm opinion that
any restriction on the number of BPL families would provide
unnecessary discretion to the agencies involved the finalization
of BPL lists and can invite corruption and malpractices. The
Committee do not accept all the logic put forth by the Department
and strongly recommend to the Government not to impose
unnecessary limitations on the number of BPL persons for the
purpose of the Eleventh Plan.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.21)
9. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“As the Committee has rightly observed, this Department has
been making consistent efforts to get the results of BPL Census
2002 finalised at the earliest possible. As a result of these efforts,
some more States like Karnataka, Punjab, Rajasthan, Mizoram,
Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Nagaland have also
finalized the new BPL list. In Haryana, the State Government
has ordered to carry out the re-survey of the BPL families in
view of large scale complaints. The matter is being regularly

9
reviewed with the remaining States and UTs at various levels.
The Committee is well aware of efforts made by the Ministry at
each level and even addressed letters to the Chief Ministers.
However, due to receipt of a large number of applications/
appeals, it took considerable time to dispose them of, through
two stage appeal mechanism, which has been provided to redress
the grievances of the people. As the Committee is well aware,
the Ministry is making concerted efforts and is closely following
it up with the States at each level. So far 17 States/UTs have
finalized BPL List.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
“The concerns of the Committee regarding the delay in finalizing
the BPL list are equally shared by this Ministry and the matter
has been taken up with the State Governments at various levels
such as with the State Secretaries and Chief Secretaries besides
discussing the matter in the meetings of the Performance Review
Committee. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has also
taken up this issue with the respective Chief Ministers of the
respective States. 12 States/UTs have already finalized the new
BPL list and posted on their websites and a number of States
will be completing this exercise very soon.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
“It may be pointed out that the number and proportion of BPL
population living in the country is determined by the Planning
Commission and are the only officially recognized estimates. The
purpose of BPL Census conducted by this Ministry is only to
identify those BPL families in the rural areas who could be
targeted under the programmes of this Ministry. There is no point
in having a large list of identified BPL families. Identified list
should be two-three times of families likely to be assisted during
a five year plan keeping in view resources made available, rather
than 10-15 times and unnecessarily arise expectations of crore of
families to get assistance in poverty alleviation programmes. This
may lead to cornering benefits by relatively better of households
in the BPL list. Keeping in view the above, States were advised
to have a cut off points.
It is clarified that for the BPL Census 2002, the guidelines did
not restrict the number to the poverty estimates of 1999-2000 of
Planning Commission. In fact it has been provided that the States

10
can identify the number of BPL families which may be equal to
the Poverty Estimates of 1999-2000 or the Adjusted Share
whichever is higher with another 10 per cent flexibility. According
to Poverty Estimates of 1999-2000, it was estimated that about
3.86 crore families were living Below the Poverty line in rural
areas. However under Adjusted Share, the number of such
families was worked out as 4.88 crore. With the above option,
the States/UTs were having the flexibility to identify roughly up
to 5.4 crore families as BPL in the rural areas which is much
higher as compared to the Poverty Estimates of 1999-2000, and
the latest poverty estimates of 2004-05. This provides enough
flexibility to the States/UTs in deciding the number of BPL
families. Earlier also it was clarified that since the list of BPL
families is to be decided and approved by the Gram Sabhas in
a transparent manner, the scope for any discretion on the part of
any agency or official etc. has already been minimized. The issue
of putting any cap on the total number of BPL families will be
discussed while deciding the methodology for the next BPL
Census.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.21)
10. The Committee find that even after so much effort made by
the Department, only 17 States/ UTs have finalised the BPL list.
Further, the Department has not mentioned whether the mandatory
approval of the Gram Sabhas in the 17 States/UTs has been obtained
before finalizing the list which is stipulated under the guidelines of
BPL Census 2002. The Committee also find from the replies furnished
by the Department that in the State of Haryana, the Government
has ordered to carry out a re-survey of the BPL families. Further, the
status of BPL list in various States as furnished by the Department
is contradictory. In reply to recommendation Para No. 2.19, the
Department has stated that 17 States/UTs have finalised the BPL list.
However, in reply to recommendation Para No. 2.20, the Department
has stated that 12 States/UTs have finalised the BPL list.
While reiterating their recommendation on expediting the
finalisation of BPL list, within a stipulated time frame as discussed
and decided in consultation with the State Secretaries, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the actual number of States/UTs where
the BPL list has been finalised and the number of States/UTs who
have posted the BPL list on their official website. Further, the
Committee would also like to be apprised as to when the last
Performance Review Committee meeting was held and what was
the outcome of the meeting.

11
In addition to what has been stated above, the Committee have
repeatedly been expressing strong concern over the unnecessary cut
off limit imposed by Planning Commission on the number of BPL
households to be identified by various State Governments. Even
when it has been stated that the aforesaid gap would be discussed
while deciding the methodology for the next BPL census, the
Department has unnecessarily tried to justify the cut off limit by
giving various reasonings. The Committee disapprove the reasoning
given by the Department that the identified lists should be 2-3 times
of families likely to be assisted rather than 10-15 times which raise
expectations of crore of families to get the assistance in the poverty
alleviation programmes. The Committee fail to understand how the
Union Government can set a limit on the number of BPL households
keeping in view the resources available particularly when there is a
set criteria of identification of families. How a family which is BPL
as per the set criteria can be excluded due to the reasons that
sufficient resources are not available with the Government is hard
to be comprehended. The Committee are very much concerned about
the families actually living below the poverty line but getting deleted
on account of the unnecessary cut-off limit imposed by the
Government. There appears to be no logic in denying the families
their right to the resources meant for the BPL families if they are
falling under that category. While reiterating the repeated concerns
of the Committee on the cut off limits fixed by Planning Commission,
the Committee would like that their concerns should be taken into
consideration while deciding the methodology for the next BPL
Census.
C. Revision of the BPL list through appeal mechanism
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.22)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee further find that on the direction of Hon’ble
Supreme Court, a provision has been made in the guidelines to
allow new names to be added and ineligible names deleted from
the BPL list on a continuous basis during the period to which
the BPL list applies. The Committee welcome the aforesaid move
of the Government. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the modalities of exclusion/inclusion of BPL families in the BPL
list so as to understand the entire process of revision of BPL list
and comment further in this regard.”

12
12. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Ministry has taken steps to ensure that the new BPL list is
prepared in a transparent manner. It has been provided in the
guidelines that a photocopy of the survey form will be provided
on demand to anybody to reveal how the scores have been given.
A two-stage appeal mechanism has been introduced under which,
the first appeal can be filed before the SDM or the Tehsildar as
the case may be. However, if somebody still has a grievance, the
final appeal can be filed with the Collector. It has also been
provided to dispose of the appeals at each level in a time-bound
manner. The new names can be added and ineligible names
deleted from the BPL list 2002 on a continuous basis through the
appeal mechanism as provided under the guidelines.”
13. The Committee appreciate the steps initiated by the
Department to provide two stage appeal mechanism in the guidelines
whereby new names can be added and the ineligible names deleted
from the BPL lists on a regular basis. As per the information
provided by the Department, in most of the States BPL list based
on Census 2002 are still to be finalized. The Committee feel that the
aforesaid process of appeal mechanism can help the beneficiaries
whose names have not appeared in the list only when the BPL
Survey 2002 results are finally available. Further, the Committee
would also like the Department to monitor whether the benefits of
the aforesaid two stage appeal mechanism are actually being extended
to beneficiaries in the States where BPL lists have been finalized.
The poorest of the poor further need to be made aware about the
availability of appeal mechanism provided in the guidelines. The
State Governments may be required to take the desired steps to
make the people aware about it.
In addition to what has been stated above, the Committee find
that the benefits of addition/deletion of BPL households can be
provided only when the State Governments have the authority to
finalise the BPL list on the basis of criteria fixed in a particular
Census. In the event of fixing the cut-off limits by the Union
Government, the Committee have the apprehension on the
fruitfulness of the aforesaid appeal mechanism. The Committee may
like the Department to clarify the position in view of the aforesaid
apprehension of the Committee.

13
D. Monitoring Mechanism
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 9, 10, 11, 12 & 13,
Para Nos. 2.35, 2.36, 2.37, 2.38 & 2.39)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that there is an elaborate system of
monitoring introduced at various levels which includes periodical
progress reports, on line monitoring mechanism, District Level
and National Level monitors, utilization certificates, audit reports
etc. In addition to it, the officials of the Ministry under area
officers scheme and the State level officials undertake field visits
to know the ground situation with regard to various schemes.
There are District and State level Vigilance Committees constituted
by the Union Ministry of Rural Development. Besides Union and
State Ministers of Rural Development also monitor the
implementation of the programmes through field visits and
meetings. A new initiative of holding a meeting of State Nodal
Officers has been introduced by the Department. The Committee
find that in spite of having such an elaborate system of
monitoring Rs.10, 277.97 crore which comes to 43.01 per cent of
the allocated outlay during 2006-07 are lying unspent with various
implementing agencies. Besides, 151 Utilisation certificates
amounting to Rs.744.45 crore are still pending under different
schemes of the Department.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.35)
“As regards the position of the meetings of District and State
level, Vigilance and Monitoring Committees held during 2006-07
(upto 10 January, 2007), 531 district level meetings were held in
only 389 districts. There are 597 districts in the country which
meant 208 districts did not hold even a single meeting. Similarly,
12 meetings of State level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees,
were held by 8 States and one Union territory, which means that
most of the States did not hold even a single meeting. As per
the guidelines district and State level Vigilance Committees shall
hold at least one sitting in each quarter during the year. The
aforesaid data indicates the failure of the above system of
monitoring. With regard to the Area Officers scheme, when the
Committee enquired about the shortcomings noticed by different
Area officers, the Department has replied that the Area Officers
undertake field visits not with the fault finding mission rather

14
with the constructive approach which strengthens the relationship
between the State Governments and the Union Ministry. The
Committee strongly disapprove the way various systems of
monitoring are working. The Committees feel that perhaps more
than introducing various systems, it is essential that the system
works properly with the given objective. The purpose of
monitoring by the Area Officers should be to know the various
bottlenecks and difficulties being faced by the implementing
agencies as well as the beneficiaries. Besides, interacting with the
implementing agencies/district level officials, said officers should
try to know the ground situation from the beneficiaries and
physically check the quality of the various assets created under
the scheme. Meeting with the district level officials alone can not
provide the desired results. The findings of the Area Officers
should be indicated in the Outcome Budget document.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.36)
“With regard to the system of Vigilance and Monitoring
Committee the Standing Committee in their 25th Report (refer
Para No. 22) while reviewing the position of these Committees
has recommended that Member/Secretary should be held
responsible for not conducting the meetings at the regular
intervals as per the guidelines. The Committee has also
recommended that reporting format of utilization certificate should
include the number of meetings of Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees held in each quarter of the year. The Committee
emphasize that crores of rupees every year are being allocated
under different schemes of the Department and there is a genuine
concern on the part of the exchequer that the taxes deducted
from their income/revenue are purposefully utilized and the
outlays allocated in the social sector projects actually reach to
the intended beneficiaries.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.37)
“The Committee further feel that none of the aforesaid monitoring
mechanisms involve general public to act as catalyst in effective
monitoring. At least, one issue  i.e. checking the quality of projects
and permanent assets created can be done effectively by active
participation of the general public. This could be done by
developing effective mechanism for receiving feedback. There is
a need to strengthen the complaint mechanism. The minimum
standards prescribed for a project, durability of assets created

15
etc. should be published by way of prominently displaying at
notice board at the site of the project. Besides, there is an urgent
need to fix time limit for disposal of each nature of complaint
along with the name, telephone number and contact address of
the authority who can be contacted in the event of deficiency. In
addition to what has been stated above, the Committee
recommend to the Department to strengthen the monitoring
mechanism on the aforesaid levels. Perhaps there is a need to fix
accountability for each specific work.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
“The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to act
on the suggested lines by the Committee and take all possible
measures to strengthen the Monitoring Mechanism without any
further delay. The Committee should also be kept apprised.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.39)
15. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“As the Committee has rightly noticed the elaborate system of
monitoring in the Ministry, the objectives of having such multi–
level and multi tool monitoring mechanism is to ensure efficient
delivery at grass root level including proper and faster utilization
of funds. The Ministry has taken a number of steps to ensure
maximum utilization of funds and minimize the closing balances
like quarterly target for utilization of funds, certain percentage
of utilization of funds to become eligible for release of
2nd installment, cut in allocations/released if opening balances
are higher than 10 per cent etc. It may be clarified that as a
policy, the Ministry has allowed to carry forward 10 per cent as
closing balance to continue programme during next financial year
(till the first installment is received by them). The Committee is
well aware that due to budgetary approval process, normally it
takes 1-2 months to get first instalment by the implementing
agencies. The opening balances are utilized by them during this
period.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.35)
“As per information received from States and District
administration the position regarding holding meetings of

16
Vigilance and Monitoring Committee at District and State levels
during 2006-07 is as given below:
Meetings of the District level V&MCs
Sl.No. Year No. of Districts where Total number of
meetings of District Distt. V&MC
level V&MCs held meetings held
1. 2006-07 465  738
Meetings of the State level V&MCs
Sl.No. Year No. of Districts where Total number of
meetings of District Distt. V&MC
level V&MCs held meetings held
1. 2006-07 22 32
This Ministry has taken various steps to ensure that the meetings
of the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees at State and District
levels are held regularly. To emphasize the importance of the
meetings of V&MCs, instructions have been issued to all States/
UTs and District Administrations vide this Ministry’s letter
dated 10th August, 2006 that in future while processing proposals
for releasing second installment of funds under various
programmes of this Ministry, the status of meetings held at State/
District level V&MC will also be taken into account. The second
installment of funds under various programmes will be released
only after getting confirmation that at least one meeting of the
V&MC has been held at the State and District level and this
information is indicated in the proposals for release of 2nd
installment for each programme of this Ministry. However,
considering the problems faced by many State Governments and
District administrations in holding these meetings, this condition
was relaxed for the year 2006-07. Further to ensure that at least
one meeting of the District V&MC is held at the State and District
level, the guidelines for V&MCs have been amended and a
provision has been made for holding a Special Meeting of V&MCs
in July or August if no meeting of V&MC could be arranged in
the first quarter due to any reason. With the amendment of these
guidelines it is hoped that now at least one meeting of the V&MC
will be arranged at the State and District level during each year.
The Area Officers make all efforts to visit the allocated districts
on Quarterly basis, but due to pre occupations, Parliament Session

17
and preparation of other documents for various meetings etc. it
becomes difficult to adhere to the prescribed schedule. To ensure
that all the districts are covered for physical and financial
achievements, the district level monitoring mechanism through
independent Research Organisations is being implemented. As
suggested, the findings of the Area Officers will be indicated in
the Outcome Budget document.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.36)
“This Ministry has already issued instructions vide  letter
dated 2nd August, 2005 that the District Collector being the
Member Secretary is responsible for conducting these meetings
regularly. It is also stated in these instructions that in cases where
the Chairman of the District V&MC is preoccupied and has not
indicated any dates for convening such meetings, the Member
Secretary should ensure, in consultation with the co-Chairman,
that these meetings are convened within 15 days of the end of
each quarter under intimation to the Chairman/co-Chairman and
all other members.
This Ministry has also already issued instructions vide letter
dated 10th August, 2006 that in future while processing release
of second installment of funds under various programmes of
this Ministry, the status of meetings held at State and district
level V&MCs will also be taken into account. The second
installment of funds under various programmes will be released
only after getting confirmation that at least one meeting of V&MC
has been held at the State and District level during that year
and this information is indicated in the proposals for release of
second installment for each programme of this Ministry. As
mentioned in reply to above para, provision has been made for
special meeting of the District Level Vigilance and Monitoring
Committee to make Member Secretary accountable for not holding
of these meetings.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.37)
“The Ministry of Rural Development has laid down specific
provisions for quality aspects of the projects created under its
programmes. The independent agencies are also furnishing regular
reports regarding the quality of projects after physical verification
of these assets. The State Governments have been advised from
time to time to adopt five pronged strategy i.e. awareness about
the programmes among the rural people, transparency, social

18
audit/accountability, people participation and strict Vigilance and
Monitoring. The complaints received from various parts of the
country are immediately brought to the notice of the concerned
State Government for furnishing factual position of the case and
Action Taken Report. The Ministry is also investigating serious
complaints through the field visit of its officers. Social audit is
one of the main elements in NREGA. They continuously monitor
quality of assets generated. Similarly, there are local committees
for SGRY and IWDP works. Further National Level Monitors
verify quality of assets created/providing during there visits. Each
NLM is required to visit 10-15 villages in each visit and verify
each asset created in these villages during the last 3-4 years.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
“The suggestion of the Committee is welcomed and the Ministry
is continuously trying to improve its monitoring system. In
addition of the existing monitoring tools like Districts wise
database management, State/District Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees, Performance Review Committee, National Level
Monitors, etc. the Ministry is emphasizing to switchover to on-
line monitoring of monthly and quarterly progress reports. A
new system of organizing meeting of State Nodal Officers every
month has been introduced and so far twelve such monthly
meetings have taken place. Under the Programmes of SGRY and
NREGA, the Ministry is insisting all the State Governments to
constitute work wise monitoring committee.
For effective monitoring of NREGA, computer based MIS is in
the process of being operationalised. For this, efforts are on to
strengthen the ICT infrastructure at the Block level. For this a
detailed assessment of Block level ICT infrastructure resources
such as computer hardware, trained personnel and internet
connectivity has been undertaken. The gaps that emerge will be
addressed so that all the blocks are connected through the
internet. This will bring transparency in NREGA data base and
enable monitoring. Social audit has also become an integral tool
for transparent and effective monitoring by the stakeholders.
Under PMGSY, a web-based on-line Management & Monitoring
Accounting Systems (OMMAS) has been developed by the Centre
for Development of Advanced Computer (CDAC). Besides, a
three-tier quality mechanism has been operationalised under the
programme. At the first-tier, the contractors are required to carry

19
out mandatory Quality Control tests under the supervision of
District Programme Implementation Units (PIUs). In addition,
every work is required to be inspected at three stages by State
Quality Monitors as per second-tier of quality mechanism and
about 10-15 per cent works are inspected by independent National
Quality Monitors deployed by the NRRDA.
Guidelines for district level Vigilance & Monitoring Committee
have been amended and release of second instalment has been
tied up with the holding of Vigilance & Monitoring Committee
meeting. Provision for special meeting has been introduced.
During the year 2006-07 as many as 808 District level Vigilance
& Monitoring Committee were held as against 504 meetings
during 2005-06. The National Level Monitors visited 743 times
during 2006-07 as against 410 during 2005-06 to monitor rural
development programmes. The Minister of Rural Development
has also directed all the Ministers, Senior Officers above Deputy
Secretary to visit two-three districts and 10 villages each during
October-December, 2007. Similarly the 2nd round during January-
March, 2008, there by covering all the districts during the financial
year. The Ministry is also very particular in organizing meetings
of the consultative Committee of Parliament attached to this
Ministry every Quarter.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.39)
16. The Committee in the earlier recommendations, while noting
a plethora of monitoring mechanisms introduced by the Ministry,
had stressed on actual implementation of the various systems. In
pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee, the Department
has agreed to indicate the findings of Area Officers scheme in the
Outcome Budget document. Further, pursuant to the recommendation
of the Committee to hold Member/Secretary accountable for not
conducting the meetings at regular intervals as per the guidelines,
the Department has taken a favourable decision. Instructions have
been issued whereby Collector being the Member/Secretary is
responsible for conducting these meetings regularly. The Committee
appreciate the aforesaid initiatives taken by the Department.
The Committee would further like to add that on some of the
issues raised by them, the action taken by the Department does not
seem to be satisfactory. One of the important recommendations made
by the Committee was that reporting format of Utilisation Certificates
should include the number of meetings of State and District level

20
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees held in each quarter of the
year. The Committee find that pursuant to the recommendation made
by the Committee during the year 2006-07, the Department had
instructed the State Governments that the second installment of funds
under various programmes would be released only after getting
confirmation of holding Vigilance and Monitoring Committee
meetings at least once at the State and District level. Even though
the Committee reiterated the earlier recommendation while examining
the Demands for Grants of previous year 2007-08, they are surprised
to note that the aforesaid condition has further been relaxed by the
Department. As per the revised guidelines issued, a provision has
been made for holding a special meeting of V&MCs in July or
August, if such a meeting could not be arranged in the first quarter
due to any reason. The Committee cannot understand relaxing the
conditions set earlier by the Government. Further, the new guidelines
would further provide relaxation to the State Governments to hold
only one meeting of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees whereby
as per the existing norms such sittings should be held in each quarter
of the year. Not only that, holding such meting in the months of
July and August would not generate the desirable pressure on the
implementing agencies as the first installment would have already
been released to them. Keeping in view the aforesaid position, the
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like
that reporting format of Utilisation Certificates should include the
number of meetings of V&MCs held in each quarter of the year so
that the guidelines are scrupulously followed by the State
Governments.
The Committee further note that the data provided by the
Department do not give any clear picture about the number of
districts/States where not even one Vigilance & Monitoring
Committee V&MC meeting has been held both at District and State
level and also the number of Districts/States that have held V&MC
meetings every quarter as per the norms. Further, the information
with regard to the number of district V&MC meetings held during
the 2006-07 is conflicting. In reply to recommendation to Para No. 2.39,
the Department has stated that 808 V&MC meetings were held while
in reply to recommendation Para No. 2.36, the Department has stated
that 738 V&MCs meeting were held. The Committee desire the actual
information on the aforesaid issue expeditiously from the
Department.

21
E. On line Complaint Mechanism for the public
Recommendation Serial Nos. 14 & 15
(Para Nos. 2.42 & 2.43)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note the various measures taken by the Ministry
to display information on the website. The Committee desire that
the Ministry should disclose as much information as possible to
the public on their official website so that people need not resort
to the provisions of Information Act for getting even small
information. The Ministry should also display vital documents
such as the Outcome Budget, Annual Report of the Ministry,
physical and financial performance of various schemes, minutes
of various meetings, highlights of various research studies on
rural development etc. on their official website. Besides, there is
a need to develop an on-line complaint mechanism with unique
complaint ID number under each scheme so as to draw attention
of senior officers who should dispose of the complaints in a time
bound manner and inform the complainant about the action
taken.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.42)
“The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Department in
providing various tools to the public to lodge as well as redressal
of complaints through the user friendly technological
interventions. People can lodge their complaint through user-
friendly websites. The Committee however feel that innocent and
illiterate people living in rural areas, at present need the help of
NGOs to invoke the various provisions of Right to Information
Act. Perhaps, there is an urgent need to, first of all, enlighten
the rural masses about their right provided through Right to
Information Act. In this regard there is an urgent need to
empower the Panchayati Raj Institutions in tune with the
provisions made under Part IX of the Constitution. The
Panchayats equipped with the latest technology and trained
manpower can help the public to lodge the complaints. The
Committee would like the comments of the Department on the
aforesaid observation. Besides, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the status of data with regard to the number of
complaints registered and addressed so far under the Right to
Information Act so as to analyze the position and comment
further in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.43)

22
18. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:—
“The website of the Ministry  i.e. www.rural.nic.in gives
comprehensive information on all important activities and
programmes of the Ministry and also provides link to other
websites pertaining to both the programmes of the Ministry and
also its organizations like NIRD and CAPART. As recommended
in the 29th Report on Demands for Grants, the Ministry provides
information on the physical and financial performance under all
its schemes, proceedings of important meetings, details of sanction
orders, circulars and letters issued to DRDAs on policy matters
from time to time. Further news in respect of rural development
is also provided on the website.
The two flagship programmes of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY) and National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme (NREGS) have their individual websites also which
contain details of operational parameters and progress in an
aggregated form as well as with State-wise details. There is a
FEEDBACK option in the websites through which the public can
offer their advice or comments.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.42)
“The execution of the most of the rural development schemes is
done through the District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs).
In order to implement the provisions of the Right to Information
Act, 2005 the Chief Secretaries of all the States have been
requested to issue instructions accordingly to the District Rural
Development Agencies (DRDAs)/Zila Parishads and other State
level implementing Agencies of Rural Development programmes
to comply with the provisions of the RTI Act. The Central Public
Information Officers in the Ministry and in the public authorities
under the aegis of the Ministry, have been requested to upload
the relevant material suo motu so that the public may have to
resort minimally to the use of RTI Act. In the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Rural Development and Department
of Land Resources) a total of 49 cases under the RTI Act have
been received and in the public authorities namely Council for
Advancement of Peoples’ Action and Rural Technology (CAPART),
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) and National
Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) 22, 62 and 22 cases
under the RTI Act respectively have been received in the financial
year 2006-07.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.43)

23
19. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had
recommended to develop an online complaint mechanism under
different schemes with unique complaint ID number under each
scheme. The Committee had also desired that such complaint should
be disposed of in a time-bound manner and the complainant be
kept informed in this regard. The Department in the action taken
reply has furnished the detailed information with regard to the
websites of the Department on different schemes as well as
operational guidelines. It has also been mentioned that there is a
feedback option in the website through which public can offer their
advice and comments. The Department has not addressed to the
recommendation on the suggested lines. The aforesaid online
mechanism introduced by the Department do not provide the
opportunity to public to lodge the complaint and know about the
action taken in a time-bound manner. The Committee would like
the Department to take the action accordingly and keep them
informed.
F. National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA)
Recommendation Serial Nos. 16 & 17
(Para Nos. 3.25 & 3.26)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note from the position of outlay provided under
NREGA, that Rs. 11,300 crore was provided during the year
2006-07 when 200 districts were to be covered in the first phase.
Including the Opening Balance, the Department has roughly
Rs. 12,000 crore during 2006-07. Out of this Rs. 8,000 crore could
actually be spent while the balance Rs. 4,000 crore which should
have been deposited in Central Employment Guarantee Fund
(CEGF), have actually been diverted to liquidate the FCI bills.
During 2007-08, an additional 130 districts have been proposed
to be added thus making the total number to 330 districts. The
allocation during 2007-08 has been made for Rs. 12,000 crore
which is equal to the total available funds during 2006-07,
although 130 additional districts are proposed to be covered
during 2007-08.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)
“The Committee strongly object to the aforesaid diversion of funds
of NREGA. The Committee find that the year 2006-07 was the
first year of implementation of NREGA and the total available

24
funds could not be utilized fully. Since the scheme might pick
up during 2007-08 providing of outlay equal to the allocation
made during 2006-07 is not justified particularly when
130 additional districts are proposed to be covered during 2007-08.
In view of aforesaid position, the Committee strongly recommend
the Government to provide adequate allocation under NREGA.
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission may be apprised of
the concerns of the Committee in this regard. Besides the
transaction of funds should be made strictly as per rules and
savings under NREGA should be deposited in National
Employment Guarantee Fund and not diverted elsewhere.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26)
21. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:—
“The total central release for NREGA in the year 2006-07 was
Rs. 8,263.66 crore. The total availability of funds, including
Opening Balance with the NREGA States was 12,073.55 crore
and total expenditure incurred was Rs. 8823.35 crore. Besides,
Rs. 8,263.66 crore, Rs. 377.20 crore were released to 113 Phase - II
districts (except 17 districts of Uttar Pradesh). The allocation of
Rs. 12,000 crore is initial allocation. Since the programme is
demand driven, additional funds, if required, will be demanded
at the supplementary stage.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)
“The allocation of Rs.12,000 crore is initial allocation. NREGA is
a demand driven programme and additional funds, if required,
will be demanded at the supplementary stage. The Ministry
accepts the recommendation that savings under NREGA should
remain in National Employment Guarantee Fund and a claim
can be made as and when required.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.26)
22. The Committee note that the total Central release for NREGA
during the year 2006-07 was Rs. 8,263.66 crore and the total opening
balance was Rs. 12,073.55 crore which implies that the unspent
balance of the previous year was Rs. 3,808.85 crore. The Committee
in the earlier recommendation had observed that the unspent amount
which should have been deposited in the Central Employment
Guarantee Fund (CEGF) as per rules was instead diverted to liquidate

25
FCI bills. The Committee find that although the Department has
agreed to the Committee’s recommendation to deposit the unspent
amount in Central Employment Guarantee Fund (CEGF) in principle,
the compelling reasons for diverting the savings to liquidate FCI
bills during 2006-07 have not been furnished. The Committee would
like to be apprised about the same. The Committee would further
like to emphasize that it should be invariably ensured that any
savings under NREGA is deposited in the Central Employment
Guarantee Fund.
The Committee in their report had also observed that since
NREGA might pick up during 2007-08, providing of outlay equal to
the allocation made during 2006-07 is not justified particularly when
130 additional districts were proposed to be covered during 2007-08.
The Department has released only Rs. 377.20 crore during 2007-08 to
the 113 additional districts (except 17 districts of Uttar Pradesh) of
Phase II under NREGA. The Committee recommend that at the time
of allocation of funds, due care should be taken by the Department
to ensure that the additional funds allocated are in proportion to the
number of new additional districts included under NREGA.
Recommendations Serial Nos. 18 & 19
(Para Nos. 3.27 & 3.28)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee further note that, out of 1.47 crore households
who have been provided employment, only 10, 89,017 i.e.
7.41 percent households could complete 100 days of employment,
which is the main objective of the Act. The State-wise performance
indicates that in Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram and Nagaland, none of the families could get 100 days
of employment. In the progressive State of Kerala, only 66 families
could get 100 days of employment. The Committee also note
that an amount of Rs. 4,75,386 was paid as unemployment
allowance in Barwani District of Madhya Pradesh. The Committee
feel that the aforesaid data need to be analysed carefully by the
Department so as to understand the peculiar State-wise problems
in the implementation of NREGA. Such an analysis would provide
the Government necessary input to take the desired State specific
action so as to achieve the objectives of ambitious legislation of
NREGA.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.27)

26
“The Committee further note that one of the aspect that need to
be addressed is to generate works in different districts that can
provide 100 days of employment to the families who demand
employment particularly when it is a statutory requirement. With
the existing works being undertaken under NREGA like
deepening of water bodies, water harvesting, drought proofing
etc. the Committee have their apprehension that these works may
not provide 100 days employment to a family in a year. The
Department has to study the implementation of the programme
in various States and analyse the position in view of the aforesaid
observation of the Committee and also to take decision on
allowing certain other works which are at present not permissible
under NREGA.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
24. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“NREG Act provides for a legal guarantee of at least 100 days
of wage employment in a financial year to every rural household
for doing unskilled manual work on demand. Thus, employment
under NREGA is demand based. As and when any job card
holding household applies for work, it is provided employment
for the number of days for which the household has demanded
work. Since, NREGA provides for the enhancement of livelihood
security of the households in rural areas, the number of days for
which employment is demanded by different households may
vary according to their needs. Periodic meetings are being held
with State-officials so as to understand State-specific problems
pertaining to implementation of NREGA.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.27)
“National Rural Employment Guarantee Act aims to enhance
livelihood security to poor households in rural areas by providing
at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment to every poor
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled
manual work. As per Section 1 of Schedule 1 of National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, the focus of the Scheme shall
be on the following works in their order of priority:-
(i) water conservation and water harvesting;
(ii) dr ought proofing (including afforestation and tree
plantation);

27
(iii) irrigation canals including micro and minor irrigation works;
(iv) provision of irrigation facility to land owned by households
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes or
to land of beneficiaries of land reforms or that of the
beneficiaries under the Indira Awas Yojana of the
Government of India;
(v) renovation of traditional water bodies including desilting of
tanks;
(vi) land development;
(vii) flood control and protection works including drainage in
water logged areas;
(viii) rural connectivity to provide all-weather access; and
(ix) any other work which may be notified by the Central
Government in consultation with the State Government.
States are to prepare Labour Budget and annual shelf of projects
to meet employment demand. If such planning throws up a need
for any other work, the case will be examined by the Ministry.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
25. The Committee note from the replies furnished by the
Department that not even a single family could get employment of
100 days in the States/UTs of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram & Nagaland. The Department has stated that
since NREGA is a demand driven programme, employment is
provided only for the number of days for which the household has
demanded work. The Department has however not furnished any
valid reasons for people not demanding work under NREGA. On
the other hand, the Department has stated that plenty of works have
been identified under NREGA and beyond that States have to
prepare Labour Budget and annual shelf of project to meet the
employment demand. Despite this fact, unemployment allowance was
paid in Barwani District of Madhya Pradesh which implies the State’s
incapacity to provide work to the applicants. The Committee observe
that NREGA provides legal guarantee of at least 100 days of wage
employment in a financial year to every household for doing
unskilled manual work on demand. However, provision of wage
employment for a period of 100 days under NREGA is the minimum
requirement and implementing agencies can provide employment to
the household for a period even exceeding 100 days when demanded.
The Committee note that even the minimum period of 100 days

28
employment has not been attained by most of the States/UTs. The
Committee are of the view that the Department cannot wash away
its hands by simply stating that, since NREGA is a demand driven
programme, employment will be provided only when people demand
for it. The Committee desire that the Department should find the
compelling reasons as to why people are not demanding work under
NREGA and preferring for wage employment elsewhere. Another
area that the Department has to work out is to give adequate
publicity to NREGA for spreading awareness of the scheme. In
addition, the implementing agencies should be equipped with
sufficient shelf of works so as to meet the demand under NREGA.
The Committee would like the Department to apprise the Committee
about the measures taken in this regard.
G. Rural Housing (RH) Scheme – Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)
Recommendation Serial No. 20
(Para No. 3.73)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that rural housing is one of the six
components of Bharat Nirman, the ambitious programme of the
Government. The Government plan to construct 60 lakh houses
under Indira Awaas Yojana during the Bharat Nirman period  i.e.
2005-06 to 2008-09. Besides as per the Approach Paper to Eleventh
Plan the Planning Commission have set monitorable Socio-
Economic Targets under which houses have to be provided to all
rural poor by 2016-17. The Secretary during the course of oral
evidence has informed the requirement of 200 lakh housing units
to end shelterlessness in rural areas. However, if upgradation of
kutcha houses is also included, the number comes to 400 lakhs.
The data indicated by the Department show that during the year
2005-06 i.e. first year of Bharat Nirman period, the Department
has achieved more than the physical targets of 15 lakh houses.
However, during the year 2006-07, the achievement is just 58.23
per cent. The Department has indicated that the aforesaid shortfall
in achievement of targets was due to the fact that there was
delay in the release of first instalment of fund under Indira Awaas
Yojana because of non-preparation of permanent Indira Awaas
Yojana waitlist by the States. Subsequently, the funds were
released with the stipulation that the beneficiaries will be selected
only out of the permanent Indira Awaas Yojana waitlist. This

29
resulted in delayed implementation of the programme during
the year 2006-07. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the State-wise status of the preparation of permanent Indira Awaas
Yojana waitlist. The Committee also emphasize to take the desired
steps so that the targets set under Bharat Nirman period are
fully achieved.”
27. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:—
“Under Bharat Nirman, 60 lakh houses are to be constructed in
four years from 2005-06 to 2008-09. During the year 2005-06,
15.52 lakh houses have been constructed which is more than the
target of 14.41 lakh houses. During the year 2006-07, 14.98 lakh
houses have been constructed which amounts to achievement of
97.71 per cent of the target. To further improve the coverage of
needy people the allocation under IAY for 2007-08 has been
increased to 4032.70 crore for achieving the target of 21.27 lakh
houses. Sum of Rs.1549.41 crore as on 29.6.2007 has already been
released as first instalment to the States. Department is also
actively pursuing the matter with the State Governments to ensure
that the targets of Bharat Nirman are fully achieved. As far as
the issue of permanent IAY wait list is concerned, the Department
is actively pursuing the matter with the States. MRD has written
to the CMs of all the States on 10.4.2006 for completion of
Permanent IAY wait list on the basis of Census 2002. Letters at
the level of Secretary (RD) have also been written for early
completion of waitlist. Recently, Secretary (RD) has written to
the States on 11.4.2007 for completion of the list by 30.6.2007.
The statement of status of Permanent IAY waitlist is at
Appendix I”
28. The Committee find that whereas BPL list has been finalised
in case of 12 or 17 States, (as per conflicting information furnished
by the Department as stated in the earlier para of the report), the
waitlist of IAY beneficiaries, partially or fully have been prepared
in all the States, barring Haryana and Meghalaya. The aforesaid
waitlist was to be prepared on the basis of 2002 Survey. The
Committee are unable to comprehend how the waitlist for IAY
beneficiaries could be prepared/finalised in the States where 2002
Survey results are yet to be finalised. The Committee would like
the clarification of the Department in this regard.

30
Recommendation Serial Nos. 21 & 22
(Para Nos.3.82 & 3.83)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that Rs.400 crore were sanctioned and
released to the State Government of Bihar, during the year
2004-05 in order to re-construct IAY houses damaged by flood in
20 districts. At one place, the Department has stated that out of
Rs.400 crore, Rs.270.74 crore were lying unspent thereby indicating
that only Rs.129.26 crore i.e. a little over 30 per cent could be
utilized. At another place it has been mentioned that only
51.27 per cent of the total available funds could be utilized. As
regards the physical targets it has been mentioned that 43.03 per
cent of the target could be achieved. At another place it has been
mentioned that the utilization certificates for the amount of
Rs. 337.95 crore actually utilized out of the special package had
already been received. The Secretary during the course of oral
evidence further stated that State releases corresponding to the
amount utilized is also yet to be made. The Committee find
from the aforesaid data that there is utter confusion about the
releases made and physical and financial targets achieved for the
outlay released to Bihar under natural calamities.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.82)
“The Committee further observe from the information provided
by the Department that the funds allocated for calamity relief to
20 districts of Bihar could not be utilized in spite of the linkage
of releases of funds to normal IAY. In the same para it has been
stated that the State Government officers had requested to allow
them to transfer the unspent balance under the calamity head to
the normal IAY. Again it has been stated that a case on these
lines will be processed after receipt of formal request from the
State Government. Three contradictory positions have been
indicated in the same para. The Committee disapproved the way
the IAY funds for natural calamities are being handled by the
Department. The Committee would like clarifications from the
Department on the aforesaid observations. They would like to be
apprised about the visit of National Level Monitors, Area Officers
to these flood affected districts where rehabilitation programme
was going on along with their findings so as to know the ground
reality in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.83)

31
30. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:—
“An amount of Rs.400 crore was released to 20 districts of Bihar
in the year 2004-05 under PM’s Package for construction of 2.13
lakh houses damaged by floods occurred during that year.
 The matter was pursued with the State Government from time
to time regarding utilization of funds and rectification of
discrepancies noticed in the UCs already submitted. However, as
the discrepancies noticed in the utilization certificates and the
audit report submitted, were not rectified by the State
Government, the release of 2nd instalment of normal IAY funds
during the year 2006-07 were initially linked to the settlement of
UCs/ARs in respect of the funds released under PM’s Package.
However, this condition was subsequently postponed till 2nd
instalment of 2007-08. As per the information furnished by the
State Government in March, 2007, Rs.279.63 crore were utilized
out of total available funds of Rs.545.40 crore including State
share plus interest earned by DRDAs on this amount. Against
the target of construction of 2.13 lakh houses, only 91 thousand
houses were constructed (43%).
During the course of a review meeting taken by Secretary (RD)
in Patna on 20.2.2007, the State Government had informed that
they were having no more flood-affected houses left with the
DRDAs for reconstruction. Accordingly, the State Government was
advised to send a formal request to surrender the unutilized
amount to the Central Government. In this connection, a letter
was also sent to the State Government on 10th April, 2007 and
again on 23.5.2007.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.82)
“In this connection, it is submitted that there is nothing
contradictory. From the Statement enclosed at Appendix – II  in
reply to the Question of the Standing Committee, it was clear
that utilization of Rs.279.62 crore was out of total available funds
of Rs.545.40 crore which comes to 51.27%. Accordingly, unspent
amount of Rs.270 crore given at Appendix –III was also out of
the total available funds of Rs.545.40 crore and not out of Rs.400
crore, as has been observed by the Committee. It may also be
mentioned here that while calculating the total funds under IAY,
Central share plus due State matching share is always taken into

32
account irrespective of the fact whether the State Government
have released its State share or not. In this case, as per the UCs
now received, the State Government has released its due State
share.
In this connection, it is rightly stated that settlement of UCs was
linked to the release of 2nd instalment of funds under normal
IAY. It is also true that the State Government have informed that
they do not have more flood-affected houses for reconstruction
and therefore, they should be allowed to surrender or transfer
the funds to normal IAY. However, this information was verbally
given in the review meeting and no formal request in this regard
was received. That is why it was informed to the Committee
that further action will be taken on receipt of the formal request
from the State Government.
As per the latest information received from the State Government,
Rs.302.03 crore have been utilized and 97331 houses have been
constructed against the target of 2.13 lakh houses. It has since
been decided that the unspent amount of PM’s Package lying
with the Districts will be deducted from the 2nd instalment of
normal IAY funds during the current year.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.83)
31. The Committee find that funds for flood affected districts
were sanctioned to the State Government of Bihar in 2004-2005. Out
of the total sanctioned fund of Rs. 545.40 crore including State’s
share plus interest earned by DRDAs on this account, only Rs. 279.63
crore could be utilised. After so many years, when the Secretary,
Department of Rural Development held a review meeting in Patna
on 20 February 2007, the State Government of Bihar suddenly
informed that they no longer required the funds and subsequently,
the State Government asked to surrender the unutilized funds. The
Committee take a serious view of this situation where the Department
has not taken any note of such huge amount of funds lying
unutilized with the State Government which could have been used
for some other important programme. Not only that the funds
released for calamity relief under specific programmes remain
unutilised and DRDA earn interest on the un-utilised funds. This is
really pathetic. The Committee while taking serious note of it
strongly recommend the Department to take all the desired steps to
ensure that the funds released under different programmes actually
reach the poorest of the poor i.e. the intended beneficiaries. Further,

33
strict monitoring is required in case of calamity relief funds to ensure
that the needy people are provided immediate help.
H. Maintenance of roads constructed under Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
Recommendation Serial No. 23
(Para No. 3.115)
32.  The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that under PMGSY the maintenance after
completion of contract work of road has to be taken care for five
years by the contractor as per the contractual clause entered in
the agreement. The area of concern is maintenance of roads after
five years. The Department has informed that there are State
Rural Road Development Agencies in each State, which have the
overall responsibility for construction and maintenance of rural
roads. The Department is making efforts to transfer the
responsibility of maintenance of rural roads to this agency. The
Committee find that for adequate maintenance of PMGSY roads
after the contract, adequate funding and capacity building of State
level agencies is required. The Committee would like that the
Department should take the decision expeditiously to transfer
the roads constructed under PMGSY to State Rural Road
Development agencies after the contractual period of five years
is over so that the roads constructed after spending crores of
money are not damaged after a certain period of time. Besides
taking decision to transfer the PMGSY roads to State Rural Road
Development agencies, the Union Government has to take
decision to partially fund these agencies so that PMGSY roads
are maintained properly.”
33. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:—
“Ministry of Rural Development has addressed the Chief
Secretaries of all States on 28.3.2006, requesting them to ensure
that due share of the Twelfth Finance Commission award to States
for maintenance of roads and bridges (Rs.15,000 crore) is
earmarked for rural roads and is efficiently utilized for the
purpose. Since the maintenance is funded by the State
Governments, Phase-wise and Scheme-wise details are not
monitored. However, Planning Commission has been requested
to closely monitor performance of the State Governments with

34
regard to the maintenance of rural roads while finalizing the
State Plans. In particular, the Commission has been requested to
scrutinize the amount budgeted and spent for maintenance of
the Core Network of rural roads in the preceding years.”
34. The Committee in the earlier recommendation, while
expressing strong concern over the issue of maintenance of roads
constructed under PMGSY after the contractual period of five years
is over, had recommended to transfer the responsibility of
maintenance of roads to State Rural Development Agencies
expeditiously. The Committee had also recommended to partially
fund these agencies so that PMGSY roads are properly maintained.
The Department has not addressed the issues in the right perspective.
In an evasive way a mention has been made to the share of Twelfth
Finance Commission funds for roads. The Committee would like
the Department to take concrete action on the suggested lines and
inform the Committee accordingly.
I. Role of Banks in implementation of Swarnjayanti Gram
Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
Recommendation Serial No. 24
(Para No. 3.136)
35. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing on the need
to address the issue of poor performance of Bankers which has
resulted in poor credit off-take under SGSY at the various levels.
In spite of this, there is no considerable improvement in the
performance of various Banks. The information furnished by the
Department indicates that as many as 2,643 Bank Branches have
been marked as poor performing Bank Branches. Out of these
2,463 poor performing Bank Branches 1,297 are Commercial Bank
Branches and the remaining 1,346 are Regional Rural Banks and
Cooperative Bank Branches. The poor performing Branches are
more in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Assam, Himachal
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The
Committee further note that the details of poor performing Bank
Branches have been furnished to Reserve Bank of India and
Ministry of Finance for further necessary action and special
monitoring during the current year. In spite of the various
directions issued by the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank
of India through various meetings, there is no considerable change
in the attitude of Bankers. The Committee feel that Bankers are

35
required to the sensitized about the need to shoulder responsibility
with regard to making credit available at affordable rate of interest
to the Self Help Groups under SGSY. Since the present efforts
being made by way of meetings and directions are not resulting
in considerable improvement, perhaps there is a need to have
the system of incentives and disincentives for various Bank
Branches. Besides, more rural Bank Branches need to be opened
by Commercial Banks. It should be ensured that each Panchayat
Headquarter has a Branch of Commercial Bank within a stipulated
period of time. To have proper monitoring by RBI and Ministry
of Finance a separate window for making available credit under
SGSY needs to be opened. The Committee strongly recommend
to the Department to convey aforesaid observations to the
Ministry of Finance and the Heads of various Commercial Banks
for taking the desired initiative. The follow up action in this
regard may be communicated to the Committee.”
36. The Department in the action taken replies have stated as
under:—
“The 10th CLCC meeting was held on 7th February, 2007 in
which the issues of low credit disbursal, poor performance by
Bank branches and huge pendency of loan applications were
discussed. As a follow up of the meeting, Secretary, Ministry of
Rural Development has written to Secretary (Financial Sector),
Ministry of Finance to take up the matter of poor credit disbursal
by banks with RBI and Indian Banks Association (IBA). The action
taken has resulted in good increase in mobilization of credit
during the last two months of the financial year 2006-07.
Further, the observation of the Standing Committee has been
communicated to the Ministry of Finance as well as Commercial
banks for taking appropriate action.”
37. The Committee find that the Department has communicated
the following concerns of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance
as well as Commercial Banks:
(i) there is a need to have the system of incentives and
disincentives for various Bank Branches;
(ii) it should be ensured that each Panchayat Headquarter has
a Branch of Commercial Bank within a stipulated period
of time;

36
(iii) to have proper monitoring by RBI and Ministry of Finance,
a separate window for making available credit under SGSY
should be opened.
The Committee would like the Department to pursue further
with the Ministry of Finance and respective Banks so that the
aforesaid recommendation of the Committee are implemented in a
stipulated time frame. The Committee may also be kept apprised of
the follow up action in this regard.

37
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No.9, Para No. 2.22)
The Committee further find that on the direction of Hon’ble
Supreme Court, a provision has been made in the guidelines to allow
new names to be added and ineligible names deleted from the BPL
list on a continuous basis during the period to which the BPL list
applies. The Committee welcome the aforesaid move of the
Government. The Committee would like to be apprized of the
modalities of exclusion/inclusion of BPL families in the BPL list so as
to understand the entire process of revision of BPL list and comment
further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has taken steps to ensure that the new BPL list is
prepared in a transparent manner. It has been provided in the
guidelines that a photocopy of the survey form will be provided on
demand to anybody to reveal how the scores have been given. A two-
stage appeal mechanism has been introduced under which, the first
appeal can be filed before the SDM or the Tehsildar as the case may
be. However, if somebody still has a grievance, the final appeal can be
filed with the Collector. It has also been provided to dispose of the
appeals at each level in a time-bound manner. The new names can be
added and ineligible names deleted from the BPL list 2002 on a
continuous basis through the appeal mechanism as provided under
the guidelines.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M.No.H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.17, Para No. 2.46)
The Committee are perturbed to note that huge amount of funds
area lying with DRDAs as miscellaneous receipts. Miscellaneous receipts

38
essentially include the interest earned by DRDAs while the funds lie
with the Banks. The amount of subsidy sanctioned by the Banks which
could not be availed of by the beneficiaries and whatever remains, is
refunded to DRDAs that gets into a Miscellaneous receipt and form
part of the opening balances and get expanded. In this regard the
interest income has been shown against some of the States. For example
State of Jharkhand has shown an interest income of Rs. 70.92 lakh
when Punjab has shown an amount of Rs. 32.40 lakh as interest. The
Committee fail to understand the concept of miscellaneous receipts
and funds lying with DRDAs which are being deposited in Banks to
earn interest.
Reply of the Government
The funds available for DRDAs under SGSY are basically Central
releases and State releases. Any other accruals in a particular financial
year by way of interest earned, return of unavailed subsidy, backlog
releases etc. are accounted as Miscellaneous receipts.
These miscellaneous receipts account for only minor portion of the
total funds. For the financial year 2006-07, miscellaneous receipts were
approximately Rs. 40 crores, out of total funds of Rs. 1719 crores which
comes only to 2.3%. Out of this amount of Rs. 40 crores only one state
(Assam) accounts for Rs. 33 crores. Assam Government clarified that
State share for the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 was released in
subsequent financial years.
The physical and financial progress of the scheme is regularly
monitored through monthly progress reports. Further, quarterly physical
and financial targets are fixed for the States. All the State Governments
have been instructed to utilize the funds in a time bound manner to
achieve the targets set under the scheme.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.18, Para No. 2.47)
The Committee observe that this is a very serious issue as funds
are not given to the States to earn interest but to carry out various
rural development programmes. This trend must be discontinued and
the concerned DRDAs may be instructed accordingly. Financial
performance may be reviewed periodically so that expenditure is
actually incurred and do not lie with Banks as unspent balance. The
problems faced by Government in disbursement of credit should also
be discussed with all the concerned Banks at the highest level.

39
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been communicated to all
the State Governments for taking follow-up action.
The physical and financial performance under SGSY is monitored
every month State-wise. Shortfalls in achievement of physical and
financial targets are communicated to Secretaries of Rural Development
Department of all State Governments. The last such review was done
in April, 2007.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M.No.H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.19, Para No. 2.48)
The Committee also find that inadequate or ineffective participation
of the programme implementing agencies such as the DRDAs and the
Banks is found to be responsible for the slightly indifferent performance
of the Programme as indicated in the study conducted by NIRD.
DRDAs do not have the required professional competence to provide
training to the Swarozgaries and develop their entrepreneurship skills.
Besides, the study point out that the DRDAs have not been able to
ensure effective participation of the Line Departments. The Committee
observe that there is a need to have a relook into the functioning of
DRDAs which is main agency responsible for carrying out various
rural development programmes. The Committee strongly recommend
to the Department to analyze the performance of DRDAs in the light
of the aforesaid observation of the Committee. All the required steps
should be taken to make DRDAs professionally competent. All the
areas concerned with the capacity building of DRDAs should be
addressed to and the committee be apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
In order to make DRDA a professional body, emphasis is given
for getting the officers and staff of DRDA constantly trained in the
general field of management of rural areas. State Institute of Rural
Development (SIRDs) and National Institute of Rural Development
(NIRD) design suitable training programmes for DRDA officials.
Ministry of Rural Development has also taken steps to strengthen the
DRDA and it has made the amendments in DRDA Administration
guidelines enabling the State Governments to hire qualified and
experienced persons on contract basis to fill up the vacant sanctioned
posts in DRDA in Group ‘A’, ‘B’ & ‘C’ as per their recruitment rules.

40
As recommended by the Committee, to analyse the performance of
DRDAs the Ministry is in the process of getting an evaluation study
carried out to evaluate the effectiveness of the DRDA Administration
scheme with respect to coordinating, monitoring and overseeing the
implementation of the various Rural Development programmes and to
suggest steps to make DRDA Administration more professional and
effective in managing the programmes of the Ministry .
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.20, Para No. 2.54)
A specific allocation under the employment schemes of the
Department where targets of mandays are fixed, keeping in view the
specified targets i.e. 30 percent has been separately made for women.
Besides the impact of various other schemes some of the schemes like
PMGSY, help women indirectly. The impact of such schemes on the
women is being studied through a study commissioned by the
Department. The Committee note that where as under SGSY, the
performance of women is remarkable where 63.37 per cent of the
swarozgaris during the year 2006-07 are women. However, the
employment schemes, the stipulated targets are not being achieved.
During the year 2006-07 the percentage of mandays of employment
for women under SGRY scheme during 2006-07 was 22.85 percent
which is below the set targets of 30 percent. The Committee would
like to be apprised about the position of mandays generated for women
during the year 2006-07 under NREGA so as to know the evaluation
of Gender Budgeting under one of the important programmes. The
Committee strongly recommend to the Department to take all the
desired steps so that the targets fixed under different schemes for
women are achieved.
Reply of the Government
The latest available information indicate that during the year 2006-
07 the percentage of mandays of employment generated for women
under SGRY was 23.75 against the target of 30%. However, under
NREGA, 3679 lakh persondays of employment were generated for
women during the year 2006-07 as against the total persondays of
employment of 9050.56 lakhs which works out to more than 40% and
is well above the stipulations incorporated in guidelines of the
Programme. The NREGA has already been extended to 330 districts of
the country and remaining districts are to be covered from 1.4.2008. In
view of this situation the SGRY Programme will be subsumed with

41
the NREGA and the coverage of women under NREGA has been very
encouraging. It should not be difficult to maintain this trend.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.21, Para No. 2.55)
The Committee note that w.e.f. 2007-08 Performance Budget has
been merged with the Outcome Budget. The Outcome Budget 2007-08
of the Department indicates the consolidated position of the quarter-
wise targets fixed during the year 2007-08. As regards the performance
during the previous two years i.e. 2005-06 and 2006-07, the position
has been indicated while reflecting the achievement of different
schemes. The consolidated data with regard to the physical and
financial targets and achievements of the previous two years along
with the physical and financial targets of the current year has not
been mentioned at one place. In the absence of the aforesaid data at
one place, which used to be part of the earlier exercise of Performance
Budget, it is difficult to have a comparative position of the targets and
achievements in three years i.e. the current and the previous two years.
The Committee recommend to the Department to ensure that the
consolidated position of the quarter-wise targets and achievements of
the three years is reflected in the Outcome Budget.
Reply of the Government
The format for presenting the outcome budget has been prescribed
by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. The
observations of the Committee will be conveyed to that Ministry, so
that the concerns of the Committee are addressed to by making suitable
changes in the formats for the next year’s outcome budget. However,
as desired by the Committee, the Ministry will ensure that in the
Outcome Budget 2008-09, the consolidated data with regard to the
physical and financial targets and achievements for previous two years
along with the physical & financial targets of the current year at
appropriate place is incorporated.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.22, Para No. 2.56)
The Committee further find that 15 percent of financial and physical
target at the National level have been earmarked for minority

42
community and State-wise/districts-wise earmarking is done on the
basis of their BPL population. The identified minority communities
are Muslims, Sikhs, Buddhists, Christians and Parsis. However, these
communities would not be treated as minority in the States where
their population is in majority. The Ministry of Minority Affairs in
consultation with the Planning Commission has given a State-wise
ratio as to how this 15 percent should be divided among the States.
The Committee would like to be apprised on the action taken in this
regard by the Department of Rural Development and about the
response received from various State Governments. The Committee
also desire that adequate publicity in this regard be given in all the
States so that Minority population are aware of their rights and are
able to avail of the benefits provided under the scheme. Further, the
Department should maintain a separate data on minority community
so that an assessment can be made on whether the minority community
is actually benefiting from the rural development schemes.
Reply of the Government
On the basis of State-wise ratio of minority population, the targets
for coverage of minority communities were conveyed to the States.
However, States like Jharkhand, West Bengal and some other States
faced certain difficulties to maintain the balance between the targets to
be covered for the minority communities and the other target groups
including the weaker sections of the society. The issue was reconsidered
in the Ministry and the revised targets for 2007-08 with regard to the
coverage of minority communities under SGSY and IAY have been
conveyed to the States. The State Governments are being advised to
give wide publicity to the provisions made for the minority
communities. The Ministry has already made specific provisions in the
formats prescribed for monitoring the progress of implementation of
these programmes to capture the information on coverage of minority
communities. The State Governments and the Districts have been
advised accordingly to furnish information regarding the coverage of
minority communities separately under the three programmes of the
Ministry where provisions have been made for the minority
communities.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.29, Para No. 3.31)
The Committee feel that there is not enough awareness about the
scheme among people. In most of the districts in which the Committee

43
visited during the study tours, the Committee found that people
mistook the ration card for job card. The Committee have noted that
in many places even the local Panchayat is not educated enough to
carry out the scheme. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Rural Development in consultation with the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj draw a module covering all rural development schemes for the
training of PRIs so that PRIs can effectively discharge their
responsibility in carrying out the schemes. The role of NIRD and SIRDs
may also be strengthened to organize training programmes for PRIs
and District and Block level officials.
Reply of the Government
In order to facilitate the process of articulation of demand by the
rural poor intensive Information Education Communication (IEC)
activities have been given the highest priority. IEC activities suggested
to States include one day orientation of all Sarpanchs /Ward members
of Gram Panchayats at the Block level, social mobilization, pamphlets
and brochures. States have now been directed to arrange training for
its officials and PRIs through SIRD or any other Institute in the State.
Ministry of Panchayati Raj Institutions are reported to train PRIs to
augment their institutional capacity.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.30, Para No. 3.32)
The Committee further note that the guidelines have been slightly
amended to allow work on the individual land holdings and the
number of persons required to start a work has been reduced to 10
from the existing 50 persons. The Committee only hope that with this
amendment more and more people will be benefited by the scheme.
Reply of the Government
Minister for Rural Development has written to all Chief Ministers
to take full advantage of this amendment.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.31, Para No. 3.33)
The Committee note that 130 new districts have been added to
the scheme from 2007-08. During the launching of the scheme in its

44
initial phase, the Committee had observed that the States were not
equipped and needed some preparatory time for transfer of work from
NFFWP to NREGA. The Committee desire that the concerned State
and District Administrations be ready with the plan for the transition
by making a list of works which are on-going and try to complete it
as starting of the NREGA will require some minimum preparatory
time. The machinery for wide publicity of NREG Scheme, issue of job
cards, preparation of muster rolls may be geared up so that the
problems experienced in the implementation of scheme in its initial
phases does not recur.
Reply of the Government
Comprehensive Guidelines outlining critical activities have been
sent to the States in respect of 130 new NREGA districts, 113 of which
were covered under NREGA w.e.f . 1.4.2007 and 17 districts of
Uttar Pradesh w.e.f. 15.5.2007. They have been informed of the statutory
processes that become effective with notification of additional districts.
In order to meet these statutory obligations, the States have also been
intimated of the set of critical activities that they have to undertake
and complete. The concerned districts have been asked to certify to
the Ministry that it has completed such activities to ensure that work
started under NREGS conforms to the statutory processes of the Act.
Two workshops of District Programme Coordinators were also held
on 10th April 2007 at new Delhi and on 18th June 2007 at Lucknow.
A workshop of National Level Monitors for 130 new districts was
held on 26th June 2007 at New Delhi.
It has now been decided by the Government to cover all the
remaining 296 districts in the States and Union Territories under
NREGA with effect from 1.4.2008. Thus, SGRY operational in these
districts will stand discontinued from 1.4.2008. Instructions have been
issued to all the States to complete SGRY works by March, 2008 as
there will be no allocations under SGRY for the year 2008-2009. Detailed
guidelines for implementing NREGA in the additional districts notified
under NREGA from 1.4.08 have been issued wherein it has been clearly
stated that entire balance funds of SGRY as on 31st March, 2008 must
be transferred immediately to a separate account created for NREGA
works at the district level. These guidelines also provide the necessary
preparatory activities which need to be taken up by the States/UTs to
meet the challenges of NREGA.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]

45
Recommendation (Serial No.32, Para No. 3.57)
The Committee find that during the year 2006-07, the releases made
under SGRY against the Revised Estimate allocation is almost 100 per
cent. Further, during the year 2006-07, out of Rs.3000 crore, Rs.2439crore
have actually been released as on 28.2.2007. As regards State-wise
performance during the year 2005-06 the percentage expenditure of
total available fund is 83.79 per cent. Further, in some of the States
like Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Andaman & Nicobar Islands,
Lakshadweep the expenditure is less than 50 per cent and in Daman
& Diu the expenditure is nil. During the year 2006-07, the percentage
expenditure of the total available fund is 43.86 per cent. As regards
State-wise performance, almost all the States barring Assam, Gujarat,
Orissa and Sikkim have utilized less than 60 per cent of the outlay.
With regard to physical performance in different States, the information
given by the Department indicates that no work has been completed
in Manipur, Daman & Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep
while in Goa only 12 works, in Andaman & Nicobar Islands 37 works
and in Pondicherry 81 works have been completed during the year
2006-07. In Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep
during the entire Tenth Plan, not even a single work was completed.
From the aforesaid scenario, the Committee conclude that whereas the
releases from the Union Government are almost 100 per cent, there
are problems in certain States as indicated in the financial and physical
performance of various States. The Committee would like the
Department to analyze the position in various States/UTs and take
the necessary action. The Committee may also be kept apprised.
Reply of the Government
As per the latest information available from the States/UTs, in
2006-2007, 75.55% of total available funds has been spent under SGRY.
It is submitted that Rs. 634.64 crore became available on 28.3.2007
from the savings of this Ministry for SGRY programme. The entire
amount of Rs. 634.64 crore was released to the States/UTs on 29th
and 30th March 2007 over and above their normal entitlement under
the programme. Further, Rs, 94 crore was released to Rajasthan on
19.3.2007 in lieu of 2 lakh MT of foodgrains for calamity affected
areas. Thus an amount of Rs. 728.64 crore was released to the States/
UTs in the second fortnight of March 2007. In case, this amount of
Rs. 728.64 crore is deducted from total available funds, the percentage
of expenditure in 2006-2007 is 88.15% of available funds. Thus 11.85%
of available funds remained with the States/UTs against permissible
limit of 10%.

46
On analyzing the financial performance of various States/UTs, it
is noted that more than 80% of expenditure against total available
funds has been reported by 10 States, namely, Chhattisgarh (83.68%),
Goa (96.88%), Haryana (83.76%), Jharkhand (81.96%), Madhya Pradesh
(84.02%), Mizoram (81.01%), Orissa (85.09%), Punjab (87.87%), Sikkim
(83.83%) and Tamil Nadu (84.43%). 18 States/UTs have reported
expenditure ranging between 60% and 80%. These States/UTs are—
Andhra Pradesh(63.48%), Arunachal Pradesh (67.37%), Assam (76.22%),
Bihar (66.53%),Gujarat (78.17%), Himachal Pradesh (72.80%), J&K
(76.63%), Karnataka (78.70%), Kerala (67.35%),Maharashtra (76.83%),
Manipur (79.27%), Meghalaya (79.63%), Nagaland(70.66%), Tripura
(76.71%), Uttaranchal (76.35%),Uttar Pradesh (75.98%), West Bengal
(73.44%) and Pondicherry (75.19%). Thus, the performance below 60%
has been reported by only 5 States/UTs which are – Rajasthan (58.90%),
A&N Islands (10.62%), Lakshadweep (8.33%). The expenditure figures
are not available from D&N Haveli and Daman.
As regards completion of works, as reported by States/UTs, against
11,34,731 works undertaken, 9,34,215 works have been completed in
2006-07. Goa has reported completion of 25 works in 2006-07 while
Manipur 6158 works and A&N Islands 52 works. D&N Haveli, Daman
& Diu have not furnished any report while Lakshadweep has furnished
progress report upto October, 2006.
D&N Haveli and Daman & Diu have not drawn any instalment
under SGRY during the years 2005-06 and 2006-07. We took up the
matter with the respective States/UTs with a view to ascertaining the
reasons for poor performance. The UT of Daman & Diu has informed
that the economic condition of the people of this UT is better in
comparison with the rest of the country as there are more than 2000
industrial units where about 55000 youths are working. In addition
Hotels Tourism and fishing activities are also providing good
opportunity of employment. Hence the people did not prefer to work
as labourer under SGRY. As regard Rajasthan, Rs.94 crores was released
to the State on 19.3.2007 in lieu of 2 lakh MTs of foodgrains for relief
works in calamity affected areas and such works are taken up
separately by District Collectors and if this amount is deducted,
performance of Rajasthan is around 82.52%.
It is the responsibility of the State Governments/ UT
Administrations for implementation of the SGRY programme
satisfactorily and draw full Central assistance allocated to the respective
States/UTs. The performances of the States/UTs are reviewed from
time to time at the high level forums under the Chairmanship of

47
Secretary (RD) and Hon’ble Minister (RD). The reasons for poor
performance in the UT of Daman & Diu are explained in the above
paragraph.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.33, Para No. 3.58)
As regards allocation made under SGRY during the year 2007-08,
the Committee note that Rs.400 crore lesser than the previous year
have been allocated. The Committee also note that during the year
2006-07 an additional 130 districts would be covered under NREGA
and as such SGRY would be implemented in 130 lesser districts. As
per the information provided by the Department, the allocation of
cash component for the year 2007-08 has not been reduced in respect
of remaining districts covered under SGRY during the year. The
Committee also find that the allocation made under SGRY is lesser by
Rs.684 crore if compared to the proposed allocation. The Committee
find that the districts where SGRY is being implemented have actually
not been covered under NREGA. In view of the aforesaid position,
the Department should ensure that adequate outlay to each of the
districts is provided by the Department.
Reply of the Government
 SGRY Programme does not cover those districts where NREGA
is under implementation. In 2007-08, SGRY Programme covers 258
districts of the country. An amount of Rs.1639.97 crore has been
allocated to these districts in 2007-2008. There is no reduction of
allocation in respect of any SGRY district presently covered under
SGRY as compared to the allocation made in 2006-2007.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.34, Para No. 3.59)
The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the
Government to indicate the outlay required for foodgrains component
under SGRY and special component of SGRY, the payment for which
has to be paid to FCI/Ministry of Food in the budget documents and
allocate adequate outlay at BE Stage. In spite of this, the position of
indicating outlay at supplementary grants stage continue with the
Department. During the year 2005-06 and 2006-07, no allocation for

48
food component was made at BE Stage. However, at the Revised
Estimates stage Rs. 2,998 crore (including SGRY special component)
and Rs. 3,000 crore respectively were allocated. During the year
2007-08, only Rs. 200 crore have been earmarked at the Budget
Estimates stage. The Committee further note that to clear the
outstanding dues to FCI, the Government of India has allowed FCI to
raise special securities to the tune of Rs. 16,200 crore. This special
security has been given by the Reserve Bank of India on behalf of the
Central Government. The Department has further stated that the
proposed amount during the year 2007-08 excluded Rs. 14,989.64 crore
towards settlement of FCI bills. It means that against the requirement
of Rs. 14,989.64 crore, only Rs. 200 crore have been provided during
the year 2007-08 for foodgrains component. The Committee observe
from the aforesaid information that there is utter confusion with regard
to the settlement of dues to FCI on account of foodgrains component
under SGRY and the erstwhile scheme ‘National Food for Work
Programme’. The Committee strongly recommend to the Government
to settle all the dues to FCI. Besides sufficient allocation should be
made at the Budget Estimates stage for foodgrains component under
SGRY as has repeatedly been recommended by the Committee. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the clear position of the
outstanding dues to FCI as on date.
Reply of the Government
The BE 2007-2008 provision for foodgrains component under SGRY
is Rs. 200 crore. As per the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) decision
dated 9th February 2007, adequate budget provision is to be made for
supply of foodgrains under SGRY from 2007-08. FCI will supply the
foodgrains in case adequate budget provision is available in the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural Development. Accordingly
additional budget provision of Rs. 300 crore for foodgrains component
has been made through first supplementary grants. In addition
Rs. 876.54 crore have been got re-appropriated for the foodgrains
component in the first supplementary.
So far as settlement of outstanding dues of FCI bills is concerned,
bonds worth Rs. 16,200 crore have been issued in favour of F.C.I. and
remaining payment the matter is being submitted for consideration of
the Government of India by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, food
and Public Distribution.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]

49
Recommendation (Serial No. 35, Para No. 3.60)
The Committee further find that the Department has no monitoring
mechanism to ensure the quality of foodgrains being provided to the
beneficiaries under SGRY. The Ministry has never procured the
information regarding the number of samples being checked by the
officials of DPs/DRDAs. The Department has mentioned that they settle
the FCI bills for foodgrains after the bills are authenticated by the
respective DP/DRDA. It has further been mentioned that it would not
be advisable to interfere into the powers delegated to the States for
smooth implementation of the programme. The Committee are
concerned to note the position with regard to the monitoring of quality
of foodgrains provided under the aforesaid schemes. Although the
allocation is being made by the Union Government, the Department
has no concern with regard to the quality of foodgrains. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to monitor the data with regard
to the samples checked by the officials of DPs/DRDAs and take the
necessary action to ensure that the foodgrains supplied to the
beneficiaries are of at least minimum standard.
Reply of the Government
SGRY Guidelines provide that it would be the responsibility of the
District Panchayats/DRDAs to ensure that the quality of foodgrains
supplied to them conforms to ‘Fair Average Quality’ and the concerned
officers of DPs/DRDAs should conduct inspection of the stocks by
way of joint sampling before taking delivery of the same to ensure
that foodgrains are not below FAQ standard. In case of any complaint,
action will be initiated against responsible officers, if any discrepancy
is established. Thus, existing mechanism will ensure lifting of foodgrains
not below FAQ standard. No report has been received from any of the
State or the district regarding poor quality of foodgrains supplied under
SGRY in the previous year. NLMs have been requested to specifically
check on these aspects on a sample basis during their visits.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 36, Para No. 3.61)
As regards the cost of foodgrains provided under SGRY, the
Committee find that there is variation in various States/UTs. Whereas
the cost of rice has been fixed at BPL rates, in case of wheat in
Chhattisgarh and Karnataka the cost of wheat has been fixed above
APL rates. In all other States for which information has been provided,

50
the rate is below BPL rates. The information with regard to 11 different
States/UTs has not been indicated in the information given by the
Department. The Committee further find that the equal rate of
foodgrains calculated at BPL/APL rate is actually deducted from the
wages payable to a labourer under SGRY and thus affects the interest
of the poorest of the poor. In view of the aforesaid position, the
Committee feel that the position of fixing the rate of foodgrains at
BPL and APL rates needs to be reviewed. The Committee would like
to be informed about the position of rates of foodgrains in the States
in case of which the information has not been furnished so as to
analyze the position and comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
A flexibility has been given to States/UTs to fix the cost of
foodgrains, to be paid as part of wages under the SGRY, at either BPL
rate or APL rate or any where between the two. Some States have
fixed based on BPL rates while others on APL rates.
As per the recommendation of the Committee, the State
Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to furnish the
rate of foodgrains being charged as part of wages. The matter is being
regularly followed up with the States and UTs. As a result, some
States/UTs have furnished the requisite information. A  statement
(Appendix-IV) showing information received in this regard is enclosed.
The information from the remaining States and UTs is being collected
and would be furnished.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 37, Para No. 3.62)
The Committee further find that out of 8,16,813 number of works
undertaken under SGRY, as many as 3,74,905 works are still under
progress. The Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Department to ensure that the issue of committed liabilities for these
ongoing works is handled carefully while switching on from the
erstwhile NFFWP and SGRY to NREGA specially when the type of
projects allowed under SGRY are not allowed under NREGA. The
Committee would also like to be apprised about how the Department
has handled the committed liabilities for projects under implementation
under SGRY in the 200 districts earlier merged with NREGA and the
additional 130 districts which have now been merged with NREGA.”

51
Reply of the Government
The NREGA came into force with effect from 2nd February , 2006
in 200 identified districts in its Ist Phase. The ongoing SGRY & NFFWP
were merged with NREGA in these districts. The instructions of the
Ministry were amply clear right from the beginning regarding this
merger of wage employment programmes and about the completion
of ongoing SGRY & NFFWP works. Key instructions  to the States by
the Ministry to ensure smooth transition from SGRY and NFFWP
include the following:
(i) Merger of SGRY and NFFWP with NREGA: The National
Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) and Samporana
Gramin Rojgar Yojana (SGRY) will merge in the identified
districts with the Employment Guarantee Scheme, once
NREGA comes into force. ( V-2401/46/-NFFWP/NREGA dated
27th December, 2005 )
(ii) Incomplete works under SGRY and NFFWP : The
incomplete works under the SGRY/NFFWP , if any, will be
allowed to be completed upto 30.06.2006 out of the balance
funds available with the districts. ( V-2401/46/-NFFWP/NREGA
dated 27th December, 2005 )
(iii) Liability of ongoing works under SGRY and NFFWP : The
SGRY works should be completed out of the SGRY funds
and no part of the resources being released under NFFWP
and NREGA be diverted to SGRY works. The ongoing works
under the NFFWP should be completed with the resources
already available with the District. If there is paucity of
funds for completing the ongoing works, it may be assessed
and funded by the Programme officer or by the District
Programme Coordinator out of their share. (V-24011/1/2005-
NREGA dated 16th February, 2006
(iv) Unutilised resources as on 1.4.2006 : All unutilized balance
of NFFWP on 1.04.2006 should be transferred to the NREG
account. All unutilized balances with executing/
implementing agencies on 1.04.2006 shall be deemed to be
resources under NREGA and continuing works deemed as
NREGA works to be completed as per NREGA guidelines
for employment of labour and contribution of the State
share. ( V-24011/46/2005 – NFFWP/NREGA dated 20th March,
2006)
(v) Starting new works under NFFWP/SGRY : It was informed
that there will be no allocation/release under NFFWP and

52
SGRY in NREGA districts w.e.f., 1.04.2006 and works should
be taken up keeping in view this position so that there is
no difficulty in completing pending works.
(V-24011/46/2005 – NFFWP/NREGA dated 20th March, 2006)
(vi) Status of ongoing works under NFFWP/SGRY : It was
clarified that NFFWP and SGRY have subsumed with
NREGA in the notified districts, NFFWP and SGRY have
become part of the NREGA and ongoing works under these
programmes are an instrument to provide wage employment
guarantee to the unskilled labour in the rural areas.
(V-24011/1/2005(NREGA) dated 25th April, 2006)
INSTRUCTIONS GIVEN TO THE STATES AT THE TIME
OF INCLUSION OF ADDITIONAL 130 DISTRICTS
UNDER PHASE-II OF NREGA
(vii) Starting new works under SGRY : No new SGRY works
will be taken up in these districts with immediate effect i.e.
from the date of issue of these instructions. It may be noted
that these districts will not be getting any allocation under
SGRY from the year 2007-08.
(viii) Completion of works : All out efforts will be made by the
implementing agencies at different levels in the district to
ensure that all works undertaken SGRY are completed by
31st March, 2007
(ix) Completion of spill over works beyond 31st March 2007 :
Such SGRY works which cannot be completed due to
unavoidable circumstances by 31st March, 2007 may be
completed at the earliest with the balance of funds available
under the SGRY in each district as on 1st April, 2007. This
is absolutely necessary as the SGRY programme shall stand
discontinued in the districts on starting of the NREG
programme therein and the SGRY will get merged in
NREGP .”
(x) Furnishing of details regarding incomplete works : it was
requested to furnish full details of such works which have
not been completed on 31.03.2007 may be compiled. Basic
information for each project may be compiled in the format
enclosed and a summary may be sent to Ministry of Rural
Development by verification of progress of each of the
project in the field. This should be completed in a campaign
mode latest by 7.04.2007.”

53
(xi) On the basis of measurements taken up on 31st March,
2007 or within 1st week of April, 2007 at the latest, specific
strategies should be developed for completing and closing
these projects at the earliest.
 (V24011/34/2001-SGRY-I dated 23rd March, 2007)
(xii) The Ministry has directed that incomplete SGRY works in
the phase II districts should be closed positively w.e.f
31.08.2007 and no further expenditure is incurred on them.
(xiii) Accordingly entire balance funds of SGRY as on 31.08.07
must be transferred immediately to a separate account
created for NREGA works at the district level in phase II
districts. Any expenditure incurred from SGRY funds after
31.08.07 shall be on the State account.
(xiv) Full details at the time of closure of project should be
brought on record and must be sent to the Ministry as
sought vide above letter dated 23rd March 2007.
(xv) Those incomplete works which are permissible under
NREGA can be taken up as new project under NREGA
after following due process of selection of works as laid
down in NREGA. Such works would be subject to other
terms and conditions e.g. shall be duly approved by Gram
Sabha and PRIs, only job card holders to get employment
on such works, maintenance of 60:40 wage material ratio at
the district level, muster rolls to be maintained as prescribed
under NREGA, such works to be an instrument to provide
100 days of entitlement of employment to the job card
holders etc. Display of the list of incomplete SGRY works
in the office of Village/Intermediate/District Panchayat and
also the offices of Programme Officers and District
Programme Coordinators. Further, the concerned district
shall certify for such incomplete SGRY works which are
permissible under NREGA that expenditure incurred is
accounted and the work was sanctioned within the
authorized allocation of the district. The works which are
not permissible under NREGA will be funded from the other
sources of the State and Central Government programmes.
State will bear the entire cost of SGRY works sanctioned
after the NREGA notification date for 117 districts of
Phase-II on 1.4.2007 and 17 districts in Uttar Pradesh after
15/5/2007.
 (V24011/34/2001-NFFWP/NREGA dated 2nd August, 2007)

54
 It may be seen from the summary that clear instructions on
transitional issues especially commitments under ongoing NFFWP and
SGRY have been given time and again.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.40, Para No. 3.76)
The Committee find from the data indicated in the Outcome Budget
that there is gross mis-match between the physical and financial
achievement during different years. During the year 2005-06 whereas
the financial achievement was to the tune of 107.68 per cent, the
physical achievement was 79.67 per cent. To this anomaly, the Secretary
during the course of oral evidence has stated that the mis-match may
be due to huge opening balances, achievement of targets under special
component and the combined data of new construction and
upgradation, (the assistance provided for upgradation is around half
of the assistance provided for construction). The Committee note that
whereas the Department has separate data for shelterlessness and
upgradation, the achievements is not monitored separately for
upgradation and shelterlessness. The Committee feel that it is difficult
to know the position of shelterlessness in the absence of the aforesaid
data. The Committee therefore recommend that the targets and
achievements for upgradation, new construction as well as special
component should be maintained separately so as to know the exact
position and do the proper planning.
Reply of the Government
Under the guidelines there is a provision for upgradation of IAY
houses i.e up to 20 per cent of the total funds can be utilized for
upgradation of kutcha houses. State-wise and District-wise data in
respect of new construction and upgradation is available with the
Department. However, recommendation of the committee is noted for
further improvement in collection/compilation of the data.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.43, Para No. 3.101)
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was launched w.e.f.
24 December, 2000 with the objective to connect all habitations in
rural areas with a population of 1000 or above by 2003 and all

55
habitations having population of 500 and above by the year 2007. The
targets were further spilled over and the Government projected to
cover all habitations having the population of 1000 and above by the
end of Tenth Plan. The Tenth Plan is now over and as stated by the
Secretary, it is difficult to achieve the aforesaid target of connectivity
of habitations having 1000 population even by Twelfth Plan. The
Committee deplore the way huge pronouncements of unachievable
targets without doing the proper planning are being made by the
Government during different plans.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development, while formulating the scheme
of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) for approval of the
Cabinet in 2001 had gathered data from the States regarding the status
of rural connectivity. As per the data obtained from the States, the
total number of unconnected habitations was 2.93 lakhs, out of a total
of 7.45 lakh habitations in all the States and Union Territories in the
country. Of these, about 1.42 lakh habitations were found eligible for
providing new connectivity within the framework of the objectives
defined for PMGSY.
After PMGSY was launched, all the States were requested to
prepare District Rural Roads Plan (DRRP) from which a Core Network
(CN) is to be identified. The Core Network gives the number of
unconnected habitations and the rural roads proposed for connecting
the same. The Core Network Maps were prepared at Block level and
integrated to District Maps. Based on the data derived the number of
habitations eligible for new connectivity rose to about 1,78,768 at
present. This estimate is based on proper inventory of the habitations
and the tracks.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.44, Para No. 3.102)
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the
initial projections of the outlay required and the present situation of
the requirement of funds to achieve the targets of connectivity of
habitations of 1000 or above population. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the details of the States in which all the
habitations having 1000+population have already been covered to know
the exact status of implementation of the programme.

56
Reply of the Government
At the beginning of the programme, the number of eligible
unconnected habitations was about 1.42 lakhs which included 50728
unconnected habitations under 1000+population category. The average
cost of providing fresh connectivity worked out to Rs. 14.75 lakhs per
km. while the average distance per habitation was 1.26 km. The total
cost for providing fresh connectivity worked out to Rs. 34,200 crores.
In addition, it was estimated that the cost of providing upgradation
would be Rs. 24000 crore. The total requirement of funds was estimated
at Rs. 58,200 crore or say Rs. 60,000 crore.
As per the latest data furnished by the State Governments, there
are 178768 eligible habitations under the programme. The category
wise details are:
Eligible under PMGSY
S.No. Item Total Unconnected 1000+ 500-999 250-499 Total
1 Rural Habitations 8,82,955 3,46,607 60,030 79,208 39,530 1,78,768
2 Length of rural 30,00,000 - 1,38,890 1,60,752 70,518 3,70,160
roads in km
The cost of providing connectivity to 1000+habitations involving
length of 1,38,890 km. would be approximately Rs. 1,38,890 x 21 lakhs/
km. = Rs. 29,166.9 crore at 2003-04 prices. A statement indicating status
of coverage of 1000+habitations is enclosed at Appendix-V. Some States
have indicated that the balance number of 1000+habitations may not
be provided connectivity due to the physical features, forest land or
being in Island and as such even though smaller number are remaining,
they may be considered to have achieved connectivity to their 1000+
population.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.45, Para No. 3.103)
The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants 2004-05
refer para No. 3.114 (of 3rd Report – Fourteenth Lok Sabha) had been
apprised that there are 6,34,321 villages as per 2001 census and the
number of habitations having population of 1000 and above are
2,31,331. The number of habitations below 1000 is as under:—
500-1000 205276
250-500 187591
Below 250 285044
Total: 909242

57
Recommendation (Serial No.46, Para No. 3.104)
The Department has informed that 1,72,772 habitations having 1000
and above population are eligible to be covered under PMGSY. Out of
which 34,691 habitations could be connected. Thus, the balance number
of unconnected habitations are 1,38,581. State-wise position indicates
that in Andhra Pradesh out of 980 eligible habitations, 889 habitations
could actually be connected. Other States where almost 50 per cent or
above eligible habitations could be covered are Maharashtra, Punjab,
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. In other States, the number of habitations
covered as compared to eligible habitations are less than 50 per cent.
Further analysis of the data indicates that in Bihar, Goa, Jammu &
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Tripura and Uttaranchal, the performance is worse.
In these States less than 10 per cent of the eligible habitations, could
actual be covered. In Haryana, out of 2 such habitations, none of the
habitations could be covered. The Committee conclude from the
aforesaid that the apprehension of the Secretary that it is difficult to
achieve the targets of connecting 1000 population and above by the
end of Twelfth Plan seems to be correct. The Committee observe that
a laudable initiative has been taken to provide the connectivity in
rural areas under PMGSY. The connectivity is the basic infrastructure
which can further lead to the economic progress of the rural areas. In
this scenario, the Committee would recommend to the Government to
take all the desired steps in consultation with the State Governments
so that the connectivity to habitation of 1000 and above population
can be provided at least by the end of Eleventh Plan. The issue of
providing connectivity to 9,09,242 habitations having less than 1000
population can be taken subsequently. Besides, the Committee would
also like to be apprised of the reasons for very slow progress in the
aforesaid States. The Committee would also like to be apprised as to
why only 2 eligible habitations in Haryana could not be covered under
PMGSY.
Reply of the Government
Under Rural Roads component of Bharat Nirman, a goal has
already been set to provide connectivity to all villages with a population
of 1000 persons and above (500 persons and above in the case of hilly
or tribal areas) with an all weather road by the year 2009.
In reply to Para No. 3.102, category-wise eligible number of
habitations and corresponding length has already been enumerated.
Out of 60030 eligible habitations, proposals to connect 32979 habitations
have already been given. Connectivity to 3,571 habitations of 1000+
population has been provided under other State Sponsored Schemes.

58
Rural Roads being a State subject, projects are executed by the
State Governments through their agencies. Some of the major
constraints affecting the pace of implementation of PMGSY are
inadequate institutional capacity for programme implementation;
inadequate contracting capacity for execution of projects; non
availability of critical construction materials; non availability of land;
delay in obtaining regulatory clearances including clearance under
Forest (Conservation) Act 1980; and security related problems. Measures
have been taken to accelerate the pace of implementation of the
programme. Some of these are enhanced allocation of funds; training
and capacity building of the implementing agencies; revision of interest
free advance to the contractors for acquisition of machinery and
equipment.; amendment to the Standard Bidding Document & package
sizes from Rs 50 lakh-Rs 2 crore & 2 crore-Rs. 10 crore allowed with
differential qualification criteria to enable more contractors to
participate; flexibility given to States to float packages above Rs. 10
crore to induce participation by big contractors; permitting joint
ventures between big and small contractors; performance incentive for
timely completion introduced in September 2006 through higher
weightage in qualification assessment in future; augmentation of a
number of programme implementing units in States and strengthening
of State Rural Roads Development Agencies; regular monitoring and
review of performance of States where the implementation is lagging
behind schedule with a view to augmenting their programme
management capacity.
In Bihar and Tripura, Central Agencies have been deployed to
speed up implementation of the work. In Goa, because of acute land
problem, it has not been possible to proceed further. J&K have now
created 13 dedicated Programme Implementing Units and
3 Superintending Engineers. In Haryana due to land acquisition
problem, 2 habitations of 500 + population could not be covered.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.47, Para No. 3.105)
The Department has informed that tendering of works under
PMGSY takes around three to four months. Thereafter, the expected
time period for completion of projects is twelve months. The data
indicated by the Department show 10,514 incomplete roads under
Phase-I to Phase-II during the period 2000-2001 to 2004-2005. The
Committee fail to understand as to why such a large number of roads

59
remain incomplete even for the projects taken up during 2004-05. Some
of the road works taken up during Phase-I and Phase-II i.e. 2000-01
and 2002-03 are also lying incomplete, even when six and seven
complete years respectively have been passed. The Committee are
unable to comprehend the position of such a large number of
incomplete works in a programme which contains provisions of
penalties for delay of work. The Committee would like the Department
to explain the specific reasons for such a large number of incomplete
works.
Reply of the Government
The project proposals are cleared in annual batches and in turn
tendering and execution also follows a cyclic order. To achieve a good
progress normally project proposal of 2-3 times the annual targets are
cleared and that is why there is gap between the number of projects
cleared, targeted number of habitations and road length to be covered
and actual number of projects completed, habitations connected and
road length completed . Some works are getting abnormally delayed
because of the delays in forest clearance, non-availability of land which
is the responsibility of the State Government. In some cases, dispute
or abandonment of the work by the contractors also causes delay.
There is a problem of contracting capacity also. The States, through
regular review meeting, are being requested to increase the pace of
completion of the roads particularly which have been sanctioned in
the earlier years through better contract and project management.
The percentage of completed road works in respect of phase-I and
phase-II is 96.6% and 92.89% respectively. However, most of the Phase-
I & II balance roads are those which have either been completed under
some other programme or scheme of the State Governments or are
proposed to be dropped by the State Governments. An exercise is
being undertaken to ascertain the exact number of roads which will
remain pending after they are dropped from the list of pending PMGSY
roads.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.48, Para No. 3.106)
The Committee find that as per the guidelines of PMGSY, whenever
a road involves a bridge upto 25 meters, the funds are provided under
PMGSY. However, beyond 25 Meters the State has to provide funds.
The Department has also stated that NABARD has been contacted to

60
provide funds for State share through RIDF without any further
technical examination of DPR. The Department has also mentioned
that road work is not tendered unless the DPR for the bridge is
approved with provision of funds. The Committee note that although
the adequate provisions have been made in the guidelines to ensure
that the road constructed under PMGSY do not remain unutilized due
to the missing link and the problem of access, yet there may be cases
where roads may have been constructed without making provision for
the bridges over rivers. The Committee would like to be informed
whether the Department has received any complaints through various
levels of monitoring mechanism as well as through Area Officers
Scheme etc. to know the ground situation in this regard.
Reply of the Government
A Detailed Project Report (DPR) is prepared based on the data
collected through topographical surveys, traffic surveys, soil surveys
and hydrological surveys. During this exercise itself the need for bridges
is established and the location and type of bridge also decided and
accordingly provided.
When the proposals are received from the States, NRRDA gets an
extract of the DPR in which specific information on Long Span Bridges
(more than 25 m) is to be stated and certified by the Executing Agency
as well as the State Technical Agency (STA). From the proposals
received from 2003-04 onwards, this item is specially checked and
ensured that wherever such bridges are required they are being
provided.
No specific complaint about the missing bridges on the proposed
roads has been received. If any such complaint is received, NRRDA
would depute National Quality Monitors (NQMs)/STA Coordinators
for ground verification and the State would be advised to propose
suitable bridge structure required for providing complete utility of the
roads constructed under PMGSY.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.49, Para No. 3.113)
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana is one of the six components
of Bharat Nirman Programme. Bharat Nirman is the ambitious
programme of the Government to achieve monitorable targets under
different existing schemes. The Committee find that under Bharat

61
Nirman component of PMGSY, 60 per cent allocation is being provided
for up gradation and 40 per cent for new connectivity in different
States. The State-wise details of allocation of funds for new connectivity
and up gradation indicate that the aforesaid ratio of 60:40 has not
been maintained in either of the States. No pattern of new connectivity
and up gradation emerges from the State wise data. In Arunachal
Pradesh and Manipur, no outlay has been allocated for up gradation.
In Meghalaya and Uttar Pradesh, the allocation of up gradation is
more than the new connectivity and in the remaining States expenditure
is more on new connectivity. The Committee observe that during the
Bharat Nirman Period perhaps more emphasis is being given to up
gradation as per the criteria of 60 per cent for up gradation and
40 per cent for renewal whereas the foremost objective of the PMGSY
was to provide new connectivity to unconnected habitations. However,
20 per cent of the outlay could be used for upgradation as per the
guidelines of PMGSY. In view of the aforesaid position under Bharat
Nirman perhaps the objective of connectivity has got the backseat.
That may be the reason for not achieving the targets of connectivity
in different States, the analysis of which has been given in the preceding
para of the report.
Reply of the Government
It may be clarified that under Bharat Nirman, 1, 46,185 kms roads
for new connectivity is to be constructed to provide connectivity to
66,802 habitations. Further, to provide full farm to market connectivity
up gradation of through routes and major rural links totaling to
1,94,130 kms is targeted. However, out of total 1,94,130 kms, it has
been enjoined on the State Government that 40% of this road length
(77,652 kms) be brought to better standards by the surface renewal
through State Governments own funding and the balance 60% of
1,94,130 kms ( i.e. 1,16,478 kms) will be funded by the Government of
India under PMGSY. The funds being provided by Government of
India for new connectivity and for up gradation of roads is in the
ratio of 70:30 approximately. The proportion of new connectivity and
up gradation is varying from State to State because of different
proportion of the eligible habitations remaining unconnected in the
states and also the total length of core network routes is different in
different States.
No physical targets for up gradation have been provided for
Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur, as the States do not have any rural
road core network through routes or major link routes constructed by
the respective States in earlier years under any of the State Sponsored
Programme. In Uttar Pradesh, the road length under new connectivity

62
targets is 7,795 km which is required for providing connectivity to
eligible 4,989 habitations under Bharat Nirman. Similar is the case
with Meghalaya. Bharat Nirman is a sub set of PMGSY and its
objectives still remain to provide connectivity to eligible habitations.
After completing the targets of Bharat Nirman, the State Government
can provide connectivity or up gradation to eligible roads under
PMGSY as per their capacity . In the progress reports under up
gradation, lengths include renewal funded and carried out by the State
Government under their own resources which gives an impression
that achievement under up gradation is much larger than that for new
connectivity under Bharat Nirman.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.50, Para No. 3.114)
The Committee further find that there is a lot of confusion with
regard to targets fixed under Bharat Nirman and PMGSY. The Secretary
has explained that there is no separate funding or guidelines for Bharat
Nirman whereas the Department has given separate data for Bharat
Nirman and PMGSY works which indicates that perhaps there are
separate targets and achievements under PMGSY and Bharat Nirman
component whereas the Department has indicated the separate
information in the written replies, no such data has been indicated in
the Outcome Budget. However, the Department has assured that during
the next year separate targets versus achievements would be indicated
for Bharat Nirman and PMGSY in the Outcome Budget also. In view
of the aforesaid scenario, there is utter confusion between the position
of Bharat Nirman and PMGSY. As regards the guidelines, on the one
hand it has been stated that the guidelines for PMGSY and Bharat
Nirman are same, on the other hand the allocation for up gradation
indicates that thrust under Bharat Nirman is more on up gradation
whereas PMGSY guidelines give more emphasis on new connectivity.
The Committee would like the clarification from the Department on
the aforesaid observations so as to analyze the position and comment
further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Bharat Nirman Scheme is within the over all ambit of PMGSY.
Accordingly, for reporting the achievement under Bharat Nirman, only
eligible category viz. habitation with a population of 1000+(500+in case
of hilly or tribal areas) is considered whereas for progress under the
PMGSY, total achievement under the programme viz. all unconnected

63
Habitations with a population of 500 persons and above (250 in respect
of Hill States and Desert Areas as well as Tribal Schedule V areas) is
considered. The outcome is linked to the financial outlay in the budget.
As stated in reply to Para No. 3.113, Bharat Nirman lays down greater
emphasis on new connectivity as compared to upgradation. The ratio
of allocation of funds between new connectivity and up gradation is
70:30. The up gradation component has been included so that in
addition to improve roads under the links to the eligible habitations,
the thorough routes and major link routes are also in better condition
for providing full farm to market connectivity.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.52, Para No. 3.135)
From the data provided by the Department regarding performance
of SGSY, the Committee find that the percentage of credit disbursed
by seven States and one Union territory viz Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, West Bengal and Pondicherry
is dismal and well below 50 per cent during 2005-2006. Even though
the Government has furnished the reasons behind the poor
disbursement credit in these States, the Committee feel, corrective steps
taken are inadequate to have a better result as during 2006-2007, these
States have again not performed well. As SGSY is one of the oldest
and important Schemes of the Department, the Committee feel that
the Government has to critically analyse the performance of SGSY
after interacting with the Banks, respective State Government, PRIs
and all other stake-holders. Besides, they feel, steps to provide both
forward and backward linkages to SHGs and individual swarozgaries
be taken to maintain the viability of the Scheme.
Reply of the Government
A close coordination mechanism between different agencies
responsible for implementation of SGSY has been evolved by forming
block level, district level, State level and Central level SGSY
Committees. The State level Bankers Committee (SLBC) has the
mandate to approve the bank credit plan and review the credit trend
in the State. Considering the significance of these meetings, all the
State Governments are instructed to conduct meetings of these
Committees as per the schedule prescribed in the SGSY guidelines for
effective implementation of this scheme. The States are also instructed
to furnish the details of such meetings.

64
The 10th Central Level Coordination Committee (CLCC) meeting
was held on 7th February , 2007 with all CMDs of Public Sector Banks
and State Secretaries of Rural Development Departments in which,
inter-alia, the issues of disbursement of credit and sanctioning of
pending loan applications were discussed. Subsequently , Secretary, Rural
Development had written to CMDs of all these banks to designate an
officer in Corporate office as well as at the State level for coordination
and monitoring of SGSY. Chief Secretaries of all States were requested
to nominate a Nodal officer for SGSY programme at State level.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 54, Para No. 3.142)
The Committee find that most of the Swarozgaris have to sell
their products in the market on their own because there is lack of
institutional arrangements being made for the aforesaid schemes. The
Committee feel that the profits of Swarozgaris are considerably reduced
if they resort to self marketing. Another area of concern is the
competitiveness in the market. The Government has to think of all
these aspects seriously and provide the protection to the self help
groups. Besides, to enable the self help groups to face the competition
in the market stress need to be given to training aspect so that the
products produced by the beneficiaries are competitive in the market.
More and more Gramshree Melas, like SARAS, organized during the
India International Trade Fair in Delhi and Delhi Haat, should be
organized in other States of the country so as to enable Swarozgaris
to sell their products in such Melas.
Reply of the Government
As against a Budget provision of Rs.970.00 lakhs for SGSY
(Marketing) during 2006-07, a sum of Rs.7800.00 lakhs has been
provided in BE 2007-08 to meet the expenditure for providing improved
marketing facilities to the rural artisans. Every year, this Ministry is
organizing regional SARAS fairs in major cities of the country. This
Ministry is considering to further enhancing number of regional SARAS
fairs in the States. Apart from organising SARAS Fairs in the States,
Ministry has initiated action to create permanent infrastructure facilities
in New Delhi viz. construction of (i) Dilli Haat type Complex at Jasola,
(ii) Hiring of 44 stalls at Dilli Haat, Pitampura, (iii) Renovation of
Rural Development Pavilion at Pragati Maidan, (iv) and Hiring of
Gallery at Rajiv Gandhi Crafts Bhavan. These infrastructures will act
as an outlet for giving more marketing facilities to the SHGs.

65
The Ministry has initiated action to set up a National Rural
Products Marketing Agency, which will be manned by professionals in
the marketing field. This would enable the Self Help Groups to face
the competition in the market and to produce competitive products.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 55, Para No. 3.143)
The Committee further find that the Department has taken certain
initiatives for creation of permanent infrastructure for marketing of
SGSY products in various cities. For creation of aforesaid marketing
structure, the State Governments have to help by providing the land
free of cost for these projects. However, the entire expenditure on
construction has to be borne by the Union Government. The Committee
also find that the department is facing technical problems for addressing
to the need of creating marketing structures in different cities. The
Department has informed that the current marketing sub-head under
the SGSY broad head of account does not permit any capital
expenditure it being a revenue head. The creation of such a capital
expenditure sub-head will help in creating marketing infrastructure
for SGSY products. The Committee recommend to consider creation of
a head under the marketing sub-head under SGSY major head so that
the technical problem being faced by the Department can be addressed.
The Committee also recommend that initially all State Headquarters
should have one dedicated marketing complex for rural products
particularly of artisans which can be extended to cover all the district
in a time bound manner. The Committee find that at the National
level, there is no agency that can exclusively handle the marketing
aspect of the rural products in a systematic and sustainable basis
connecting all Self Help Groups with domestic and international
markets is a task that is not being addressed institutionally by the
Department at present. There is an urgent need for creating a dedicated
National Marketing Agency for providing professional marketing
support to products of Self Help Groups and act as a facilitator. The
Committee recommend to the Government to consider setting up of
the aforesaid National Marketing Agency.
Reply of the Government
A separate Head of Account under the Capital Section of the
Budget to meet the capital expenditure on marketing infrastructure
has been created through First Supplementary Grants.

66
Permanent marketing infrastructure facilities are already sanctioned
for 10 States as Special Projects under SGSY. The proposals from
4 more States are under consideration for sanction of permanent
marketing infrastructure. The Hon’ble Minister (RD) has requested the
remaining 19 States/UTs where such facilities are not available to
provide land free of cost and send proposals for financial assistance
for creating permanent marketing infrastructure.
The proposal to set up a new “National Rural Products Marketing
Agency” has been sent to Ministry of Finance for approval.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 56, Para No. 3.154)
The Committee are concerned to note the under-spending by
CAPART during 2006-2007. Rs. 70 crore were allocated to CAPART
during 2006-2007 against which Rs. 35 crore were released in February
2007. However, during 2006-2007, CAPART had an opening balance of
Rs. 27.51 crore. Thus, the total available funds with CAPART during
2006-2007 was Rs. 62.51 crore. The actual expenditure of CAPART upto
February, 2007 is Rs. 44.96 crore which means that about Rs. 17.55 crore
are still lying unspent with CAPART. The Committee feel that spending
of such large amount of funds at the fag end of the year is not a
healthy practice. The Committee desire that suitable corrective measures
be taken from the year 2007-2008 onwards, so that expenditure is
evenly spread throughout the year and heavy expenditure at the fag
end of the year is avoided.
Reply of the Government
For the first six months for the financial year 2006-07, CAPART
was in the process of establishing sound financial and administrative
system both at the Hqrs. and its Regional offices. It was also attending
to the clearance of pending files.
Some of the corrective measures taken by CAPART in the year
2006-07 are as under:—
- Established new system of receipt of new proposals only
up to November 2006,  so that the remaining part of the
year can be spent in processing and approving the viable
projects.

67
-T o bring in greater transparency and accountability, the
system of individual monitoring was changed to Institutional
Monitoring system where instead of using the services of
individual members, technical and specialized Institutions
were empanelled for monitoring.
- CAPART pro-actively approached good NGOs with good
track records in consultation with State Govts. for
formulation of model projects.
- CAPART also facilitated submission of proposals from
credible NGOs that was continued till January 2007.
Thereafter the proposals were approved by appropriate
committees and amount released in the last quarter of the
financial year.
- For the year 2007-08, the receipt of applications will be
closed in October 2007, and thereafter approvals and
financial releases will be made.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No.57, Para No. 3.155)
The Committee also note the recent changes like streamlining the
procedure and taking new initiatives which focus on the holistic
development of the most backward districts in the States. CAPART
has also signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Centre
for Sustainable Technologies (SCT) of Indian Institute of Science (IISc),
for technology upgradation, adaptation, standardization of currently
available technologies developed at Indian Institute of Science to
different regions as well as develop new designs in response to demand
on water, sanitation, housing, rural energy, field testing and networking
developmental agencies and nodal NGOs. In addition, CAPART is also
focusing on four or five research areas in improvement of health of
rural women with the help of NGOs. CAPART has also set up about
eight model programmes including biogas model for excellent, cheap
and smoke free chullah. The Committee recommend that the CAPART
should step up the exposure of NGOs and another implementing
agencies to such activities so that certain problem areas of rural
development sector like water, sanitation, housing, rural energy, field
testing etc. are addressed. The Committee also hope that with the
restructuring of CAPART their functioning would be more effective
and help in coordinating the activities of the NGOs and other
implementing agencies. The Committee would like to be apprised
further in this regard.

68
Reply of the Government
The Primary focus of CAPART’s advocacy activity is to provide
exposure of NGOs particularly grass root NGOs to vital issues in the
rural development sector such as Water, Sanitation and Rural Energy
etc. For this purpose, CAPART regularly organizes workshops at State,
District and Taluk Hqrs. throughout the country for providing
information regarding the model projects formulated on the Rural
Young Professionals, Sanitation, Rain Water Harvesting and Village
Knowledge Centre schemes, and on any other issues that the NGOs
desire.
1. Model Projects
The credible, well established VOs with sufficient infrastructure
have been nominated as Nodal NGOs with an objective to reach the
unserved, under-served and unreached areas through targeted project
mode in the States of Orissa, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Rajasthan,
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and
Gujarat. The States of Bihar, U.P ., Uttarakhand, Haryana and Punjab
will be taken up in 2007-08. The Nodal NGOs will facilitate project
and NGO mapping and create a database of grassroot NGOs in each
State. The Nodal NGOs are also implementing model projects on
following schemes:
a. Rural YP
b. Sanitation
c. Rain Water Harvesting
d. Village Knowledge Centre
e. Food Preservation at the Primary level
Through above programmes, CAPART is confident that it will
function in a more effective manner and coordinate activities of NGOs
in the field.
2. Village Knowledge Centre and Technology Resource and Training
Center at CGC Vaishali  (Bihar)
(i) A Village Knowledge Centre for disseminating various
technologies appropriate in the rural areas on the pattern
of life cycle of rural people has been set up at CGC, Vaishali
(Bihar) as a pilot project. The Centre will utilize Space
Technology to propagate and disseminate issues of local

69
importance and relevance, viz. weather, crop pattern, health
and nutritional issues, etc.
(ii) Village Knowledge Centres will be established in 1 central
site at CGC Vaishali and 49 remote points connected to it
during 2007-08. Apart from this CAPART has sanctioned
proposals for setting up 12 central and 57 remote sites to
the Nodal NGOs.
(iii) A Technology Resource Training Centre(TRTC) is being set
up at CAPART premises at CGC, Vaishali.
3. Media
Radio Programme
• ‘Badhayen Haath CAPART ke Saath’  launched on 14.12.06
• 52 Episodes weekly program in Hindi being aired from
67 Stations in 10 States
• This is a vigorous media campaign though All India Radio
focusing through episodes on current issues of rural
development. The topics covered include Health, Safe
Drinking Water, Nutrition, Literacy (benefits of going to
school), Income Generation, Management of Disability, Rural
Young Professionals/Life Skill Development, Micro Credit/
SHGs, Rain Water Harvesting, Village Knowledge Centres,
Rural Sanitation etc.
• Good Feedback has been received from the listeners and
the Program will be taken up soon in Regional
languages during the year 2007-08.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 58, Para No. 3.169)
The Committee note that NIRD at Central level, SIRD at the State
Level and ETCs at the district/block level are the premier institutions
involved for imparting training and capacity building of Panchayats
and other functionaries involved with the implementation of various
programmes meant for the upliftment of rural masses. However, during
2006-07, NIRD could conduct only 199 programmes as against the
target of conducting 230 programmes. Further, no research activity has
been completed in 2006-07. The shortfall in achievement of targets is

70
a matter of great concern. The Committee feel that with the added
responsibilities, the challenge of imparting training to Panchayats and
other implementing agencies cannot be met only by NIRD, SIRD and
ETCs. While NIRD has designed training modules for some rural
development schemes like NREGA, SGSY, Swajaldhara, IAY and IWDP .
Further, NIRD has identified 26 institutions like IRMA and Xavier
Institute of Management, Bhubaneshwar for the purpose of imparting
training. The Committee desire that to meet the huge demand of
training and research activities, some Universities and Institutions that
are doing good work in the field of rural development may be roped
in and measures may be taken to support such institutions. Besides,
more training modules may be designed by NIRD to cover other rural
development schemes which should be revised suitably as and when
the rural development schemes are restructured. The Committee would
like to be apprised further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
One of the important functions of National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD) is to build the capacities of functionaries involved
in implementation of the rural development programmes. To achieve
this goal, NIRD is imparting training to officials, PRI representatives
and reputed Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) from all over
the country at NIRD and its Regional Centre at Guwahati for State
and District level functionaries. The NIRD organises training
programmes for District and Sub-Divisional level functionaries at
28 State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) and at 89 Extension
Training Centres (ETCs) for Block and Gram Panchayat level
functionaries.
The NIRD has organised 265 training programmes against the target
of 230 programmes in the year 2006-07. The number of participants
trained in these programmes is 7371. Thus, there is no shortfall in
achieving the targets. The NIRD has completed the following
20 research projects in the year 2006-2007:
(i) Nation Wide study on Participatory Development Approaches.
(ii) Comparative study of Institutional Arrangements and
Farming Systems: Viable options for Small and Marginal
farmers.
(iii) Food Security for the Poor through State Intervention: A
Study across the States.
(iv) Socio-Economic Status of the Scheduled Caste Women
working as Traditional Birth Attendants.

71
(v) Fund Utilisation for creation of durable assets – A Study of
District Rural Development Agency/Zilla Parishad in three
States.
(vi) Community and Government initiatives in Rain Water
Harvesting for Drinking Water in Tamil Nadu.
(vii) Food Grains Delivery mechanism under SGRY – A Study
in Two States.
(viii) Collaborative Study on “Right to Information and PRIs”.
(ix) Collaborative Study “Establishing participative transparent
and accountable governance through participation of social
movements in electoral politics”.
(x) Study on disparities between Rural and Urban Areas.
(xi) GIS based development Atlas for India at Micro level.
(xii) Ground Truthing Development in Naxalite affected areas—
Present and Future.
(xiii) Socio-economic Impact of the proposed Polavaram project
on the life of Tribals in the affected areas.
(xiv) Initiatives taken up for augmenting resources in Gram
Panchayats—Case studies in Four States.
(xv) Interventions for Women Empowerment.
(xvi) Development of Entrepreneurship among Rural Women.
(xvii) Competency Mapping: A Study on Rural Development
Functionaries.
(xviii) Pro-poor Strategy for Micro-credit Delivery systems.
(xix) Partnership Strategies for Marketing of SGSY products: A
study of private sector linkages.
(xx) Stakeholders’ participation in Watershed Development: A
study in two States.
Five more research projects will be completed by the end of the
current year.
To meet the challenge of imparting training to the rural
development functionaries comprehensively , State Training Action Plans
(STAP)for 2007-2008 have been prepared by the States and were
approved by the Ministry for implementation which envisages a greater
role of NIRD, SIRDs and ETCs by taking up more off-campus training

72
programmes at District and Sub-district levels. Based on the STAP , roll
out plans under different programmes/schemes of the Ministry have
also been prepared by NIRD to ensure comprehensive and continuous
coverage.
The NIRD has developed training modules for National Rural
Employment Guarantee Programme (NREGP), Swaran Jayanti Swrozgar
Yojna (SGSY), Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojna (SGRY), Watershed
Development, Drinking Water and Sanitation and Indira Awaas Yojna
(IAY) duly taking into consideration the latest guidelines/changes in
the strategies for implementation of these programmes. These modules
are developed by conducting workshops wherein the representatives
of the Ministry of Rural Development, States and State Institutes of
Rural Development and experts from the field including the reputed
NGOs have participated in the deliberations.
A one day National Consultation was organized under the
chairmanship of Minister for Rural Development to have more
meaningful linkages with the Institutions like universities and other
educational institutes of national repute engaged in conducting courses,
research and training on rural development. Issues like suitable
curricula for the course in Rural Development-degree/diploma/
certificate courses, conducting monitoring and evaluation studies on
the rural development programmes and to bridge the gap between
theory and practice have come up for deliberations.
NIRD has launched its 1st Certificate Course on “participatory
Rural Development” of 3 months duration with 34 participants.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]

73
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 2.13)
The Committee further find that the total outlay of the Department
has been indicated as Rs. 43,347.86 crore in Demands for Grants 2007-
08. However, after deducting the recoveries to the tune of Rs. 15,825
crore expected during the year, the net Budget of the Department
during BE 2007-08 has been indicated as Rs. 27,522.86 crore for Plan
and Non-plan. The Committee urge the Department to furnish the
details of the recoveries so as to enable the Committee to understand
the purpose of recoveries and to comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As per budgetary procedure prescribed by the Ministry of Finance,
the Schemes which are funded through Reserve Funds involve a three
tier budgetary system in the Detailed Demands for Grants (DDG) as
under:
(i) The budget allocation made for these Schemes is first
notionally made in the respective Fund under the head
‘Transfer to Reserve Fund’. For example, under National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, a notional provision
of Rs. 12000.00 crore has been made for 2007-2008 under
the following head of account in the Detailed Demands for
Grants of Department of Rural Development:
(Rs. in crores)
2505—Rural Employment (Major Head)
02—Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(Sub-Major Head)
02.797—Transfer to Reserve Fund
(Minor Head)
01—Transfer to National Rural Employment
Guarantee Fund
01.01—Assistance for Rural Employment
Guarantee Schemes
01.01.63—Inter Account Transfer
(page 8 of DDG) 12000.00

74
(ii) In the second tier, a corresponding budget provision is made
under the functional budget heads i.e Major Head ‘2505’
and Major Head ‘2552’ in the Detailed Demands for Grants
for enabling release of funds under NREGS to Non-North
Eastern States and N.E. States respectively as per the details
shown below:
2505—Rural Employment (Major Head)
02—Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(Sub-Major Head)
02.101—National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme 10800.00
(Detailed head-wise break-up is given in
DDG at pages 8 and 9)
2552—North Eastern Areas (Major Head)
451—Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme—
National Rural Employment Guarantee 1200.00
Scheme
(page 13 of DDG)
These heads are related to the Budgetary Support provided
by the Planning Commission for NREGS and are operated
upon for release of funds under the programme.
(iii) As and when the funds are released to the implementing
agencies during the course of the year, an equal amount is
deemed to have been recovered from the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Fund. Accordingly, in the third tier,
a corresponding deduct entry is made as recoveries adjusted
in reduction of expenditure to maintain the level of  Budget
Support for the Scheme:
(Rs. in crores)
2505—Rural Employment (Major Head)
60—Other Programmes (Sub-Major Head)
902—Deduct Amount met from National
Rural Employment Guarantee Fund
00.00.70—Deduct recoveries (-) 12000.00
(page 18 of DDG)

75
Thus the net Budgetary Support for NREGS would only
be Rs. 12000.00 crores.
Similarly in the case of PMGSY, the
funds are provided from Central Roads
Fund (Diesel Cess). The same procedure
as outlined above is also followed in this
case as per details given below:
(Rs. in crores)
(i) 3054—Roads and Bridges (Major Head)
80—General (Sub-Major Head)
80.797—Transfer to Reserve Fund (Minor Head)
03—Transfer to Central Roads Fund
03.01—Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
03.01.63—Inter Account Transfer (page 16 of DDG) 3825.00
(ii) 3054—Roads and Bridges (Major Head)
04—District and Other Roads (Sub-Major Head)
04.337—Road Works (Minor Head)
05—Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana  3510.00*
(Detailed head-wise break-up is given in DDG at pages 16
and 17)
* (Excluding EAP Component of Rs. 2600.00 crore).
2552—North Eastern Areas (Major Head)
297—District and Other Roads—Road Works
(Minor Head)
01—Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 390.00
(page 15 of DDG)
These heads are related to the Budgetary Support provided
by the Planning Commission for PMGSY and are operated
upon for release of funds under the programme.
(iii) 3054—Roads and Bridges (Major Head)
80—General (Sub-Major Head)
903—Deduct Amount met from Central
Road Fund (Minor Head)
00.00.70—Deduct recoveries (-) 3825.00
(page 18 of DDG)

76
Thus the net Budgetary Support for PMGSY would be
Rs. 3900.00 crores.
(Rs. 3825.00 crore from diesel cess and Rs. 75.00 crore budgetary
support)
Thus the total outlay of Rs. 43,347.86 crore for the Department of
Rural Development includes the notional provision of Rs. 12000.00 crore
for NREGF and Rs. 3825 crore for CRF. By deducting this notional
provision from the total outlay, the net budgetary allocation stands at
Rs. 27522.86 crore which includes Rs. 27500.00 crore as Plan allocation
and Rs. 22.86 as Non-plan allocation and Rs. 15,825.00 crores in NREGF
and CRF.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]

77
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 2.9)
The Committee note that Indian economy has been in a robust
condition for the last couple of years and has been acknowledged as
the booming economy world-wide. The approach paper for the Eleventh
Plan aims at a sustainable growth with a growth rate of ten per cent
by the end of the Tenth Plan. To achieve the growth in real terms it
is imperative that the poorest of the poor share the benefit of growing
economy. In this regard, the Department of Rural Development has
launched various centrally sponsored programmes which aim at
alleviating poverty by providing guarantee of employment and self-
employment. Various schemes SGRY, SGSY and particularly NREGA
aim to achieve the aforesaid objective. Besides, the other schemes of
the Department, PMGSY and IAY aim to improve objectives quality of
life for the rural population. The objectives of the various schemes can
be achieved only with the adequate allocation during different Plans.
Reply of the Government
The mandate of the Ministry is to reduce poverty, development of
infrastructure and to provide amenities in the rural areas. There have
been consistent efforts to get the enhanced central allocation for the
programmes of Ministry of Rural Development. This is evident from
the Budget Estimates of 2007-08 as compared to the Budget Estimates
of the 2006-07 of the Ministry. The Budget Estimates were Rs. 31443.62
crore in 2006-2007 and it has now been enhanced to Rs. 41060.00 crore
during 2007-08 reflecting an increase of 30.6%.
The Budget Estimates for Department of Rural Development is
Rs. 32,000 crore which is higher by 33.19% over previous year. The
allocation for PMGSY is Rs. 11,000 crore (including Rs. 4500 crore loan
from NABARD) i.e 110.50% higher as against Rs. 5225.62 crore during
2006-07. Similarly other programmes have been provided higher
allocations are Rural Housing Rs. 4040 crore against Rs. 2920 crore of
Previous year 2006-07. i.e 38.36% higher of the previous year. SGSY
budget estimates is Rs. 1800 crore as against Rs. 1200 crore which is

78
50% higher than that of previous year 2006-07. Since 130 districts have
been added under NREGA, number of districts under SGRY has
declined hence lower outlay. NREGA is demand based programme,
allocation has no implication as funds will be made available whenever
needed.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.10)
The Committee find that the percentage hike in allocation of outlay
has declined after 2005-06. As against the hike of 37.62 per cent during
2005-06 and 23.69 per cent during 2006-07, the hike is just 13.28 per
cent during the year 2007-08. Besides, the outlay allocated is 33 per
cent less than the projected outlay of the Department. Not only that,
there is reduction of outlay under some of the schemes like SGRY,
CAPART and DRDA Administration.
Reply of the Government
The trend of Budget Estimates during the last four years in respect
of Department of Rural Development indicate that there has been a
consistently significant increase in allocation of funds. During 2004-05,
the Budget Estimates were Rs.11437.40 crore which was increased to
Rs. 18334.00 crore representing an increase of 60.30%. During 2006-07,
the BE was Rs. 24025.62 crore which reflected an increase of 31.04%
over 2005-06 and during 2007-08, the BE have been provided as
Rs. 32000 crore (including Rs. 4500 crore NABARD loan) reflecting an
increase of 33.19% over the BE of 2006-07. The reduction of outlay
under SGRY during 2007-08 is mainly on account of the fact that
NREGA has been extended to another 130 districts where the SGRY
has been subsumed with NREGA. The NREGA being a demand based
programme, BE has no implication as funds will be provided as and
when required for it. There has been an over all increase in the Central
allocation, however, there has been marginal decrease in respect of
Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology
(CAPART) and District Rural Development Agency (DRDA)
Administration which are the supporting components.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]

79
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 2.11)
Another trend noticed by the Committee is that whereas during
the year 2006-07, the percentage growth in tax revenue is 28.01 per
cent, the additional resources being made available through favorable
tax collection have not been shared correspondingly in the social sector.
The hike of just 13.28 per cent in the outlay of the Department of
Rural Development substantiates the aforesaid observation. The
aforesaid hike of the outlay of the Department of Rural Development
is not adequate particularly when NREGA would be applicable in
additional 130 districts thereby increasing the number of districts from
200 to 330.
Reply of the Government
Generally, there is no direct co-relation between the growth and
tax revenue and the outlay of D/o Rural Development. However, the
concern of the Committee regarding the enhancement of social sector
outlay in proportion to tax revenue collection is appreciated. The
programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development are part of social
sector development. There are other Ministries such as Ministry of
HRD, Social Justice & Empowerment, Health and so on which are
also implementing the programmes relating to social sector. The
Department of Rural Development had proposed higher allocation.
However keeping in view funds constraints and other issues, funds of
rural development programmes have been provided. The size of budget
allocation at the beginning of the year may not have any impact on
the implementation of NREGA as it is not an allocation based
programme and adequate funds will be provided as and when required.
As mentioned in reply to recommendation No. 2.9, there is 30.6%
increase in the Central outlay for the schemes of Department of Rural
Development during 2007-08 as compared to the Budget allocation of
the previous year 2006-07. The Ministry has initiated action to step up
implementation of programmes during the year and utilize funds as
early as possible. A meeting of Secretaries of Rural Development
Programmes of all States was held on 12-13 April, 2007 to chalk out
strategy for this purpose. On the basis of pace of utilization of funds,
additional requirement would be asked at RE stage.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]

80
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.4, Para No. 2.12)
The scheme-wise analysis of the position of outlay has been made
in the subsequent Chapters of the report. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to enhance the outlay under different
schemes so as to achieve the set objectives.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned in reply to recommendation No. 2.9, there is 30.6%
increase in the Central outlay for the schemes of Ministry of Rural
Development during 2007-08 as compared to the Budget allocation of
the previous year 2006-07. The Ministry has initiated action to step up
implementation of programmes during the year and utilize funds as
early as possible. A meeting of Secretaries of Rural Development
Programmes of all States was held on 12-13 April, 2007 to chalk out
strategy for this purpose. On the basis of pace of utilization of funds,
additional requirement would be asked at RE stage.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 2.19)
The Committee note that the BPL list based on 2002 census has
been delayed for a long time. The Committee in their various reports
of previous years have been repeatedly emphasizing on the expeditious
finalisation of BPL list. But even after so many years, the Committee
find that the results of the BPL Survey have not been finalized. Initially
the results were delayed due to the imposition of stay by
Hon’ble Supreme Court. Now when the stay has been vacated by the
Supreme Court w.e.f. 14th February 2006, the results are further being
delayed by various State and Union territory Administrations. The
Committee find that the BPL list so far has been approved only in six
States by the Gram Sabhas viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradsesh,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. In other
States, the process of getting the mandatory approval from Gram

81
Sabhas is still going on. In some States like Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar,
Rajasthan large number of objections were filed with the appellate
authorities to resolve the objections filed by people in connection with
the BPL list which means that there would be further delay in
finalization of BPL list. On the part of the Ministry, they have
reportedly discussed the issue in every Performance Review Committee
(PRC) besides taking up the matter with the Chief Secretaries of the
defaulting States. The Committee further note that a lot of efforts are
being made by the Department to put pressure on the State
Governments to finalise the BPL List. The issue has been discussed in
each Performance Review Committee meeting held during the current
year. The matter was particularly discussed in the meeting held on 20-
21 December, 2006. States have also been informed that release of
funds can be tied up with finalization of BPL List. A meeting of the
Performance Review Committee is scheduled to be held in April, 2007
where the issue would be discussed with the State Secretaries and the
timeframe finalized.
Reply of the Government
 As the Committee has rightly observed, this Department has been
making consistent efforts to get the results of BPL Census 2002 finalised
at the earliest possible. As a result of these efforts, some more States
like Karnataka, Punjab, Rajasthan, Mizoram, Himachal Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Gujarat and Nagaland have also finalized the new BPL
list. In Haryana, the State Govt. has ordered to carry out the re-survey
of the BPL families in view of large scale complaints. The matter is
being regularly reviewed with the remaining States and UTs at various
levels. The Committee is well aware of efforts made by the Ministry
at each level and even addressed letters to the Chief Ministers.
However, due to receipt of a large number of applications/appeals, it
took considerable time to dispose them of, through two stage appeal
mechanism, which has been provided to redress the grievances of the
people. As the Committee is well aware, the Ministry is making
concerted efforts and is closely following it up with the States at each
level. So far 17 States/UTs have finalized BPL List.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)

82
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.20)
The Committee find that crores of rupees are being allocated by
the Union Government through various welfare schemes meant for
the poorest of the poor. Unless, the BPL list is finalized, the benefit
envisaged under these schemes can not reach to the intended
beneficiaries. In spite of best of efforts made by the Department, the
results are not forthcoming and the fate of the genuine poor is hanging
and thus they are being deprived of the benefits of the various
developmental schemes. The Committee strongly recommended to the
Department to take up this matter at the highest level. The State
Governments should be strictly told to finalise the BPL lists without
further delay through meetings with State Secretaries/Chief Secretaries/
Minister of State Governments etc. Besides, the matter needs to be
deliberated at the Chief Ministries level. There is an urgent need to fix
a deadline. The Committee strongly recommend the Department to
take all the desired steps so that the BPL list is finalized and displayed
at Gram Panchayat Headquarters so that every household knows its
status in the survey list and feels secured that he would get the benefit
envisaged under the various programmes.
Reply of the Government
The concerns of the Committee regarding the delay in finalizing
the BPL list are equally shared by this Ministry and the matter has
been taken up with the State Governments at various levels such as
with the State Secretaries and Chief Secretaries besides discussing the
matter in the meetings of the Performance Review Committee. The
Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has also taken up this issue
with the respective Chief Ministers of the respective States. 12 States/
UTs have already finalized the new BPL list and posted on their
websites and a number of States will be completing this exercise very
soon.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.21)
Further, the Committee do not understand the logic of the
mandatory cut imposed on the number of households to be identified

83
under the BPL Census 2002 in accordance with the mandatory cut off
limit imposed by Planning Commission according to which the number
of BPL families cannot exceed the limit of 10 per cent of BPL families
identify in 1999-2000 BPL survey. The Department has stated that since
the resources of the country are limited and thinly distributed, the
intention of the imposing the mandatory cut off is to ensure that the
poorest of the poor in the rural areas are able to avail the benefit of
the schemes. The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing in the
various reports that such a cut off limit can be a source of corruption
and other malpractices. The Committee had strongly recommended
that such cut of limit should not be applicable while finalizing the
BPL list for Eleventh Plan. The Department has stated that the ranking
of the poorest of the poor as decided by the Gram Sabha would
address to the concerns of the Committee. The Committee fail to
understand the logic of putting unnecessary limitation on BPL persons
specifically when the benefit of the schemes has to be provided on the
basis of the scores, a BPL family gets in the BPL list. In such a situation
the logic of available resources being thinly distributed cannot be
understood. Further, the Committee are of the firm opinion that any
restriction on the number of BPL families would provide unnecessary
discretion to the agencies involved the finalization of BPL lists and
can invite corruption and malpractices. The Committee do not accept
all the logic put forth by the Department and strongly recommend to
the Government not to impose unnecessary limitations on the number
of BPL persons for the purpose of the Eleventh Plan.
Reply of the Government
It may be pointed out that the number and proportion of BPL
population living in the country is determined by the Planning
Commission and are the only officially recognized estimates. The
purpose of BPL Census conducted by this Ministry is only to identify
those BPL families in the rural areas who could be targeted under the
programmes of this Ministry. There is no point in having a large list
of identified BPL families. Identified list should be two-three times of
families likely to be assisted during a Five Year Plan keeping in view
resources made available, rather than 10-15 times and unnecessarily
arise expectations of crore of families to get assistance in poverty
alleviation programmes. This may lead to cornering benefits by
relatively better of households in the BPL list. Keeping in view the
above, States were advised to have a cut off points.
It is clarified that for the BPL Census 2002, the guidelines did
not restrict the number to the poverty estimates of 1999-2000 of

84
Planning Commission. In fact it has been provided that the States can
identify the number of BPL families which may be equal to the Poverty
Estimates of 1999-2000 or the Adjusted Share whichever is higher with
another 10% flexibility. According to Poverty Estimates of 1999-2000, it
was estimated that about 3.86 crore families were living Below the
Poverty Line in rural areas. However under Adjusted Share, the number
of such families was worked out as 4.88 crore. With the above option,
the States/UTs were having the flexibility to identify roughly up to
5.4 crore families as BPL in the rural areas which is much higher as
compared to the Poverty Estimates of 1999-2000, and the latest poverty
estimates of 2004-05. This provides enough flexibility to the States/
UTs in deciding the number of BPL families. Earlier also it was clarified
that since the list of BPL families is to be decided and approved by
the Gram Sabhas in a transparent manner, the scope for any discretion
on the part of any agency or official etc. has already been minimized.
The issue of putting any cap on the total number of BPL families will
be discussed while deciding the methodology for the next BPL Census.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.35)
The Committee find that there is an elaborate system of monitoring
introduced at various levels which includes periodical progress reports,
on line monitoring mechanism, District Level and National Level
monitors, utilization certificates, audit reports etc. In additional to it
the officials of the Ministry under area officers scheme and the State
level officials undertake field visits to know the ground situation with
regard to various schemes. There are District and State level Vigilance
Committees constituted by the Union Ministry of Rural Development.
Besides Union and State Ministers of Rural Development also monitor
the implementation of the programmes through field visits and
meetings. A new initiative of holding a meeting of State Nodal Officers
has been introduced by the Department. The Committee find that in
spite of having such an elaborate system of monitoring Rs. 10,277.97 crore
which comes to 43.01 per cent of the allocated outlay during 2006-07
are lying unspent with various implementing agencies. Besides,
151 Utilisation Certificate amounting to Rs. 744.45 crore are still pending
under different schemes of the Department.

85
Reply of the Government
As the Committee has rightly noticed the elaborate system of
monitoring in the Ministry, the objectives of having such multi–level
and multi-tool monitoring mechanism is to ensure efficient delivery at
grass root level including proper and faster utilization of funds. The
Ministry has taken a number of steps to ensure maximum utilization
of funds and minimize the closing balances like quarterly target for
utilization of funds, certain percentage of utilization of funds to become
eligible for release of 2nd isntallment, cut in allocations/released if
opening balances are higher than 10% etc. It may be clarified that as
a policy, the Ministry has allowed to carry forward 10% as closing
balance to continue programme during next financial year (till the
first installment is received by them). The Committee is well aware
that due to budgetary approval process, normally it takes 1-2 months
to get first installment by the implementing agencies. The opening
balances are utilized by them during this period.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.36)
As regards the position of the meetings of District and State level,
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees held during 2006-07 (upto 10 January,
2007), 531 district level meetings were held in only 389 districts. There
are 597 districts in the country which meant 208 districts did not hold
even a single meeting. Similarly, 12 meetings of State level Vigilance
and Monitoring Committees, were held by 8 States and one Union
Territory, which means that most of the States did not hold even a
single meeting. As per the guidelines district and State level Vigilance
Committees shall hold at least one sitting in each quarter during the
year. The aforesaid data indicates the failure of the above system of
monitoring. With regard to the Area Officers Scheme, when the
Committee enquired about the shortcomings notices by different Area
Officers, the Department has replied that the Area Officers undertake
field visits not with the fault finding mission rather with the
constructive approach which strengthens the relationship between the
State Governments and the Union Ministry. The Committee strongly
disapprove the way various systems of monitoring are working. The
Committees feel that perhaps more than introducing various systems,

86
it is essential that the system works properly with the given objective.
The purpose of monitoring by the Area Officers should be to know
the various bottlenecks and difficulties being faced by the implementing
agencies as well as the beneficiaries. Besides, interacting with the
implementing agencies/district level officials, said officers should try
to know the ground situation from the beneficiaries and physically
check the quality of the various assets created under the scheme.
Meeting with the district level officials along can not provide the
desired results. The findings of the Area Officers should be indicated
in the Outcome Budget document.
Reply of the Government
As per information received from States and District Administration
the position regarding holding meetings of Vigilance and Monitoring
Committee at District and State levels during 2006-07 is as given below:
Meetings of the District level V&MCs
S.No Year No. of Districts where Total number of
meetings of District Distt. V&MC
level V&MCs held meetings held
1. 2006-07 465  738
Meetings of the State level V&MCs
S.No Year No. States/UTs where Total number of
meetings of District States V&MC
level V&MCs held meetings held
1. 2006-07 22 32
This Ministry has taken various steps to ensure that the meetings
of the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees at State and District levels
are held regularly . To emphasize the importance of the meetings of
V&MCs, instructions have been issued to all States/UTs and District
Administrations vide this Ministry’s letter dated 10th August, 2006 that
in future while processing proposals for releasing second installment
of funds under various programmes of this Ministry, the status of
meetings held at State/District level V&MC will also be taken into
account. The second installment of funds under various programmes
will be released only after getting confirmation that at least one meeting
of the V&MC has been held at the State and District level and this
information is indicated in the proposals for release of 2nd installment

87
for each programme of this Ministry. However, considering the
problems faced by many State Governments and District
Administrations in holding these meetings, this condition was relaxed
for the year 2006-07. Further to ensure that at least one meeting of the
District V&MC is held at the State and District level, the guidelines
for V&MCs have been amended and a provision has been made for
holding a Special Meeting of V&MCs in July or August if no meeting
of V&MC could be arranged in the first quarter due to any reason.
With the amendment of these guidelines it is hoped that now at least
one meeting of the V&MC will be arranged at the State and District
level during each year.
The Area Officers make all efforts to visit the allocated districts on
Quarterly basis, but due to pre occupations, Parliament Session and
preparation of other documents for various meetings etc. it becomes
difficult to adhere to the prescribed schedule. To ensure that all the
districts are covered for physical and financial achievements, the district
level monitoring mechanism through independent Research
Organisations is being implemented. As suggested, the findings of the
Area Officers will be indicated in the Outcome budget document.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.37)
With regard to the system of Vigilance and Monitoring Committee
the Standing Committee in their 25th Report (refer Para No. 22) while
reviewing the position of these Committees has recommended that
Member/Secretary should be held responsible for not conducting the
meetings at the regular intervals as per the guidelines. The Committee
has also recommended that reporting format of utilization certificate
should include the number of meetings of Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees held in each quarter of the year. The Committee emphasize
that crores of rupees every year are being allocated under different
schemes of the Department and there is a genuine concern on the part
of the exchequer that the taxes deducted from their income/revenue
are purposefully utilized and the outlays allocated in the social sector
projects actually reach to the intended beneficiaries.

88
Reply of the Government
This Ministry has already issued instructions vide letter dated 2nd
August, 2005 that the District Collector being the Member Secretary is
responsible for conducting these meetings regularly. It is also stated in
these instructions that in cases where the Chairman of the District
V&MC is preoccupied and has not indicated any dates for convening
such meetings, the Member Secretary should ensure, in consultation
with the Co-Chairman, that these meetings are convened within
15 days of the end of each quarter under intimation to the Chairman/
Co-Chairman and all other members.
This Ministry has also already issued instructions vide letter
dated 10th August, 2006 that in future while processing release of
second installment of funds under various programmes of this Ministry,
the status of meetings held at State and District level V&MCs will
also be taken into account. The second installment of funds under
various programmes will be released only after getting confirmation
that at least one meeting of V&MC has been held at the State and
District level during that year and this information is indicated in the
proposals for release of second installment for each programme of this
Ministry. As mentioned in reply to above para that provision has been
made for special meeting of the District Level Vigilance and Monitoring
Committee to make Member Secretary accountable for not holding of
these meetings.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.38)
The Committee further feel that none of the aforesaid monitoring
mechanisms involve general public to act as catalyst in effective
monitoring. At least, one issue  i.e checking the quality of projects and
permanent assets created can be done effectively by active participation
of the general public. This could be done by developing effective
mechanism for receiving feed back. There is a need to strengthen the
complaint mechanism. The minimum standards prescribed for a project,
durability of assets created etc. should be published by way of
prominently displaying at notice board at the site of the project. Besides,
there is an urgent need to fix time limit for disposal of each nature of

89
complaint along with the name, telephone number and contact address
of the authority who can be contacted in the event of deficiency. In
addition to what has been stated above, the Committee recommend to
the Department to strengthen the monitoring mechanism on the
aforesaid levels. Perhaps there is a need to fix accountability for each
specific work.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development has laid down specific
provisions for quality aspects of the projects created under its
programmes. The independent agencies are also furnishing regular
reports regarding the quality of projects after physical verification of
these assets. The State Governments have been advised from time to
time to adopt 5 pronged strategy i.e awareness about the programmes
among the rural people, transparency, social audit/accountability, people
participation and strict Vigilance and Monitoring. The complaints
received from various parts of the country are immediately brought to
the notice of the concerned State Government for furnishing factual
position of the case and Action Taken Report. The Ministry is also
investigating serious complaints through the field visit of its officers.
Social Audit is one of the main elements in NREGA. They continuously
monitor quality of assets generated. Similarly, there are local committees
for SGRY and IWDP works. Further National Level Monitors verify
quality of assets created/providing during their visits. Each NLM is
required to visit 10-15 villages in each visit and verify each asset created
in these villages during the last 3-4 years.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.14, Para No. 2.39)
The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to act on
the suggested lines by the Committee and take all possible measures
to strengthen the Monitoring Mechanism without any further delay .
The Committee should also be kept apprised.
Reply of the Government
The suggestion of the Committee is welcomed and the Ministry is
continuously trying to improve its monitoring system. In addition of

90
the existing monitoring tools like Districts wise database management,
State/District Vigilance and Monitoring Committees, Performance
Review Committee, National Level Monitors, etc. the Ministry is
emphasizing to switchover to on-line monitoring of monthly and
quarterly progress reports. A new system of organizing meeting of
State Nodal Officers every month have been introduced and so far
twelve such monthly meetings have taken place. Under the Programmes
of SGRY and NREGA, the Ministry is insisting all the State
Governments to constitute work wise monitoring Committee.
For effective monitoring of NREGA, computer based MIS is in the
process of being operationalised. For this, efforts are on to strengthen
the ICT infrastructure at the Block level. For this a detailed assessment
of Block level ICT infrastructure resources such as computer hardware,
trained personnel and internet connectivity has been undertaken. The
gaps that emerge will be addressed so that all the blocks are connected
through the internet. This will bring transparency in NREGA data
base and enable monitoring. Social audit has also become an integral
tool for transparent and effective monitoring by the stakeholders.
Under PMGSY, a web-based on-line Management & Monitoring
Accounting Systems (OMMAS) has been developed by the Centre for
Development of Advanced Computer (CDAC). Besides, a three-tier
quality mechanism has been operationalised under the programme. At
the first-tier, the contractors are required to carry out mandatory Quality
Control tests under the supervision of District Programme
Implementation Units (PIUs). In addition, every work is required to
be inspected at three stages by State Quality Monitors as per second-
tier of quality mechanism and about 10-15 per cent works are inspected
by independent National Quality Monitors deployed by the NRRDA.
Guidelines for district level Vigilance & Monitoring Committee have
been amended and release of second instalment has been tied up with
the holding of Vigilance & Monitoring Committee meeting. Provision
for special meeting has been introduced. During the year 2006-07 as
many as 808 District level Vigilance & Monitoring Committee Meetings
were held as against 504 meetings during 2005-06. The National Level
Monitors visited 743 times during 2006-07 as against 410 during
2005-06 to monitor rural development programmes. The Minister of
Rural Development has also directed all the Ministers, Senior Officers
above Deputy Secretary to visit two-three districts and 10 villages each
during October—December, 2007. Similarly the 2nd round during

91
January—March, 2008, there by covering all the districts during the
financial year. The Ministry is also very particular in organizing
meetings of the consultative Committee of Parliament attached to this
Ministry every Quarter.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.15, Para No. 2.42)
The Committee note the various measures taken by the Ministry
to display information on the website. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should disclose as much information as possible to the public
on their official website so that people need not resort to the provisions
of Information Act for getting even small information. The Ministry
should also display vital documents such as the Outcome Budget,
Annual Report of the Ministry, physical and financial performance of
various schemes, minutes of various meetings, highlights of various
research studies on rural development etc. on their official website.
Besides, there is a need to develop an on-line complaint mechanism
with unique complaint ID number under each scheme so as to draw
attention of senior officers who should dispose the complaints in a
time bound manner and inform the complainant about the action taken.
Reply of the Government
The website of the Ministry i.e.  www.rural.nic.in gives
comprehensive information on all important activities and programmes
of the Ministry and also provides link to other websites pertaining to
both the programmes of the Ministry and also its organizations like
NIRD and CAPART. As recommended in the 29th Report on Demand
for Grants, the Ministry provides information on the physical and
financial performance under all its schemes, proceedings of important
meetings, details of sanction orders, circulars and letters issued to
DRDAs on policy matters from time to time. Further news in respect
of rural development is also provided on the website.
The two flagship programmes of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY) and National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(NREGS) have their individual websites also which contain details of
operational parameters and progress in an aggregated form as well as

92
with state-wise details. There is a FEEDBACK option in the websites
through which the public can offer their advice or comments.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.16, Para No. 2.43)
The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Department in
providing various tools to the public to lodge as well as redressal of
complaints through the user friendly technological interventions. People
can lodge their complaint through user-friendly websites. The
Committee however feels that innocent and illiterate people living in
rural areas, at present need the help of NGOs to invoke the various
provisions of Right to Information Act. Perhaps, there is an urgent
need to, first of all, enlighten the rural masses about their right
provided through Right to Information Act. In this regard there is an
urgent need to empower the Panchayati Raj Institutions in tune with
the provisions made under Part IX of the Constitution. The Panchayats
equipped with the latest technology and trained manpower can help
the public to lodge the complaints. The Committee would like the
comments of the Department on the aforesaid observation. Besides,
the Committee would like to be apprised of the status of data with
regard to the number of complaints registered and addressed so far
under the Right to Information Act so as to analyze the position and
comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The execution of the most of the rural development schemes is
done through the District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs). In
order to implement the provisions of the Right to Information Act,
2005 the Chief Secretaries of all the States have been requested to
issue instructions accordingly to the District Rural Development
Agencies (DRDAs) / Zila Parishads and other State level implementing
Agencies of Rural Development programmes to comply with the
provisions of the RTI Act. The Central Public Information Officers in
the Ministry and in the public authorities under the aegis of the
Ministry, have been requested to upload the relevant material suo motu
so that the public may have to resort minimally to the use of RTI Act.
In the Ministry of Rural Development (D/o Rural Development and

93
D/o Land Resources) a total of 49 cases under the RTI Act have been
received and in the public authorities namely Council for Advancement
of Peoples’ Action and Rural Technology (CAPART), National Institute
of Rural Development (NIRD) and National Rural Roads Development
Agency (NRRDA) 22, 62 and 22 cases under the RTI Act respectively
have been received in the financial year 2006-07.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.23, Para No. 3.25)
The Committee note from the position of outlay provided under
NREGA, that Rs. 11,300 crore was provided during the year 2006-07
when 200 districts were to be covered in the first phase. Including the
Opening Balance, the Department has roughly Rs. 12,000 crore during
2006-07. Out of this 8000 crore could actually be spent while the balance
Rs. 4,000 crore which should have been deposited in Central
Employment Guarantee Fund (CEGF), have actually been diverted to
liquidate the FCI bills. During 2007-08, an additional 130 districts have
been proposed to be added thus making the total number to 330
districts. The allocation during 2007-08 has been made for Rs. 12,000
crore which is equal to the total available funds during 2006-07,
although 130 additional districts are proposed to be covered during
2007-08.
Reply of the Government
The total central release for NREGA in the year 2006-2007 was
Rs. 8263.66 crores. The total availability of funds, including Opening
Balance with the NREGA States was Rs. 12072.51 crores and total
expenditure incurred was Rs. 8812.60 crores. Besides, Rs. 8263.66 crores,
Rs. 377.20 crores were released to 113 Phase - II districts (except
17 districts of Uttar Pradesh). The allocation of Rs. 12000.00 crores is
initial allocation. Since the programme is demand driven, additional
funds, if required, will be demanded at the supplementary stage.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M.No.H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)

94
Recommendation (Serial No.24, Para No. 3.26)
The Committee strongly object to the aforesaid diversion of funds
of NREGA. The Committee find that the year 2006-07 was the first
year of implementation of NREGA and the total available funds could
not be utilized fully. Since the scheme might pick up during 2007-08
providing of outlay equal to the allocation made during 2006-07 is not
justified particularly when 130 additional districts are proposed to be
covered during 2007-08. In view of aforesaid position, the Committee
strongly recommend the Government to provide adequate allocation
under NREGA. Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission may be
apprised of the concerns of the Committee in this regard. Besides the
transaction of funds should be made strictly as per rules and savings
under NREGA should be deposited in National Employment Guarantee
Fund and not diverted elsewhere.
Reply of the Government
The allocation of Rs. 12000.00 crores is initial allocation. NREGA
is a demand driven programme and additional funds, if required, will
be demanded at the supplementary stage. The Ministry accepts the
recommendation that savings under NREGA should remain in National
Employment Guarantee Fund and a claim can be made as and when
required.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M.No.H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.25, Para No. 3.27)
The Committee further note that, out Rs. 1.47 crore households
who have been provided employment, only Rs. 10,89,017 i.e 7.41 percent
households could complete 100 days of employment, which is the
main objective of the Act. The State-wise performance indicates that in
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland, none
of the families could get 100 days of employment. In the progressive
State of Kerala, only 66 families could get 100 days of employment.
The Committee also note that an amount of Rs. 4,75,386 was paid as
unemployment allowance in Barwani District of Madhya Pradesh. The
Committee feel that the aforesaid data need to be analysed carefully
by the Department so as to understand the peculiar State-wise problems

95
in the implementation of NREGA. Such an analysis would provide the
Government necessary input to take the desired State specific action
so as to achieve the objectives of ambitious legislation of NREGA.
Reply of the Government
NREG Act provides for a legal guarantee of at least 100 days of
wage employment in a financial year to every rural household for
doing unskilled manual work on demand. Thus, employment under
NREGA is demand based. As and when any job card holding
household applies for work, it is provided employment for the number
of days for which the household has demanded work. Since, NREGA
provides for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households
in rural areas, the number of days for which employment is demanded
by different households may vary according to their needs. Periodic
meetings are being held with state-officials so as to understand state-
specific problems pertaining to implementation of NREGA.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.26, Para No. 3.28)
The Committee further note that one of the aspect that need to be
addressed is to generate works in different districts that can provide
100 days of employment to the families who demand employment
particularly when it is a statutory requirement. With the existing works
being undertaken under NREGA like deepening of water bodies, water
harvesting, drought proofing etc. the Committee have their
apprehension that these works may not provide 100 days employment
to a family in a year. The department has to study the implementation
of the programme in various States and analyse the position in view
of the aforesaid observation of the Committee and also to take decision
on allowing certain other works which are at present not permissible
under NREGA.
Reply of the Government
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act aims to enhance
livelihood security to poor households in rural areas by providing at
least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment to every poor

96
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual
work. As per Section 1 of Schedule 1 of National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, 2005, the focus of the Scheme shall be on the following
works in their order of priority:-
(i) water conservation and water harvesting;
(ii) dr ought proofing (including afforestation and tree
plantation);
(iii) irrigation canals including micro and minor irrigation works;
(iv) provision of irrigation facility to land owned by households
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes or
to land of beneficiaries of land reforms or that of the
beneficiaries under the Indira Awas Yojana of the
Government of India;
(v) renovation of traditional water bodies including desilting of
tanks;
(vi) land development;
(vii) flood control and protection works including drainage in
water logged areas;
(viii) rural connectivity to provide all-weather access; and
(ix) any other work which may be notified by the Central
Government in consultation with the State Government.
States are to prepare Labour Budget and annual Shelf of Project to
meet employment demand. If such planning throws up a need for any
other work, the case will be examined by the Ministry.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.38, Para No. 3.73)
The Committee find that rural housing is one of the six components
of Bharat Nirman, the ambitious programme of the Government. The
Government plan to construct 60 lakh houses under Indira Awaas
Yojana during the Bharat Nirman period i.e 2005-06 to 2008-09. Besides
as per the Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan the Planning Commission

97
have set monitorable Socio-Economic Targets under which houses have
to be provided to all rural poor by 2016-17. The Secretary during the
course of oral evidence has informed the requirement of 200 lakh
housing units to end shelterlessness in rural areas. However, if
upgradation of Kutcha houses is also included, the number comes to
400 lakhs. The data indicated by the Department show that during the
year 2005-06 i.e first year of Bharat Nirman period, the Department
has achieved more than the physical targets of 15 lakh houses.
However, during the year 2006-07, the achievement is just 58.23 per
cent. The Department has indicated that the aforesaid shortfall in
achievement of target was due to the fact that there was delay in the
release of first instalment of fund under Indira Awaas Yojana because
of non-preparation of permanent Indira Awaas Yojana waitlist by the
States. Subsequently, the funds were released with the stipulation that
the beneficiaries will be selected only out of the permanent Indira
Awaas Yojana waitlist. This resulted in delayed implementation of the
programme during the year 2006-07. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the State wise status of the preparation of permanent Indira
Awaas Yojana waitlist. The Committee also emphasizes to take the
desired steps so that the targets set under Bharat Nirman period are
fully achieved.
Reply of the Government
Under Bharat Nirman, 60 lakh houses are to be constructed in
four years from 2005-06 to 2008-09. during the year 2005-06, 15.52 lakh
houses have been constructed which is more than the target of 14.41
lakh houses. During the year 2006-07, 14.98 lakh houses have been
constructed which amounts to achievement of 97.71% of the target. To
further improve the coverage of needy people the allocation under
IAY for 2007-08 has been increased to 4032.70 crore for achieving the
target of 21.27 lakh houses. Sum of Rs.1549.41 crore as on 29.6.2007
has already been released as first instalment to the States. Department
is also actively pursuing the matter with the State Governments to
ensure the target of Bharat Nirman are fully achieved. As far as the
issue of permanent IAY wait list is concerned, the Department is
actively pursuing the matter with the States. MRD has written to the
CMs of all the States on 10.4.2006 for completion of Permanent IAY
Wait List on the basis of Census 2002. Letter at the level of Secretary
(RD) have also been written for early completion of Wait List. Recently,
Secretary (RD) has written to the States on 11.4.2007 for completion of
the list by 30.6.2007. The statement of status of Permanent IAY waitlist
is at Appendix –I.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]

98
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.41, Para No. 3.82)
The Committee find that Rs. 400 crore were sanctioned and released
to the State Government of Bihar, during the year 2004-05 in order to
re-construct IAY houses damaged by flood in 20 districts. At one place,
the Department has stated that out of Rs. 400 crore, Rs. 270.74 crore
were laying unspent thereby indicating that only Rs. 129.26 crore i.e a
little over 30 per cent could be utilized. At another place it has been
mentioned that only 51.27 per cent of the total available funds could
be utilized. As regards the physical targets it has been mentioned that
43.03 per cent of the target could be achieved. At another place it has
been mentioned that the utilization certificates for the amount of
Rs. 337.95 crore actually utilized out of the special package had already
been received. The Secretary during the course of oral evidence further
stated that State releases corresponding to the amount utilized is also
yet to be made. The Committee find from the aforesaid data that
there is utter confusion about the releases made and physical and
financial targets achieved for the outlay released to Bihar under natural
calamities.
Reply of the Government
An amount of Rs.400.00 crore was released to 20 districts of Bihar
in the year 2004-05 under PM’s Package for construction of 2.13 lakh
houses damaged by floods occurred during that year.
 The matter was pursued with the State Government from time to
time regarding utilization of funds and rectification of discrepancies
noticed in the UCs already submitted. However, as the discrepancies
noticed in the utilization certificates and the Audit Report submitted,
were not rectified by the State Government, the release of 2nd
instalment of normal IAY funds during the year 2006-07 were initially
linked to the settlement of UCs/ARs in respect of the funds released
under PM’s Package. However, this condition was subsequently
postponed till 2nd instalment of 2007-08. As per the information
furnished by the State Government in March, 2007, Rs.279.63 crore
were utilized out of total available funds of Rs.545.40 crore including
State share plus interest earned by DRDAs on this amount. Against
the target of construction of 2.13 lakh houses, only 91 thousand houses
were constructed (43%).

99
During the course of a review meeting taken by Secretary (RD) in
Patna on 20.2.2007, the State Government had informed that they were
having no more flood-affected houses left with the DRDAs for
reconstruction. Accordingly, the State Government was advised to send
a formal request to surrender the unutilized amount to the Central
Government. In this connection, a letter was also sent to the State
Government on 10th April, 2007 and again on 23.5.2007.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.42, Para No. 3.83)
The Committee further observe from the information provided by
the Department that the funds allocated for calamity relief to 20 districts
of Bihar could not be utilized in spite of the linkage of releases of
funds to normal IAY. In the same para it has been stated that the
State Government officers had requested to allow them to transfer the
unspent balance under the calamity head to the normal IAY. Again it
has been stated that a case on these lines will be processed after
receipt of formal request from the State Government. Three
contradictory positions have been indicated in the same para. The
Committee disapproved the way the IAY funds for natural calamities
are being handled by the Department. The Committee would like
clarifications from the Department on the aforesaid observations. They
would like to be apprised about the visit of National level Monitors,
Area Officers to these flood affected districts where rehabilitation
programme was going on along with their findings so as to know the
ground reality in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In this connection, it is submitted that there is nothing contradictory.
From the Statement enclosed as Appendix – II  in reply to the Question
of the Standing Committee, it was clear that utilization of Rs.279.62
crore was out of total available funds of Rs.545.40 crore which comes
to 51.27 per cent. Accordingly, unspent amount of Rs.270 crore given
as Appendix –III was also out of the total available funds of Rs.545.40
crore and not out of Rs.400 crore, as has been observed by the
Committee. It may also be mentioned here that while calculating the
total funds under IAY, Central share plus due State matching share is

100
always taken into account irrespective of the fact whether the State
Government have released its State share or not. In this case, as per
the UCs now received, the State Government has released its due
State share.
In this connection, it is rightly stated that settlement of UCs was
linked to the release of 2nd instalment of funds under normal IAY. It
is also true that the State Government have informed that they do not
have more flood-affected houses for reconstruction and therefore, they
should be allowed to surrender or transfer the funds to normal IAY.
However, this information was verbally given in the review meeting
and no formal request in this regard was received. That is why it was
informed to the Committee that further action will be taken on receipt
of the formal request from the State Government.
As per the latest information received from the State Government,
Rs.302.03 crore have been utilized and 97331 houses have been
constructed against the target of 2.13 lakh houses. It has since been
decided that the unspent amount of PM’s Package lying with the
Districts will be deducted from the 2nd instalment of normal IAY
funds during the current year.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No.51, Para No. 3.115)
The Committee further observe that under PMGSY the maintenance
after completion of contract work of road has to be taken case of for
five years by the contractor as per the contractual clause entered in
the agreement. The area of concern is maintenance of roads after five
years. The Department has informed that there are State Rural Road
Development Agencies in each State, which have the overall
responsibility for construction and maintenance of rural roads. The
Department is making efforts to transfer the responsibility of
maintenance of rural roads to this agency. The Committee find that
for adequate maintenance of PMGSY roads after the contract, adequate
funding and capacity building of State level agencies is required. The
Committee would like that the Department should take the decision
expeditiously to transfer the roads constructed under PMGSY to State
Rural Road Development agencies after the contractual period of five

101
years is over so that the roads constructed after spending crores of
money are not damaged after a certain period of time. Besides taking
decision to transfer the PMGSY roads to State Rural Road Development
agencies, the Union Government has to take decision to partially fund
these agencies so that PMGSY roads are maintained properly .
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Rural Development has addressed the Chief Secretaries
of all States on 28.3.2006, requesting them to ensure that due share of
the Twelfth Finance Commission award to States for maintenance of
roads and bridges (Rs.15,000 crore) is earmarked for rural roads and
is efficiently utilized for the purpose. Since the maintenance is funded
by the State Governments, Phase-wise and Scheme-wise details are
not monitored. However, Planning Commission has been requested to
closely monitor performance of the State Governments with regard to
the maintenance of rural roads while finalizing the State Plans. In
particular, the Commission has been requested to scrutinize the amount
budgeted and spent for maintenance of the Core Network of rural
roads in the preceding years.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 34 of Chapter-I of the Report)

102
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 3.29)
The Committee during the Study visit the various backward
districts of the country have found that the payment of wages to
beneficiaries is being made by different methods. In Uttar Pradesh,
the payment is being made in cash. In Andhra Pradesh it is being
done through Post Offices. In Karnataka, payment is being made
through Banks and Post Offices. The Committee have also noted that
2 per cent service expenses were being charged by Post Offices and
the representatives of the banks requested the Committee that similar
two percent transaction charges, should be allowed to Banks also. The
Committee have selected the subject implementation of NREGA and
the issues will be dealt with, in detail, during the course of examination.
Reply of the Government
Mode of payment is to be decided by State Governments.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 3.30)
Here the Committee find that the matter regarding charging of
service expenses is being taken up with the Department of Posts. The
Committee recommend that the matter should be settled between the
Department of Rural Development and Department of Posts by sitting
across the table. The representatives of the Department of Posts should
be persuaded not to deduct any service charges since this is a social
sector scheme meant for the poorest of the poor and every section of
the Government has the responsibility to ensure that maximum benefit
reaches to the beneficiaries. Charging of 2 per cent as service expenses
would ultimately result in reduction of 2 per cent of the allocation
meant for the poorest of the poor.
Reply of the Government
The matter is being taken up with the Department of Posts.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]

103
Recommendation (Serial No. 39, Para No. 3.74)
The Standing Committee in the earlier report (refer para 2.69 of
22nd Report) had recommended to enhance the existing per unit
assistance for construction of IAY house from Rs.25,000 to Rs.50,000 in
plain areas and from Rs.27,500 to Rs.60,000 in hilly difficult areas. The
Department has informed that the matter regarding enhancement in
per unit cost of construction of IAY house is under consideration and
the Department is actively pursuing it. The Committee note that the
aforesaid scale of assistance under IAY was fixed way back during
2004. Since then there has been no revision in per unit assistance.
Since the prices of construction material have increased considerably
specifically during the last couple of years, the Committee strongly
recommend that the per unit assistance under IAY should be enhanced
as recommended earlier by the Committee. While recommending for
enhancement of per unit cost of IAY house, the Committee also
recommend that the annual allocation made under IAY needs to be
enhanced considerably so that there is no reduction in the set targets
under Bharat Nirman period and Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Reply of the Government
The Department is actively considering the matter of revision of
unit cost. As suggested by Standing Committee earnest efforts are
being made to get annual allocation for IAY considerably enhanced.
It may be noted here that allocation for 2007-08 for IAY is
Rs. 4040.00 crore which is 38% higher than the previous year.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Recommendation (Serial No. 53, Para No. 3.136)
The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing on the need to
address the issue of poor performance of Bankers which has resulted
in poor credit off-take under SGSY at the various levels. In spite of
this, there is no considerable improvement in the performance of
various Banks. The information furnished by the Department indicates
that as many as 2,643 Bank Branches have been marked as poor
performing Bank Branches. Out of these 2,463 poor performing Bank
Branches 1,297 are Commercial Bank Branches and the remaining
1,346 are Regional Rural Banks and Cooperative Bank Branches. The
poor performing Branches are more in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Gujarat, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh. The Committee further note that the details of poor
performing Bank Branches have been furnished to Reserve Bank of
India and Ministry of finance for further necessary action and special
monitoring during the current year. In spite of the various directions
issued by the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India through

104
various meetings, there is no considerable change in the attitude of
Bankers. The Committee feel that Bankers are required to the sensitized
about the need to shoulder responsibility with regard to making credit
available at affordable rate of interest to the Self Help Groups under
SGSY. Since the present efforts being made by way of meetings and
directions are not resulting in considerable improvement, perhaps there
is a need to have the system of incentives and disincentives for various
Bank Branches. Besides, more rural Bank Branches need to be opened
by Commercial Banks. It should be ensured that each Panchayat
Headquarter has a branch of Commercial Bank within a stipulated
period of time. To have proper monitoring by RBI and Ministry of
Finance a separate window for making available credit under SGSY
needs to be opened. The Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to convey aforesaid observations to the Ministry of Finance
and the Heads of various Commercial Banks for taking the desired
initiative. The follow up action in this regard may be communicated
to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The 10th CLCC meeting was held on 7th February, 2007 in which
the issues of low credit disbursal, poor performance by bank branches
and huge pendency of loan applications were discussed. As a follow
up of the meeting, Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development has written
to Secretary (Financial Sector), Ministry of Finance to take up the matter
of poor credit disbursal by banks with RBI and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). The action taken has resulted in good increase in
mobilization of credit during the last two months of the financial year
2006-07.
Further, the observation of the Standing Committee has been
communicated to the Ministry of Finance as well as Commercial banks
for taking appropriate action.
[Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
O.M. No. H-11020/6/2007-GC (P) dated 23.10.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 37 of Chapter-I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
04 March, 2008 Chairman,
14 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

105
APPENDIX I
STATUS OF IAY WAITLISTS
As on 12.07.2007
Sl.No. Name of State Status
12 3
1. A&N Islands BPL List has been prepared in
Andaman.
2. Arunachal Pradesh W aitlists prepared in all the 15 districts,
displayed in 9 districts and painted on
the walls in 8 districts.
3. Assam Lists prepared, displayed and booklets
printed by all the 23 districts, painted
on walls in 12 districts. Painting work
in other districts is in progress.
Information furnished on format.
4.  Bihar BPL lists prepared and kept in the
Gram Sabha for seeking objections.
After settlement of objections, final BPL
lists will be prepared by August 2007
after which permanent IAY waitlists
will be prepared.
5. Chhattisgarh Waitlists completed in all respects,
including wall painting, by all
districts.
6. Goa Waitlists prepared and same are affixed
on the Notice Board in both the districts
of Goa.
7. Gujarat IAY waitlists have been completed and
painting work is on verge of
completion.
8. Haryana BPL survey conducted in 2002 was
found faulty and therefore it has been

106
12 3
decided to conduct a fresh BPL Survey.
Accordingly, fresh survey has been
conducted and lists will be finalized by
July, 2007.
 9. Himachal Pradesh Waitlists are proposed to be finalized
shortly.
10. J & KW aitlists have been prepared for Jammu
division and are likely to be completed
for Kashmir division shortly.
11. Jharkhand W aitlists prepared by all the 22 districts,
displayed by 19 districts, painted on
walls by 7 districts. Information
furnished on format.
12. Karnataka Out of 5652 Panchayats, 4800 have
prepared the lists.
13. Kerala Data collected for BPL 2002 is being
vetted by Kutumbashree Groups and
after BPL list is prepared, IAY lists will
be prepared.
14. Lakshadweep List published and waiting for
complaints.
15. Madhya Pradesh W aitlists prepared and wall painting
done in all the 48 districts. Also put on
the website.
16. Maharashtra 75% Gram Sabhas prepared the list.
17. Meghalaya Survey completed, but waitlists still to
be prepared.
18. Mizoram Waitlists prepared by all districts.
19. Nagaland IAY waitlists prepared, displayed and
painted on the walls in all the 11
districts. However, the work of
uploading and and printing as booklet
is in progress. Information furnished on
format.

107
12 3
20. Orissa. IAY waitlist prepared based on 1997
BPL Survey. Painting on walls done by
95% Gram Sabhas. The State Govt. has
been advised to re-do it based on 2002
Survey.
21. Punjab Waitlists prepared and painted on the
walls in 8 districts and will be painted
in other districts shortly.
22. Pondicherry 1,17,000 families have been identified
as BPL out of the BPL Census 2002.
25000 families are unsatisfied whose
complaints are pending. It will take
time to sort out the issue.
23. Rajasthan W aitlists prepared and painted in all the
32 districts. Booklet printed in 21
districts and put on website by 3.
24. Sikkim Lists prepared. The waitlists are ready
but they have not been uploaded or
painted on the walls.
25. Tamil Nadu Waitlists are ready and were displayed
on notice board and updating done on
the district website but painting is not
being taken up.
26. Tripura IAY Waitlist prepared and displayed by
all districts.
27. Uttar Pradesh Waitlists prepared and displayed by all
districts. Painted on walls by 57
districts. Information furnished on the
format.
28. Uttaranchal W aitlists prepared, displayed and
painted on walls by all districts.
29.  West Bengal Earlier, the State Government had
requested to exempt from preparation
of waitlists during the year 2006-07.
Now, being MoRD’s methodology of
2002 Census the BPL census 2005 has
been carried out and that the BPL lists
are ready and that IAY waitlists will
be prepared shortly.

108
APPENDIX II
DISTRICT--WISE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE AND PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF
20 FLOOD AFFECTED DISTRICTS DURING 2004-05
2004-05 to 2006-07
BIHAR
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. Name of the Opennning Allocation Releases State Release Total Utilisa- Percentage Nos. of HousesNo. Districts Balance Central State Total Central State Total SMS Misc. Available tion of Target Const- Percentage
as on Matching 1st 2nd Total Matching Col. Release receipts Funds Utilisa- ructed/ of1.4.2004 Share Instal- Instal- Share 9+10 by State interest TAFs tion on Upgraded Target
ment ment (SMS) Govt. etc. Col. 11+13 TAFs Achieved
12 3 4 5 6
789 1 0 1 1
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
1. Araria 0.00 3743.75 1247.92 4991.67 1871.84 1871.84 3743.68 1247.89 4991.57 0.00 0.00 4991.57 3428.59 68.69 19967 9425 47.202. Begusarai 0.00 2267.00 755.67 3022.67 1133.50 1133.50 2267.00 755.67 3022.67 0.00 0.00 3022.67 1652.03 54.65 12091 8029 66.403. Bhagalpur 0.00 914.75 304.92 1219.67 457.38 457.38 914.76 304.92 1219.68 0.00 1206.82 2426.50 1648.00 67.92 4879 4006 82.114. Champaran East 0.00 2729.50 909.83 3639.33 1364.75 1364.75 2729.50 909.83 3639.33 0.00 0.00 3639.33 2485.34 68.29 14557 7290 50.085. Champaran West 0.00 107.50 35.83 143.33 53.75 53.75 107.50 35.83 143.33 17.92 0.00 143.33 37.76 26.34 573 74 12.916. Darbhanga 0.00 2359.25 786.42 3145.67 1179.63 1179.63 2359.26 786.42 3145.68 393.21 0.00 3145.68 3478.31 110.57 12583 11092 88.157. Gopalganj 0.00 1014.75 338.25 1353.00 507.38 507.38 1014.76 338.25 1353.01 0.00 0.00 1353.01 547.88 40.49 5412 2088 38.588. Katihar 0.00 103.00 34.33 137.33 51.50 51.50 103.00 34.33 137.33 0.00 0.00 137.33 129.08 93.99 549 533 97.09

109
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1
31 4 1 51 6 1 7 1 81 9
 9. Khagaria 0.00 5152.50 1717.50 6870.00 2576.25 2576.25 5152.50 1717.50 6870.00 858.75 000 6870.00 291.12 4.24 27480 235 0.8610. Kishanganj 0.00 1208.00 402.67 1610.67 604.00 604.00 1208.00 402.67 1610.67 0.00 0.00 1610.67 285.23 17.71 6443 3366 52.2411.
Madhepura 0.00 589.75 196.58 786.33 294.88 294.88 589.76 196.59 786.35 0.00 0.00 78635 485.27 61.71 3145 1049 33.35
12. Madhubani 0.00 4378.00 1459.33 5837.33 2189.00 2189.00 4378.00 1459.33 5837.33 729.66 0.00 5837.33 2482.76 42.53 23349 16217 69.4513. Muzaffarpur 0.00 2768.75 922.92 3691.67 1384.38 1384.38 2768.76 922.92 3691.68 0.00 0.00 3691.68 2371.06 64.23 14767 11994 81.2214. Purnia 0.00 231.25 77.08 308.33 115.63 115.63 231.26 77.09 308.35 0.00 0.00 308.35 284.05 92.12 1233 742 60.1815. Saharsa 0.00 965.50 321.83 1287.33 482.75 482.75 965.50 321.83 1287.33 0.00 0.00 1287.33 981.25 76.22 5149 677 13.1516. Samastipur 0.00 5849.50 1949.83 7799.33 2924.75 2924.75 5849.50 1949.83 7799.33 974.92 0.00 7799.33 6144.74 78.79 31197 10560 33.8517. Sheohar 0.00 675.25 225.08 900.33 337.63 337.63 675.26 225.09 900.35 0.00 0.00 900.35 708.17 78.66 3601 2619 72.7318. Sitamarhi 0.00 2211.00 737.00 2948.00 1105.50 1105.50 2211.00 737.00 2948.00 0.00 0.00 2948.00 0.00 0.00 11792 0 0.0019. Supul 0.00 2542.00 847.33 3389.33 1271.00 1271.00 2542.00 847.33 3389.33 0.00 0.00 3389.33 105.82 3.12 13557 477 3.5220. Vaishali 0.00 189.00 63.00 252.00 94.50 94.50 189.00 63.00 252.00 0.00 0.00 252.00 416.07 165.11 1008 1182 117.26
Total 0.00 40000.00 13333.33 53333.33 20000.00 20000.00 40000.00 13333.33 53333.33 2974.46 1206.82 54540.15 27962.53 51.27 213332 91655 42.96

110
APPENDIX III
STATEMENT SHOWING DISTRICT-WISE UNSPENT BALANCE
UNDER 400 CRORE SANCTIONED TO 20 DISTRICTS
OF BIHAR FOR FLOODS
 (Rs. in lakhs)
Sl.No. Name of the Districts Unspent
Balance
1. ARARIA 1562.98
2. BEGUSARAI 1370.64
3. BHAGALPUR 778.50
4. CHAMPARAN EAST 1153.99
5. CHAMPARAN WEST 105.57
6. DARBHANGA 0.00
7. GOPALGANJ 805.13
8. KATIHAR 8.25
9. KHAGARIA 6578.88
10. KISHANGANJ 1325.44
11. MADHEPURA 301.08
12. MADHUBANI 3354.57
13. MUZAFFARPUR 1320.62
14. PURNIA 24.30
15. SAHARSA 306.08
16. SAMASTIPUR 1654.59
17. SHEOHAR 192.18
18. SITAMARHI 2948.00
19. SUPUL 3283.51
20. VAISHALI 0.00
T OTAL 27074.31

111
APPENDIX IV
STATEMENT SHOWING COST OF FOODGRAINS CHARGED
UNDER SGRY BY VARIOUS STATES/UTS
Sl.No. State/UT Cost of foodgrains charged
under SGRY per kg.
Wheat Rice
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh
2. Arunachal Pradesh Exempted from compulsory distribution
of foodgrains for 2004-05 & 2005-06
3. Assam — Rs. 8/-
4. Bihar
5. Chhattisgarh Rs. 6.50 —
6. Goa Exempted from compulsory distribution
of foodgrains
7. Gujarat Rs. 5.05 Rs. 7.00
8. Haryana Rs. 5.50 —
9. Himachal Pradesh Rs. 5.15 Rs. 6.90
10. J&K Rs. 4.75 Rs. 6.25
11. Jharkhand
12. Karnataka Rs. 6.25 —
13. Kerala Rs. 5.50 Rs. 6.20
14. Madhya Pradesh Rs. 5.00 Rs. 6.50
15. Maharashtra
16. Manipur — Rs.6.10
17. Meghalaya
18. Mizoram

112
12 3 4
19. Nagaland Rs. 5.00 Rs. 7.00
20. Orissa — Rs. 5.65
21. Punjab Rs. 5.00 —
22. Rajasthan Rs. 4.60 —
23. Sikkim
24. Tamil Nadu — Rs. 5.65
25. Tripura
26. Uttaranchal
27. Uttar Pradesh
28. West Bengal — Rs. 6.00
29. A&N Islands — Rs. 6.06
30. D&N Haveli
31. Daman& Diu Exempted from compulsory distribution
of foodgrains
32. Lakshadweep Exempted from compulsory distribution
of foodgrains
33. Pondicherry — Rs. 5.00
                  Existing Cost Issue Price (CIP) as on 30.6.2006 for
Wheat per quintal Rice per quintal
Above Poverty Line (APL) Rs. 610/- Rs. 830/-
Below Poverty Line (BPL) Rs. 565/- Rs. 615/-

113
APPENDIX V
STATEMENT INDICATING STATUS OF COVERAGE OF
1000+ HABITATIONS UNDER ‘PMGSY’
#
States Eligible 1000+ 1000+ 1000+ 1000+ 1000+ Remarks
Unconnected Habitations Habitations Habitations Balance HabitationsHabitations Cleared connected Covered by Habitations balance to
1000+ under other to be be
PMGSY Schemes Covered connectedupto =3-4-6 =3-5-6
June 2007
12
3456 7 8 9
1. Andhra Pradesh 167 160 158 0 7 9
Land Acquisition problemfor remaining habs
2. Arunachal Pradesh 49 36 16 0 13 33 3. Assam 7323 2657 1343 0 4666 5980 4. Bihar 8187 3030 1197 0 5157 6990  5. Chhattisgarh 2604 1592 973 226 786 1405 6.
Goa
000000 

114
12
3456 7 8 9
7. Gujarat 472 385 369 52 35 51 Land acquisition in process8. Haryana
000000 
9. Himachal Pradesh 262 212 126 0 50 136 10. Jammu & Kashmir 785 469 16 0 316 769 11.
Jharkhand 2622 873 551 0 1749 2071 
12. Karnataka 156 151 149 5 0 2 13. Kerala 121 118 75 0 3 46 14. Madhya Pradesh 5804 5368 2911 0 436 2893  15. Maharashtra 187 154 154 20 13 13 16. Manipur 71 47 9 0 24 62 17. Meghalaya
964035 
18. Mizoram 47 35 23 0 12 24 19. Nagaland 24 24 14 0 0 10 20. Orissa 3703 2576 1515 78 1049 2110 

115
12
3456 7 8 9
21. Punjab 103 94 94 0 9 9
Land Acquisition problemfor remaining 1000+ habs
22. Rajasthan 2725 2688 2650 37 0 38 23. Sikkim 16 16 10 0 0 6 24. Tamil Nadu 577 562 530 0 15 47 30 habitation Island, forest
land
25. Tripura 179 147 20 0 32 159 26. Uttar Pradesh 10898 7322 5318 3138 438 2442 27. Uttaranchal 152 118 44 15 19 93  28. West Bengal 12790 4139 2342 0 8651 10448 T
otal 60033 32979 20611 3571 23483 35851 

116
APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Shri D. Narbula
5. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
6. Shri Sita Ram Singh
7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Balihari Babu
9. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
10. Dr. Ram Prakash
11. Shri P . R. Rajan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A. K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary Grade-II

117
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption
of two draft action taken reports on Demands for Grants (2007-2008)
of the Department of Rural Development and Ministry of Panchayati
Raj. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration
Memoranda Nos. 4 and 5 regarding draft action taken reports on
Twenty-ninth report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007-
08) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) and Thirtieth report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj respectively. The
Committee after deliberations adopted the aforesaid draft reports
without any modification
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
aforesaid draft action taken reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

118
APPENDIX VII
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-
NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (14th LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 58
II. Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government 31
Para Nos.: 2.22, 2.46, 2.47, 2.48, 2.54, 2.55,
2.56, 3.31, 3.32, 3.33, 3.57, 3.58, 3.59, 3.60,
3.61, 3.62, 3.76, 3.101, 3.102, 3.103, 3.104,
3.105, 3.106, 3.113, 3.114, 3.135, 3.142, 3.143,
3.154, 3.155 and 3.169
Percentage to the total recommendations (53.45%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies 1
Para No.: 2.13
Percentage to total recommendations (1.72%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee 22
Para Nos.: 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21,
2.35, 2.36, 2.37, 2.38, 2.39, 2.42, 2.43, 3.25,
3.26, 3.27, 3.28, 3.73, 3.82, 3.83 and 3.115
Percentage to total recommendations (37.93%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited 4
Para Nos.: 3.29, 3.30, 3.74 and 3.136
Percentage to total recommendations  (6.90%)

THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Twenty-ninth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 039
Price : Rs. 126.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2007-08) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government .................................................. 37
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 73
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 77
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 102
APPENDICES
I. Status of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) Waitlist
(As on 12.07.2007) .................................................... 105
II. District-wise financial performance and physical
achievements of 20 flood affected districts during
2004-05 to 2006-07 under Indira Awaas Yojana .... 108
III. Statement showing district-wise unspent balance
under 400 crore sanctioned to 20 districts of
Bihar for floods under Indira Awaas Yojana .... 110
IV . Statement showing cost of foodgrains charged
under SGRY by various States/UTs .................... 111
V. Statement indicating status of coverage of
1000+ habitations under ‘PMGSY’ ....................... 113
VI. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 25 February, 2008................ 116
VII. Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Ninth Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 118
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri George Fernandes
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari*
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
12. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
17. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
18. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
#
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
* Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari, MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 30 August, 2007, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4022
dated August 30, 2007.
# Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri Tarit Baran Topdar, MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Energy to Standing Committee on Rural Development
w.e.f. 12 December, 2007 as intimated  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4366
dated 12 December, 2007.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Dr. Ram Prakash
28. Shri P .R. Rajan
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
31. Shrimati Kanimozhi @
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri G.C. Prasad — Committee Officer
@Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha nominated Shrimati Kanimozhi, MP , (RS) to Standing
Committee on Rural Development w.e.f. 15 September, 2007  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin
Part-II, Para No. 4096 dated 19 September, 2007.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-third Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2006-07) on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Department of
Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Twenty-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 14
May, 2007. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 23 October, 2007.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
25 February, 2008.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-ninth Report of the
Committee is given in Appendix V .
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
04 March, 2008 Chairman,
14 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

33
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Twenty-ninth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI