9
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.4.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 19.4.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Chaitra, 1927 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 012
Price : Rs. 52.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (ix)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory ................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Overall Evaluation of the Demands for Grants
2005-2006 of the Department of Rural
Development .............................................................. 3
Proposed outlay, outlay agreed to, total releases
and expenditure ........................................................ 3
Scheme-wise, comparative analysis ...................... 5
Cooperative analysis of allocation made in
2005-2006 ..................................................................... 7
Supplementary Demands for Grants and
surrender of outlay .................................................. 9
Monitoring of different Schemes .......................... 10
Below Poverty Line (BPL) Census, 2002 ............ 16
Role of Panchayats in implementation of Schemes
and simplification of procedure............................ 17
Gender Budgeting ..................................................... 18
Implementation of schemes in North-Eastern
Region .......................................................................... 20
C
HAPTER III Scheme-wise assessment of Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department of  Rural
Development .............................................................. 21
(i) National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Vis-a-vis  Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
(SGRY) and National Food for Work Programme
(NFFWP) ..................................................................... 21

PAGE
(ii)
(ii) Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) .... 32
(iii) Rural Housing (RH) ................................................ 43
(iv) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) ... 47
(v) Provision for Urban Amenities in Rural Areas
(PURA) ........................................................................ 57
(vi) Training Section: National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD) ............................................... 59
(vii) Str engthening and establishment of State Institute
of Rural Development (SIRD) and Extension
Training Centres (ETCs) .......................................... 60
(viii) Organisation of Training Courses, Seminars and
Workshops (OTC) ..................................................... 61
(ix) Assistance to Council for Advancement of People’s
Action and Rural Technology (CAPART) ........... 62
APPENDICES
I. Statement showing Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates
and Actual Expenditure during 9th Plan by the Department
of Rural Development ............................................................... 68
II. Statement showing proposed outlay, outlay agreed to, total
release, Budget Estimate, Revised Estimate and Actual
Expenditure, during 10th Plan by the Department of Rural
Development ................................................................................ 70
III. Comparative Data with regard to BE 2004-2005, RE
2004-2005 and BE 2005-2006 under various schemes of the
Ministry of Rural Development .............................................. 72
IV . Statement showing implementing Agency and release of
funds under various schemes of Department of Rural
Development ................................................................................ 73
V. List of 150 most backward districts under the National
Food for Work Programme during 2004-2005 .................... 74
VI. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
29 March, 2005 ............................................................................ 82
VII. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
8 April, 2005 ................................................................................ 85
VIII. Statement of observations/recommendations ...................... 87

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
12. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
14. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
15. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
24. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
25. Shri Penumalli Madhu
@26. Vacant
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
*29. Vacant
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
5. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Committee Officer
@ Vice Shri Stephen Marandi ceased to be a member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f.
16 March, 2005 consequent upon his election to the Jharkhand Legislative Assembly
vide Rajya Sabha Secretariat notification No. RS. 10/2005-T dated 11 April, 2005.
* Vice Shri Keshubhai S. Patel ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.
22 March, 2005 consequent upon his resignation from the membership of Standing
Committee on Rural Development.

ABBREVIATIONS
AARDO — Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation
ADB — Asian Development Bank
APL — Above Poverty Line
BE — Budget Estimates
BLCC — Block Level Coordination Committee for SGSY
BPL — Below Poverty Line
CAPART — Council for Advancement of People’s  Action and
Rural Technology
CCSS — Credit-cum-subsidy Scheme
CIRDAP — Centre on Integrated Rural Development in Asia
and Pacific
CLCC — Centre Level Coordination Committee for SGSY
CLGF — Commonwealth Local Government Forum
DAVP — Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
DLCC — District Level Coordination Committee
DLM — District Level Monitoring
DRDA — District Rural Development Agency
DWCRA — Development of Women and Children in Rural
Areas
EAS — Employment Assurance Scheme
ETC — Extension Training Centre
FAQ— Fair Average Quality
FCI — Food Corporation of India
GJRHFS — Golden Jubilee Rural Housing Finance Scheme
GKY — Ganga Kalyan Yojana
HUDCO — Housing and Urban Development Corporation
Limited
HLC — High Level Committee
HSD — High Speed Committee
IAY — Indira Awaas Yojana
(v)

IBRD — International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
ICAR — Indian Council for Agricultural Research
IEC — Information, Education and Communication
IRDP — Integrated Rural Development Programme
IRMA — Indian Institute of Rural Management, Anand
IWDP — Integrated Wastelands Development Programme
JGSY — Jawahar Gram Samridhi Yojana
JRY — Jawahar Rozgar Yojana
LIBOR — London Inter Bank Offer (Exchange) Rate
MPR — Monthly Progress Report
MNP — Minimum Needs Programme
MWS — Million Wells Scheme
NABARD — National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development
NC — Not Covered
NCT — National Capital Territory
NGO — Non-Governmental Organization
NIRD — National Institute of Rural Development
NLM — National Level Monitors
NRRDA — National Rural Roads Development Agency
NSAP — National Social Assistance Programme
NSSO — National Sample Survey Organisation
NYK — Nehru Yuvak Kendra
OB — Organization of Beneficiaries
OTC —O rganisation of Training Courses/Seminars/
Workshops
PC — Public Cooperation regarding promotion of
Voluntary Action in Rural Development
PDS — Public Distribution System
PMGY — Prime Minister’s Gramodaya Yojana
PMGSY — Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
PURA — Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas
PRIs — Panchayati Raj Institutions
RBI — Reserve Bank of India
(vi)

RBC — Rural Building Centres
RC — Regional Committees of CAPART
RD — Rural Development
RE — Revised Estimates
RH — Rural Housing Schemes
Rs. — Rupees
SAY — Samagra Awaas Yojana
SC — Scheduled Caste
SHG — Self Help Group
SGRY — Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
SGSY — Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
SIDBI — Small Industries Development Bank of India
SIRD — State Institute of Rural Development
SITRA — Supply of Improved Tool Kits to Rural Artisans
SLCC — State Level Coordination Committee
SLSC — State Level Sanctioning Committee
ST — Scheduled Tribe
SVO — Support Voluntary Organisations
TRC — Technology Resource Centre
TRYSEM — Training of Rural Youth for Self-Employment
UB/OB — Unspent Balance/Opening Balance
UC — Utilisation Certificate
UT — Union territory
ZP — Zilla Parishad
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Ninth Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development).
2. Demands for Grants have been examined by the Committee
under Rule 331E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
on 29 March, 2005.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 8 April, 2005.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
for placing before them the requisite material and their considered
views in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. They would also like to place on record their deep sense of
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 April, 2005 Chairman,
25 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(ix)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The basic function of the Ministry of Rural Development is to
realise the objectives of alleviating rural poverty, ensuring improved
quality of life for the rural population, especially of those living below
the poverty line through formulating and implementing different
Yojanas/Programmes relating to various spheres of rural life and
activities. The Ministry consists of the following three Departments:
(i) Department of Rural Development;
(ii) Department of Land Resources; and
(iii) Department of Drinking Water Supply.
(i) Department of Rural Development
1.2 The Department of Rural Development formulates and
implements Schemes for generation of self-employment and wage
employment, provision of housing to rural poor, rural roads and
provides support services and other quality inputs such as assistance
for strengthening of District Rural Development Agency Administration,
training and research, human resource development, development of
voluntary action etc. for proper implementation of the Programme.
1.3 The Ministry implements various Central Sector and Centrally
Sponsored Schemes. The main Schemes being implemented by the
Department are:
(a) Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY);
(b) Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY);
(c) National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP);
(d) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY);
(e) Rural Housing (RH): Indira Awaas Yojana;
(f) District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) Administration
Scheme.

2
1.4 The Department of Rural Development has three autonomous
bodies under its administrative control viz. (i) Council of Advancement
of People’s Action and Rural Technology (CAPART); (ii) National
Institute of Rural Development (NIRD); and (iii) National Rural Roads
Development Agency (NRRDA).
1.5 The overall Demands for Grants of the Department for
2005-06 are for Rs. 22163.37 crore. However, after deducting the
recoveries expected during the year, the net Budget of the Department
during 2005-06 BE is Rs. 18,353.87 crore both for Plan and non-Plan.
1.6 The Demands for Grants of the Department have been
presented to Parliament under Demand No. 79. The detailed Demands
for Grants of the Department was laid in Lok Sabha on 18 March,
2005.
1.7 In the present Report, the Committee have restricted their
examination only to the major issues concerning the Department and
the Programmes/Schemes that are being implemented in the context
of Demands for Grants 2005-2006.

CHAPTER II
OVERALL  EVALUATION  OF  THE  DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
2004-2005 OF THE DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Proposed outlay, outlay as agreed to, total releases and expenditure
made during 9th and 10th Plan
The Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and actual expenditure
during 9th Plan as a whole and scheme-wise is indicated in
Appendix-I. The proposed allocation, outlay agreed to by Planning
Commission, total releases (up to 15th March, 2005) during 10th Plan
as a whole and scheme-wise is indicated in Appendix-II.
2.2 The analysis of the comparative data of 9th and 10th Plan
indicates the following:
(i) Budget Estimates during 9th Plan are for Rs. 41,014.70 crore
against the outlay agreed to, amounting to Rs. 32,869.87
crore, which means additional Rs. 8,144.83 crore were
allocated than what was agreed to during 9th Plan.
(ii) Revised Estimates during 9th Plan was to the tune of
Rs. 40,752.65 crore against the Budget Estimates of
Rs. 41,014.70 crore which indicates that allocation was
reduced by Rs. 262.05 crore and were allocated lesser at
Revised Estimates stage as compared to what was allocated
at Budget Estimates stage.
(iii) Actual expenditure during 9th Plan was Rs. 579.48 crore
lesser if compared to Budget Estimates and Rs. 317.43 crore
lesser if compared to Revised Estimates of that plan period.
(iv) During 10th Plan, outlay agreed to is Rs. 56,748 crore against
the proposed outlay of Rs. 1,29,464.27 crore which indicate
less than half allocation of what was proposed to the
Planning Commission was made.
(v) If outlay actually allocated at Revised Estimates stage during
9th Plan is compared to 10th Plan agreed to outlay, it is
Rs. 15,995.35 crore higher.
3

4
(vi) During first three years of 10th Plan i.e.  2002-2003,
2003-2004 and 2004-2005 total releases are to the tune of
Rs. 41,464.52 crore which indicate that Rs. 15,283.48 crore
i.e. around 1/4 of the outlay agreed to is the balance for
the remaining two years of 10th Plan.
2.3 Finance Minister in his Speech on Budget (2005-2006) has
indicated higher targets under certain schemes of Rural Development
in line with an overarching vision to build India called ‘Bharat Nirman’
as referred to by the President in his address to Parliament. Some of
the ambitious targets indicated to be achieved by 2009 by the
Government are:
(i) to connect all villages that have a population of 1,000 (or
500 in hilly/tribal areas) with a road;
(ii) to construct 60 lakh additional houses for the poor.
2.4 The Committee find from the analysis of 9th and 10th Plan
outlay as indicated above that although during 9th Plan, the actual
allocation was enhanced by Rs. 8,144.83 crore, there was reduction
of Rs. 262.05 crore at Revised Estimates stage. The expenditure
position further indicates under spending of Rs. 317.43 crore if
compared to the outlay given at Revised Estimates stage during 9th
Plan. The Committee further note that although the allocation during
10th Plan has been enhanced by Rs.15,995.35 crore if compared to
9th Plan allocation, the allocation as agreed to is far lesser i.e. less
than half of the projected outlay during 10th Plan. The Committee
also find that certain ambitious projections have been made by the
Government under the vision ‘Bharat Nirman’. The Committee fail
to understand how such ambitious targets would be achieved with
the outlay that is almost half of what was projected to the Planning
Commission. Scheme-wise details have been analysed in the
subsequent Paragraphs/Chapters of the Report. The Committee would
like to strongly recommend the Government, to pursue with the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for adequate allocation
commensurating the targets projected by the Government, so that
the benefits envisaged under different schemes of the Department
could be extended to the poorest of the poor in the country. While
approaching Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance in this regard
the concerns of the Standing Committee should be duly
communicated.

5
2.5 While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee
strongly feel that whatever allocation is agreed to at Budget Estimates
stage should not further be reduced at Revised Estimates stage as
has been done during 9th Plan, since, even the slightest reduction
of outlay means depriving the lakhs of poor of the little hope that
is intended by such schemes of the Union Government.
2.6 One of the biggest concern expressed by the Committee
almost every year is underutilization of resources. The aforesaid data
of under spending i.e. Rs. 337.43 crore as compared to Revised
Estimates during 9th Plan indicate the shortfall in releases by the
Union Government to States/Union territory Administrations. The
picture of under spending is more clear when we analyse the under
spending by way of huge opening balances with different State
Governments, the analysis of which has been done in the subsequent
part of the Report. Even if actual releases are taken into consideration,
the Committee feel that the amount of Rs.337.43 crore is a big amount
in the resources starved economy of the country. In view of the
aforesaid position the Committee hold the strong view that not even
a single paise of the allocated amount should remain as unutilized.
The Committee strongly calls for more effective steps on the part of
the Government in this regard.
Scheme-wise comparative analysis of the data with regard to
BE 2004-2005 and BE 2005-2006 under the Schemes of the Department
of Rural Development
2.7 The Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Rural
Development have been presented to Parliament vide Demand No.79.
In the Detailed Demands for Grants (2005-2006) the following data
has been indicated:
(In Rs. crore)
Year Plan Recover- Net-Plan Non Net Budget Percentage
ies from Budget Plan Col. (4+5) change
Plan
Budget
2003-04 (Actuals) 17826.198 2325 15501.198 18.07 15519.26
2004-05 (BE) 13585.40 2148 11437.40 18.56 11455.90
2004-05 (RE) 16014.40 2148 13866.40 19 13885.40 +21.20%
2005-06 (BE) 22143.50 3809.50 18334 19.87 18353.87 +32.18%

6
2.8 The net Budget of the Department has been increased from
Rs.13,885.40 crore in 2004-05 (RE), to Rs.18,353.87 crore in 2005-2006
BE [ i.e. an increase of Rs. 4,468.47 crore or (+) 32.18 %].
2.9 It can also be seen from the above table that, the net budget
of the Department in 2004-2005 BE was Rs. 11,455.90 crore which has
been increased to Rs. 18353.87 crore  [i.e. an increase of Rs. 6897.91 crore
or (+) 60.21 percent].
2.10 When asked about the plans of Department to spend the
enhanced allocation, the Department has stated in the replies as below:
“The increase in the budget allocation for 2005-2006 as compared
to B.E. of 2004-2005 is mainly on account of (i) provision of
Rs. 6,000 crore for the new schemes of National Food for Work
Programme inclusive of Rs. 1,500 crore for SGRY for districts
identified under National Food for Work Programme and
(ii) additional provision of Rs.1,767 crore under PMGSY due to
higher cess collection from diesel and enhanced provision for
Externally Aided Projects. The funds under these schemes will be
spent, based on the State-wise allocation made as per the funding
criteria provided under the guidelines of these schemes.
Under National Food for Work Programme, it is expected that
with this level of investment it will be possible to provide
100 days of supplementary wage employment to one member of
each BPL family in the rural areas of the identified 150 districts.
Though no physical targets are fixed under Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana, the enhanced allocation will help State Governments
to take up more rural road projects during the year 2005-2006 as
compared to 2004-2005.
It may also be clarified that out of the total plan budget allocation
of Rs. 22,143.50 crore being shown in the Detailed Demands for
Grants 2005-2006, the actual expenditure under plan budget of the
Department is Rs. 18,334.00 crore. The remaining amount of
Rs. 3,809.50 crore is for intra-account transfer to Central Road
Fund(CRF) against accruals from the cess on diesel. The amount is
a notional provision and is not an addition to the total plan budget
of Rs.18,334.00 crore.”

7
Comparative analysis of allocation made during 2005-2006 as
compared to previous year
2.11 A comparative analysis of data with regard to BE 2004-2005
and BE 2005-2006 indicates that there is overall enhancement of
Rs. 4,468.47 crore in allocation during 2005-2006 as compared to RE of
previous year. The scheme wise analysis ( Appendix III ) however,
indicates that there is a shortfall in allocation under the major schemes
of the Department i.e. SGSY (Rs. 37.76 crore), SGRY (Rs. 990 crore)
Housing (Rs. 109.40 crore), DRDA Administration Scheme
(Rs. 8.69 crore), and Training Schemes (Rs. 0.4 crore).
2.12 When enquired about the reasons for shortfall in allocation of
major schemes of the Department, the following has been submitted:
“The Planning Commission had allocated a total Plan outlay of
Rs. 18,334.00 crore for the Department of Rural Development for
the year 2005-2006. The scheme-wise distribution of this outlay, as
finally approved by the Ministry of Finance, showed reduction in
the outlay of certain schemes like SGRY, SGSY, IAY, DRDA
Administration and Training. The matter has been taken up with
the Ministry of Finance who have agreed to make re-allocation/
re-adjustments through re-appropriations/ Supplementary Demands
during the course of the year.”
2.13 So far as the details of the additional allocation sought by the
Department is concerned, the Department has furnished the following
data:
(Rs.  in crore)
Name of the Scheme Additional allocation
proposed to be made
during the year
2005-2006
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) 400
National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) 2480*
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) Same as last year
Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) 270
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) 1767
Watershed Development Programme 143
*NFFWP was launched w.e.f. November, 2004 and an allocation of Rs. 2020 crore was
made for 2004-2005.

8
2.14 Further the Secretary during the course of oral evidence
submitted the following data with regard to the projection for the
year 2005-2006:
(Rs.  in crore)
Allocation asked for 53,740.61
For foodgrains 27325.87
For Schemes other than foodgrains (53740.61 – 27325.87 =) 26414.74
Outlay provided  18334.00
Shortfall against the projections  8080.74
2.15 The Committee find that although the overall outlay (both
plan and non plan) during 2005-2006 has been enhanced by
Rs. 4,468.47 crore as against Revised Estimates of previous year and
by Rs. 6,897.91 crore (excluding North Eastern region allocation) as
compared to Budget Estimates of previous year, there is net reduction
of outlay under the priority schemes of the Department viz
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana, Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar
Yojana, Rural Housing, DRDA Administration scheme and Training
scheme. The detailed analysis of the impact of reduction on
implementation of these schemes has been given in the subsequent
part of the Report. Here the Committee from the data furnished by
the Department find that the increase in allocation is only under
National Food for work Programme and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY). The Committee while appreciating the
Government’s targets of providing 100 days wage employment to
each family in rural India, feel that the outlay for this programme
should not be provided at the cost of other established major schemes
of the Department. The Committee also note that the Department
has approached the Planning Commission for providing enhanced
allocation under these schemes. The Committee express their strongest
concern over the trend of allocating outlay at the cost of other
schemes and disapprove the policy of the Government in providing
adequate outlay for a scheme after adjustments in one or the other
schemes. The Committee would like that their strongest concern in
this regard should be properly conveyed to the Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance.
2.16 Further, while noting that although the Ministry of Finance
has agreed to provide additional allocation at Supplementary Grants
stage, the Committee feel that sanction of grants at Supplementary

9
Grants stage always leads to uncertainty. In view of this, they would
like that adequate outlay commensurating the targets should be
provided at Budget Estimates stage for the schemes.
Supplementary Demands for Grants and surrender of outlay during
2004-2005
2.17 The details with regard to Supplementary Grants seeking
additional requirement of funds during 2004-2005 as submitted by the
Department are as under:
Sl.No. Supplementary Amount Purpose for which Supplementary
Batch No. (Rs. in crore) Grant was obtained
1. 1st Batch 2020 For implementation of new Scheme
of National Food for Work
Programme.
9 For meeting the additional
requirement for the Scheme of
PURA.
400 For construction of houses in the
flood affected districts of Bihar.
2. 2nd Batch  0.01 T oken provision was sought for
(Token) meeting additional requirement (Rs.
242 crore) under the lump-sum
provision for North Eastern Region
from the savings within the Grant.
0.01 T oken provision was sought for
(Token) meeting additional liability of
Rs. 5 crore under the Scheme of
State Institutes of Rural
Development (SIRDs) from the
savings within the Grant.
0.44 For meeting the additional
requirement of Establishment
expenditure of the Department.

10
2.18 The details of the amount surrendered since 2002-2003 are as
under:-
PLAN
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Amount Amount
Expenditure surrendered surrendered
as compared as compared
to B.E. to R.E.
2002-2003 10270.00 15176.00 15043.19 0.00 132.81
2003-2004 10270.00 15500.00 15503.53 0.00  0.00
NON-PLAN
2002-2003 19.41 19.13 18.61 0.80 0.52
2003-2004 19.28 18.76 18.03 1.25 0.73
2.19 The Committee are unable to comprehend the position of
seeking additional funds as Supplementary Grants and then
surrendering the amount at the close of the year. To understand the
position in a much better way, the Committee would like to be
informed about the details of the physical achievement under the
sectors for which Supplementary Grants have been sought for. The
Committee would also like to be informed about the position of
amount surrendered during 2004-2005 so as to enable them to
comment further in this regard.
Monitoring of different Schemes of the Department
2.20 The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech stressed to improve
the quality of implementation and enhance the efficiency and
accountability of the delivery mechanism. He stated that mechanism
will be put in place to measure the development outcome of all major
schemes. He also stated that it would be ensured that programmes
and schemes will not be allowed to continue indefinitely from one
plan period to the next without an independent and in-depth
evaluation.
2.21 The Ministry has further substantiated by stating that their
monitoring system consists of the following:
(i) Review of programme implementation by the Union
Ministers with the Chief Ministers and other State Ministers
and senior officers concerned with the implementation of
the Programmes of the Ministry;

11
(ii) Performance Review Committee under the chairmanship of
Secretary (RD) and consisting of representatives from the
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Programme Implementation,
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Planning Commission,
Secretaries of Rural Development of all the States besides
senior officers of the Ministry;
(iii) Area Officer’s Scheme;
(iv) V igilance and Monitoring Committees under the
chairmanship of Hon’ble Members of Parliament;
(v) Periodical progress reports and MIS system;
(vi) District Level Monitoring through independent professional
agencies;
(vii) National Level Monitors;
 (viii) Concurrent and Quick Evaluation Studies; and
(ix) Impact Assessment Studies.
 It has further been informed by the Ministry that independent
in-depth Evaluation Studies have been done for the following schemes/
programmes:
9th Plan
(i) Concurrent Evaluation of Integrated Rural Development
Programme (IRDP).
(ii) Concurrent Evaluation of Million Wells Scheme.
(iii) Quick Evaluation of 7 major schemes such as SITRA,
TRYSEM, JRY etc.
10th Plan
(i) Concurrent Evaluation of Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar
Yojana (SGSY).
(ii) Concurrent Evaluation of Special Projects under SGSY.
(iii) Concurrent Evaluation of Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar
Yojana (SGRY).
(iv) Concurrent Evaluation of Innovative Stream of Rural
Housing and Habitat Development projects.

12
(v) Concurrent Evaluation of Samagra Awaas Yojana.
(vi) Intensive Evaluation Study of Watershed Programmes in
15 States.
(vii) Mid-Term Evaluation of Watershed under DPAP/ DDP/
IWDP in 9 States.
(viii) Quick Impact Assessment Study of Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) in 9 States.
(ix) Rapid Evaluation of Sector Reform Projects under the
Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme in 20 Districts
of 20 States.
(x) Impact Assessment Studies of all Rural Development
programmes in selected Districts.
Evaluation Studies in progress:
(i) Evaluation of Sector Reform Projects under the Accelerated
Rural Water Supply Programme in 65 Districts of 25 selected
States.
(ii) Concurrent Evaluation of special projects under SGSY.
(iii) Impact Assessment Studies of all Rural Development
programmes in selected Districts.
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
2.22 As per the information given in the Performance Budget
2005-2006 of the Department, Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
are constituted for ensuring quality expenditure and effective
monitoring of programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development. These
Committees have been constituted at the State/Union territory and
district levels to monitor execution of the Scheme/Programmes in the
most effective manner and within the given time frame. These
Committees are expected to keep a close watch on the implementation
of the Programmes of the Ministry as per prescribed procedures and
guidelines. As per the guidelines, the meetings of these Committees at
each level are to be held at least once, in every quarter after giving
sufficient notice to all members.
2.23  As per the written communication received from the
Department of Rural Development, 8 State level and 84 district level
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees have been constituted so far.

13
Besides, it has been added that meetings of the district level Vigilance
and Monitoring Committees have been held in 19 districts and that of
the State level Committees only in one State. When the issue of
functioning of such Committees was deliberated, the Secretary during
the course of oral evidence stated that the district level Committees
have been constituted in all the districts but meetings have not been
held in 84 districts. At the State level, the action is being taken at the
highest level.
2.24  As regards the position of Chairman of district Committees,
it has been stated that the Chairman of district level Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees are nominated by the Ministry of Rural
Development in accordance with the guidelines issued in this regard.
Area Officers Scheme of the Department of Rural Development
2.25  The officers of Department of Rural Development undertake
field visits to different States with a view to monitor the implementation
of different schemes of the Department of Rural Development. When
asked about the impact of this type of monitoring mechanism, the
Department has informed that 43 officers undertook visits during the
last three years. The main observations of the area officers are as
under :
(i) On the whole, programmes are being implemented in almost
all the districts in accordance with the guidelines issued by
the Ministry of Rural Development;
(ii) The rural poor have been benefited to a large extent and a
number of them have crossed the poverty line over the
years;
(iii) The Area Officers have documented, a number of success
stories with regard to micro-enterprises development,
provision of self-employment, improvement in quality of
life of people, solidarity of Self Help Groups etc;
(iv) A large number of durable community and social assets
have been created under the wage employment programme
in several districts of the country. These assets, by and large,
have proved useful to the community;
(v) In several States houses build under IAY has been very
useful in improving the quality and living environment of
the rural poor. There is a high satisfaction level to the extent

14
of 96 per cent in case of IAY houses. Beneficiary selection
under IAY has also been largely made by the Gram Sabhas;
(vi) People’s participation in programme implementation is seen
in almost all the States; and
(vii) There is a visible improvement in the socio economic life of
the village community.
2.26 The Area Offices have also brought out certain deficiencies in
programme implementation which is as follows:
(i) In some cases wrong selection of beneficiaries/swarozgaries
is reported.
(ii) In a few cases there is delay in release of State share to the
Implementing Agencies.
(iii) Bunching of loan applications under SGSY/delay in
disbursement of loan to the SHGs.
(iv) At times there is lack of coordination among various
Implementing Agencies/Line Departments.
(v) In a few cases the need to strengthen the monitoring
arrangement is felt.
(vi) Shortage of staff in block and Districts is reported.
(vii) There is wage differential in the male and female workers
in some cases.
(viii) Distribution of foodgrains under SGRY sometimes is delayed
mainly because the low priority accorded by the FCI in
supply of grains under this programme.
2.27 The Committee strongly feel that there is an urgent need to
improve the quality of implementation and enhance the efficiency
and accountability of the monitoring mechanism as stressed by
Finance Minister in his speech while presenting the Budget for the
year 2005-2006. They also note from the information furnished by
the Department that different types of monitoring mechanism like
Concurrent Evaluation, different types of Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees, Area Officers Schemes etc. are in place. The Committee
further find that during 10th Plan, independent and in-depth
evaluation studies were conducted for all the major schemes of the
Department. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details,

15
scheme-wise, of the major findings and corrective action taken
thereon by the Department so as to enable them to analyse the
usefulness of the system and comment further in this regard. The
Committee would also like to be informed about the way these
studies could provide an input for further improvement in the
schemes of the Department.
2.28 The Committee further note that the Ministry has introduced
a system of District and State level Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees. These Committees are to be constituted by the Union
Ministry of Rural Development. From the information provided by
the Department it seems that such Committees could be an effective
monitoring mechanism only in few States. Not only that, there is
confusion on the issue of constitution of such Committees. Different
data regarding the constitution of Committees were indicated in the
written note as well as during the course of oral evidence as indicated
in the preceding para of the report. The Committee are constrained
to note that if this is the state of affairs of the Committees that
were to be constituted by the Union Government, the status of other
Committees being constituted by State Governments can be well
imagined. The Committee would like the Department to furnish a
detailed note indicating the action taken by them for early
constitution of such Committees. Besides it should be ensured that
such Committees are constituted in all States and Districts without
any further delay. Further no State or Union territory should be
allowed to be exempted from constituting the said vigilance and
monitoring Committees. Not only that, there is an urgent need to
monitor that the sittings of such Committees are held periodically
as per guidelines so as to prove an effective mechanism for effective
implementation of various schemes of the Department for which
crores of rupees are being spent annually.
2.29 The Committee would further like to be apprised about the
corrective action taken on the findings of the area officers under the
monitoring system of the Ministry of Rural Development. The
Committee would also like to be apprised about the number of
States/Districts covered by the said scheme during the last three
years so as to enable them to analyse the usefulness of this system
and comment further in this regard. The Committee would also like
to recommend that there should be an inbuilt mechanism in each of
the schemes for regular monitoring/evaluation. Not only that, there
should be specific allocation of outlay for the purpose. Besides, the
Committee find that there is no system of fixing accountability. They

16
feel that there should be well defined system of fixing accountability
and some sort of action against the defaulter officers/agencies
involved in the implementation of the schemes/programme to serve
as a deterrent for others. Further, there is a need to have a more
transparent system for implementation of various schemes so that
the public may be well informed about the spending under various
schemes. Such a system will automatically put a pressure on the
implementing authorities to perform better and deliver results.
Gram Sabha in this regard can be the best forum in rural areas.
There is an urgent need to strengthen the Gram Sabhas so that they
can function as an institution of social audit. The Committee would
like the Department to take urgent action in this regard and inform
the Committee accordingly.
Below Poverty Line (BPL) Census, 2002
2.30  The Committee were earlier informed that the Ministry of
Rural Development has released Rs. 75.96 crore to all States and Union
territories for conducting the BPL Census, 2002 ( refer paragraph 2.39
of 3rd Report—14th Lok Sabha). Further as stated in the Performance
Budget (2005-2006), the Ministry is making efforts to finalise the results
and make it operational immediately.
2.31 It has further been stated in the Performance Budget that in
consultation with the Planning Commission the Ministry has decided
that the number of persons identified through the BPL Census, 2002
may not exceed the number of BPL persons estimated by the Planning
Commission during 1999-2000 for the rural sector or the number of
persons as per the adjusted share completed by the Planning
Commission which ever is higher. An additional 10 per cent may be
permitted to account for the transit poor.
2.32 In another document of the Department, the Committee have
been informed that the results of BPL Census, 2002 have not yet been
finalised because of direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court. The matter
is still pending before the Supreme Court. It has further been stated
that the exercise of BPL Census, 2002 is yet to be completed in terms
of tabulation and analysis, as per the Tabulation Plan of the Ministry.
As regards the expenditure with regard to the money released to State
Governments for conducting said survey, the Ministry has informed
that the complete details of expenditure from the States/Union
territories will be received after completion of the survey.

17
2.33 While noting that the results of BPL survey (2002) could
not be finalised due to the direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court, the
Committee would like to be apprised about the latest position with
regard to the hearing on the aforesaid case by Hon’ble Supreme
Court. Further the Committee are concerned to note that the exercise
of BPL Census, is further being delayed by the State Governments/
Union territory Administrations. The Committee strongly recommend
that pending decision by the Supreme Court, the exercise by States/
Union territories should be completed expeditiously and the
provisional results should be made available by the Government so
that the results could be finalised immediately when the decision in
this regard is taken by the Supreme Court.
2.34 The Committee are further unhappy to note the decision of
the Government according to which the number of BPL persons
estimated should not exceed those of identified as per 1999-2000
survey. The Committee feel that such an arbitrary limit of BPL
persons to be identified will do a great injustice to the genuine BPL
persons who could be debarred from certain benefits. Not only that,
it would be a major factor for providing unreasonable authority to
the agencies involved, thereby inviting corruption and malpractices.
The Committee strongly recommend not to fix any such limitations.
They would also like that their concern in this regard should also
be brought before the Planning Commission and matter should be
reviewed afresh.
Role of Panchayats in implementation of schemes and Simplification
of procedure under different schemes of the Department
2.35 The different schemes of the Department are implemented by
different implementing agencies and funds in most of the cases are
directly released to DRDAs. The position in this regard has been
indicated in Appendix-IV. The implementing Agency under only one
scheme i.e. SGRY is Panchayats. In all other schemes, the involvement
of Panchayats is there but the implementing agency is not exclusively
the Panchayats.
2.36 The Committee find that there is an urgent need to
implement all the schemes of the Department directly by the
Panchayati Raj Institutions in the true spirit of the mandate of the
Constitution as per article 243G of the Constitution. Besides the funds
for all the schemes should be released directly to Panchayats in the

18
specific accounts for the purpose. Such a system will not only
empower Panchayats but also improve the implementation of the
Programme. The common Implementing Agency and the funds
transfer agency would further simplify the procedure and avoid delay
in transfer of funds. The Committee in their earlier reports had also
been drawing the attention of the Government in this regard. While
reiterating their earlier stand, the Committee would like that earnest
action in this regard should be taken.
Gender Budgeting
2.37 Finance Minister in his Budget speech (2005-2006) has
indicated that all the Departments will be required to present gender
budgets as well as make benefit incidence analyses.
2.38 As a follow up to the instructions issued by the Ministry of
Finance, the Department of Rural Development has created a ‘Gender
Budgeting Cell’ under the overall supervision of Chief Economic
Adviser (Monitoring) for dealing with the issues relating to Gender
Budgeting. The Department has informed that it was decided that in
respect of the Schemes viz. SGSY, SGRY, IAY and PMGSY under which
women are benefited directly or indirectly, a para in financial
provisions/physical targets, if any, benefiting women under these
schemes may be included in the Performance Budget and Annual
Report. Accordingly a para on Gender Budgeting has been included in
the Performance Budget (2005-2006) and Annual Report (2004-2005).
2.39 Under SGSY, it is envisaged that 50 per cent of the SHGs
formed in each block should be exclusively for women who will
account for at least 40 percent of Swarozgaries. During 2003-2004,
percentage of women beneficiaries was 52.46 per cent and during
2004-2005 (upto 31 January, 2005), the percentage of women beneficiaries
is 53.60 per cent. Under SGRY, no specific targets for women
beneficiaries assisted have been fixed but efforts are made by the
Department to provide 30 per cent of employment opportunities for
women under the programme. During 2003-2004, as per the data
provided by the Department, around 25 per cent of beneficiaries were
women and during 2004-2005 around 15 per cent of beneficiaries could
be benefited (upto 31 January, 2005). Under Indira Awaas Yojana, as
per the guidelines, houses constructed under Yojana are allotted in the
name of female member of the beneficiary household. Alternatively it
can be allotted in the name of both husband and wife. In case no
eligible member in the family is available/alive, IAY house can be
allotted to the male member of a deserving BPL family. During

19
2003-2004, a total number of 9.37 lakh houses were allotted to the
women beneficiaries out of which 5.22 lakh houses were allotted
exclusively in the name of women members, while 4.15 lakh houses
were allotted in the name of both husband and wife. During 2004-
2005 (up to 31 January, 2005), a total of 6.75 lakh houses were allotted
to the women beneficiaries of which 4.49 lakh houses were allotted
exclusively in the name of females and 2.26 lakh houses were allotted
in the name of both husband and wife. Women are indirectly benefited
in the habitations which are provided connectivity under PMGSY.
2.40 The Standing Committee (2004-2005) during their Study visit
to Varanasi and Lucknow during November 2004 had found that the
number of women beneficiaries under different schemes particularly
SGRY was marginal. The State level representatives clarified that the
non-participation of women in labour intensive works under different
Centrally sponsored schemes was due to family traditions according
to which women prefer to be engaged in the household activities.
2.41 The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Government
to present gender budgeting by all the Departments of the Union
Government and also to make benefit incidence analyses. They also
appreciate the initiative taken by the Department of Rural
Development to indicate the data with regard to women beneficiaries.
Such type of data brings transparency towards the efforts of different
Department for the welfare of women and also help the Government
to monitor the implementation of the policies initiated for women
welfare.
2.42 The Committee note that in the schemes meant for providing
wage employment for manual labour work, like SGRY and Food for
Work Programme the participation of women, may not be so
encouraging. The data with regard to SGRY, as well as the
observation of the Committee during the Study-visit to Varanasi and
Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh substantiate this point. The Committee
find that the Government propose to provide 100 days of wage
employment to each family in rural area. To achieve this objective
the Government have brought a legislation, ‘The National
Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ which is under examination of
this Standing Committee. At present National Food for Work
Programme is being launched in 150 districts to achieve the said
objective. The Committee feel that serious efforts have to be made
by taking suitable action in this regard so as to encourage
participation of women under the Employment Guarantee Scheme.

20
The Committee would further like to hear from the Government
about their experience under the National Food for Work Programme
as well as the efforts envisaged to protect the interests of women at
the work fields to enable the Committee to analyse the position and
comment further in this regard.
Implementation of Schemes in North-Eastern Region
2.43 The data with regard to the overall allocation of different
schemes to North Eastern Region including Sikkim since 2000-2001,
when the concept of per cent exclusive allocation to such Region was
started is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Opening Total Total Total Total
Balance Allocation Release Funds Expenditure
2000-2001 144.58 963.54 442.54 587.13 449.62
2001-2002 128.22 906.15 766.22 894.44 623.24
2002-2003 217.41 795.51 621.68 839.10 609.06
2003-2004 189.14 938.83 803.54 992.68 870.40
2.44 As per the existing position, the funding pattern for all the
schemes including North Eastern Region is 75:25 i.e. 75 per cent by
the Union Government and 25 per cent by State Governments.
2.45 The Department has informed that North Eastern Rural
Development Minister’s Conference has forwarded a resolution to the
Ministry of Rural Development to the effect that funding pattern of
the Centrally sponsored Schemes of the Ministry may be made in the
ratio of 90 per cent and 10 per cent. Accordingly the matter was taken
up with the Planning Commission.
2.46 The Committee note from the data provided by the
Department that spending position under different schemes in North
Eastern Region has improved. But underspending still persists. The
Committee would like the Government to take up the issue of
underspending with North-Eastern States so as to improve the
position further.
2.47 On the issue of revision of norms for Centre vis-à-vis State’s
allocation, the Committee find that the matter of revision of Centre,
State allocation from 75:25 to 90:10 is being taken up with the
Planning Commission. The Committee would like to know the final
decision when taken in this respect.

 CHAPTER III
SCHEME-WISE ASSESSMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
The Committee in this Chapter have analysed the Demands for
Grants and performance of different Central Sector and Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Department of Rural Development as
indicated under:—
(i) Wage Employment programmes: National Employment
Guarantee Scheme, Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
(SGRY) and National Food For Work Programme (NFFWP);
(ii) Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY);
(iii) Rural Housing (RH);
(iv) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY);
(v) District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) Administration;
(vi) Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA);
(vii) Training Schemes; and
(viii) Assistance to Council for Advancement of People’s Action
and Rural Technology (CAPART).
(i) National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme vis-a-vis
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) and National Food
for Work Programme (NFFWP)
3.2 The Finance Minister in his speech on Budget 2005-2006, has
indicated that it is the Government’s intention to convert National
Food for Work Programme into the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme. When fully rolled out, the scheme will provide
livelihood security for crores of poor families. At present National
Food for Work Programme is being implemented in 150 districts.
3.3 The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004 has been
referred to the Committee for examination and report to Parliament.
In the Budget speech, Finance Minister has stated that Government
intends to convert the National Food for Work Programme into the
21

22
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. As per the proposed
legislation, 100 days wage employment will be legally guaranteed to
each rural household. When asked for the details in this regard the
Department has clarified that the objective of scheme and legal
guarantee envisaged in the Bill are quite different. The Rural
Employment Guarantee Act would guarantee 100 days of wage
employment to every rural poor household, whereas under National
Food for Work Programme, resources have been allocated based on
the same criteria for providing 100 days of wage employment to one
member from each rural poor household. The only difference is that
under Rural Employment Guarantee Act, there is a provision of legal
guarantee of 100 days whereas under the NFFWP , no such guarantee
has been envisaged. But the outcome would be the same if the
resources allocated to the concerned districts, are utilized to the fullest
extent and if the present level of allocation of the SGRY to the
concerned Districts, is maintained.
Criteria for selection of 150 districts in the country
3.4 When asked for the criteria for selection of 150 most backward
districts in the country, the Department has informed that for the States
(other than special category States and States in the North Eastern
region except Assam) most backward Districts have been chosen on
the basis of an exercise undertaken by the Planning Commission using
three parameters, namely (i) agricultural productivity per worker,
(ii) agricultural wage rate, and (iii) SC/ST population. For the special
category States and States in North Eastern region (except Assam),
districts were identified from out of the list selected under Rashtriya
Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY).
3.5 The Department has further informed that at least one district
has been selected in each State. All the States except Goa have been
covered. The State Governments have been consulted while finalizing
the districts.
3.6 The details indicating the names of the identified 150 districts
along with allocation of resources (funds and foodgrains) and the
releases may be seen at Appendix-V.
3.7 When asked about the number of additional districts in which
the NFFWP will be implemented during 2005-2006, the Department
has given a vague reply. Further on a query asking whether any
planning has been made to roll out the programme in whole of the
country, the Department has responded that there is no such proposal
at this stage. Further it has been stated that no exercise estimating the
required outlay in case the scheme is rolled out for the whole of the
country has been made by the Ministry.

23
3.8 The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech has mentioned
about 170 most backward districts of the country as identified by an
Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG). When asked as to whether 150 districts
identified under National Food for Work Programme are different from
170 most backward districts mentioned by the Finance Minister, the
Ministry has clarified that, 170 districts mentioned by the Finance
Minister are different from 150 most backward districts for the
implementation of NFFWP . However there are also common districts
in these two exercises.
3.9 When asked as to how the coordination between SGRY and
National Food for Work Programme is being maintained specifically
when both the programmes have the common objective, the Department
has clarified that though, both the programmes have similar objectives
of generation of additional supplementary wage employment in rural
areas the major difference is that the SGRY is entirely implemented by
the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) whereas NFFWP is implemented
by the District Collectors. The SGRY and the NFFWP are complimentary
in nature since, the requirement of resources under NFFWP has been
calculated taking into account the present level of allocation of the
SGRY in a particular district and the balance resources required to
provide 100 days of employment to one member of each rural poor
family. Moreover, each district has to prepare a Perspective Plan of
Five Years taking into account resource availability under all the social
sector programmes including that of the SGRY and accordingly a shelf
of projects under each programme has to be clearly indicated.
3.10 Further the Department has informed that National Food for
Work Programme and SGRY will be merged with National Employment
Guarantee Scheme in the areas where Guarantee Scheme is being
implemented.
3.11 Clarifying the objective of several wage employment schemes
as stated above, the Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated
that when the Employment Guarantee Act will be applicable, Food for
Work Programme and Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana will be
merged in the districts where Guarantee scheme will be applicable.
3.12 The Committee find from the information and clarification
provided by the Department that at present National Food for Work
Programme along with Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)
is being implemented in 150 selected districts. In the remaining
districts Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana is being implemented.
When, the National Employment Guarantee Act will be applicable,

24
these two programmes will be merged together and shall be known
by the name of the Act. While noting the aforesaid scheme of things,
the Committee are at a loss to understand the plethora of schemes
with the same objective. Not only that it is not clear where the
National Employment Scheme will be applicable, indicating clearly
whether it is the replacement of Food for Work Programme. The
Committee strongly recommend that SGRY and Food for work
programme should be merged together in the 150 districts selected
so far which will pave the way for 100 days guarantee. The merged
scheme should be known as National Employment Guarantee Scheme
which will ultimately be proposed to take the shape of legal
guarantee after the aforesaid enactment.
3.13 The Committee find from the Budget documents as well as
replies furnished by the Department that allocation and utilisation
has been indicated State-wise. The Committee note that that in view
of the existing system of indicating and monitoring data, it is not
possible to know the performance of the programme in the selected
150 districts. The Committee would like to recommend that district-
wise physical and financial achievement should be indicated against
each of the districts so as to know the impact of the programme in
each of the districts. Such data will also enable the Government to
know the various shortcomings in the programme which will
ultimately be taking the shape of a guarantee scheme.
3.14 The Committee further fail to understand the difference
between the most backward districts selected by the Department for
the purpose of National Food for Work Programme with those of
170 most backward districts mentioned by the Finance Minister in
his Budget speech. The Committee would like the Department to
analyse the position in this regard and furnish explanation to the
Committee. The Committee would also like to strongly recommend
that while selecting the districts for National Food for Work
Programme, it should be strictly ensured that parameters for selection
of districts are such that first of all the most backward districts in
a State get the due priority in the Programme.
3.15 The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, (2004) is
being examined by this Committee and all related matters will be
analysed and suitably recommended in the report. At this stage, the
Committee would like to say that although the Government has
started the Food for Work Programme in 150 districts meant to
achieve the similar objective as of the said legislation, there is no

25
planning on the part of the Government as to how the Guarantee
Scheme will be applicable throughout the country. The Committee
are constrained to find that so far no exercise has been made to
know about the estimated outlay that will be required to cover the
whole country with the said guarantee. The Committee fail to
understand how the Government would be achieving the objective
of such an ambitious legislation. The Committee strongly recommend
that the Government should do the desired home-work so that such
a big programme with laudable objectives could be translated into
reality.
Implementation of Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana Outlay for
SGRY
3.16 The information on outlay and expenditure under SGRY since
9th plan is as follows:
Outlay for SGRY
(Rs. in crore)
9th Plan outlay 32869.87
Actual outlay 40435.22
Proposed 10th Plan outlay 48538
Outlay agreed to by Planning Commission 30000
Total releases up to 15.3.2005 in 10th Plan 23972.73
BE 2002-2003 4440
RE 2002-2003 9086
Actual expenditure 2002-2003 9085.93
BE 2003-2004 4900
RE 2003-2004 10130
Actual expenditure 2003-2004 10129.93
BE 2004-2005 5100
RE 2004-2005 5100
Actual expenditure (up to 15.3.2005) 4756.87
Proposed BE 2005-2006 (Cash component) 5428
(Foodgrains component) 27375.87
BE 2005-2006 (Cash component) 4000
(Foodgrains component) Nil

26
3.17 When asked to justify the allocation during 2005-2006 under
SGRY i.e. Rs. 500 crore lesser than the allocation of previous year, the
Department has clarified that in BE 2005-2006 allocation under SGRY
for 150 districts where NFFWP is under implementation has been
shown in the outlay provided under NFFWP . However, on the request
of this Ministry, the Planning Commission has reconsidered the matter
and has now recommended transfer of this amount of the outlay under
SGRY. Accordingly, the allocation now recommended by the Planning
Commission for SGRY is Rs. 5,500 crore which is higher than the
current year’s outlay for the scheme. Thus, there would be no reduction
in the outlay for SGRY during 2005-2006.
3.18 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated that
so far as the question of foodgrain is concerned, last year only partial
allocation was made and as such payment of about Rs. 15,000 crore is
due for Food Corporation of India. The Committee were further
informed during the course of oral evidence that the Ministry of
Finance has recently decided that they will directly pay the amount to
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution for
foodgrains component.
State-wise performance of SGRY during 2004-2005
3.19 The status of utilization of funds for the year 2004-05 in some
of the poor performing States is indicated below:—
S.No States/Union Percentage Expenditure Reasons for
territory utilised reported less utilisation
up to
12 3 4 5
1. Arunachal Pradesh 26.25 Sept., 04 Utilisation reported from May, 04
to Aug., 04 for 4 months.
2. Bihar 46.81 Nov., 04 Due to non-availability of
foodgrains in FCI Godowns
3. Manipur 36.59 Nov., 04 Dif ficulties faced in lifting
foodgrains from FCI Godowns to
work sites
4. Mizoram 42.53 Oct., 04 Dif ficulties faced in lifting
foodgrains from FCI Godowns to
work sites

27
12 3 4 5
5. Nagaland 24.07 July, 04 Dif ficulties faced in lifting
foodgrains from FCI Godowns to
work sites
6. Sikkim 0  NYR —
7. A&N Islands 2.2 Sept., 04 Poor demand of work under
SGRY
8. Daman & Diu 0  NYR —
9. Lakshadweep 29.81 Jan., 05 Poor demand of work under
SGRY
NYR – Not Yet Reported
3.20 When asked about the corrective steps taken by the
Department, the Committee have been informed that utilisation reports
in respect of most of the States mentioned above do not indicate the
latest status of utilisation. As per in-built mechanism of the programme,
if any district fails to achieve utilisation of 60 per cent of available
funds, it will not be eligible for second instalment and funds will be
deducted proportionately from second instalment in case more than
15 per cent of available funds is available as Opening Balance.
3.21 As per the Performance Budget 2005-2006, DP/DRDAs are
required to identify the nearest depot of FCI from which they are
proposing to lift the foodgrains so that there is economy in the
transportation charges for lifting of foodgrains.
3.22 As reported by FCI, 112 revenue districts of 33 States/Union
territories where this programme is being implemented, are not having
any storage capacity with FCI. However, these revenue districts are
being fed through the nearest FCI depot. As regards transportation
charges, the State Governments/Union territories will bear the
transportation cost and other handling charges from their own resources
and hence the transportation charges are not being monitored at the
Centre.
Special Component of SGRY (SC-SGRY)
3.23 Allocation of foodgrains to the States, under Special
Component of SGRY, is made on the basis of requirement to deal with

28
calamities such as drought, earthquake, cyclone, flood etc. As per the
Performance Budget 2004-05, the foodgrains can be utilised in any
Scheme of Central or State Government in the district affected by a
natural calamity and duly notified as such. The subject of notification
of calamity is dealt with by the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry
of Home Affairs. For drought, the nodal Ministry is Ministry of
Agriculture. For other calamities like flood, earthquake etc., the Ministry
of Home Affairs is the nodal Ministry. When a calamity takes place in
any State, the State Government, after making an assessment, notifies
the affected areas. After notification, depending on the nature of the
calamity, the magnitude of the problem is assessed by one of these
Ministries. It is only when a High Level Committee (HLC) set up for
the purpose, decides inter-alia, how much of foodgrains under the
Special Component shall be released to which of the affected districts
of the State, that the Ministry of Rural Development comes into the
picture for release of foodgrains accordingly.
3.24 As per the Performance Budget 2005-2006 the foodgrains under
SC-SGRY were released to 12 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Rajasthan, Sikkim and Tamil Nadu during 2004-2005. Out of all of
these States, foodgrains have been lifted and utilized only by Karnataka
and Maharashtra. Only Karnataka has generated 287.11 lakh mandays
out of the utilization. Mandays generation information about the
remaining States is nil.
3.25 The details of foodgrains authorised by the Ministry and
utilized by the States during the year 2004-2005 for those States for
which progress reports were received as reported by the Department
are given below:—
Sl.No. Name of the State Foodgrains authorized Foodgrains
Utilised (including
the unutilized
foodgrains of
previous year)
1. Tamil Nadu 150000 288554
2. Karnataka 353620 1359230
3. Andhra Pradesh 402000 554000
4. Kerala 42000 60878

29
3.26 The progress reports from the other States have been called
which are still awaited. When asked for the corrective steps to be
initiated by the Department, during 2005-2006 to overcome the aforesaid
problems the Department has stated that the corrective steps will be
taken after analysing the reports.
Outlay for calamity affected areas including Tsunami affected areas
3.27 The SGRY guidelines provide that 5 per cent of the funds
and foodgrains of SGRY may be retained in the Ministry for utilization
in the areas of acute distress arising out of natural calamities. However,
during the years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005, no resources were set aside
under this provision. During 2003-2004, funds were released under
this provision out of expected savings to some drought affected States.
In the current year, only Tsunami affected States were given additional
allocation amounting to Rs. 360 lakh out of the overall savings. The
amount so released is monitored along with funds released as per
allocation and hence no separate information for utilization of such
grants is maintained.
Review of National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP)
3.28 As stated in the earlier paragraph of the report National Food
for Work Programme is being implemented in 150 districts so far.
The analysis of outlay provided under NFFWP
Rs. in crore
BE 2004-2005 Nil
RE 2004-2005 2020
Actual expenditure (upto 15.3.2005) 1951.66
Proposed BE 2005-2006 (Cash component) 5427
(Foodgrains component) 2313
BE 2005-2006 (Cash component) 6000
(Foodgrains component) Nil
3.29 The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech has indicated that
for 2005-2006, a provision of Rs. 5,400 crore for cash component and
50 lakh MT of foodgrains have been made under Food for Work
Programme, which in overall terms, will increase to Rs. 11,000 crore.

30
He also stated that it is the Government’s intention to convert the
programme into the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme,
which when fully rolled out will provide livelihood security for crores
of poor families. The Finance Minister also promised to find the money
for the programme.
Implementation of NFFWP in Union territories
3.30 When asked whether Union territories were also consulted
for choosing 150 most backward districts, the Department has informed
that it has been the experience of the Ministry that the Union territories
have never utilised their allocated resources to the fullest extent under
SGRY and therefore, it was felt if the Union territories do require
some additional resources, they can be assisted out of SGRY resources
itself and as such they were not considered under NFFWP .
3.31 The Committee find that during 10th Plan under Sampoorna
Grameen Rozgar Yojana Planning Commission has allocated for cash
component Rs. 18,538 crore lesser than the proposed allocation.
Similarly during 2005-2006, the allocation is Rs. 1,428 crore lesser
than the proposed allocation. Under National Food for Work
Programme during 2005-2006, the allocation for cash component is
Rs. 573 crore higher than the proposed allocation. The Committee
further note that SGRY will be applicable in the districts where
National Food for Work Programme which eventually will be
converted into Guarantee Scheme is not applicable. In such a
situation, the Committee hold the view that till the scope of NFFWP
is further extended, the majority of the districts will be covered by
SGRY. In such a situation the Committee recommend that due
priority should be accorded to SGRY. The outlay under National
Food for Work Programme should not be provided at the cost of
SGRY.
3.32 The Committee further find that with regard to the payment
for foodgrains component under SGRY as well as NFFWP , there is
utter confusion. They note that as per the recent decision, the
payment for foodgrains component will directly be managed by the
Ministry of Finance. As per the data reported by the Secretary during
evidence Rs. 15,000 crore is the outstanding payment to Food
Corporation of India. The Committee also note that during
2005-2006, no allocation has been indicated against the proposed
allocation of Rs. 27,375.87 crore under SGRY and Rs. 2,313 crore
under NFFWP for foodgrains component. In such a scenario the
Committee fail to understand how the Government will fulfil the

31
commitment of providing adequate allocation under the wage
employment programme of the Department. The Committee feel that,
the specific allocation and outstanding due to Food Corporation of
India should invariably be indicated in the Budget documents
irrespective of the fact whether payment is made by the Ministry of
Rural Development or Ministry of Finance to the Food Corporation
of India or to the Department of Food and Public Distribution
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) so as to
know about the clear picture of the allocation. The Committee would
like to be clearly informed how the Government propose to arrange
for the outlay for the employment guarantee for which ambitious
commitments have been made in the National Common Minimum
Programme as well as in the Budget announcements.
3.33 The Committee are disappointed to note the implementation
of SGRY in some of the States particularly Union territories. The
Committee are further constrained to note the reply of the
Department stating that Union territories have never utilised their
allocated resources to the fullest extent under SGRY and as such no
district under Food for Work Programme was included for Union
territories. The Committee strongly recommend to analyse the reasons
for poor performance in each of the States as indicated in the
preceding para of the report and take the corrective action
immediately. The Committee may also be kept informed about this.
The Committee are unable to understand poor performance of SGRY
in Union territories which are directly under the administrative
control of the Union Government. They would like the explanation
of the Department in this regard.
3.34 The Committee are further constrained to note that out of
12 States to whom foodgrains were released under Special component
of SGRY, only 4 States have submitted the progress reports. Further
the data submitted by the Department in case of these States is also
not clear. Foodgrains authorized indicated is for the year 2004-2005,
whereas the utilisation data is cumulative data including utilisation
for the year 2004-2005. Thus the performance cannot be evaluated.
The Committee would like that the data for each year under specific
item should be made individually so as to enable the Committee to
come to some meaningful conclusion. The Committee strongly
recommend that proper monitoring of data should be done for the
outlay earmarked under Special Component of SGRY so as to ensure
that the meagre resources earmarked for calamity affected areas reach
the intended calamity stricken beneficiaries. The Committee would

32
like the Department to collect the utilisation data from such States/
Districts and submit before the Committee along with the position
of mandays created.
3.35 The Committee further note that during 2005-2006, Rs. 360
crore out of overall savings has been allocated additionally for
Tsunami affected States. The Committee strongly recommend to
monitor the utilisation position in the said districts/States regularly
so that the benefits reach to the targeted persons.
(ii) Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY):
3.36  Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), a holistic
programme of self-employment, was launched w.e.f. 01 April, 1999
following restructuring of the erstwhile Integrated Rural Development
Programme (IRDP), Training of Rural Youth for Self-Employment
(TRYSEM), Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas
(DWCRA), Supply of Improved Tool Kits to Rural Artisans (SITRA)
and Ganga Kalyan Yojana (GKY).
Funding Pattern
3.37 As provided in the Scheme, the funding pattern is:
Central Allocation — 75 per cent,
State Allocation — 25 per cent, and
Union territory Allocation — 100 per cent by Centre.
Objective
3.38 The objective of the SGSY is to bring the assisted poor families
(Swarozgaris) above the poverty line by organizing them into Self-
Help Groups (SHGs) through the process of social mobilisation, training,
capacity building and provision of income-generating assets through a
mix of bank credit and Government subsidy.
Subsidy to individuals and Self-Help Groups (SHGs)
3.39 Assistance under SGSY , to individual Swarozgaris or Self-Help
Groups (SHGs), is given in the form of subsidy by the Government
and credit by the banks. There is no monetary limit on subsidy for
irrigation projects. The subsidy is back ended. Cooperative Banks,
Regional-Rural Banks and Commercial Banks and some of the
banks in the private sector disburse the loan and subsidy under the
scheme.

33
Subsidy for Individuals
3.40 An individual is provided a subsidy @ 30 per cent of the
project cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 7,500. In respect of SCs/STs/
disabled persons, the subsidy is 50 per cent of the project cost upto
a maximum of Rs. 10,000.
Subsidy for Self Help Groups (SHGs)
3.41  Under the Scheme, 50 per cent of the project cost can be
given as subsidy to SHGs subject to per capita subsidy of Rs. 10,000
or Rs. 1.25 lakh, whichever is less.
Implementation
 3.42 The Scheme is implemented through District Rural
Development Agencies (DRDAs) in various States with active
involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions, banks, line departments
and the Non-Government Organisations.
Analysis of outlay under SGSY
(Rs. in Crore)
9th plan outlay 4690
9th plan BE 5308
9th plan RE 4198.94
Actual expenditure 9th plan 4258.59*
10th plan proposed outlay 9850
10th plan outlay agreed to 3955
Total releases upto 15.03.05 2398.86
2003-2004 BE 800
2003-2004 RE 800
Total expenditure 797.55
2004-2005 BE 1000
2004-2005 RE 1000
Actual expenditure-2004-2005 895.27
2005-2006 BE proposed 1300
2005-2006 BE 960
* including IRDP and allied schemes.

34
3.43  As per the Performance Budget 2005-2006 the total allocation
for subsidy to DRDAs during 2004-2005 was Rs. 1,332.67 crore, of
which the Central share was Rs. 1,000 crore, which has been reduced
to Rs. 960 crore in 2005-2006 BE ( i.e a reduction of Rs. 40 crore or
4 per cent).
3.44 The tentative credit mobilisation target under SGSY during
2004-2005 was fixed as Rs. 2,507.67 crore for the States and Union
territories out of which up to January, 2005 Rs. 1,068.84 crore credit
has been mobilized as per the reply of the Government.
3.45 As per information given in Performance Budget of the
Department of Rural Development, performance of SGSY since
inception upto December, 2004 is as follows:
2003-2004 2004-2005
(i) Number of SHGs formed since inception 17.41 lakh 19.12 lakh
of SGSY in 1999-2000
(ii) Number of Swarozgaries assisted 8.96 lakh 5.68 lakh
(a) Individual Swarozgaries 3.19 lakh 1.59 lakh
(b) SHG Swarozgaries 5.77 lakh 4.09 lakh
3.46 As per the written reply the matter regarding reduction of
SGSY outlay has been taken up with the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission has assured to restore the Central Plan outlay
2005-2006 for SGSY at the level of 2004-2005 i.e. Rs. 1,000 crore.
Therefore, per family investment and subsidy credit ratio targets under
SGSY during 2005-2006 would not be affected.
State-wise performance of SGSY
3.47 As per the Performance Budget 2005-2006 the performance of
SGSY is not at all satisfactory in the following States and Union
territories:
States/Union territory Total funds available Per cent of
(In Rs. crore) credit disbursed
12 3
Andhra Pradesh 66.21 37.34
Arunachal Pradesh 3.87  3.64

35
12 3
Assam 74.51 12.37
Goa 0.73 19.62
Manipur 0.54 0
Mizoram 1.23 0
Nagaland 1.83 0
West Bengal 81.08 11.25
A&N Islands 0.44 0.22
Daman & Diu 0.82 0
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.13 0
Lakshadweep 0.47 0
3.48  None of the States except Himachal pradesh (69 per cent)
and Rajasthan (53 per cent) have distributed more than 50 per cent of
credit available under the scheme in the first 10 months of 2004-2005.
3.49 When asked as to whether the aforesaid performance reflect
poor monitoring  of SGSY during 2004-2005 and the corrective steps so
far been initiated by the Department, the Department has replied that
the above situation is not because of poor monitoring but due to
lesser number of SHGs taking up economic activities. The Area Officers
of the Ministry have been regularly visiting their designated States
and have observed viz. low actual credit disbursement, low per family
investment, slow sanctioning process of loans by banks, denial of loans
to non willful defaulters, banks not being regular in attending the
district/block level meetings etc.
3.50 The Committee are concerned to note a reduction of four
per cent outlay under SGSY in 2005-2006 as compared to previous
year allocation at BE stage. They also note that during 10th plan the
Department has been allocated less than half of what was proposed
under SGSY. Similarly during 2005-2006, the Department has got
less than 75 per cent of the proposed outlay in this regard. A little
over Rs. 1,068 crore credit mobilisation only has so far been achieved
by States and Union territories against the target of Rs. 2,508 crore
during the previous year. Further alarming is the fact that none of
the States except Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan could distribute

36
more than 50 per cent of the credit available during 2004-2005. The
Committee, therefore, conclude that the Department has to blame
itself for the reduction of outlay of the scheme in the current year.
They note the assurance of the Planning Commission to restore the
Central outlay of SGSY at the level of the previous year i.e.
Rs. 1,000 crore. They also note the reports of the Area Officers
regarding the reasons for poor performance of the scheme. In this
scenario the Committee urge the Government to take corrective
measures for satisfactory implementation of the scheme and then
approach the Planning Commission by which the Commission could
be convinced for higher allocation under the scheme.
Monitoring of SGSY
3.51 The Department has informed that the prescribed frequency
of CLCC is generally maintained to the extent possible. The meetings
of SLCC, DLCC and BLCC are required to be monitored by the
respective State Governments.
Observation by the Committee during the Study visit
3.52 The Committee on Rural Development during their Study visit
to Varanasi and Lucknow from 24 November to 27 November, 2004
have observed that no certification of quality has been given to the
produce of SHGs, even if the product is found to be of a higher
quality ( i.e. Ghee produced by the SHG had not been given Agmark
type of quality assurance).
3.53 The Government in reply have stated that an amount of
Rs. 5 lakh per DRDA is provided for market research, hiring of
consultants, participation in fairs, providing suitable design inputs to
the SHG products etc. Apart from this, any assistance sought by the
State Government for specific market interventions is also provided by
the Ministry of Rural Development as per the norms. Intensive efforts
have been made to improve the products in terms of standardization
and certification. As per information available with the Ministry, some
initiatives have been taken in Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra for
branding of products of SHGs. An AGMARK Laboratory has been
established at Wardha out of SGSY infrastructure funds to facilitate
quality certification of various products. Other State Governments are
also being advised to open such facilities to help the nearby SHGs to
get certification of their products.

37
3.54 The Committee during the aforesaid study visit had also
observed that Marketing of SHG products has reduced considerably in
Uttar Pradesh after UP Handlooms Corporation and UP Co-optex
ceased to exist. These organizations were earlier taking the bulk of
SHG products. All SHGs engaged in making sarees were hard pressed
and their products were hardly marketed except for in the local
market.
3.55 In their reply the Government have stated that this concern
of the members of the Standing Committee would be conveyed to the
State Government of Uttar Pradesh and the State Government would
be advised to devise appropriate market interventions to help marketing
of SHG products. Financial support required for such interventions
would be considered by the Ministry of Rural Development as per
norms within the available Budget.
3.56 The Committee observe that due care has not so far been
taken by the Government either to arrange for proper certification
or for marketing of SHG products. The Committee note the reply of
the Department that some initiatives by only two States viz. Madhya
Pradesh and Maharashtra have been taken to facilitate quality
certification of various SHG products. They feel that these efforts
are not enough. The laboratory at Wardha cannot cater to the need
of all SHGs of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Government should help to establish at least one laboratory
in each region of the country that too only for certification of SHG
products, which can be replicated for establishment of such centers
in all States and Union territories in a time bound manner later.
3.57 The Committee also note with concern that marketing of
several SHG products including silk sarees has reduced considerably
in Uttar Pradesh where the existing marketing organisations ceased
to operate. They feel that similar problems might be arising in other
States/Union territories from time to time. It is an irony that the
SHG members continue to face tremendous problems even now for
marketing of their products. As importance of marketing of SHG
products cannot be overlooked, the Committee recommend that
appropriate action may be taken in this regard and they be apprised
accordingly. Further, the Government should also ensure that such
problems do not take place in other States and Union territories.
Interest charged by banks on the loan advanced under SGSY
3.58 The Committee during their aforesaid Study visit have found
that in some cases banks charge interest on subsidy provided under

38
SGSY also, which is against the guidelines. Besides, banks are charging
old rate of interest from the beneficiaries of SGSY loan which is much
higher even after the rate of interest is reduced under new loans
obtained under the scheme. The benefit of the lower interest regime
was not being extended to the old beneficiaries. When asked for the
comments of the Department, the Committee have been informed that
as and when such complaints are received, these are taken up with
the concerned bank for remedial action.
3.59 The Committee had also noticed that NABARD refinance
Banks for SGSY at the rate of 5.50 per cent whereas banks are charging
between 8.5 per cent and 9.5 per cent from beneficiaries/groups. When
asked about the justification of charging such a high rate of interest,
the representative of banks present at the informal meeting during the
Study visit stated that this was due to difficulties in the recovery of
loans from SHGs. He also stated that three per cent was charged as
the administrative charges.
3.60  In reply the D epartment has stated that the matter of
charging high interest rates and other charges has been taken up by
the Ministry with the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India
(RBI). However, the interest rate has been deregulated and the
individual banks are free to fix the rate of interest depending on the
cost of the funds and the risk involved in such lending.
3.61 Regarding the position of recovery of loans provided under
SGSY in different States, so far in the 10th Plan, the Government have
furnished the following information:
SGSY RECOVERY IN PERCENTAGE DURING 2002-2003
S.No. STATE PERCENTAGE OF RECOVERY
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 55.4
2. Assam 31.71
3. Bihar 36.48
4. Gujarat 53.12
5. Harayana 57.89
6. Himachal Pradesh 56.06

39
12 3
7. Jammu & Kashmir 42.68
8. Karnataka 48.61
9. Kerala 56.06
10. Madhya Pradesh 27.05
11. Maharashtra 35.76
12. Manipur 0
13. Meghalaya 30.43
14. Nagaland 33.21
15. Orissa 22.93
16. Punjab 53.81
17. Rajasthan 36.1
18. Sikkim 75.64
19. Tamil Nadu 80.81
20. Tripura 0
21. Uttar Pradesh 56.18
22. West Bengal 40.42
23. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 25
24. Arunachal Pradesh 12.5
25. Chandigarh 64.89
26. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0
27. Goa 67.61
28. Mizoram 0
29. Pondicherry 91.85
30. Lakshadeweep 0
31. Damand & Diu 0
32. Delhi 100
33. Jharkhand 49.13
34. Chhattishgarh 37.16
35. Uttaranchal 57.48
Total 42.11

40
3.62 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence acknowledged
that for buying a car or a house in urban areas, the rate of interest
charged is much lesser than the interest charged for SGSY loans in
rural areas. He also informed the Committee that Hon’ble Minister of
Rural Development is taking up this matter with the Ministry of
Finance.
3.63 The Committee find that over the years there has been
considerable reduction in rate of interest being charged by
Commercial Banks from the customers. They further note that
whereas people in urban areas are enjoying the benefits of this
lower interest rate regime, the poorest of the poor are being deprived
of the said benefits. People in urban areas can get loan for buying
a car or a house at much less rate than the rate of interest being
imposed on the poorest of the poor under the social sector schemes
like SGSY. Similar may be the position for loans advanced for
housing in rural areas. Not only that, whereas banks get refinance
at a much cheaper rate of 5.50 per cent, they charge interest at much
higher rate between 8.5 to 9.5 per cent as the Committee noticed
during the Study visit to Varanasi and Lucknow.
 Besides the Committee found during the said study tour that
banks were charging old rate of interest i.e on the loans advanced
earlier under SGSY. The benefit of the lower interest regime is not
being extended to the old loans sanctioned to SGSY beneficiaries at
much higher rates as compared to present day rate of interest.
While noting the data with regard to recovery of loans under
SGSY in various States, the Committee feel that the ground reality
in this regard may not be so worse as indicated in the data provided
by the Department. Another noticeable point is the zero per cent
recovery rate in Manipur, Tripura, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Mizoram,
Lakshadweep, Daman and Diu. The Committee feel that there are
certain discrepancies in the data furnished by the Department with
regard to the recovery rate of SGSY loan. The Committee would
like the Department to explain the position in this regard. Besides,
they would like to be apprised of the data with regard to the recovery
of commercial lending by banks so as to enable them to react further
in this regard. On the issue of administrative charges, the Committee
feel that 3 per cent charges as indicated by banks during the Study
visit are much on higher side.

41
3.64 In view of the aforesaid scenario, the Committee strongly
feel that there is no justification for charging higher rate of interest
from the poorest of the poor in rural areas. While noting that the
Government has deregulated the interest rate and banks are free to
charge rate of interest from customers, the Committee feel that while
dealing with the issues related to the poorest of the poor, some sort
of regulation is necessary. Besides there is an urgent need to change
the mindset of banks towards lending for social sector. They feel
that the mindset of the banks should be pro-poor. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Government to take up the issue raised
above on an urgent basis with the Ministry of Finance, Reserve
Bank of India and all other concerned. Not only that, the intervention
at much higher level in this regard is required. The Committee will
also like that their concerns in this regard should be communicated
to the Cabinet Secretary so that this issue may get the top most
priority. The Committee would also like that the said issue should
be taken in consideration for Cooperative as well as Regional Rural
Banks also as these banks are also charging high rate of interest on
social sector lending like SGSY loans.
3.65 The Committee further find that besides the higher rate of
interest, there are other severe anomalies as the Committee noticed
and the banks admitted during the Study visit. The most glaring
anomaly noticed is charging of interest on subsidy which is a gross
violation of the guidelines. The reaction of the Department stating
that the complaints when received are taken up with the concerned
bank, smacks of the casual approach of the Department towards
such a serious issue. The Committee feel that this is not a normal
complaint. Some sort of accountability should be fixed. Stringent
and serious efforts are called for on behalf of the Department when
such issues specifically by a Parliamentary Committee are brought
to the notice of the Department. The Committee would like the
Department to explain the position in this regard.
SGSY Infrastructure
3.66  The Committee have been informed that as per mandated
guidelines of SGSY, DRDAs may prioritise the expenditure on different
components i.e. training and capacity building, revolving funds, subsidy
for economic activity based on the local requirements at different stages
of group formulation. DRDAs may ensure that there is a balance
between the expenditure proposed for different items. The expenditure
on infrastructure should not exceed 20 per cent of the total SGSY

42
allocation, (25 per cent in case of North-Eastern States). Under Special
Project Component of SGSY, Projects are approved in the Ministry by
an Inter-Ministerial Committee, headed by the Secretary (Rural
Development) and the funds are released to the concerned DRDAs/
Implementing Agencies. As per the information furnished by the
Department, the State of Sikkim till date has not been provided any
funds for infrastructure Projects. In addition to 27 other States, Nehru
Yuvak Kendras (NYKs) have been involved in the implementation of
Special Projects. The information on allocation, release and utilisation
of SGSY Special Project funds is given as under:
Year-wise allocation and releases under SGSY Special project
since inception
Year Total Central 15% of the Funds Total Funds Funds
Allocation share Central released funds utilized remaining
for subsidy under allocation for available for unspent
to DRDAs SGSY under SGSY Special for Special under
under (Rs. in i.e. Allocation Projects special projects Special
SGSY crore) for SGSY (Rs. in projects (Rs. in projects
(Rs. in special- crore) (Rs. in crore)
crore) projects crore)
(Rs. in
crore)
1999-2000 1472.33 1105 165.75 62.74 165.75 62.74 103.01
2000-2001 1332.50 1000 150 67.37 150 67.37 82.63
2001-2002 774.50 581.50 87.23 102.66 87.23 102.66 -15.43*
2002-2003 756.37 567.90 85.19 105.45 85.19 105.45 -20.26*
2003-2004 1065.83 800 120 111.74 120 111.74 8.26
2004-2005 1332.67 1000 150 55.47 150 55.47 94.53
(*) Excess Amount/Saving was adjusted under normal SGSY .
It can be seen therefrom that Rs. 8.26 crore in 2003-2004 and
Rs. 94.53 crore so far during 2004-2005, remained unspent under the
SGSY Special projects component.
3.67 Regarding the physical achievement of SGSY Special projects
since 1999-2000, the Committee have been informed that there are 178
projects approved under the SGSY Special Projects programme since
1999-2000. Each project has separate specific physical activity to be

43
undertaken, so no aggregation of physical targets as such for the SGSY
Special projects as a whole has been done.
3.68 Regarding the performance of NYKs under SGSY Special
Projects, the Committee have been informed that NYK is an
autonomous body under the administrative control of Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports and these are engaged in the Poverty Alleviation
programmes with active involvement of Youth Clubs. These are also
involved in other activities like Health, Education, Environment etc.
Since the projects involve ground level mobilization and interaction
with the beneficiaries and NYKs have strength on that account, NYK
were involved. It has further been clarified that the NYKs have been
involved in the implementation of four Special Projects. Initially the
progress of those projects was very slow but now the pace of the
project implementation is improving.
3.69 The Committee are unhappy to note the performance of
SGSY Special projects. They find that Rs. 8.26 crore during
2003-2004 and Rs. 94.53 crore so far during 2004-05 have remained
unspent. Not only that, the Government have involved in the
implementation Nehru Yuvak Kendras which are under the
administrative control of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
even though DRDAs/ Zilla Parishads continue to implement rural
development schemes in all districts of the country. As admitted by
the Government, the progress of the projects being implemented by
NYKs was very slow but the pace is improving now. The Committee
fail to understand as to why the NYKs were involved in the
implementation of SGSY projects specifically when DRDAs/Zilla
Parishads have been established and are functioning in most of the
districts of the country to monitor the implementation of schemes of
the Ministry. The Committee in this regard would like the
Department to furnish the reasons for involving NYKs in the
implementation of SGSY special projects. Besides they would like
to be apprised of about the details of such projects indicating the
financial and physical performance of these projects which are being
taken up by NYKs so as to enable the Committee to ensure the
reasons for their involvements and comment further in this regard.
(iii) Rural Housing
3.70 The following four schemes are being implemented by the
Department under Rural Housing:
(a) Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) is being implemented since
1985-86 to provide assistance to Below Poverty Line (BPL)

44
households belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes, freed bonded labourers and also to non Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes, households of rural BPL, families
of ex-servicemen of the armed forces and para military forces
killed in action. The ceiling on construction assistance under
IAY is Rs. 25,000 per unit for plain areas and Rs. 27,500 for
hilly/difficult areas and conversion of kutcha house into pucca
house (upgradation) is Rs. 12,500 w.e.f. 1 April, 2004. The
funds under the Scheme are shared between the Centre and
the States in the ratio of 75:25. The Union territories are
provided 100 per cent Central assistance.
(b) Credit-cum-Subsidy Scheme for Rural Housing: The Scheme
was launched w.e.f. 1 April, 1999. The Scheme targets rural
families having annual income up to Rs. 32,000 while the
subsidy is restricted to Rs. 10,000 per household. The upper
limit of construction, i.e. loan admissible under the scheme
is Rs. 40,000 per household. The subsidy component is
shared between the Centre and the States in the ratio of
75:25. The Union territories are provided 100 per cent
assistance. The scheme has been merged with Indira Awaas
Yojana w.e.f. 1 April, 2004. Up to 20 per cent of the total
funds under IAY (annual district allocation) can be utilized
for upgradation of existing kutcha houses and towards
subsidy for construction of houses with credit from banks/
Financial Institutions or both or for new construction, since
2002-03.
(c) Innovative Stream for Rural Housing and Development: The
Scheme was being implemented on project basis since
1999-2000. Recognised educational/technical institutions,
corporate bodies, autonomous societies, State Governments,
development institutions and credible NGOs in the field of
Rural Housing can apply for assistance under the Scheme.
The maximum permissible assistance for Government
agencies is Rs. 50 lakh.
(d) Rural Building Centres (RBCs): The Scheme of Rural
Building Centres was launched w.e.f. 1 April, 1999. The
objective is to achieve technology transfer, information
dissemination, skill upgradation through training of rural
masons, plumbers etc., production of cost effective and
environment friendly material. For setting up a RBC, a total
Central grant of Rs. 15 lakh is provided in three instalments.

45
The Scheme is being implemented and monitored by the
Ministry of Rural Development with the assistance of
Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited
(HUDCO). As per the written reply, the Innovative stream
for Rural Housing and Habitual Development Rural Building
Centres and Samagra Awaas Yojana were project based and
demand driven schemes. These schemes have been
discontinued/merged with the IAY from April 1, 2004.
Overall analysis of Rural Housing Schemes
3.71 The overall Budget allocation for the Rural Housing (RH)
during 2005-2006 BE is Rs. 2,775 crore, and the 2004-2005 BE for the
schemes was for Rs. 2,500 crore. Thus the 2005-2006 BE has been
increased by Rs. 275 crore or 10.78 percent over the previous year.
During 2004-2005, Rs. 400 crore additional assistance has been provided
to Bihar for construction of nearly 2.13 lakh houses damaged due to
floods.
3.72 As per the written reply, the Government propose to construct
additional 60 lakh houses during the next four years (2005-2006 to
2008-2009) under Bharat Nirman Programme. Accordingly, the Planning
Commission has been requested to allocate additional funds for
construction of additional 15 lakh houses annually so that the target
of 60 lakh houses during next four years could be met.
3.73 As per the campaign of Housing for all, between 1999-2000
and 2002-2003, additional 13 lakh houses annually were targeted to be
constructed in rural areas, which has not been achieved. As per 2001
Census estimates, the housing shortage in the rural areas is estimated
at 14.84 million. In addition, about 10 lakh houses are added to the
existing shelterlessness every year. Regarding the parallel Rural Housing
Scheme being implemented by the States and Union territories the
Committee have been informed that Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat
are dovetailing funds with IAY. The Ministry of Rural Development
do not monitor other schemes being implemented by State
Governments for people other than BPL families.
3.74 During their Study visit to Varanasi and Lucknow from 24
November, 2004 to 27 November, 2004 the Committee have found that
several houses constructed under IAY were without proper ventilation
and windows. Several such houses also had no drinking water
connection.

46
3.75 The following information has been furnished on the
performance of IAY in the 9th Plan vis-a-vis 10th Plan relating to IAY:—
 (Rs. in crore)
Plan Approved OB at Central Central State State Total Total Total Total
Proposal Plan beginning Share Share Share Share allocation Release available Expen-
by Deptt. outlay of the alloca- release alloca- release (C+S) (C+S) funds diture
Plan tion tion
9th Plan 28042.00 8035.75 372.23 7468.69 7425.12 2265.99 2256.46 9734.68 9681.58 10053.81 9638.36
1997 to (95.87%)
2002
10th Plan * 13040.00 8603.00 821.42 5987.57 6238.09 1991.86 2076.73 7979.43 6318.63 9136.24 2668.73
2002 to (83.94%)
2007
*as on 22.03.2005
3.76 The Committee find from the data indicated above that
there is an increase of 11 per cent in the outlay provided during
BE 2005-2006, but if compared to RE, there is further reduction of
outlay. As clarified by the Department, even if it is accepted that
Rs. 400 crore special assistance is provided to Bihar for construction
of 2.15 lakh additional houses damaged by floods is included in the
outlay, the outlay provided during 2005-2006 is inadequate keeping
in view the data of shelterlessness in the country. As per
Government’s own data 14.84 million is the housing shortage. Not
only that shortage of around 10 lakh houses is added to it annually.
The Committee find that shelter is basic necessity of life and there
is an urgent need to tackle the issue on war footing.
3.77 The Committee further note that ambitious targets of
constructing 60 lakh houses in four years (2005-2006 to 2008-09) have
been set under ‘Bharat Nirman’. They feel that without adequate
funding, targets will remain only dreams. To translate such ambitious
programmes in to reality, the Committee strongly recommend that
adequate outlay should be provided. Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission should be approached for adequate funding. The
Committee would like to be apprised of their reaction. With regard
to special allocation of Rs. 400 crore as provided to Bihar for
construction of 2.15 lakh additional houses damaged by floods, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the physical achievement
in this regard.

47
3.78 The Committee further note that the Government have
started implementing several sub-schemes hurriedly which have now
been merged with IAY from this year. They are astonished to find
that the Government have not been able to monitor the physical
progress of the sub-Schemes except IAY, after these are merged with
IAY. The plea taken by the Department that these sub-schemes are
demand driven and hence unmonitorable is unacceptable to the
Committee. When scarce resources are being provided, it should be
spent judiciously and the target and achievements should be
monitored accordingly. Therefore, the Committee would like that the
infrastructure created under all sub-schemes of rural housing should
be monitored even after these are merged with IAY and should be
reflected in the various Budget documents.
3.79 The Committee note that nearly 15 million families were
houseless in the rural areas as per 2001 census. In addition, about
10 lakh houses are being added to the existing shelterlessness. The
Committee also find that various parallel rural housing schemes are
being implemented by the respective State Governments. The States
of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat are dovetailing funds with IAY.
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need for dovetailing the
rural housing schemes with IAY in the remaining States. The
dovetailing of State Sector Schemes would not only help in avoiding
the problem of coordination but would also help in having accurate
data about the level of shelterlessness in a particular State. The
Committee would like that said issue should be taken up and
discussed at the various conference/workshops and through various
review meetings conducted by the Ministry in which representatives
of State Governments participate. The Committee should also be
apprised about the deliberations and outcome of such discussions.
3.80  The Committee are concerned to note that several IAY
houses have been constructed without basic necessities, like proper
ventilation, provision for windows, drinking water, toilets etc. as
found by them during their Study visit. They feel that without the
provision for basic necessities the condition of poor people living in
IAY houses can not be improved. They, therefore, recommend that it
should be ensured to provide basic necessities in IAY houses so that
poor people can live with dignity.
(iv) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
3.81 PMGSY was launched on  25 December 2000. The objective of
the Yojana is to provide road connectivity, through good all-weather

48
roads, to all rural habitations with a population of more than
500 persons by the year 2007 (terminal year of Tenth Plan Period).
Up-gradation (to prescribed standards) of existing roads is permitted
to be taken up under the Programme so as to achieve connectivity
through good all-weather roads. As per the guidelines of the scheme
up-gradation is not central to the Programme and cannot exceed
20 per cent of the State’s allocation where unconnected habitations in
the State still exist. In up-gradation works, priority should be given to
conversion of fair weather roads to all weather roads in the Core
Network. This is a cent per cent Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
Implementing Authority
3.82 Each State Government/Union territory administration identify
one or two suitable agencies (having a presence in all districts and
with competence in executing time-bound road construction works)
designated as Executing Agencies (such as the Public Works
Department/Rural Engineering Service/Rural Works Department/Zilla
Parishad/Panchayati Raj Engineering Department).
3.83 The funding under PMGSY is made by the diesel cess in the
Central Road Fund, and some additional funds are obtained through
borrowing from domestic financial institutions and multilateral funding
agencies.
Outlay under PMGSY
(Rs. in Crore)
Outlay for 10th Plan as proposed by the Department 55,000
Outlay agreed to by Planning Commission 12,500
Total releases up to 15.3.2005 7,077.64
BE 2002-2003 2,500
RE 2002-2003 2,500
Actual Expenditure 2002-2003 2,500
BE 2003-2004 2,325
RE 2003-2004 2,325
Actual Expenditure 2003-2004 2,328.60
BE 2004-2005 2,468
RE 2004-2005 2,468
Actual Expenditure (up to 15.3.2005) 2,249.04
Proposed BE 2005-2006 3,640
BE 2005-2006 4,235

49
3.84 As per projections made under ‘Bharat Nirman’, a vision to
build India as outlined in the address of President to Parliament, all
the habitations having a population of 1000 (or 500 in hilly, tribal
areas) are intended to be covered by 2009. As per the targets set
earlier, all the habitations with a population of more than 500 persons
were intended to be covered by the year 2007. The habitations with a
population of 1,000 or more were to be connected by 2003.
Total roads to be constructed under PMGSY
3.85 It is estimated that about 3,68,000 km will be required to be
newly constructed under PMGSY and about 3,69,000 km of through
routes will need to be upgraded/renewed. The proposal cleared so far
by the Government involve construction/upgradation of about 1,30,000
kilometres. As such the total balance for construction/upgradation is
about 6,07,000 km.
The allocation required under PMGSY
3.86 As per Economic Survey, a total cost of Rs. 1,33,000 crore as
against earlier estimates of Rs. 60,000 crore will be required for new
construction as well as upgradation.
3.87 As per the position indicated by the Department, according
to current estimates, the total requirement for funding the PMGSY
programme is of the order of Rs. 1,32,300 crore. Of this approximately
Rs. 75,800 crore is required for new connectivity and Rs. 56,500 crore
is required for upgradation/renewal of existing through routes. Annual
funding for the programme during the last 5 years has been of the
order of Rs. 2500 crore or less. During 2005-2006 the allocation required
will depend upon the targets fixed. It is estimated that in order to
achieve the Bharat Nirman targets of 2009-2010 with respect of new
connectivity, and also to upgrade and renew a portion of the Core
Network including the associated through routes in line with the
National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) which speaks of
modernization of the rural roads network, approximately Rs. 48,000
crore will be required during next 5 years up to 2009-2010, which
implies an annual allocation of Rs. 9,600 crore against the current
proposed budget of Rs. 4,235 in 2005-2006.
 3.88 PMGSY is funded from a cess of Rs. 1.50 paise per litre on
High Speed Diesel (HSD). Loans have also been negotiated with World
Bank/ADB. These two sources of funding will continue to be the main
source for the foreseeable future. In addition, seeing that the cess on
high speed diesel is a continuing revenue source even after the

50
conclusion of PMGSY, it has been suggested that the cess may be
leveraged in order to borrow long term funds from the domestic capital
market. The quantum of funding likely to be available will depend on
a number of factors including the terms of finance and the depth of
the domestic capital market. According to the advice given by the
Ministry of Law, the Central Road Fund Act through which the cess
is collected and distributed, permits the use of the portion of the cess
meant for National Highways to be used to repay loans, what not the
portion meant for rural roads. Accordingly, a proposal has been moved
to amend the Central Road Fund Act to enable cess funds to be used
for repaying loans taken for constructing and upgrading rural roads.
This will facilitate the leveraging of the cess in the domestic capital
market.
3.89 The Department has further informed that PMGSY was
approved as Centrally Sponsored Scheme by the Union Cabinet on
7th August, 2001. The Ministry of Rural Development was authorized
in consultation with Ministry of Finance to negotiate with ADB/World
Bank. As a result of negotiations, a loan/credit of $399.50 million has
been signed with World Bank and another loan with the ADB for
$ 400 million in November, 2004. The ADB has agreed to further loans
up to 2007. The project appraisal for first of these two loans comprising
about $400 million has already started. The other loan, of about $350
million is likely to be negotiated by 2007.
3.90 As per the speech of the Minister of Finance on Budget
2005-2006 the cess on petrol and diesel has been increased by 50 paise
per litre. The additional cess will be earmarked exclusively for National
Highways by making suitable amendment to the Central Road Fund
Act, 2000. Since 2003-2004, the PMGSY has not received the enhanced
allocation cess on petrol and diesel (para 3.119 of 3rd Report 14th
Lok Sabha).
3.91 The Department has informed that arrears of additional diesel
cess (imposed in 2003-2004) for the years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005
amounting to about Rs. 2,500 crore have not been provided even though
the cess is being collected.
Involvement of Central Agencies for implementation of PMGSY
3.92  It has been mentioned in the Economic Survey that in order
to improve the absorption capacity of the States where the performance

51
has been poor, initiatives have been taken for special intervention like
involving Central Agencies for implementation of PMGSY on the
request of such States.
3.93 When asked about the name of the States having poor
absorption capacity, the Department has informed that PMGSY is a
new Central intervention in the rural roads sector, whereas ‘rural roads’
are included in the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution of India. State Governments have in the past been
following different practices for construction of rural roads. Technical
and management standards have also varied, and generally
maintenance and renewal are in arrears. PMGSY has resulted in the
enforcement of common and high technical and management standards
for the construction of rural roads of high quality. During the past
five years of implementation of PMGSY, all States have put in place
mechanism to manage the programme better, and with assurance of
higher quality. The progress in this regard has however been varied to
the extent that many States in the North East as well as most of the
hill States and States affected by reorganization, such as Uttaranchal,
Chhattisgarh, Bihar and Jharkhand are relatively slow in building up
capacity.
3.94 Further when enquired in which States, Central Agencies have
been involved so far and its impact, the Department has informed
that discussions have been held with North Eastern States and Bihar
on the issue of induction of Central Agencies in improving executing
capacity. Since rural roads is a State subject, execution of PMGSY would
have to be done by a State Government agency. Accordingly the
arrangement envisages induction of Central agencies like NBCC, NHPC
etc., as executing agencies of the State Government. So far this process
has been operationalised in the States of Bihar and Tripura.
State-wise performance of PMGSY
3.95 As per Annexure-I of Performance Budget, in Bihar, Gujarat,
Kerala, Manipur and Rajasthan percentage utilisation of funds is less
than 75 per cent during 2000-2001 (Phase-I). During 2002-2003 (Phase-
II), in Goa the utilisation was very dismal i.e., 3.40 per cent. In
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura, Uttaranchal, percentage utilisation was less than 75 percent.
In 20 States, the utilisation was less than 60 per cent during 2003-2004
(Phase-III). The worst is the position during 2004-2005, (Phase-IV).
Excepting two States Rajasthan and Bihar, the utilisation in all States
is nil.

52
3.96 When asked the reasons for under spending, the Department
has informed that 2000-2001 was the first year of PMGSY. The
programme started on 25 December, 2000 and funds were released as
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for the State Plan. Funds were
released on the basis of line estimates. States with incomplete Basic
Minimum Services (BMS) works were also allowed to utilize PMGSY
funds for completion of such works. As a result, the percentage of
utilisation is a less reliable indicator than the length of road works
completed or number of road works completed, in some cases. Thus
in Gujarat in Phase-I, 95.38 per cent of the road length was reported
as complete and in Rajasthan similarly 87.23 per cent of road length
was reported as complete. In the other three States namely, Bihar and
Manipur due to institutional problems, performance has been less than
satisfactory and in the case of Kerala, problems have been partly due
to institutional capacity since there was a lack of Executive Engineers
at the PIU level, but also partly due to difficulty in obtaining land. In
so far as phase-II is concerned in most States significant progress has
been made and efforts are underway to get the other States also to
complete the balance road works.
3.97 In so far as Phase-III is concerned, it is submitted that in
several States, the clearance of these works were delayed because for
first time States were asked for detailed DPRs before coming to
Empowered Committee for clearance of works. As such clearance was
accorded in most cases at the fag end of 2003-2004 and even in the
early part of 2004-2005. It may also be mentioned that the work is
highly seasonal and many of the proposals of 2003-2004 which were
cleared towards the end of the financial year were awarded just before
the monsoon of 2004. Further tendering and awarding was held up in
many cases due to General Elections and the enforcement of the Model
Code of Conduct. Further, the progress of work has not picked up
and it is expected that during the current working season significant
expenditure will be made.
3.98 In the case of (Phase-IV) 2004-2005, the proposals were cleared
mostly during year 2004-2005, and it takes three months to tender
the road works after clearance and 9-12 months of actual execution
time.
Maintenance of Rural Roads
3.99 As per the guidelines of the scheme, the State Authorities
will be required to furnish an undertaking that they would remit (to
the identified Panchayati Raj Institution), from the State Government

53
funds, the requisite cost of maintenance. The State Governments will
also offer an undertaking for the release of maintenance costs, along
with their project proposals. The Ministry of Rural Development would
oversee the implementation of this undertaking. It shall be open to
the State Governments/Panchayati Raj institutions to develop
sustainable alternative sources of funding for undertaking the
maintenance function…..The Rural Roads will be handed over by the
Project Implementation Units, on completion of the contract (including
guarantee/maintenance period of 5 years), to the designated Panchayati
Raj Institution for maintenance, and a separate report will be made in
all such cases under Online Management and Monitoring System giving
the name of the PRI and the date of its taking over.
Core Network
3.100 As per the Performance Budget 2004-2005 after the PMGSY
was launched, all the State Governments were asked to do a survey
to establish a ‘Core Network’ of rural roads which also provided data
on length of roads required.
3.101 When asked as to whether all State Governments and Union
territories have completed the said survey for establishing the Core
Network the Department has replied that Core Network is that network
which ensures single all-weather connectivity to all eligible habitations
under PMGSY. The Core Network consists of data of habitations and
roads connecting the habitations, prepared at the block and district
level, and supplemented by a map. Since this level of detail is not
required in what is essentially a State subject, the Core Network
information is not maintained at the Central level. The Core Network
data has been fed by the State Governments into the Online
Management and Monitoring System (OMMS) for PMGSY, and can be
seen at the programme website www.pmgsyonline.nic.in. Most States have
completed in putting of the data from the Core Network into the
programme database. The following reports are available in the website
under the heading ‘Core Network Report’:—
• DRRP Road-wise
• DRRP Habitation-wise
• Road-wise Core Network
• Habitation-wise Core Network

54
District Road Plan
3.102 The PMGSY envisages preparation of District Road Plan. As
per the information provided by the Department, all States of the
country barring Bihar have prepared the District Rural Road Plans
(DRRP). In some States the DRRP is under verification. In the case of
Bihar the task has been entrusted by the State Government to the
Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), New Delhi and the work is
reported to be in progress. The Core Network of the States has been
extracted from the DRRP Data.
3.103 The Committee note that a laudable programme was
launched by the Government on 25 December, 2000 with the objective
to provide road connectivity, through good all weather roads, to all
unconnected rural habitations with a population of 1000 or more by
2003 and those habitations having population of more than
500 persons by the year 2007. As per the revised estimates under
‘Bharat Nirman’ the habitations having population of 1000 (or 500 in
hilly, tribal areas) are now proposed to be covered by 2009. The
earlier estimates of outlay required were for Rs. 60,000 crore. As per
Economic Survey, now the said projections have increased to
Rs. 1,33,000 crore. Further if the objective set under ‘Bharat Nirman’
i.e. to upgrade and renew a portion of the Core Network is included,
as per the Government’s estimates, an outlay of Rs. 48,000 crore will
be required during next four years which implies an annual allocation
of Rs. 9,600 crore against the current budget of Rs. 4,235 crore during
2005-2006.
3.104 The Committee find from what has been stated above, that
the targets of connectivity cannot be achieved with present level of
allocation. They also find that due to spillover of targets, the
estimates of required outlay have considerably increased. The present
estimates of requirement of Rs. 48,000 crore for four years may further
enhance, if the set targets are not achieved as per the revised date
of coverage of habitation population of 1000 i.e. by the year 2009.
Thus the Committee conclude that inadequate financial resources is
the biggest concern. For augmenting resources for the programme,
the Committee suggest the following:
(i) the projections made by the Department during 2005-2006
do not correspond to the annual requirement of outlay to
achieve the objective of Bharat Nirman. The Department

55
in fact got Rs. 595 crore more than the projected outlay
during 2005-2006. The projections made by the Department
should commensurate to the overall projections of the
Government;
(ii) There is enough scope to tap external funding from ADB/
World Bank. More efforts need to be made to explore the
potential for augmenting available resources with external
funding;
(iii) The Committee in their earlier report (refer paragraph no
3.126 of 3rd Report—14th Lok Sabha) had expressed their
concern over not allocating funds on account of increase
in diesel cess. As reported by the Department, the arrears
amounting to Rs. 2,500 crore on account of additional cess
imposed since 2003-2004 have not been allocated to the
Department. Besides, during the current year i.e. 2005-2006
although there is a proposal to increase the cess on petrol
and diesel by 50 paise per litre, the additional resources
are proposed to be exclusively earmarked for the National
Highways. Keeping in view the escalation in cost of
constructing roads due to spillover of the targets as stated
above, at least 50 per cent of the additional resources to
be procured by the additional cess should be made
available for PMGSY;
(iv) As replied by the Department a proposal has been moved
to amend the Central Road Fund Act to enable cess funds
to be used for repaying loans taken for constructing and
upgrading rural roads to facilitate leverage of the cess in
the domestic capital market. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to finalise the aforesaid
proposal which may enable the Government to leverage
long-term funds from the domestic capital market.
3.105 While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to take stringent steps for the better
and effective implementation of the programme. As stated above,
the performance of the projects taken under Phase I to IV of PMGSY
is not satisfactory in some of the States. The problems as stated by
the Department are manifold like institutional problems, and
procedural delays etc. The Committee would like that the State-
specific problems in the under performing States should be analysed
critically and the corrective action taken thereon. The Committee
may also be apprised in this regard.

56
3.106 The Committee further note that the guidelines of the
Yojana provide for the maintenance of roads. The roads constructed
under PMGSY will be maintained by the Project Implementing Units
and after that the maintenance will be taken over by the PRI
designated for the purpose. The State authorities are also required
to furnish an undertaking that they would remit to the identified
PRI from the State Government funds, the requisite cost of
maintenance. The Committee find that although an elaborate system
has been indicated in the guidelines for the maintenance of roads
constructed under PMGSY there is an urgent need that these
provisions are strictly adhered to by the State Governments. The
Committee would like the Department to take the desired steps in
this regard and apprise them accordingly.
3.107 The Committee note that PMGSY was envisaged with a
laudable objective of providing connectivity to not connected
habitations. The guidelines of the Yojana provides for upgradation
of roads up to 20 per cent of the State’s allocation where unconnected
habitations still exist. The Committee also note that although it has
been indicated in the guidelines that upgradation is not central to
the Programme, there is a need to monitor and ensure that the main
emphasis of Yojana is to provide new connectivity so that the main
objective of starting the Yojana is not sidelined. The Committee
therefore like the Department to strictly monitor the position in this
regard. Besides the Committee would like to be apprised to the data
indicating the per cent allocation and expenditure made on new
connectivity as well as on maintenance scheme-wise, year-wise and
State and Union territory-wise.
 3.108 The Committee further note that Central Agencies like
NBCC and NHPC have been inducted for construction of roads under
PMGSY in Bihar and Tripura. The Committee would like to be
apprised whether the induction of Central agencies in said States
could help in getting better results. After evaluating the performance
of such Central Agencies, the Committee would like that in the
under performing States, where there is problem of executing
agencies, the possibility of induction of such agencies, should be
explored in consultation with State Governments.
3.109 The Committee would also like to recommend to put in
place a strict monitoring mechanism to ensure the quality of the
roads constructed under PMGSY. Besides, they would like to be

57
informed the number of States/Union territories who have put the
Core Network reports indicating DRRP Road-wise and habitation-
wise. Road-wise and habitation-wise network should also be put on
the website as per the guidelines. Besides the Committee would
like that the details of the projects indicating the date of starting
the project, estimated outlay, stage of implementation, total road
length etc. should also be put on the website for the purpose of
bringing transparency in the implementation of the programme.
3.110 The Committee further find that in Bihar so far District
Road Plans have not been prepared. They would like to know the
reasons for delay in preparing DRPs, specifically when the Central
Agency has been inducted as the executing agency in that State.
(v) Provision for Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA)
3.111The Centrally Sponsored Scheme ‘Provision for Urban
Amenities in Rural Areas’ (PURA) has been started w.e.f. 2003-04. It
was prepared by the Planning Commission based on the thoughts
placed before the Nation by the Hon’ble President of India for bridging
the rural urban divide and achieving balanced socio-economic
development. The Planning Commission prepared a Cabinet Note for
the Scheme. As per the Cabinet Note the Scheme would be
implemented in 5,000 rural clusters across the country in the next five
years. The scheme aims to provide physical and social infrastructure
in the identified rural clusters to further their growth potential, which
are:
1. Road transportation and power connectivity,
2. Electronic connectivity in the form of reliable Telecom,
Internet and IT services,
3. Knowledge connectivity in the form of good educational
and training institutions,
4. Market connectivity that would enable farmers to get the
best price for their produce.
3.112 In addition to the above, the Scheme would also include
provisions of drinking water supply and upgradation of existing health
facilities. A list of towns for PURA was also selected by the Planning
Commission as per the criteria suggested in the Cabinet Note. The

58
Cabinet considered the note in its meeting on 20 January , 2004 approved
in principle the ‘Provision of Urban Services in Rural Areas’ Scheme
with the direction that the outlay for the scheme will be within the
Gross Budgetary Support.
3.113 The objective of PURA is to provide 7 urban quality facilities
viz. power, road and transport, telecom, health, education, water supply
and marketing in selected rural clusters. The average cost estimated
per growth pole center is in the range of Rs. 100 crore. Plannning
Commission has decided to launch PURA initially in a pilot phase in
7 States with a cluster in each State comprising of 10 to 15 villages.
The States selected for pilot phase are: Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh. The pilot phase
will be completed in 2 to 3 years with an estimated cost of Rs. 4 crore
to Rs. 5 crore per cluster under PURA. As per the Annual Report
2004-05 of the Ministry, the Ministry of Rural Development is the
nodal ministry for formulation, implementation and monitoring of
PURA. A steering Committee (chaired by the Secretary, Rural
Development) has been constituted to examine sanction and monitor
the implementation of projects under PURA. The allocation and
expenditure under PURA since 2003-04 is as under:
(Rs in crore)
Year Allocation Expenditure
2003-04 BE 0 5.78 (up to March 2004)
2004-05 BE 1 -
2004-05 RE 10* NA
2005-06 BE 10
*Rs. 9 crore was obtained in the Supplementary Grants 2004-05.
3.114 The Committee note the reply of the Government that
Rs. 4 crore to Rs. 5 crore per cluster is estimated to be required for
development of a PURA cluster. They also note that since 2003-04,
Rs. 20 crore have been allocated under PURA. They, therefore
conclude that with these funds only 4 PURA clusters can be taken
up for development. For the development of one PURA cluster in
7 selected States at least Rs. 35 crore will be required. With the

59
present level of allocation under the Scheme, the Government may
take another two years to start a single PURA cluster each in all
these States. They also apprehend that with the present pace of
implementation, the complete development of pilot PURA clusters
may not end before 2008-09 as the development of cluster will take
about 3 years time. This might delay the framing of the guidelines
and the launching of PURA in the Country as a whole. They,
therefore, recommend that the Department should approach Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance for adequate outlay for pilot
projects. The Department should also ensure that pilot projects are
taken up expeditiously so that the ambitious programme could be
launched Nation-wide.
(vi) Training Section
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD)
3.115 In April 1962, the Central Institute of Study and Research in
Community Development, Trainers Training Institute were merged to
establish National Institute of Community Development (NICD). The
NICD became an autonomous registered Society in November 1965.
The name of NICD was changed to National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD) in September 1977 which has since set up a
regional Centre at Guwahati in July 1983. The policy of NIRD is
determined by a 47 member General Council.
3.116 The NIRD undertakes training programmes for creation and
enhancement of capacity of the delivery mechanism for poverty
alleviation and rural infrastructure programmes, undertakes research
and studies on Panchayati Raj Institutions and Rural Development
programmes for continuous policy and programme upgradation and
disseminates information through various publications.
3.117 The activities of NIRD relate to training, research, action
research and consultancy in rural development. Action Plan has been
drawn up on each of these activities and is being implemented.
3.118 During 2004-05, NIRD has planned to conduct 200 Training
Programmes by 31 January, 2005. The Ministry had proposed a plan
outlay of Rs. 15.24 crore against which the Planning Commission has
approved Rs. 10 crore for 2005-06.

60
3.119 The extent of assistance by Department of Rural Development
to NIRD since 1999-2000 is as follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Plan Non-Plan
1999-2000 5.00 7.15
2000-2001 5.00 7.60
2001-2002 5.00 7.55
2002-2003 5.45 7.55
2003-2004 6.57 7.50
2004-2005(upto 23.02.05) 8.35 7.42
(vii) Strengthening and Establishment of State Institute of Rural
Development (SIRDs) and Extension Training Centres (ETCs)
(A) SIRDs
3.120 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Strengthening and
Establishment of State Institute of Rural Development (SIRDs) and
Extension Training Centres (ETCs) is being implemented since 6th Five
Year Plan (1980-85).
3.121 28 SIRDs have been established and are functioning in the
country. All SIRDs are operating from their own buildings or in rented
buildings. Two more SIRDs are yet to be established in the States of
Chhattisgrah and Uttaranchal. Since 1994-1995, 100 percent Central
assistance is provided to SIRDs for non-recurring expenditure while
the recurring expenditure is shared on 50:50 basis between the Centre
and the States. During 2004-2005, Rs. 9.07 crore Central share for
recurring expenditure has been provided to 23 SIRDs till 20 March,
2005.
(B) ETCs
3.122 In or der to impart training to village and block level
functionaries, the Scheme of ETCs was taken up since 7th Plan period
(1985-90). In 24 States, 88 different Extension Training Centres (ETCs)
have been established and functioning as on 1 April, 2004. The States
which do not have ETCs are Goa, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttaranchal.

61
(viii) Organisation of Training Courses, Seminars and Workshops
(OTC)
3.123 The funds under OTC scheme are used for funding proposals
relating to capacity building, organisation of workshops and training
courses on the various rural development schemes and career
management of departmental staff. However, after making separate
provisions for training of elected members and officials of Panchayati
Raj Institutions from the year 2001-02 onwards, there has been a
reduction in the number of proposals under the OTC scheme, resulting
in savings under the scheme, which were utilised for SIRDs/ETCs.
3.124 The SIRDs and ETCs during 2004-2005, had planned to
conduct 5,899 training programmes with 1,74,390 participants against
which 1,719 training programmes have been conducted in which 66,002
participated till December, 2004. The SIRDs and ETCs plan to conduct
6,000 training programmes during 2005-2006.
3.125 As per the Performance Budget 2005-2006, allocation for
training since 2004-2005 is as below:
 (Rs. in crore)
Plan Non-Plan Total
B.E. 2004-2005 33.40 7.60 41
R.E. 2004-2005 33.40 7.42 40.82
B.E. 2005-2006 33.40 7.87 41.87
3.126 Further it has been stated that during 2004-2005, out of
Rs. 40.82 crore for training, Rs. 33.40 crore was the expenditure under
plan funds upto January 2005. Rs. 26.49 crore and Rs. 7.42 crore was
spent separately under non-plan funds.
3.127 The Committee note that during 2004-2005, Rs. 26.49 crore
could be spent up to January 2005 out of total allocation of Rs. 33.40
crore earmarked under plan budget for the training. They find that
nearly Rs. 7 crore of the plan funds remained unspent for training
during 2004-2005 up to the month of January. The Committee further
note that even for training schemes there is rush of funds in the
last two months of the financial year. The Committee urge the
Department to properly plan ahead so that the pace of expenditure
for training is evenly spread through out year during 2005-2006.

62
3.128 The Committee note that out of 28 SIRDs the Central share
for recurring expenditure of Rs. 9.07 crore has been provided to
23 SIRDs so far. They, therefore, conclude that 5 SIRDs have not
been provided with the funds for recurring expenditure this year.
The Committee would like to know the name of the States to which
SIRD allocation has not been made. They would also like to be
apprised of the reasons for which the said 5 SIRDs have been
deprived of the Central funds. As training is an important input for
the success of rural development programmes, all SIRDs should
receive the funds in time and it should be ensured that the scarce
resources are spent in a proper manner. The Committee further note
that in 24 States, 88 ETCs have been established and are functioning.
ETCs have not been constituted in Goa, Sikkim, Tripura and
Uttaranchal. The Committee would like to recommend for the early
constitution of ETCs in said States. Besides the Committee would
like to be informed about the number of ETCs in each State so as
to have a better idea of the functioning of ETCs and recommend
further in this regard. The Committee would also like to recommend
for early construction of SIRDs in Chhattisgarh and Uttaranchal.
3.129 The Committee further find that SIRDs/ETCs have so far
conducted only 1,719 training programmes out of the target of 5,899
training programmes during 2004-2005. They also find that only 66,002
participants have so far taken training against a target of 1,74,390.
They, therefore, conclude that the training activity by SIRDs/ETCs
are not up to the mark during the said year. The Committee observe
that since the training is the basic input for the effective
implementation of rural development schemes, there is an urgent
need to give more stress in this regard. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Department to analyse the position of training
programme more critically in each State and it should be ensured
that the targets are fully achieved in a particular year. The Committee
would also like to be kept informed about the reasons for shortfall
in targets State-wise along with the corrective action initiated by the
Department.
(ix) Assistance to Council for Advancement of People’s Action and
Rural T echnology (CAPART)
3.130 The Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural
Technology (CAPART) came into existence in September, 1986 following
the merger of two erstwhile Societies, namely, People’s Action for
Development India (PADI) and Council for Advancement of Rural

63
Technology (CAPART). CAPART’s principal aim is to involve the people
in the implementation of development programmes and promote need-
based, innovative projects through non-governmental voluntary
organizations and it works towards creating a peoples’ movement for
development in the rural areas through higher social mobilization,
lowering of social barriers and empowerment of the rural poor. The
main objectives of CAPART include:
•P romotion of voluntary action through grassroots planning,
organization of seminars and workshops;
•P roviding a platform for sharing and dissemination of
knowledge and experience;
•P roviding funding support to innovative need based projects;
• Encouraging voluntary organizations to collaborate amongst
themselves by developing networks;
• Selection and encouragement of innovative technologies and
their dissemination;
• Reduction of rural poverty;
• Generation of awareness for conservation of the environment
and natural resources;
•P roviding the minimum needs in respect of safe drinking
water, sanitation etc.
3.131 From the financial year 2001-2002, the Ministry has made
the budget provision for CAPART under a single Head, namely,
“Assistance to CAPART”. This assistance is principally utilized in
implementing three Schemes, namely, Promotion of Voluntary Action
in Rural Development (PC), Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme
(ARTS) and Organization of Beneficiaries (OB). The administrative costs
are also met from the Head “Assistance to CAPART”.
3.132 The aim and objective of the projects implemented under
these programmes are as under:—
1. Public Cooperation Scheme:—Projects of innovative and
integrated nature only are considered under the scheme
which result in harnessing the collective energies and
creativity of the rural community and lead to capacity
building and enhancement of life.

64
2. Organisation of Beneficiaries:—Projects for creating awareness
organising the beneficiaries into groups and strengthening
their bargaining position etc., are considered under this
scheme.
3. Watershed Development Scheme:—CAPART Watershed
Programme is operational in drought prone and water
scarcity areas with the active involvement of grassroot
voluntary organizations and village level beneficiaries. The
programme involves experienced voluntary organizations
representing all the agro-ecological Zones in the country.
Capacity building stage in the programme is very useful
for the voluntary organizations as well as for village level
workers so that implementation work is done adhering to
the watershed principles, such as top to bottom and ridge
to valley approach. The unique model of Support Voluntary
Organisations (SVOs) is to train and technically assist various
voluntary organizations approved for watershed and natural
resource management. This has been developed for better
implementation of the programme.
4. Appropriate Rural Technology Scheme:—Under Rural
Technology activity, the mandate of CAPART is to co-
ordinate all efforts towards advancement of technology
relevant to rural areas except for sectors being dealt with
ICAR and its sister organizations. The broad objective of
the Council under this is development and dissemination
of rural technology. Projects aimed at conducting need based
study, survey and adaptive research and development,
administration and dissemination of appropriate technologies
amongst the poor are funded under this scheme. A
programme of setting up of Technology Resource Centre
(TRCs) was initiated by CAPART under this scheme. These
are VOs equipped with lab facilities that received annual
grants from CAPART for development of appropriate
technology and dissemination of the same through network
of small VOs within their areas of operation.
5. Disability:—Projects relating to the Community Based
Rehabilitation of the disabled to facilitate and help them
for integration with the community as dignified, self-reliant
categories so that they can contribute to the development
process of the Society.
3.133 No project under any of CAPART’s schemes is sanctioned
without pre-funding appraisal and the approval of the National

65
Standing Committee/Regional Committees which comprises eminent
persons in the field of rural development. The VO has to submit
progress report in the prescribed Performa within six months of the
release of the 1st instalment. Before the second instalment is released,
mid term evaluation is done. After completion of the project, the VO
has to submit the final progress report and audited statement of
accounts alongwith Utilization Certificate and therefore, the entire
project is post evaluated.
3.134 The extent of assistance to CAPART by Ministry of Rural
Development since 1999-2000 is as below:
1999-2000 Rs. 13 crore
2000-2001 Rs. 13 crore
2001-2002 Rs. 30 crore
2002-2003 Rs. 30 crore
2003-2004 Rs. 71.46 crore
2004-2005 Rs. 62.50 crore (upto January, 2005)
2005-2006 Rs. 70 crore
3.135 The Department has stated that CAPART’s expenditure for
the year 2004-2005 was Rs. 62.50 crore against the revised estimate of
Rs. 65 crore. The activity wise expenditure of CAPART is as below:
Activity-wise Expenditure upto 28.02.2005
S.No. Activity Expenditure upto Feb. 2005
(Rs. in crore)
1. PC 17.42
2. OB 0.89
3. ARTS 11.67
4. DISABILITY 0.58
5. WSD 4.89
6. MEDIA & PUBLICATION 0.34
7. MARKETING 1.21
8. Yps 0.58
9. Administration 6.33
TOTAL 43.91

66
3.136 The Ministry of Rural Development monitors the activities
of CAPART through a series of meeting at the Secretary (RD) level,
which includes monthly staff meeting of Secretary (RD). In addition,
CAPART’s activites are reviewed by the Chairman, Executive
Committee who is also the Minister for Rural Development as well as
through Executive Committee and General Body meetings.
3.137 As per the information, 35 different Voluntary Organizations
out of 659 NGOs operating in 20 States and two Union territories,
have been black-listed by CAPART during 2004-2005.
3.138 As per information furnished to the Committee, the CAPART
has identified NGOs as Support Voluntary Organisations (SVOs),
Facilitation Centres (FCs) and Technology Resource Centres (TRCs)
under three different schemes viz. Watershed Development and
Conservation Programme, Disability Rehabilitation and Advancement
of Rural Technology Programmes. There were 7 SVOs, 7 FCs and
23 TRCs identified by the CAPART.
3.139 The Committee find that CAPART has been constituted
with the laudable objectives which include training of voluntary
organizations, reduction of rural poverty, selection and encouragement
of innovative technologies and their dissemination, providing the
minimum need in respect of safe drinking water and sanitation. The
Committee would like to be apprised how far CAPART could achieve
the aforesaid objectives to enable the Committee to analyse the
performance of CAPART.
3.140 From the detailed expenditure position during 2004-2005,
the Committee understand that the main expenditure was on account
of Public Cooperation Scheme, Advancement of Rural Technology
Scheme as well as Administration. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the achievement of CAPART under the aforesaid schemes
to analyse the position of expenditure and comment further in this
regard. On account of expenditure on administration, the Committee
would also like to be apprised of the details of organization structure
of CAPART for which an amount of Rs. 6.33 crore was spent during
2004-2005. In other sectors the Committee find that the level of
expenditure is marginal. The Committee would like a detailed note
indicating how the meagre outlay would enable CAPART to achieve
the desired results in the different schemes.

67
3.141 The Committee find that one of the main activities of
CAPART is to provide training to voluntary organization. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the number of voluntary
organizations who could be imparted training so far. Besides they
would also like to be apprised of the details of the curriculum for
training.
3.142 The Committee note that during 2004-2005, out of 659
NGOs, 22 NGOs were blacklisted. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the mechanism to ensure that once an NGO is blacklisted
it can not be registered again and get any grant from CAPART. The
Committee would also like that stringent monitoring mechanism is
required to monitor the activities of NGOs.
 N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 April, 2005 Chairman,
25 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

68
APPENDIX I
STATEMENT SHOWING BUDGET ESTIMATE, REVISED ESTIMATE AND ACTUAL EXPENDITURE
DURING 9TH PLAN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(Rs. in Crore)
Sl.No. Name of the Schemes 9th Plan 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-2002 Total Ninth Plan
Outlay B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals
12 3 4 5 6 789 1 0 1 11 2 1 3 1 4 1 51 6 1 7 1 81 92 0 2 1
Plan
1. Employment Assurance
Scheme 8690.00 1970.00 1905.21 1968.27 1990.00 1990.00 1989.88 1700.00 2040.00 2040.00 1300.00 1600.00 1419.51 1600.00 1875.00 1898.23 8560.00 94 10.21 9315.89
2. Jawahar Gram Samridhi Yojana 7095.90 2077.70 1952.70 1951.61 2095.00 2060.00 2062.26 2095.00 1689.00 1689.00 1650.00 1510.00 1384.88 1650.0 0 1875.00 1895.58 9567.70 9068.70 8983.33
3. Food for Work Programme 0.00 800.00 800.00 0.00 800.00 800.00
4. Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar
Yojana 4690.00 1183.00 1033.00 1034.45 1410.00 1195.94 1196.17 1215.00 950.00 946.76 1000.00 470.00 544.94 500.00 550.00 536.27 5308.00 4198.94 42 58.59
5. DRDA Administration 915.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 110.00 110.00 220.00 200.00 165.97 220.00 200.00 198.90 440.00 510.00 474.87
6. N.S.A.P. 3280.00 700.00 490.00 559.41 700.00 640.00 640.11 725.00 710.00 709.94 715.00 715.00 700.55 835.00 635.00 629.85 3675.00 3190.00 3239.8 6
7. Rural Housing (Indira Awaas
Yojana) 7285.00 1190.00 1143.75 1143.55 1600.00 1532.00 1531.92 1710.00 1659.00 1659.00 1710.00 1710.00 1664.17 1527.00 1991.00 1945.33 7737.00 8 035.75 7943.97
8. Annapoorna 596.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 100.00 100.00 99.80 300.00 100.00 7163 400.00 200.00 171.43
9. Grants to National Institute of
Rural Dev. 30.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 25.00 25.00 25.00

69
 1 2  3   4    5    6   7   8  9   1 0    1 1  1 2    1 3    1 4   1 5   1 6    1 7    1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1
10. Strengthening of State Training 15.00 3.25 3.25 4.07 3.25 3.25 4.26 4.25 6.25 6.25 7.25 9.25 10.39 8.75 8.75 8.75 26.75 30.75 33.72
Centre
11.O rg. of Training Courses, 5.00 0.50 0.50 0.27 0.50 0.50 0.82 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.41 1.25 1.25 1.25 4.75 4.75 5.00
Seminars
12. Strengthening of Ext. Training Centre 15.00 3.00 3.00 3.45 3.00 3.00 1.99 3.00 4.00 4.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 15.00 16.00 15.44
13. Communication Cell 45.00 4.00 4.00 4.22 4.00 4.00 4.23 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 28.33 38.00 38.00 56.78
14. Assistance to C.A.P.A.R.T. 60.00 12.00 12.00 6.00 12.00 12.00 12.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 30.00 30.00 30.00 80.00 80.00 74.00
15. Promotion of Voluntary Actions Scheme 115.00 10.00 10.00 1.55 20.00 20.00 19.54 26.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 69.00 56.00 47.09
16. Organisation of Beneficiaries 15.97 3.50 3.50 0.50 3.50 3.00 1.75 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 2.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.00 12.50 8.25
17. Panchayat Development and Training 10.00 3.00 3.00 3.01 3.00 2.00 1.79 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 5.00 10.50 8.77 17.00 21.50 19.57
18. Roads in Special Problem Areas 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.02 1.50 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.50 2.55 1.52
19. Agricultural Marketing 0.00 7.25 7.25 5.78 7.25 7.25 4.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.50 14.50 9.90
20. Monitoring Mechanism 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.50 0.59 2.00 2.00 2.00 5.00 5.00 4.50 10.00 10.00 8.92 17.50 17.50 16.01
21. Information technology 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00
22. International Cooperation 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00
23. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 2500.00 2500.00 2435.00 2500.00 2500.00 2500.00 5000.00 5000.00 4935.00
Total—Rural Dev . (Including PMGSY) 32869.87 7174.20 6578.16 6692.16 7858.50 7478.44 7476.43 7517.00 7220.00 7216.70 9260.00 8869.55 8480.12 9 205.00 10606.50 10569.81 41014.70 40752.65 40433.22

70
APPENDIX II
STATEMENT SHOWING PROPOSED OUTLAY, OUTLAY AGREED TO, TOTAL RELEASE, BUDGET ESTIMATE,
REVISED ESTIMATE DURING 10TH PLAN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(Rs. in Crore)
Sl.No. Name of the Scheme 10th Plan 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05                   2005-06
Proposed Outlay Total rele- B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E.
outlay agreed to ase (upto Expen- Expen- Expen-
by Plg. 15.3.05) in diture diture diture upto
Commn. the 15.3.2005
10th Plan
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 11 2 1 3 1 41 5
Plan
1. Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana 48538.00 30000.00 23972.73 4440.00 9086.00 9085.93 4900.00 10130.00 10129.93 5100.00 5100.00 4756.87 4000. 00
2. National Food For Work Programme 0.00 2020.00 1951.66 6000.00
3. Food For Work Programme 785.18 600.00 860.00 785.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
4. Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana 9850.00 3955.00 2398.86 710.00 710.00 706.04 800.00 800.00 797.55 1000.00 1000.00 895.27 960.00
5. DRDA Administration Scheme 1586.27 1100.00 630.85 220.00 220.00 199.19 220.00 220.00 220.00 230.00 230.00 211.66 220.00
6. Rural Housing—Indira Awaas Yojana 13040.00 8603.00 6277.51 1725.00 1725.00 1693.14 1900.00 1900.00 1899.50 2500.00 2900.00 2684.87 2775.00

71
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 11 2 1 3 1 41 5
 7. N.I.R.D. 35.00 40.00 20.10 5.00 5.00 5.45 6.00 6.00 6.00 9.00 9.00 8.65 10.00
 8. Training 315.00 150.00 79.16 20.00 20.00 18.02 39.00 39.00 39.84 24.40 24.40 21.30 24.00
 9. Assistance to C.A.P .A.R.T. 250.00 200.00 145.00 30.00 30.00 30.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 65.00 65.00 65.00 70.00
10. Information, Education &
Communication 500.00 100.00 36.04 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.50 20.00 20.00 15.54 15.00
11. Monitoring Mechanism 350.00 100.00 35.67 10.00 10.00 10.24 20.00 20.00 15.83 20.00 20.00 9.60 15.00
12. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 55000.00 12500.00 7077.64 2500.00 2500.00 2500.00 2325.00 2325.00 2328.60 2468.00 2468.00 2249.04 4235.0 0
13. Provision for Urban Amenities in 55000.00 12500.00 7077.64 2500.00 2500.00 2500.00 2325.00 2325.00 2328.60 2468.60 2468.00 2468.00 2249.0 4
Rural Areas
14. Provision for Urban Amenities in
Rural Areas 5.78 0.00 0.00 5.78 1.00 10.00 0.00 10.00
Total—Rural Development 129464.27 56748.00 41464.52 10270.00 15176.00 15043.19 10270.00 15500.00 15503.53 11437.40 13866.40 12869.46 18334.0 0

72
APPENDIX III
COMPARATIVE  DATA  WITH  REGARD  TO  BE  2004-2005
RE 2004-2005 AND BE 2005-2006 UNDER VARIOUS SCHEMES
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
BE RE BE (Rs. in crores)
2004-2005 2004-2005 2005-2006
SGSY 900 900 862.24 (37.76)
SGRY 4590 4590 36.00 (-990)
Food for Work Programme — 1818.00 5400
Total Rural Employment 4590 6408.00 9000 .00 (+4590)
Housing 2247 2607 2497.60 (-1098.40)
DRDA Administration 207 207 198.31 (-8.69)
Training 36.26 36.08 35.32 (-0.4)
Other data for rural development 346.61 354.53 340.43 (-6.18)
PMGSY 2219 2219 3809.50 (6897+
1590.50)
Lumpsum provision for 1143.74 1386.64 1833.40 (+446.76)
North Eastern States
Grand Total 11455.96 13885.40 18353.87 (6897.91
as against BE)
(+4468.47 as against RE)

APPENDIX IV
IMPLEMENTING AGENCY AND RELEASE OF FUNDS
UNDER VARIOUS SCHEMES OF DEPARTMENT OF
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Name of Implementing Agency Release of funds
Programmes/ from the Centre
schemes
SGSY DRDAs through Panchayat Govt. of India release  funds direct
Samities and with involvement to the DRDAs.
of PRIs
SGRY (A) District Panchayat/DRDA (i) Cash component  and foodgrains
(B) Intermediate Panchayat component released directly to
(C) Village Panchayat District Panchayats/DRDAs.
(ii) Funds to intermediate/Village
Panchayats be distributed by DP/
DRDA within 15 days of receipt of
funds from Central or the State Govt.
NFFWP Line Department/PRIs/reputed NGOs/ Central Govt. will provide
SHGs/Other agencies of Central/ foodgrains and cash component
State Government dir ectly to the Districts in which
NFFWP is under operation.
Foodgrains and cash component will
be released to DRDA/District
Panchayat.
IAY Zilla Parishad/DRDA/ Released to the Zilla Parishads/
Implementing Agency DRDAs.
PMGSY One or two suitable Pr ogramme funds, administrative
Executive Agencies and travel expenses, and quality
nominated by the State Govt. control funds are released in to the
programme and administrative
account of the SRRDA.
DRDA DRDA Funds are released directly to the
Administrative DRDAs
Scheme
73

74
APPENDIX V
LIST OF 150 MOST BACKWARD DISTRICTS WITH RESOURCES
ALLOCATED AND RELEASED UNDER THE NATIONAL FOOD
FOR WORK PROGRAMME DURING 2004-2005
No. Name of the State/Districts Allocation/Release of Allocation/Authorization
Funds (Rs. in lakhs) of Foodgrains (in MTs)
12 3 4
Andhra Pradesh
1. Adilabad 2148.13 22053
2. Mahbubnagar 1888.91 19394
3. Rangareddy 1482.04 15217
4. Khammam 1647.04 16911
5. Warangal 1740.88 17874
6. Nalgonda 1417.24 14553
7. Anantpur 991.66 10182
8. Cudappah 898.82 9229
Total 12214.72 125413
Bihar
1. Araria 1101.33 11309
2. Vaishali 2131.55 21886
3. Gaya 2801.43 28764
4. Madhubani 1912.82 19639
5. Muzaffarpur 2142.3 21996
6. Nawada 1603.29 16462
7. Samastipur 2051.46 21063
8. Sheohar 1225.82 11558

75
12 3 4
 9. Katihar 1704.88 17506
10. Jamui 1792.72 18406
11. Lakhisarai 1435.38 14738
12. Monghyr 1446.13 14849
13. Purnea 1245.94 12793
14. Supaul 1883.54 19340
15. Darbhanga 2032.95 20874
Total 26411.54 271183
Chhattisgarh
1. Bastar 1394.13 14314
2. Dantewada 1049.81 10779
3. Kanker 892.05 9159
4. Koria 694.7 9291
5. Sarguja 1542.51 15837
6. Jashpur 966.17 9919
7. Dhamatri 638.31 6554
8. Raigarh 1014.55 10418
9. Bilaspur 1132.24 11626
10. Rajnandgaon 1085.72 11148
Total 10410.19 109045
Gujarat
1. Dangs 669.07 6873
2. Dohad 901.41 9262
3. Panch Mahals 820.84 8433
4. Sabarkantha 640.46 6580
5. Narmada 393.5 4044
6. Banaskantha 569.41 5850
Total 3994.69 41042

76
12 3 4
Haryana
Mohendergarh 281.85 2894
Himachal Pradesh
Chamba 303.91 3121
Jammu & Kashmir
1. Doda 267.91 2750
2. Kupwara 226.35 2324
Total 494.26 5074
Jharkhand
1. Saraikela 1142.96 11737
2. Singhbhum West 2238.74 22987
3. Godda 1701.24 17467
4. Simdega 1204 12363
5. Gumla 1829.68 18787
6. Chatra 1745.7 17924
7. Garhwa 2224.2 22838
8. Palamau 2116.86 21734
9. Latehar 1192.95 12248
10. Lohardaga 1113.09 11427
11. Dumka 1919.19 19706
12. Jamtara 857.27 8801
13. Sahebganj 1627.49 16711
14. Pakur 1682.33 17274
Total 22595.70 232004
Karnataka
1. Chitradurga 1045.8 10738
2. Davangere 987.7 10142
3. Bidar 891.88 9158
Total 2925.38 30038

77
12 3 4
Kerala
Waynad 547.14 5618
Madhya Pradesh
1. Jhabua 1947.56 19997
2. Mandla 1135.38 11659
3. Umaria 792.01 8131
4. Shahdol 1311.8 13470
5. Barwani 1284.13 13185
6. Khargone 1258.2 12919
7. Shivpuri 685.31 7037
8. Sidhi 1195.02 12270
9. Tikamgarh 585.55 6012
10. Balaghat 836.65 8590
11. Chhattarpur 654.31 6719
12. Betul 1156.37 11867
13. Khandwa 1091.56 11209
14. Seopur 306 3141
15. Dhar 1568.47 16104
Total 15808.32 162310
Maharashtra
1. Gadchiroli 1159.83 11909
2. Gondya 1186.73 12080
3. Chandrapur 1664.42 17089
4. Dhule 1220.7 12534
5. Nandurbar 1635.41 16791
6. Hingoli 1213.15 12458
7. Nanded 1734.88 17814

78
12 3 4
8. Aurangabad 881.58 9053
9. Ahmednagar 1544.41 15859
10. Yawatmal 2164.17 22220
11. Bhandara 1089.98 11191
Total 15495.26 158998
Orissa
1. Koraput 1707.54 17533
2. Malkangiri 1289.3 13237
3. Nabarangpur 1669.16 17139
4. Rayagada 1525.09 15715
5. Mayurbhanj 2408.42 24731
6. Sundergarh 1715.36 17612
7. Keonjhar 1598.15 16408
8. Phulbani 1196.74 12288
9. Boudh 738.15 7579
10. Nuapada 989.91 10165
11. Kalahandi 1390.57 14282
12. Sambalpur 893.4 9172
13. Ganjam 1462.85 15020
14. Deogarh 557.82 5727
15. Jharsuguda 656.48 6741
16. Sonepur 629.39 6464
17. Bolangir 1055.58 10838
18. Dhenkanal 799.76 8212
Total 22283.67 228863

79
12 3 4
Punjab
1. Hoshiarpur 716.32 7356
Rajasthan
1. Banswara 861.06 8841
2. Dungarpur 805.77 8272
3. Udaipur 1097.92 11271
4. Sirohi 387.55 3979
5. Karauli 380.39 3906
Total 3532.69 36269
Tamil Nadu
1. Tiruvannamalai 1381.2 14181
2. South Arcot/Cuddalore 1117.11 11471
3. Villupuram 1526.93 15679
4. Nagapattinam 826.34 8484
Total 4851.58 49815
Uttaranchal
1. Champawat 214.01 2197
2. Tehri Garhwal 800.85 8221
Total 1014.86 10418
Uttar Pradesh
1. Sonbhadra 2195.97 22542
2. Unnao 2511.75 25785
3. Raebareli 2758.1 28312
4. Sitapur 3121.3 32041
5. Hardoi 2710.09 27820
6. Fatehpur 1799.21 18469
7. Lalitpur 659.55 6770
8. Lakhimpur Kheri 1993.76 20467

80
12 3 4
9. Bana 891.91 9156
10. Chitrakoot 559.84 5747
11. Mirzapur 1703.06 17482
12. Kushinagar 1704.08 17492
13. Mahoba 454.23 4662
14. Hamirpur 667.19 6850
15. Barabanki 2648.07 27184
Total 26378.11 270779
West Bengal
1. Purulia 3672.95 37715
2. Malda 1363.74 14002
3. West Midnapur 2245.43 23059
4. Bankura 1696.86 17421
5. West/North Dinajpur 1271.69 13058
6. Murshidabad 1199.14 12313
Total 11449.81 117568
North Eastern States
1. Arunachal Pradesh (1)* 190.80 1249
2. Assam (5) 4962.59 32490
2357.71 15437
3861.41 25282
2756.37 18047
2707.71 17728
Total 16645.79 108984

81
12 3 4
3. Manipur (1) 399.22 2614
4. Meghalaya (1) 543.85 3562
5. Mizoram (1) 95.52 626
6. Nagaland (1) 455.72 2984
7. Sikkim (1) 315.73 2068
8. Tripura (1) 1543.37 10105
Grand Total 201900.00 2000000

82
APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-05)
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 29 MARCH, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
6. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
7. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
8. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
9. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
14. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
15. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
16. Shri Penumalli Madhu
17. Dr. Chandan Mitra
18. Dr. Faguni Ram
19. Prof. R.B.S. Varma

83
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development)
1. Shri M. Shankar, Secretary
2. Shri V . Subramanian, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
3. Shri L.V . Saptharishi, Director General, CAPART
4. Shri Lalit Mathur, Director General, NIRD
5. Dr. P .V . Thomas, Chief Economic Adviser
6. Shri J.K. Mahapatra, Joint Secretary
7. Shri S. Vijay Kumar, Joint Secretary
8. Shri H.K. Srivastav, Director, NRRDA
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives
of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) on Demands for Grants (2005-06).
[The representatives of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of
Rural Development), were then called in.]
3. The Chairman thereafter welcomed the representatives of the
Department of Rural Development to the sitting. He drew their
attention to direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
on Demands for Grants (2005-06). The Secretary , Rural Development
briefly explained to the Committee the overall position with regard to
the allocation and expenditure during the 9th Plan (1997-2002) period
as well as the projections of the Department during the 10th Plan
(2002-2007) period. He also dealt with various issues and enumerated
the problems being faced with regard to the implementation of various
schemes of the Department. The Committee then discussed in detail
the issues related to the examination of the Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Department with special emphasis on major Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Department. The representatives of the

84
Department clarified to the queries of the Members and were asked to
send written replies thereto which could not be answered during the
sitting.
[The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1500 hrs. to take up
the evidence of representatives of Department of Land Resources (Ministry
of Rural Development) on Demands for Grants (2005-06)].
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.

APPENDIX VII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-05)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON FRIDA Y, THE 8TH APRIL, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1345 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shri Mohan Jena
4. Shri Subhash Maharia
5. Shri Hanan Mollah
6. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
7. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
8. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
9. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
13. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
15. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
16. Shri Penumalli Madhu
17. Shri Kalraj Mishra
18. Dr. Chandan Mitra
19. Dr. Faguni Ram
20. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
85

86
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the draft Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department
of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) and adopted
the draft Report with slight modifications.
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Reports on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX VIII
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl. No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.4 The Committee find from the analysis of
9th and 10th Plan outlay as indicated above
that although during 9th Plan, the actual
allocation was enhanced by Rs. 8,144.83
crore, there was reduction of Rs. 262.05
crore at Revised Estimates stage. The
expenditure position further indicates under
spending of Rs. 317.43 crore if compared
to the outlay given at Revised Estimates
stage during 9th Plan. The Committee
further note that although the allocation
during 10th Plan has been enhanced by
Rs. 15,995.35 crore if compared to 9th Plan
allocation, the allocation as agreed to is far
lesser i.e. less than half of the projected
outlay during 10th Plan. The Committee
also find that certain ambitious projections
have been made by the Government under
the vision ‘Bharat Nirman’. The Committee
fail to understand how such ambitious
targets would be achieved with the outlay
that is almost half of what was projected
to the Planning Commission. Scheme-wise
details have been analysed in the
subsequent Paragraphs/Chapters of the
Report. The Committee would like to
strongly recommend the Government, to
pursue with the Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance for adequate allocation
commensurating the targets projected by the
Government, so that the benefits envisaged
under different schemes of the Department
could be extended to the poorest of the
87

88
12 3
poor in the country. While approaching
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance
in this regard the concerns of the Standing
Committee should be duly communicated.
2. 2.5 While recommending for higher outlay, the
Committee strongly feel that whatever
allocation is agreed to at Budget Estimates
stage should not further be reduced at
Revised Estimates stage as has been done
during 9th Plan, since, even the slightest
reduction of outlay means depriving the
lakhs of poor of the little hope that is
intended by such schemes of the Union
Government.
3. 2.6 One of the biggest concern expressed by
the Committee almost every year is
underutilization of resources. The aforesaid
data of under-spending i.e. Rs. 337.43 crore
as compared to Revised Estimates during
9th Plan indicate the shortfall in releases
by the Union Government to States/Union
territory Administrations. The picture of
under-spending is more clear when we
analyse the under-spending by way of huge
opening balances with different State
Governments, the analysis of which has
been done in the subsequent part of the
Report. Even if actual releases are taken
into consideration, the Committee feel that
the amount of Rs. 337.43 crore is a big
amount in the resources starved economy
of the country. In view of the aforesaid
position the Committee hold the strong
view that not even a single paise of the
allocated amount should remain as
unutilized. The Committee strongly calls for
more effective steps on the part of the
Government in this regard.

89
12 3
4. 2.15 The Committee find that although the
overall outlay (both plan and non-plan)
during 2005-2006 has been enhanced by
Rs. 4,468.47 crore as against Revised
Estimates of previous year and by
Rs. 6,897.91 crore (excluding North Eastern
region allocation) as compared to Budget
Estimates of previous year, there is net
reduction of outlay under the priority
schemes of the Department viz Swarnjayanti
Gram Swarozgar Yojana, Sampoorna
Grameen Rozgar Yojana, Rural Housing,
DRDA Administration Scheme and Training
Scheme. The detailed analysis of the impact
of reduction on implementation of these
schemes has been given in the subsequent
part of the Report. Here the Committee
from the data furnished by the Department
find that the increase in allocation is only
under National Food for Work Programme
and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY). The Committee while
appreciating the Government’s targets of
providing 100 days wage employment to
each family in rural India, feel that the
outlay for this programme should not be
provided at the cost of other established
major schemes of the Department. The
Committee also note that the Department
has approached the Planning Commission
for providing enhanced allocation under
these schemes. The Committee express their
strongest concern over the trend of
allocating outlay at the cost of other
schemes and disapprove the policy of the
Government in providing adequate outlay
for a scheme after adjustments in one or
the other schemes. The Committee would
like that their strongest concern in this

90
12 3
regard should be properly conveyed to the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.
5. 2.16 Further, while noting that although the
Ministry of Finance has agreed to provide
additional allocation at Supplementary
Grants stage, the Committee feel that
sanction of grants at Supplementary Grants
stage always leads to uncertainty. In view
of this, they would like that adequate
outlay commensurating the targets should
be provided at Budget Estimates stage for
the schemes.
6. 2.19 The Committee are unable to comprehend
the position of seeking additional funds as
Supplementary Grants and then
surrendering the amount at the close of the
year. To understand the position in a much
better way, the Committee would like to
be informed about the details of the
physical achievement under the sectors for
which Supplementary Grants have been
sought for. The Committee would also like
to be informed about the position of
amount surrendered during 2004-2005 so as
to enable them to comment further in this
regard.
7. 2.27 The Committee strongly feel that there is
an urgent need to improve the quality of
implementation and enhance the efficiency
and accountability of the monitoring
mechanism as stressed by Finance Minister
in his speech while presenting the Budget
for the year 2005-2006. They also note from
the information furnished by the
Department that different types of
monitoring mechanism like Concurrent
Evaluation, different types of Vigilance and

91
12 3
Monitoring Committees, Area Officers
Schemes etc. are in place. The Committee
further find that during 10th Plan,
independent and in-depth evaluation
studies were conducted for all the major
schemes of the Department. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the details,
scheme-wise, of the major findings and
corrective action taken thereon by the
Department so as to enable them to analyse
the usefulness of the system and comment
further in this regard. The Committee
would also like to be informed about the
way these studies could provide an input
for further improvement in the schemes of
the Department.
8. 2.28 The Committee further note that the
Ministry has introduced a system of District
and State level Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees. These Committees are to be
constituted by the Union Ministry of Rural
Development. From the information
provided by the Department it seems that
such Committees could be an effective
monitoring mechanism only in few States.
Not only that, there is confusion on the
issue of constitution of such Committees.
Different data regarding the constitution of
Committees were indicated in the written
note as well as during the course of oral
evidence as indicated in the preceding para
of the report. The Committee are
constrained to note that if this is the state
of affairs of the Committees that were to
be constituted by the Union Government,
the status of other Committees being
constituted by State Governments can be
well imagined. The Committee would like
the Department to furnish a detailed note

92
12 3
indicating the action taken by them for
early constitution of such Committees.
Besides it should be ensured that such
Committees are constituted in all States and
Districts without any further delay. Further
no State or Union territory should be
allowed to be exempted from constituting
the said vigilance and monitoring
Committees. Not only that, there is an
urgent need to monitor that the sittings of
such Committees are held periodically as
per guidelines so as to prove an effective
mechanism for effective implementation of
various schemes of the Department for
which crores of rupees are being spent
annually.
9. 2.29 The Committee would further like to be
apprised about the corrective action taken
on the findings of the area officers under
the monitoring system of the Ministry of
Rural Development. The Committee would
also like to be apprised about the number
of States/Districts covered by the said
scheme during the last three years so as to
enable them to analyse the usefulness of
this system and comment further in this
regard. The Committee would also like to
recommend that there should be an in-built
mechanism in each of the schemes for
regular monitoring/evaluation. Not only
that, there should be specific allocation of
outlay for the purpose. Besides, the
Committee find that there is no system of
fixing accountability. They feel that there
should be well defined system of fixing
accountability and some sort of action
against the defaulter officers/agencies
involved in the implementation of the
schemes/programme to serve as a deterrent

93
12 3
for others. Further, there is a need to have
a more transparent system for
implementation of various schemes so that
the public may be well informed about the
spending under various schemes. Such a
system will automatically put a pressure on
the implementing authorities to perform
better and deliver results. Gram Sabha in
this regard can be the best forum in rural
areas. There is an urgent need to strengthen
the Gram Sabhas so that they can function
as an institution of social audit. The
Committee would like the Department to
take urgent action in this regard and inform
the Committee accordingly.
10. 2.33 While noting that the results of BPL survey
(2002) could not be finalised due to the
direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court, the
Committee would like to be apprised about
the latest position with regard to the
hearing on the aforesaid case by Hon’ble
Supreme Court. Further the Committee are
concerned to note that the exercise of BPL
Census, is further being delayed by the
State Governments/Union territory
Administrations. The Committee strongly
recommend that pending decision by the
Supreme Court, the exercise by States/
Union territories should be completed
expeditiously and the provisional results
should be made available by the
Government so that the results could be
finalised immediately when the decision in
this regard is taken by the Supreme Court.
11. 2.34 The Committee are further unhappy to note
the decision of the Government according
to which the number of BPL persons
estimated should not exceed those of

94
12 3
identified as per 1999-2000 survey. The
Committee feel that such an arbitrary limit
of BPL persons to be identified will do a
great injustice to the genuine BPL persons
who could be debarred from certain
benefits. Not only that, it would be a major
factor for providing unreasonable authority
to the agencies involved, thereby inviting
corruption and malpractices. The
Committee strongly recommend not to fix
any such limitations. They would also like
that their concern in this regard should also
be brought before the Planning Commission
and matter should be reviewed afresh.
12. 2.36 The Committee find that there is an urgent
need to implement all the schemes of the
Department directly by the Panchayati Raj
Institutions in the true spirit of the mandate
of the Constitution as per article 243G of
the Constitution. Besides the funds for all
the schemes should be released directly to
Panchayats in the specific accounts for the
purpose. Such a system will not only
empower Panchayats but also improve the
implementation of the Programme. The
common Implementing Agency and the
funds transfer agency would further
simplify the procedure and avoid delay in
transfer of funds. The Committee in their
earlier reports had also been drawing the
attention of the Government in this regard.
While reiterating their earlier stand the
Committee would like that earnest action
in this regard should be taken.
13. 2.41 The Committee appreciate the initiative of
the Government to present gender
budgeting by all the Departments of the
Union Government and also to make

95
12 3
benefit incidence analyses. They also
appreciate the initiative taken by the
Department of Rural Development to
indicate the data with regard to women
beneficiaries. Such type of data brings
transparency towards the efforts of different
Departments for the welfare of women and
also help the Government to monitor the
implementation of the policies initiated for
women welfare.
14. 2.42 The Committee note that in the schemes
meant for providing wage employment for
manual labour work, like SGRY and Food
for Work Programme the participation of
women, may not be so encouraging. The
data with regard to SGRY, as well as the
observation of the Committee during the
Study-visit to Varanasi and Lucknow in
Uttar Pradesh substantiate this point. The
Committee find that the Government
propose to provide 100 days of wage
employment to each family in rural area.
To achieve this objective the Government
have brought a legislation, ‘The National
Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ which is
under examination of this Standing
Committee. At present National Food for
Work Programme is being launched in 150
districts to achieve the said objective. The
Committee feel that serious efforts have to
be made by taking suitable action in this
regard so as to encourage participation of
women under the Employment Guarantee
Scheme. The Committee would further like
to hear from the Government about their
experience under the National Food for
Work Programme as well as the efforts
envisaged to protect the interests of women
at the work fields to enable the Committee

96
12 3
to analyse the position and comment
further in this regard.
15. 2.46 The Committee note from the data
provided by the Department that spending
position under different schemes in North
Eastern Region has improved. But
underspending still persists. The Committee
would like the Government to take up the
issue of underspending with North-Eastern
States so as to improve the position further.
16. 2.47 On the issue of revision of norms for Centre
vis-à-vis State’s allocation, the Committee
find that the matter of revision of Centre,
State allocation from 75:25 to 90:10 is being
taken up with the Planning Commission.
The Committee would like to know the
final decision when taken in this respect.
17. 3.12 The Committee find from the information
and clarification provided by the
Department that at present National Food
for Work Programme along with
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)
is being implemented in 150 selected
districts. In the remaining districts
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana is being
implemented. When, the National
Employment Guarantee Act will be
applicable, these two programmes will be
merged together and shall be known by
the name of the Act. While noting the
aforesaid scheme of things, the Committee
are at a loss to understand the plethora of
schemes with the same objective. Not only
that it is not clear where the National
Employment Scheme will be applicable,
indicating clearly whether it is the
replacement of Food for Work Programme.

97
12 3
The Committee strongly recommend that
SGRY and Food for work programme
should be merged together in the 150
districts selected so far which will pave the
way for 100 days guarantee. The merged
scheme should be known as National
Employment Guarantee Scheme which will
ultimately be proposed to take the shape
of legal guarantee after the aforesaid
enactment.
18. 3.13 The Committee find from the Budget
documents as well as replies furnished by
the Department that allocation and
utilisastion has been indicated State-wise.
The Committee note that that in view of
the existing system of indicating and
monitoring data, it is not possible to know
the performance of the programme in the
selected 150 districts. The Committee would
like to recommend that district-wise
physical and financial achievement should
be indicated against each of the districts so
as to know the impact of the programme
in each of the districts. Such data will also
enable the Government to know the various
shortcomings in the programme which will
ultimately be taking the shape of a
guarantee scheme.
19. 3.14 The Committee further fail to understand
the difference between the most backward
districts selected by the Department for the
purpose of National Food for Work
Programme with those of 170 most
backward districts mentioned by the
Finance Minister in his Budget speech. The
Committee would like the Department to
analyse the position in this regard and
furnish explanation to the Committee. The

98
12 3
Committee would also like to strongly
recommend that while selecting the districts
for National Food for Work Programme, it
should be strictly ensured that parameters
for selection of districts are such that first
of all the most backward districts in a State
get the due priority in the Programme.
20. 3.15 The National Rural Employment Guarantee
Bill (2004) is being examined by this
Committee and all related matters will be
analysed and suitably recommended in the
report. At this stage, the Committee would
like to say that although the Government
has started the Food for Work Programme
in 150 districts meant to achieve the similar
objective as of the said legislation, there is
no planning on the part of the Government
as to how the Guarantee Scheme will be
applicable throughout the country. The
Committee are constrained to find that so
far no exercise has been made to know
about the estimated outlay that will be
required to cover the whole country with
the said guarantee. The Committee fail to
understand how the Government would be
achieving the objective of such an ambitious
legislation. The Committee strongly
recommend that the Government should do
the desired home-work so that such a big
programme with laudable objectives could
be translated into reality.
21. 3.31 The Committee find that during 10th Plan
under Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
Planning Commission has allocated for cash
component Rs. 18,538 crore lesser than the
proposed allocation. Similarly during
2005-2006, the allocation is Rs. 1,428 crore
lesser than the proposed allocation. Under

99
12 3
National Food for Work Programme during
2005-2006, the allocation for cash
component is Rs. 573 crore higher than the
proposed allocation. The Committee further
note that SGRY will be applicable in the
districts where National Food for Work
Programme which eventually will be
converted into Guarantee Scheme is not
applicable. In such a situation, the
Committee hold the view that till the scope
of NFFWP is further extended, the majority
of the districts will be covered by SGRY. In
such a situation the Committee recommend
that due priority should be accorded to
SGRY. The outlay under National Food for
Work Programme should not be provided
at the cost of SGRY.
22. 3.32 The Committee further find that with
regard to the payment for food grains
component under SGRY as well as NFFWP ,
there is utter confusion. They note that as
per the recent decision, the payment for
food grains component will directly be
managed by the Ministry of Finance. As
per the data reported by the Secretary
during evidence Rs. 15,000 crore is the
outstanding payment to Food Corporation
of India. The Committee also note that
during 2005-2006, no allocation has been
indicated against the proposed allocation of
Rs. 27,375.87 crore under SGRY and
Rs. 2,313 crore under NFFWP for food
grains component. In such a scenario the
Committee fail to understand how the
Government will fulfill the commitment of
providing adequate allocation under the
wage employment programme of the
Department. The Committee feel that, the
specific allocation and outstanding due to

100
12 3
Food Corporation of India should
invariably be indicated in the Budget
documents irrespective of the fact whether
payment is made by the Ministry of Rural
Development or Ministry of Finance to the
Food Corporation of India or to the
Department of Food and Public Distribution
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food &
Public Distribution) so as to know about
the clear picture of the allocation. The
Committee would like to be clearly
informed how the Government propose to
arrange for the outlay for the employment
guarantee for which ambitious
commitments have been made in the
National Common Minimum Programme as
well as in the Budget announcements.
23. 3.33 The Committee are disappointed to note the
implementation of SGRY in some of the
States particularly Union territories. The
Committee are further constrained to note
the reply of the Department stating that
Union territories have never utilised their
allocated resources to the fullest extent
under SGRY and as such no district under
Food for Work Programme was included
for Union territories. The Committee
strongly recommend to analyse the reasons
for poor performance in each of the States
as indicated in the preceding para of the
report and take the corrective action
immediately. The Committee may also be
kept informed about this. The Committee
are unable to understand poor performance
of SGRY in Union territories which are
directly under the administrative control of
the Union Government. They would like
the explanation of the Department in this
regard.

101
12 3
24. 3.34 The Committee are further constrained to
note that out of 12 States to whom food
grains were released under Special
component of SGRY, only 4 States have
submitted the progress reports. Further the
data submitted by the Department in case
of these States is also not clear. Food grains
authorised indicated is for the year 2004-
2005, whereas the utilisation data is
cumulative data including utilisation for the
year 2004-2005. Thus the performance
cannot be evaluated. The Committee would
like that the data for each year under
specific item should be made individually
so as to enable the Committee to come to
some meaningful conclusion. The
Committee strongly recommend that proper
monitoring of data should be done for the
outlay earmarked under Special Component
of SGRY so as to ensure that the meagre
resources earmarked for calamity affected
areas reach the intended calamity stricken
beneficiaries. The Committee would like the
Department to collect the utilisation data
from such States/District and submit before
the Committee along with the position of
mandays created.
25. 3.35 The Committee further note that during
2005-06, Rs. 360 crore out of overall savings
has been allocated additionally for Tsunami
affected States. The Committee strongly
recommend to monitor the utilisation
position in the said Districts/States
regularly so that the benefits reach to the
targeted persons.
26. 3.50 The Committee ar e concerned to note a
reduction of four per cent outlay under
SGSY in 2005-2006 as compared to previous

102
12 3
year allocation at BE stage. They also note
that during 10th plan the Department has
been allocated less than half of what was
proposed under SGSY. Similarly during
2005-06, the Department has got less than
75 per cent of the proposed outlay in this
regard. A little over Rs. 1,068 crore credit
mobilisation only has so far been achieved
by States and Union territories against the
target of Rs. 2,508 crore during the previous
year. Further alarming is the fact that none
of the States except Himachal Pradesh and
Rajasthan could distribute more than 50 per
cent of the credit available during 2004-
2005. The Committee, therefore, conclude
that the Department has to blame itself for
the reduction of outlay of the scheme in
the current year. They note the assurance
of the Planning Commission to restore the
Central outlay of SGSY at the level of the
previous year i.e. Rs. 1,000 crore. They also
note the reports of the Area Officers
regarding the reasons for poor performance
of the scheme. In this scenario the
Committee urge the Government to take
corrective measures for satisfactory
implementation of the scheme and then
approach the Planning Commission by
which the Commission could be convinced
for higher allocation under the scheme.
27. 3.56 The Committee observe that due care has
not so far been taken by the Government
either to arrange for proper certification or
for marketing of SHG products. The
Committee note the reply of the
Department that some initiatives by only
two States viz . Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra have been taken to facilitate
quality certification of various SHG

103
12 3
products. They feel that these efforts are
not enough. The laboratory at Wardha
cannot cater to the need of all SHGs of the
country. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should
help to establish at least one laboratory in
each region of the country that too only
for certification of SHG products, which can
be replicated for establishment of such
centres in all States and Union territories
in a time bound manner later.
28. 3.57 The Committee also note with concern that
marketing of several SHG products
including silk sarees has reduced
considerably in Uttar Pradesh where the
existing marketing organisations ceased to
operate. They feel that similar problems
might be arising in other States/Union
territories from time to time. It is an irony
that the SHG members continue to face
tremendous problems even now for
marketing of their products. As importance
of marketing of SHG products cannot be
overlooked, the Committee recommend that
appropriate action may be taken in this
regard and they be apprised accordingly.
Further, the Government should also ensure
that such problems do not take place in
other States and Union territories.
29. 3.63 The Committee find that over the years
there has been considerable reduction in
rate of interest being charged by
Commercial Banks from the customers.
They further note that whereas people in
urban areas are enjoying the benefits of this
lower interest rate regime, the poorest of
the poor are being deprived of the said
benefits. People in urban areas can get loan

104
12 3
for buying a car or a house at much less
rate than the rate of interest being imposed
on the poorest of the poor under the social
sector schemes like SGSY. Similar may be
the position for loans advanced for housing
in rural areas. Not only that, whereas banks
get refinance at a much cheaper rate of
5.50 per cent, they charge interest at much
higher rate between 8.5 to 9.5 per cent as
the Committee noticed during the Study
visit to Varanasi and Lucknow.
Besides the Committee found during the
said study tour that banks were charging
old rate of interest i.e on the loans advanced
earlier under SGSY. The benefit of the lower
interest regime is not being extended to the
old loans sanctioned to SGSY beneficiaries
at much higher rates as compared to
present day rate of interest.
While noting the data with regard to
recovery of loans under SGSY in various
States, the Committee feel that the ground
reality in this regard may not be so worse
as indicated in the data provided by the
Department. Another noticeable point is the
zero per cent recovery rate in Manipur,
Tripura, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Mizoram,
Lakshadweep, Daman and Diu. The
Committee feel that there are certain
discrepancies in the data furnished by the
Department with regard to the recovery rate
of SGSY loan. The Committee would like
the Department to explain the position in
this regard. Besides, they would like to be
apprised of the data with regard to the
recovery of commercial lending by banks
so as to enable them to react further in
this regard. On the issue of administrative

105
12 3
charges, the Committee feel that 3 per cent
charges as indicated by banks during the
Study visit are much on higher side.
30. 3.64 In view of the aforesaid scenario, the
Committee strongly feel that there is no
justification for charging higher rate of
interest from the poorest of the poor in
rural areas. While noting that the
Government has deregulated the interest
rate and banks are free to charge rate of
interest from customers, the Committee feel
that while dealing with the issues related
to the poorest of the poor, some sort of
regulation is necessary. Besides there is an
urgent need to change the mindset of banks
towards lending for social sector. They feel
that the mindset of the banks should be
pro-poor. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to take up
the issue raised above on an urgent basis
with the Ministry of Finance, Reserve Bank
of India and all other concerned. Not only
that, the intervention at much higher level
in this regard is required. The Committee
will also like that their concerns in this
regard should be communicated to the
Cabinet Secretary so that this issue may get
the top most priority. The Committee would
also like that the said issue should be taken
in consideration for Cooperative as well as
Regional Rural Banks also as these banks
are also charging high rate of interest on
social sector lending like SGSY loans.
31. 3.65 The Committee further find that besides the
higher rate of interest, there are other severe
anomalies as the Committee noticed and
the banks admitted during the Study visit.
The most glaring anomaly noticed is

106
12 3
charging of interest on subsidy which is a
gross violation of the guidelines. The
reaction of the Department stating that the
complaints when received are taken up
with the concerned bank, smacks of the
casual approach of the Department towards
such a serious issue. The Committee feel
that this is not a normal complaint. Some
sort of accountability should be fixed.
Stringent and serious efforts are called for
on behalf of the Department when such
issues specifically by a Parliamentary
Committee are brought to the notice of the
Department. The Committee would like the
Department to explain the position in this
regard.
32. 3.69 The Committee are unhappy to note the
performance of SGSY Special projects. They
find that Rs. 8.26 crore during 2003-2004
and Rs. 94.53 crore so far during 2004-2005
have remained unspent. Not only that, the
Government have involved in the
implementation Nehru Yuvak Kendras
which are under the administrative control
of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
even though DRDAs/Zilla Parishads
continue to implement rural development
schemes in all districts of the country. As
admitted by the Government, the progress
of the projects being implemented by NYKs
was very slow but the pace is improving
now. The Committee fail to understand as
to why the NYKs were involved in the
implementation of SGSY projects specifically
when DRDAs/Zilla Parishads have been
established and are functioning in most of
the districts of the country to monitor the
implementation of schemes of the Ministry.
The Committee in this regard would like

107
12 3
the Department to furnish the reasons for
involving NYKs in the implementation of
SGSY special projects. Besides they would
like to be apprised of about the details of
such projects indicating the financial and
physical performance of these projects
which are being taken up by NYKs so as
to enable the Committee to ensure the
reasons for their involvements and
comment further in this regard.
33. 3.76 The Committee find from the data indicated
above that there is an increase of 11 per cent
in the outlay provided during BE 2005-2006,
but if compared to RE, there is further
reduction of outlay. As clarified by the
Department, even if it is accepted that
Rs. 400 crore special assistance is provided
to Bihar for construction of 2.15 lakh
additional houses damaged by floods is
included in the outlay, the outlay provided
during 2005-2006 is inadequate keeping in
view the data of shelterlessness in the
country. As per Government’s own data
14.84 million is the housing shortage. Not
only that shortage of around 10 lakh houses
is added to it annually. The Committee find
that shelter is basic necessity of life and
there is an urgent need to tackle the issue
on war footing.
34. 3.77 The Committee further note that ambitious
targets of constructing 60 lakh houses in
four years (2005-2006 to 2008-09) have been
set under ‘Bharat Nirman’. They feel that
without adequate funding, targets will
remain only dreams. To translate such
ambitious programmes in to reality, the
Committee strongly recommend that
adequate outlay should be provided.

108
12 3
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission
should be approached for adequate
funding. The Committee would like to be
apprised of their reaction. With regard to
special allocation of Rs. 400 crore as
provided to Bihar for construction of
2.15 lakh additional houses damaged by
floods, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the physical achievement in this
regard.
35. 3.78 The Committee further note that the
Government have started implementing
several sub schemes hurriedly which have
now been merged with IAY from this year.
They are astonished to find that the
Government have not been able to monitor
the physical progress of the sub-Schemes
except IAY, after these are merged with IAY.
The plea taken by the Department that
these sub-schemes are demand driven and
hence unmonitorable is unacceptable to the
Committee. When scarce resources are
being provided, it should be spent
judiciously and the target and achievements
should be monitored accordingly. Therefore,
the Committee would like that the
infrastructure created under all sub-schemes
of rural housing should be monitored even
after these are merged with IAY and should
be reflected in the various Budget
documents.
36. 3.79 The Committee note that nearly 15 million
families were houseless in the rural areas
as per 2001 census. In addition, about
10 lakh houses are being added to the
existing shelterlessness. The Committee also
find that various paralleled rural housing
schemes are being implemented by the

109
12 3
respective State Governments. The States of
Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat are
dovetailing funds with IAY. The Committee
feel that there is an urgent need for
dovetailing the rural housing schemes with
IAY in the remaining States. The dovetailing
of State Sector Schemes would not only
help in avoiding the problem of
coordination but would also help in having
accurate data about the level of
shelterlessness in a particular State. The
Committee would like that said issue
should be taken up and discussed at the
various conference/workshops and through
various review meetings conducted by the
Ministry in which representatives of State
Governments participate. The Committee
should also be apprised about the
deliberations and outcome of such
discussions.
37. 3.80  The Committee are concerned to note that
several IAY houses have been constructed
without basic necessities, like proper
ventilation, provision for windows, drinking
water, toilets etc. as found by them during
their Study visit. They feel that without the
provision for basic necessities the condition
of poor people living in IAY houses can
not be improved. They, therefore,
recommend that it should be ensured to
provide basic necessities in IAY houses so
that poor people can live with dignity.
38. 3.103 The Committee note that a laudable
programme was launched by the
Government on 25 December, 2000 with the
objective to provide road connectivity,
through good all-weather roads, to all
unconnected rural habitations with a

110
12 3
population of 1000 or more by 2003 and
those habitations having population of more
than 500 persons by the year 2007. As per
the revised estimates under ‘Bharat Nirman’
the habitations having population of 1000
(or 500 in hilly, tribal areas) are now
proposed to be covered by 2009. The earlier
estimates of outlay required were for
Rs. 60,000 crore. As per Economic Survey,
now the said projections have increased to
Rs. 1,33,000 crore. Further if the objective
set under ‘Bharat Nirman’ i.e. to upgrade
and renew a portion of the Core Network
is included, as per the Government’s
estimates, an outlay of Rs. 48,000 crore will
be required during next four years
which implies an annual allocation of
Rs. 9,600 crore against the current budget
of Rs. 4,235 crore during 2005-2006.
39. 3.104 The Committee find from what has been
stated above, that the targets of connectivity
cannot be achieved with present level of
allocation. They also find that due to
spillover of targets, the estimates of
required outlay have considerably increased.
The present estimates of requirement of
Rs. 48,000 crore for four years may further
enhance, if the set targets are not achieved
as per the revised date of coverage of
habitation population of 1000 i.e. by the
year 2009. Thus the Committee conclude
that inadequate financial resources is the
biggest concern. For augmenting resources
for the programme, the Committee suggest
the following:
(i) the projections made by the Department
during 2005-2006 do not correspond to the
annual requirement of outlay to achieve the
objective of Bharat Nirman. The
Department in fact got Rs. 595 crore more

111
12 3
than the projected outlay during 2005-2006.
The projections made by the Department
should commensurate to the overall
projections of the Government;
(ii) There is enough scope to tap external
funding from ADB/World Bank. More
efforts need to be made to explore the
potential for augmenting available resources
with external funding;
(iii) The Committee in their earlier report
(refer paragraph no. 3.126 of 3rd Report—
14th Lok Sabha) had expressed their
concern over not allocating funds on
account of increase in diesel cess. As
reported by the Department, the arrears
amounting to Rs. 2,500 crore on account of
additional cess imposed since 2003-2004
have not been allocated to the Department.
Besides, during the current year i.e. 2005-
2006 although there is a proposal to
increase the cess on petrol and diesel by
50 paise per litre, the additional resources
are proposed to be exclusively earmarked
for the National Highways. Keeping in
view the escalation in cost of constructing
roads due to spillover of the targets as
stated above, at least 50 per cent of the
additional resources to be procured by the
additional cess should be made available
for PMGSY;
(iv) As r eplied by the Department a
proposal has been moved to amend the
Central Road Fund Act to enable cess funds
to be used for repaying loans taken for
constructing and upgrading rural roads to
facilitate leverage of the cess in the
domestic capital market. The Committee

112
12 3
strongly recommend to the Government to
finalise the aforesaid proposal which may
enable the Government to leverage long
term funds from the domestic capital
market.
40. 3.105 While recommending for higher outlay, the
Committee feel that there is an urgent need
to take stringent steps for the better and
effective implementation of the programme.
As stated above, the performance of the
projects taken under phase I to IV of
PMGSY is not satisfactory in some of the
States. The problems as stated by the
Department are manifold like institutional
problems, and procedural delays etc. The
Committee would like that the State-specific
problems in the under performing States
should be analysed critically and the
corrective action taken thereon. The
Committee may also be apprised in this
regard.
41. 3.106 The Committee further note that the
guidelines of the Yojana provide for the
maintenance of roads. The roads
constructed under PMGSY will be
maintained by the Project Implementing
Units and after that the maintenance will
be taken over by the PRI designated for
the purpose. The State authorities are also
required to furnish an undertaking that they
would remit to the identified PRI from the
State Government funds, the requisite cost
of maintenance. The Committee find that
although an elaborate system has been
indicated in the guidelines for the
maintenance of roads constructed under
PMGSY there is an urgent need that these
provisions are strictly adhered to by the

113
12 3
State Governments. The Committee would
like the Department to take the desired
steps in this regard and apprise them
accordingly.
42. 3.107 The Committee note that PMGSY was
envisaged with a laudable objective of
providing connectivity to not connected
habitations. The guidelines of the Yojana
provides for upgradation of roads up to
20 per cent of the State’s allocation where
unconnected habitations still exist. The
Committee also note that although it has
been indicated in the guidelines that
upgradation is not central to the
Programme, there is a need to monitor and
ensure that the main emphasis of Yojana is
to provide new connectivity so that the
main objective of starting the Yojana is not
sidelined. The Committee therefore like the
Department to strictly monitor the position
in this regard. Besides the Committee
would like to be apprised to the data
indicating the per cent allocation and
expenditure made on new connectivity as
well as on maintenance scheme-wise, year-
wise and State and Union territory-wise.
43. 3.108 The Committee further note that Central
agencies like NBCC and NHPC have been
inducted for construction of roads under
PMGSY in Bihar and Tripura. The
Committee would like to be apprised
whether the induction of Central agencies
in said States could help in getting better
results. After evaluating the performance of
such Central Agencies, the Committee
would like that in the under performing
States, where there is problem of executing
agencies, the possibility of induction of such

114
agencies, should be explored in consultation
with State Governments.
44. 3.109 The Committee would also like to
recommend to put in place a strict
monitoring mechanism to ensure the quality
of the roads constructed under PMGSY.
Besides, they would like to be informed the
number of States/Union territories who
have put the Core Network reports
indicating DRRP Road wise and habitation
wise. Road wise and habitation wise
network should be put on the website as
per the guidelines. Besides the Committee
would like that the details of the projects
indicating the date of starting the project,
estimated outlay, stage of implementation,
total road length etc. should also be put
on the web-site for the purpose of bringing
transparency in the implementation of the
programme.
45. 3.110 The Committee further find that in Bihar
so far District Road Plans have not been
prepared. They would like to know the
reasons for delay in preparing DRPs,
specifically when the Central Agency has
been inducted as the executing agency in
that State.
46. 3.114 The Committee note the reply of the
Government that Rs. 4 crore to Rs. 5 crore
per cluster is estimated to be required for
development of a PURA cluster. They also
note that since 2003-04, Rs. 20 crore have
been allocated under PURA. They, therefore
conclude that with these funds only
4 PURA clusters can be taken up for
development. For the development of one
PURA cluster in 7 selected States at least
Rs. 35 crore will be required. With the
12 3

115
12 3
present level of allocation under the
Scheme, the Government may take another
two years to start a single PURA cluster
each in all these States. They also
apprehend that with the present pace of
implementation, the complete development
of pilot PURA clusters may not end before
2008-09 as the development of cluster will
take about 3 years time. This might delay
the framing of the guidelines and the
launching of PURA in the Country as a
whole. They, therefore, recommend that the
Department should approach Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance for
adequate outlay for pilot projects. The
Department should also ensure that pilot
projects are taken up expeditiously so that
the ambitious programme could be
launched Nation-wide.
47. 3.127 The Committee note that during 2004-2005,
Rs. 26.49 crore could be spent up to January
2005 out of total allocation of Rs. 33.40 crore
earmarked under plan budget for the
training. They find that nearly Rs. 7 crore
of the plan funds remained unspent for
training during 2004-2005 up to the month
of January. The Committee further note that
even for training schemes there is rush of
funds in the last two months of the
financial year. The Committee urge the
Department to properly plan ahead so that
the pace of expenditure for training is
evenly spread through out year during
2005-2006.
48. 3.128 The Committee note that out of 28 SIRDs
the Central share for recurring expenditure
of Rs. 9.07 crore has been provided to 23
SIRDs so far. They, therefore, conclude that
5 SIRDs have not been provided with the

116
12 3
funds for recurring expenditure this year.
The Committee would like to know the
name of the States to which SIRD allocation
has not been made. They would also like
to be apprised of the reasons for which the
said 5 SIRDs have been deprived of the
Central funds. As training is an important
input for the success of rural development
programmes, all SIRDs should receive the
funds in time and it should be ensured that
the scarce resources are spent in a proper
manner. The Committee further note that
in 24 States, 88 ETCs have been established
and are functioning. ETCs have not been
constituted in Goa, Sikkim, Tripura and
Uttaranchal. The Committee would like to
recommend for the early constitution of
ETCs in said States. Besides the Committee
would like to be informed about the
number of ETCs in each State so as to have
a better idea of the functioning of ETCs
and recommend further in this regard. The
Committee would also like to recommend
for early construction of SIRDs in
Chhattisgarh and Uttaranchal.
49. 3.129 The Committee further find that SIRDs/
ETCs have so far conducted only 1,719
training programmes out of the target of
5,899 training programmes during 2004-
2005. They also find that only 66,002
participants have so far taken training
against a target of 1,74,390. They, therefore,
conclude that the training activity by
SIRDs/ETCs are not up to the mark during
the said year. The Committee observe that
since the training is the basic input for the
effective implementation of rural
development schemes, there is an urgent
need to give more stress in this regard. The

117
12 3
Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to analyse the position of
training programme more critically in each
State and it should be ensured that the
targets are fully achieved in a particular
year. The Committee would also like to be
kept informed about the reasons for
shortfall in targets State-wise along with the
corrective action initiated by the
Department.
50. 3.139 The Committee find that CAPART has been
constituted with the laudable objectives
which include training of voluntary
organizations, reduction of rural poverty,
selection and encouragement of innovative
technologies and their dissemination,
providing the minimum need in respect of
safe drinking water and sanitation. The
Committee would like to be apprised how
far CAPART could achieve the aforesaid
objectives to enable the Committee to
analyse the performance of CAPART.
51. 3.140 From the detailed expenditure position
during 2004-2005, the Committee
understand that the main expenditure was
on account of Public Cooperation Scheme,
Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme
as well as Administration. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the
achievement of CAPART under the
aforesaid schemes to analyse the position
of expenditure and comment further in this
regard. On account of expenditure on
administration, the Committee would also
like to be apprised of the details of
organization structure of CAPART for
which an amount of Rs. 6.33 crore was
spent during 2004-2005. In other sectors the
Committee find that the level of

118
12 3
expenditure is marginal. The Committee
would like a detailed note indicating how
the meagre outlay would enable CAPART
to achieve the desired results in the
different schemes.
52. 3.141 The Committee find that one of the main
activities of CAPART is to provide training
to voluntary organization. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the number
of voluntary organizations who could be
imparted training so far. Besides they
would also like to be apprised of the details
of the curriculum for training.
53. 3.142 The Committee note that during 2004-2005,
out of 659 NGOs, 22 NGOs were
blacklisted. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the mechanism to ensure
that once an NGO is blacklisted it can not
be registered again and get any grant from
CAPART. The Committee would also like
that stringent monitoring mechanism is
required to monitor the activities of NGOs.