27
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 14.05.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 033
Price : Rs. 131.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory.................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Status of implementation of the recommendations
made by the Committee in Nineteenth Report
under direction 73A of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha. ................................................... 4
CHAPTER III Major issues related to Land Reforms ................. 5
CHAPTER IV Issues related to the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes of Watershed Management with
specific reference to the Demands for Grants
(2007-2008) .................................................................... 18
C
HAPTER V The issues related to implementation of
Centrally Sponsored Schemes for Computerisation
of Land Records and Strengthening of
Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records .......................................................................... 51
C
HAPTER VI Bio-fuel .......................................................................... 63
APPENDICES
I. The critical analysis of the Statement on the Tenth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Rural Development on Demands
for Grants (2005-2006) of Department of Land
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) ....... 65
II. Details of Distribution of Ceiling Surplus Land
(September, 2006) ........................................................ 66
III Details of Distribution of Government Wastelands
(September, 2006) ........................................................ 67
(i)

IV. Details of Number of Tenants Conferred
Ownership Rights (or Rights Protected) and
area accrued to them (September, 2006) .............. 68
V. Details of State-Wise Information on Alienation
and Restoration of Tribal Lands (September,
2006) ............................................................................... 70
VI. State-wise data of total wastelands and areas
covered under IWDP Since 1995 ........................... 71
VII. Statement showing proposed allocation, BE, RE,
Actual Expenditure of Tenth Plan and proposed
outlay for Eleventh Plan and agreed to B.E. for
the year 2007-08.......................................................... 73
VIII. Programme and State-wise balance of funds as
on 31 December, 2006 ............................................... 81
IX. Outstanding Utilisation Certificates for 2006-07
in respect of Grants/Loan released upto
31 March, 2005 (as on 31.12.2006) ......................... 83
X. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 29.3.2007.................................................................. 86
XI. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 12.4.2007.................................................................. 89
XII. Statement of Recommendations/Observations .... 94
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shrimati Susmita Bauri
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri George Fernandes
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
9. Shri Hannan Mollah
10. Shri D. Narbula
11. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
12. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
13. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
16. Shri Sita Ram Singh
*17. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
18. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri D.C. Srikantappa, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Urban Development to Committee on Rural Development vice
the vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Shrichand Kriplani MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Rural Development to Standing Committee on Chemical
and Fertilizers vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, para no. 2847 dated August 31, 2006.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
#26. Dr. Ram Prakash
27. Dr. Chandan Mitra
28. Shri P .R. Rajan
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
#Nominated w.e.f. 27.4.2007.

ABBREVIATIONS
BE — Budget Estimates
BPL — Below Poverty Line
CAZRI — Central Arid Zone Research Institute
CLR — Computerisation of Land Records
CRIDA — Central Research Institute for Dryland
Agriculture
CSIR — Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
DDP — Desert Development Programme
DFID — Department for International Development
DOAC — Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
DoLR — Department of Land Resources
DoWD — Department of Wastelands Development
DPAP — Drought Prone Areas Programme
DRDA — District Rural Development Agency
EAS — Employment Assurance Scheme
EAPs — Externally Aided Projects
EFC — Expenditure Finance Committee
EIA — Environmental Impact Assessment
IAY — Indira Awaas Yojana
ICAR — Indian Council for Agricultural Research
IWDP— Integrated Wastelands Development Programme
IWMP — Integrated Watershed Management Programme
LBSNAA — Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration
NABARD — National Bank of Agriculture and Rural
Development
NALRM — National Agency on Land Resources
Management
NIC — National Informatics Centre
NIRD — National Institute of Rural Development
NGO — Non-Governmental Organisation
NLCB — National Land Use and Conservation Board
(v)

NLWC — National Land Use and Wasteland Development
NPCLRM — National Programme for Comprehensive Land
Resources Management
NRAA — Nation Rainfed Area Authority
NREGS — National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
NRSA — National Remote Sensing Agency
NWDB — National Wastelands Development Board
PIA — Project Implementation Agency
PRIs — Panchayati Raj Institutions
RE — Revised Estimates
RoR — Record of Rights
SAUs — State Agriculture Universities
SEZs — Special Economic Zones
SGRY — Swarnajayanti Grameen Rozgar Yojana
SGSY — Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
SHGs — Self-Help Groups
SIA — Social Impact Assessment
SLUBs — State Land Use Boards
SRA & ULR — Strengthening of Revenue Administration and
Updating of Land Records
TDET — T echnology Development Extension and
Training
TERI — The Energy and Resources Institute
UGs — User Groups
UT — Union Territory
WA —W atershed Association
WC — Watershed Committee
WDF — Watershed Development Fund
ZP — Zilla Parishad
(vi)

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty seventh Report on Demands
for Grants (2007-2008) of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry
of Rural Development).
2. Demands for Grants have been examined by the Committee
under Rule 331 E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) on
29 March, 2007.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 12 April, 2007.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
for placing before them the requisite material and their considered
views in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them
by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
 9 May, 2007 Chairman,
19 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The Ministry of Rural Development consists of three Departments
(i) Department of Rural Development (ii) Department of Land Resources
and (iii) Department of Drinking Water Supply.
1.2 The Union Department of Land Resources was set up in April,
1999 to act as the Nodal Agency in the field of Land Resource
Management. The Department of Land Resources comprises two
Divisions namely the Wastelands Development Division and Land
Reform Division.
1.3  The following functions have been assigned to the Department
of Land Resources as per the Allocation of Business Rules:
(i) Land reforms, land tenures, land records, consolidation of
holding and other related matters.
(ii) Administration of Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894)
and matters relating to acquisition of land for purposes of
the Union.
(iii) Recovery of claims in a State in respect of taxes and other
public demands, including arrears of land revenue and sums
recoverable as such arrears, arising outside that State.
(iv) Land, that is to say , collection of rents, transfer and
alienation of land, land improvement and agricultural loans
excluding acquisition of non- agricultural land or buildings,
town planning improvements;
(v) Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of
revenue, survey of revenue purposes, alienation of revenues;
(vi) Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land;
(vii) National Wastelands Development Board;
(viii) National Land Use and Wasteland Development Council;
(ix) Pr omotion of Rural Employment through Wastelands
Development;

2
(x) Promotion of production of fuel-wood, fodder and timber
on non-forest lands, including private wastelands;
(xi) Research and development of appropriate low cost
technologies for increasing productivity of wastelands in
sustainable ways;
(xii) Inter-departmental and inter-disciplinary coordination in
programme planning and implementation of the Wastelands
Development Programme including training;
(xiii) Promotion of people’s participation and public cooperation
and coordination of efforts of Panchayats and voluntary and
non-Government agencies for Wastelands Development;
(xiv) Drought Prone Area Programmes;
(xv) Desert Development Programmes;
(xvi) The Registration Act (16 of 1908);
(xvii) (a) National Mission on Bio-diesel;
(b) Bio-fuel plant production, propagation and commercial
plantation of bio-fuel plants under various schemes of
the Ministry of Rural Development in consultation with
the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj; and
(c) Identification of non-forest land wastelands in
consultation with, the State Governments, the Ministry
of Agriculture and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for
bio-fuel plant production.
1.4 To carry out the assigned functions, the Department of Land
Resources at present implements the following Schemes:
(i) Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP);
(ii) Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP);
(iii) Desert Development Programme (DDP);
(iv) Computerisation of Land Records (CLR);
(v) Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of
Land Records (SRA & ULR); and
(vi) Technology Development, Extension and Training Scheme
(TDET).

3
1.5 From the year 2007-2008 the schemes meant for the
development of wastelands/degraded land through watershed approach
viz. IWDP , DPAP and DDP have been merged into Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWMP). Besides the schemes related to
maintenance, updation and Computerisation of Land Records viz.
Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) and Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR) have
been merged into National Programme for Comprehensive Land
Resource Management (NPCLRM). Technology Development, Extension
and Training Scheme (TDET) has further been reformed and
restructured as ‘Professional Support’. The aforesaid restructured
programmes will be implemented from the year 2007-2008.
1.6 The overall Demands for Grants of the Department for the
year 2007-2008 are Rs. 1,503.78 crore both for plan and non-plan .
1.7 The Demands for Grants of the Department were presented to
Lok Sabha under Demand No. 79.
1.8 The detailed Demands for Grants of the Department were laid
in Lok Sabha on 16 March, 2007.
1.9 In the present Report, the Committee have restricted their
examination only to the major issues concerning the over—all analysis
of the Department with regard to programmes/schemes being
implemented by the Department in the context of the Demands for
Grants (2007-2008).

4
CHAPTER II
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
MADE BY THE COMMITTEE IN NINETEENTH REPORT
UNDER DIRECTION 73A OF THE DIRECTIONS
BY THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA
As per direction 73A of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’,
the Minister concerned shall make once in six months a statement in
the House regarding the status of implementation of recommendations
contained in the Reports of Departmentally Related Standing Committee
of Lok Sabha with regard to his Ministry.
2.2. Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Land
Resources was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005. The statement
with regard to this Report had fallen due on 19 October, 2005. However,
the statement on the said Report was made by Hon’ble Minister for
Rural Development in Lok Sabha on 12 May 2006. The critical analysis
of the Statement is at Appendix-I.
2.3. Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development on Demands for Grants (2006-07) was presented to
Parliament on 18 May, 2006. Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development
has made a statement in the House in pursuance of direction 73A on
9 March, 2007. Critical analysis of the Statement is in progress.

5
CHAPTER III
MAJOR ISSUES RELATED TO LAND REFORMS
Amendments to Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and amendments to
National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation, 2003.
The Standing Committee have consistently been pursuing with the
Department since Tenth Lok Sabha to bring amendments to the old
and outdated Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and bring amendments to
National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation, 2003 to address to
various issues with the fast changing scenario of industrialization,
urbanization and New Economy Policy.
3.2 In this regard, the Hon’ble President in the Address to joint
session of Parliament, 2007 has stated as below:
“Acquisition of agricultural land for industrial development and
related purposes and the terms of compensation have become
issues of major public concern in our country. On the one hand
there are genuine concerns of farmers regarding acquisition of
agricultural land and on the other hand, there is a need to use
land to generate employment through industry and related
activities. Therefore, issues of humane rehabilitation and the need
for fair pricing of agricultural land need to be addressed both in
policy and in law. My Government is committed to bringing in
a new rehabilitation policy, which will be backed by amendments
in the Land Acquisition Act wherever necessary.”
3.3 When asked about the status in this regard, the Secretary
during the course of oral evidence informed as under:
“The present status of the initiatives of the Department of Land
Resources is on three fronts. One is that a comprehensive
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy at the Central level has
been drafted and it is currently awaiting the final approval of
the Cabinet. But more importantly, the difference between the
earlier policies and the present policy is that this will be given
a statutory back up. Therefore, an Act to give shape to the policy
in statutory term is being drafted and this is currently with the
Law Ministry for finalisation.”

6
3.4 As regards the amendments to the Land Acquisition Act, the
Department has informed that the Law Ministry has been requested
to draft the amendments to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 on the
lines of the new rehabilitation policy which has been placed in the
public domain at the websites of the Department of Land Resources
and Ministry of Rural Development.
3.5 The following are the salient feature of the proposed policy:
a. Applicability enlarged to include all cases of involuntary
displacement and not merely those affected by projects
involving displacement above a certain number.
b. Social Impact Assessment (SIA) mandatory for all projects
involving physical displacement beyond the defined
threshold (400 families en masse in plain areas or 200 families
en masse in tribal, hilly areas, etc.).
c. SIA process to run simultaneously with Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) where applicable.
d. Social science and rehabilitation experts to be on the
Committee to examine the SIA study report.
e. Public hearing in affected zone mandatory for SIA study.
f. Consultation with Gram Sabhas (or public hearings in areas
not having Gram Sabhas) mandatory for finalizing R&R
plan.
g. Land-for-land subject to availability of government land.
h. Housing benefits as per the prescribed scale.
i. At least one person per family to get preference in jobs in
projects, subject to availability of vacancies and suitability
of the affected persons.
j. Training to affected persons for taking up suitable jobs as
well as for self employment.
k. Preference to affected persons in allotment of contracts.
l. Preference to affected persons in wage employment in
construction phase of project.
m. Adequate resettlement and full payment of compensation
to take place ahead of displacement.
Special consideration for SCs and STs –
i. Reservation benefits for SCs and STs to continue in
resettlement zones.

7
ii. Tribal Development Plan in projects displacing 200 or
more tribal families.
iii ST occupiers of forest lands prior to the commencement
of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 also covered.
n. Fishing rights of affected persons protected, including those
of tribals and SCs.
o. R&R Committees to have representatives of women, SCs,
STs, NGOs, PRIs/ULBs, local MPs/MLAs, etc.
p. Wide publicity to be given to the R&R Plan by all necessary
means.
q. Fast-track exercise for updating of land records to take place
concurrently with the acquisition proceedings, and titles to
alienated tribal lands to be restored.
r. National Monitoring Committee, headed by Secretary (RD),
to be supported by National Monitoring Cell.
3.6 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence while
emphasising on the need to protect the interest of the persons where
land is acquired stated that the concern of the following three categories
of persons, the Department is trying to address:
(a) People whose land is being acquired directly;
(b) People who are utilizing the land they may not have title;
and
(c) Labourers who desire livelihood from land, though they
may not have interest directly in the land, either as owner
or as encroachers.
3.7 As regards the deadline for brining the aforesaid legislation to
Parliament, the Secretary stated that currently it would be difficult to
give a precise date but they would like to do it as early as possible.
3.8 On the issue of land for land as the compensation for land
acquisition the Secretary stated as under:
“A mention was made about land for land. It is an area which
we are addressing to the extent, it should be done. Otherwise,
there can be a chain reaction. You can acquire land because the
man has to be provided land; then you acquired further land.
One possibility particularly in the irrigation projects is this—those
areas which are going to get irrigation in some clusters or patches

8
where some smaller amount of land can be given. The other
projects, some of them have followed by providing money,
allowing the people to have freedom to go and buy land wherever
they like. There has been some experience in that area. That is
an ideal situation”.
The policy of the Department on the issue of acquiring land for
Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
3.9 When asked about the data with regard to agricultural land/
wastelands acquired so far under Special Economic Zones (SEZs) for
setting up industries and related activities, the Department has informed
that the data in this regard has been called from the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry which is the nodal Ministry in the Government
of India.
3.10 As regards the stand of the Department of Land Resources
for acquiring land for SEZs, the following has been stated by the
Department:
“The Department is of the view that industries, SEZs etc. should
be established preferably on wastelands. Degraded forest land
could also be considered but with higher than the usual norms
for compensatory afforestation or reforestation. To the extent
agricultural land is used for industries etc. there should be
compensatory development of wastelands for the sake of food
security of the country.”
Separate legislation for acquisition and rehabilitation
3.11 On the observation of the Committee during the course of
evidence that the issue of acquisition and rehabilitation are inter-related
and as such these issues should be addressed by a single legislation,
the Secretary while explaining the Government’s stand in this regard
stated as under:
“In the Land Acquisition Act, the immediate issue on which there
is quite large discussion relates to the term ‘public purpose’.
Rehabilitation even earlier was not part of the Land Acquisition
Act as such. There are a number of issues beyond land
acquisition, including for example area development, the
periphery development, providing livelihood support, training
skill development and various other things. A part of land may
be acquired land and a part of land may also be Government
land which is allocated. Even then, it will apply. So, it is a slightly

9
broader perspective and we want to make it much more
comprehensive so that there is focused kind of approach on the
resettlement and rehabilitation rather than limited only to the
acquired land because it is more related to the project, though I
agree that primary motivation or trigger may come from
acquisition.”
3.12 The Secretary during the course of evidence further submitted
that the Department in the comment from the Commerce and Industry
Ministry has stated that land which is required absolutely for the
functional needs of a particular industry or a project only that much
should be acquired and not anything beyond that because then the
question of builders come.
3.13 The representative of the Department further added as under:
“The Law Ministry and the Attorney General strongly advised
that we run the risk, if we want to make an amendment and
bring the entire resettlement and rehabilitation, which may not
be in tune with the basic tenets of the Land Acquisition Act, and
that it is more advisable to have a separate Act where we will
have a monitoring and grievance redressal mechanism. It may
also apply to various kinds of rehabilitation requirements which
may be even beyond land acquisition, which may not be man-
made but may be in some other forms; disaster management
also requires a lot of rehabilitation exercise. So, the rehabilitation
policy is going beyond land acquisition. Therefore, the legal advice
was that it will not fit into a single Act.”
The need to bring the Land Use Policy
3.14 When asked whether the Department propose to have a
comprehensive land use policy for rural areas the Department has
stated as under:
“Land is a State subject. The role of the Central Government in
this field is advisory and coordinating. However, legislative
provisions restricting conversion of agricultural land for non
agricultural purposes exist in most of the States.
Ministry of Rural Development is of the view that industries,
SEZs etc. should be established preferably on wastelands.
Degraded forest land could also be considered but with higher
than the usual norms for compensatory afforestation or
reforestation. To the extent agricultural land is used for industries

10
etc., there should be compensatory development of wastelands
for the sake of food security of the country. The Ministry is
administering Watershed Development Programmes like Integrated
Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP), Drought Prone
Areas Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development Programme
for development of degraded/wastelands.
At National level for management of land resources and policy
direction, a National Land Use & Wasteland Development Council
(NLWC) headed by Prime Minister under which three Boards
namely (i) National Wasteland Development Board headed by
Minister of Rural Development; (ii) National Land Use; and
Conservation Board headed by Minister of Agriculture ; and
(iii) National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board headed
by Minister of Environment and Forests, exist.
At State Level, State Land Use Boards (SLUBs) have been created
in States/Union Territories under the chairmanship of Chief
Minister/Chief Secretaries to address land-use issues of the State
and coordinate with Centre on Land issues.
Ministry of Agriculture has been requested for convening the
meeting of the National Land Use and Conservation Board
(NLCB) so that the issues related to the acquisition of agricultural
land for non agricultural purposes could be discussed.”
3.15 Land is one of the biggest resources for any country. With
the enormous expansion of the State’s role in promoting public
welfare and economic development since Independence, acquisition
of land for public purposes has become far more important than
ever before. Further, with the changing scenario of industrialization,
liberalization, urbanization and new economic policy there is an
immense pressure on land. Now-a-days, land is being acquired for
setting up Special Economic Zones (SEZs) so as to generate
employment through industries and related activities. With the
increased activity of land acquisition for public purposes as well as
for setting up industries, the issues related to land acquisition and
rehabilitation of the affected persons whose land is being acquired
have been the matter of debate recently.
The Committee note that land and its management falls under
the State List. However, the Union Government has played a crucial
role in the advisory capacity as well as a facilitator since
Independence. In this scenario, the responsibility of the Department
of Land Resources, being the nodal Union Department, to deal with

11
the issues related to land is immense. On the one hand, there is a
need to bring amendments to the old and outdated laws related to
land acquisition to protect the interests of the persons whose land
is being acquired, on the other hand, there is a need to ensure that
there is no reduction in total agricultural land which may further
aggravate the demand and supply mis-match of agricultural products.
On both the accounts, the Department of Land Resources has the
key responsibility. On the issue of bringing amendments to the old
and outdated Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and rehabilitation policy,
the Committee have persistently been recommending in the respective
reports to expedite the same.
As regards the status of the amendments to Land Acquisition
Act and rehabilitation policy, the Committee have been informed
that the new rehabilitation policy has been drafted and is in the
public domain at the websites of the Department of Land Resources
and Ministry of Rural Development. The Ministry of Law and Justice
has been requested to draft the amendments to the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 on the lines of the new rehabilitation policy. The Committee
also find that it is proposed to give the rehabilitation policy a
statutory backing. As such, two separate legislations on the Land
Acquisition and rehabilitation are proposed to be drafted and placed
before the Parliament. As regards the major changes proposed in
the revised Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation Legislations, the
Secretary has informed that in the revised legislations, attempt is
being made to protect the interests of the following three categories
of persons:—
(a) people whose land is being acquired directly;
(b) people who are utilizing the land, they may not have title;
and
(c) labourers who derive livelihood from land though they
may not have interest directly in the land either as owners
or encroachers.
Further, the Secretary has also informed that the issue of giving
land for land is being addressed in the aforesaid proposed
legislations. As regards the deadline for bringing the aforesaid
legislations, the Secretary has informed that the Department would
like to do it as early as possible. While noting the aforesaid contents
of the proposed legislations on Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation,
the Committee strongly recommend to the Department to expedite
finalisation of the aforesaid legislations and if possible, bring the

12
same before Parliament during the second part of the current Session
of Parliament.
3.16 The Committee would also emphasize that there is an urgent
need to balance the larger interests of the community for which the
land is being acquired and the right of the individual whose land
is being acquired thereby depriving him/her of means of livelihood.
Besides, there is an urgent need to address the issue of acquisition
of land for private enterprises. The acquisition of land for private
enterprises cannot be at the same footing as the land acquired for
various projects of public welfare. The Committee also note the stand
of the Department according to which land should be acquired
absolutely for the functional needs of a particular industry or a
project and should not exceed the particular purpose so as to include
quotas of builders etc. The Committee find that there are various
issues in this regard which need to be addressed strongly in the
legislations, the foremost of which is the policy of giving land for
land. The Committee note that land besides being the source of
livelihood for a person is also a symbol of social status in the society
where a person lives. Besides, with the land various emotional issues
are also attached. In this scenario, it is of utmost importance to
address all these concerns and compensate the persons whose land
is acquired not only with land but with the land of the same quality.
Besides, another issue which needs to be addressed is that the
projects for which land is being acquired should be constructed
within a specified time period and not extended unduly to get more
profits with the rising prices of land. There is a need to ensure that
only the specific project for which land is acquired is constructed
on the land and not used for other commercial purposes. The
Committee would like the Department to address to the aforesaid
concerns of the Committee in the proposed legislations on Land
Acquisition and Rehabilitation.
3.17 On the issue of bringing two legislations, one for the
purpose of land acquisition and the other for rehabilitation, the
Department has informed that the Law Ministry and Attorney
General have strongly advised to have two separate legislations in
this regard because the rehabilitation policy is going beyond land
acquisition. The Committee feel that the issues of land acquisition
and rehabilitation are inter-linked and as such need to be addressed
in a single legislation. The Committee would like the Department
to furnish the details of the interactions and deliberations held with
the Law Ministry and Attorney General in this regard so as to

13
understand the matter in detail and recommend further in this
respect.
3.18 The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development during Tenth Lok Sabha had examined various
provisions made under Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and presented
Eighth Report on ‘Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ to Lok Sabha on
15 December, 1994. Therafter, the Standing Committee on Rural
Development pursued various issues related to land acquisition and
rehabilitation of the persons whose land is being acquired, in their
various Reports presented to Parliament. The Committee would like
that their various observations/recommendations made in the
respective reports should be taken into consideration while making
amendments to Land Acquisition Act and bringing in a new law
related to the issue of rehabilitation.
3.19 As stated earlier, there is an urgent need to ensure that
there is no reduction in total agricultural land in the country. In this
regard, the Committee note the stand of the Department according
to which industries, Special Economic Zones should be established
preferably on wastelands. Degraded forest land could also be
considered but with higher than the usual norms for compensatory
afforestation or reforestation. To the extent agricultural land is used
for industries etc., there should be compensatory development of
wastelands for the sake of food security of the country. The
Committee also note that the data with regard to the land acquired
for Special Economic Zones so far is being collected by the
Department from the concerned Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
The Committee also note that legislative provisions restricting use
of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes exist in most of
the States. In this regard, the Committee feel that there is an urgent
need to study the laws in various States. Further the Committee
note that land is a non-renewable resource and is finite. It cannot
be further extended. In view of this, there is an urgent need to
ensure a balanced use of land for different purposes viz agriculture,
industries, forestation, housing etc. While noting the stand of the
Department that industries, SEZs should preferably be set up on
wastelands/degraded forest land, the Committee recommend that the
Government should permit acquisition of land cautiously keeping
in view the limited land resources of the country. In this scenario,
perhaps there is an urgent need to have a National Land use Policy
which can guide the various State Governments in having laws with
regard to the use of land for different purposes with the objective
of balanced and harmonious use of land for different purposes. In

14
this regard, the Committee also note that the Department has
requested the Ministry of Agriculture to convene the meeting of the
National Land Use and Conversion Board to discuss the issues related
to acquisition of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes. The
aforesaid concerns of the Committee should specifically be brought
before all concerned. Besides, the concern of Committee to have a
National Land use Policy should also be brought to the knowledge
of the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Committee should also
be kept apprised about the follow up of the aforesaid
recommendation of the Committee.
Distribution of surplus land to landless labourers
3.20 When asked about the overall policy of the Government with
regard to distribution of surplus land to landless labourers in the
country, the Department has stated that Land Ceiling has been
considered as one of the effective instruments for reducing disparities
in ownership of land by prescribing a maximum ceiling area and
acquiring the surplus land for distribution amongst the eligible rural
poor. The States, therefore, enacted ceiling legislations to reduce the
land holdings and distribution of the surplus land to the landless
poor. The Department has further stated that the State Governments
have been requested from time to time to conduct special drives for
distribution of remaining ceiling surplus land to the eligible rural poor.
3.21 The information with regard to the details of distribution of
ceiling surplus land, Government wastelands, number of tenants
conferred ownership rights (or rights protected) and alienated tribal
land restored to tribals based on the feedback received from States/
UTs are given in Appendix- II, III, IV & V  respectively.
3.22 The analysis of the data reveal the following details of
distribution of Ceiling Surplus Land:
(Area in acres)
Area declared surplus 68,72,824
Area taken possession 60,27,180
Area distribution to individual beneficiaries 48,99,893
Total number of beneficiaries 54,01,232
3.23 The Department has informed that 39 percent of the total
beneficiaries belong to SC/ST.

15
3.24 The State/UTs-wise information indicates that the maximum
number of beneficiaries are 28,47,821 in West Bengal. The number of
beneficiaries ranges between one lakh and five lakh in case of Andhra
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and
Uttar Pradesh. In other States/UTs the number of beneficiaries is less
than one lakh.
Details of distribution of Government wastelands
3.25 Total wastelands distributed — 148.55 lakh acre
The State specific analysis of the data reveals that Haryana
distributed nil wastelands. The maximum number of distribution is in
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar (including Jharkhand), Gujarat, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh (including Uttaranchal).
Details of number of tenants conferred ownership rights and area
accrued to tenants
3.26 Total number of tenants — 125.85
Area accrued — 167.157
3.27 Eleven States/UTs of Bihar, Goa, Jharkhand, Manipur,
Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Delhi and
Daman & Diu have not reported the data. Tenancy laws are not
prevailing in Haryana and Madhya Pradesh. In Chhattisgarh,
Meghalaya, Mizoram Andaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, the
number of tenants who have been accrued land is nil.
3.28 Details of State-wise information as alienation and restoration
of tribal lands
(Area in acres)
Cases decided in favour of tribals — 2,02901
Area — 5,61,485
cases in which land was restored to tribals — 1,80,703
Area — 3,76,482
(The information has been provided for ten States : Bihar (including
Jharkhand) and Madhya Pradesh (including Chhattisgarh).

16
3.29 The Committee note that the Department monitors the data
with regard to distribution of surplus land to landless labourers.
Besides, the Department persuades the State Governments from time
to time to conduct special drives for distribution of surplus land
over and above the ceiling to the eligible rural poor. The Department
has furnished various data indicating the progress in regard to—
(a) distribution of surplus land, (b) distribution of Government
wastelands (c) number of tenants conferred ownership rights,
(d) information of alienation and restoration of tribal land. The
analysis of the data indicates that out of area of 68,72,824 acres
declared surplus 60,27,180 acres could be taken possession of and
out of that 48,99,893 acres could be distributed to 54,01,232
beneficiaries, out of which 39 per cent of the beneficiaries are
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. As regards distribution of
Government wastelands so far, 148.55 lakh acres could be distributed
in various States. As regards number of tenants conferred ownership
rights, 125.85 lakh could be given 167.157 lakh acres of land. As
regards alienation and restoration of tribal land, out of 2,02,901 cases
decided in favour of tribals, in 1,80,703 cases, the land was restored
to tribals. The analysis of the data indicates that there is much
difference between the area taken possession of and area distributed
to individual beneficiaries and between the cases decided in favour
of tribals and cases in which land was restored to tribals. The
Committee would like the Department to further pursue the matter
with the various State Governments so that maximum number of
beneficiaries could be helped in this regard.
As regards the distribution of Government’s wastelands to
individual beneficiaries, the Committee feel that besides distributing
land to individuals, there is an urgent need to provide the facilities
and technical know-how to the beneficiaries so that the wastelands
can be developed and can become the means of livelihood for the
individual beneficiaries.
3.30 The Committee would like to point out an interesting
situation. Whereby on the one hand land is being acquired for setting
up industries, Special Economic Zones and urbanization, on the other
hand, the emphasis is being given to distribute the land to landless
persons. The Committee also feel that the agenda of distribution of
land to the landless persons would have got a backseat due to the
current priorities of acquisition of land for setting up industries etc.
The Committee would like the Department to furnish the data with
regard to distribution of land/wastelands year-wise so as to
understand the aforesaid change of priorities and comment further
in this regard.

17
3.31 The Committee note from the statement given with regard
to number of tenants conferred ownership rights and area accrued
to them in various States that in Arunachal Pradesh tenancy laws
are not enacted. The Committee note that in the rural areas at present
there may not be trend of renting the property but with the changing
scenario of economic development there may be pressure on renting
property for housing and other things. There is an urgent need to
foresee the changing realities and bring tenancy reforms in rural
areas too. The Committee would like to have the detailed information
about the tenancy laws in various States so as to enable them to
analyze the position.
3.32 The Committee further note that in various States, there is
a peculiar problem of people occupying land and using it for several
years but not having the proper title. As dealt in detail in the
preceding part of the report, the Secretary has assured that the
proposed amendments to the Land Acquisition Act and the proposed
Rehabilitation Legislation would address to the issue of providing
due compensation to these categories of land holders. The Committee
note that land acquisition is not the only area where these people
are at a disadvantageous position, but otherwise also they are
debarred from various facilities like availing of loan under different
Central/State Schemes or for housing etc. There is an urgent need to
address to this issue by bringing various reforms in land laws of
various State Governments. The Union Government can play a role
of facilitator by guiding these States through various guidelines to
bring such reforms. The Committee recommend to the Department
to take action in view of the aforesaid observation of the Committee.

18
CHAPTER IV
ISSUES RELATED TO THE CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES
OF WATERSHED MANAGEMENT WITH SPECIFIC REFERENCE
TO THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008)
Convergence of all watershed programmes being run by different
Ministries and setting up a National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA)
4.1 The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development first took up the issue of convergence of watershed
programme being run by various Ministries/Departments and bring
under one umbrella in 2nd Report on Demands for Grants (1998-99)
(12th Lok Sabha). The aforesaid recommendation was pursued year
after year {refer 22nd Report (12th Lok Sabha), 12th Report (13th Lok
Sabha), 22nd Report, (13th Lok Sabha), 33rd Report (13th Lok Sabha),
47th Report (13th Lok Sabha), 2nd Report (14th Lok Sabha), 10th Report
(14th Lok Sabha), 19th Report (14th Lok Sabha). Pursuant to the
consistently pursuing of the matter, the programme based on watershed
guidelines viz. DPAP and DDP and watershed component in erstwhile
Employment Assurance Scheme (EAS) being run by the Department
of Rural Development were transferred to the Department of Land
Resources w.e.f. 9 April,1999. The Standing Committee continued
pursuing the matter further and finally the Government has agreed to
some sort of convergence and the Finance Minister in his speech on
Budget 2007-2008 has informed that the National Rainfed Area
Authority was established to coordinate all schemes related to
watershed development and other aspects of land use. In President’s
address to Joint Session of Parliament 2007 also, it was mentioned that
for coordinate and focused attention on the issues of dry land and
rainfed farmers, the National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) has been
set up to guide policy in this regard. Rs. 100 crore has been allocated
for the Rainfed Area Development Programme during the year 2007-
2008 under Ministry of Agriculture.
4.2 The Department in the written note while elaborating the
objectives for setting up the aforesaid authority stated as under:
“Rainfed areas present a grim picture of water scarcity, fragile
eco-system, large-scale land degradation, low rainwater use
efficiency, low investments, poor infrastructure, high population
pressure and inappropriate input and policy support.

19
Though several schemes envisaging the development of rainfed
areas are under implementation by various Central Ministries,
the outcome is not reflected in the national production,
productivity , income and equity indicators. There is, therefore, a
need for a higher level of coherence, synergy and coordination
among these programmes. An appropriate strategy is urgently
required for the holistic and integrated development of rainfed
regions.
It is with this objective that the Authority has been set up and
it is expected that the National Rainfed Area Authority would
provide the much needed knowledge support for the up-gradation
and management of the country’s dryland and rainfed
agriculture.”
4.3 Further, Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated as
under:
“A Rainfed Area Authority has been envisaged, its primary role
will be at the level of providing a strong technical support and
to take into account all the research and other developments
which are taking place, pool them and help the country to move
forward in improving the utilisation of the rainfed areas through
various programmes and to do coordination and collaboration
among the various programmes being done by the various
Ministries”
4.4 The National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) has been set up
under Union Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation, New Delhi.
The composition of the Rainfed Area Authority
4.5 The National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) is a two-tier
structure consisting of a Governing Board and an Executive Committee
with the following composition:—
I. Governing Board
1. Minister of Agriculture Chairman
2. Minister of Rural Development Co-chairman
3. Minister of Water Resources Member
4. Minister of Environment & Forests Member

20
5. Member, Agriculture, Planning Commission Member
6. Secretary, Department of Agriculture & Member
Cooperation
7. Secretary, Department of Agriculture Member
Research & Education
8. Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development Member
9. Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources Member
10. Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Member
Forests
11. Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj Member
12. Chairman, NABARD (National Bank for
Agriculture & Rural Development) Member
13. One Farmer Representative/ Organization
(To be nominated by Ministry of Member
Agriculture)
14. Chief Executive Officer (National Rainfed Member
Area Authority Secretary
4.6 II. Executive Committee
1. Chief Executive Officer, National Rainfed Area Authority
2. Five Eminent Experts in the field of:—
(i) Water Management
(ii) Agriculture/Horticulture
(iii) Animal Husbandry & Fisheries
(iv) Forestry
(v) Watershed Development
3. One representative each from Ministry of Rural
Development, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of
Environment & Forests, Ministry of Water Resources,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj
4. Advisor, Agriculture, Planning Commission
5. Director, Central Arid Zone Research Institute (CAZRI),
Jodhpur
6. Director, Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture
(CRIDA), Hyderabad
7. Subject Matter Specialists

21
Main areas of jurisdiction of the aforesaid Authority
4.7 The main areas of jurisdiction of the National Rainfed Area
Authority are:
(i) To prepare a perspective plan, outlining the national strategy
and road map for holistic and sustainable development of
rainfed farming areas.
(ii) To evolve common guidelines for all schemes of different
Ministries including Externally Aided Projects (EAPs) for
development of Rainfed/Dry land Farming Systems.
(iii) To coordinate and bring convergence within and among
agricultural and wasteland development programmes being
implemented in rainfed areas of the country.
(iv) To identify rainfed areas in different States which need
priority attention and prepare watershed development
programmes for integrated natural resource management,
in consultation with States, focusing on multi dimensional
crop, livestock, horticulture, agri-pasture integrated systems
and programmes for landless farming communities.
(v) To identify gaps in input supply , credit availability,
dissemination of appropriate technology and other
requirements relevant for development of rainfed areas.
(vi) To guide the implementing agencies on priority setting and
monitor the specific interventions required.
(vii) To develop plans/programmes for capacity building of
Centre/State Government functionaries in rainfed areas.
(viii) To suggest modalities to strengthen National and State Level
Institutions concerned with Rainfed/Dryland areas, and
establish institutional linkages with prioritized watersheds.
(ix) To monitor disbursement of rural credit/insurance cover/
safety net programmes developed for rainfed areas.
(x) To set the research agenda including a critical appraisal of
on-going programmes and promote diffusion of required
knowledge for integrated farming in rainfed areas to district
and lower level authorities.
(xi) To evaluate the effectiveness of completed watersheds and
concurrent evaluation of on-going programmes.

22
Share of different Ministries in the task of watershed development
4.8 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence informed the
Committee that Department of Land Resources and the Department of
Rural Development basically under NREGA and to some extent under
SGRY are actually doing bulk of the work under watershed
development programmes. He also added that perhaps the Ministry of
Rural Development is the largest implementing agency of the
programme.
Coordination of watershed activities at the State level as well as
ground level
4.9 The Standing Committee have persistently been recommending
convergence of watershed activities at the State level as well as at the
ground level. In this regard the Committee (refer Para 16 of
24th Report) had observed as under:
“The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to also
take into consideration the initiatives taken by the State
Governments with regard to the development of wastelands by
their own schemes. Perhaps the best way to know about the
status of wastelands in the country would be updating the
information with regard to wastelands based on the district-wise
status in the areas which have large wastelands in the country.
Unless the core data in this regard is obtained indicating the
ground position, no study would give the actual position in this
regard. While reiterating the concerns expressed earlier, the
Committee would like to recommend for a permanent mechanism
to periodically update the information in this regard. The
Department should take the desired initiatives in this regard and
apprise the Committee accordingly.”
4.10 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence
acknowledged that at the operational level, there has to be coordination
and there has to be a convergence of schemes particularly at the State
and district level.
4.11 Elaborating further, the Secretary stated as under:
“At present, there is no delegation. Today all 500 hectare proposals
are coming to the Ministry at the national level. Today, we have
about 45,000 cases. Under IWDP , we have 1877 cases; under DPAP ,
we have 27,439 cases, and under DDP we have 15,746 cases.
Total 45,000 live files are there. These are all 500 hectare proposals.

23
At the national level in the Ministry, it is not possible to handle
such projects. So, what we propose is that once we have the
State level organization, we will delegate the power to it so that
they will develop a small programme for a block or what we
call mini watershed kind of programme and bring it to the State
level, where our representatives can go and attend that, where
the sanctioning can be done. As we are doing under PMGSY, we
can release the funds to the State level agency and they can do
the day to day management with district level interaction. We
will only look at broader pictures whether the larger watershed
area at three tier level is being done professionally or not and
we will make some evaluations and studies from time to time
and provide technical support from the national level. This is a
fundamental change in the programme management which we
would like to bring.”
4.12 The Standing Committee have persistently been
recommending in their respective reports since the year 1998-1999 to
bring all the activities related to wastelands being undertaken by
different Ministries of Union Government under one umbrella.
Pursuant to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry of Rural Development initially transferred DDP , DPAP and
watershed component of erstwhile Employment Assurance Scheme
from the Department of Rural Development to the Department of
Land Resources to bring convergence of the activities related to
watershed schemes in their own Ministry. The Committee continued
pursuing the issue of bringing the watershed activities of the
different Ministries under one umbrella and the Government have
now finally agreed to the recommendation of the Committee and
the National Rainfed Area Authority has been constituted under the
Ministry of Agriculture with the initial allocation of Rs. 100 crore
for the year 2007-08. With regard to the composition of the aforesaid
authority, the Committee note that the authority has a two-tier
structure consisting of a Governing Board and an Executive
Committee. The Minister of Agriculture is the Chairman of
Governing Board and Ministers of Rural Development, Water
Resources and Environment & Forests are Members of the Board.
Further the Secretaries of various Ministries are also members of
the aforesaid Board. As regards the Executive Committee, on the top
is Chief Executive Officer, National Rainfed Area Authority. Besides,
five eminent experts in the field of Water Management, Agriculture/
Horticulture, Animal Husbandry & Fisheries, Forestry and Watershed
Development are also in the Executive Committee. One representative
each from various concerned Ministries are also in the Executive

24
Committee. Besides, Advisor, Agriculture, Planning Commission,
Director (CAZRI), Director (CRIDA) and Subject matter Specialists
are also in the Executive Committee. The Committee also note from
the information furnished by the Department of Land Resources
that with the implementation of National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme under which bulk of the works under watershed
development would be undertaken, the Ministry of Rural
Development is the largest implementing agency of the watershed
programme. The Committee appreciate the convergence of activities
related to watershed development under one Central Authority i.e.
National Rainfed Area Authority and hope that tangible results
would be seen in the coming years. The Committee feel that the
said Authority should best have been located under the Ministry of
Rural Development being the largest implementing agency of the
watershed activities. The Committee would like to know from the
Department of Land Resources the initiatives taken in this regard so
as to analyze the position and comment further.
4.13 Besides the convergence of the activities related to watershed
development at the Union Government level, the Committee have
been recommending convergence of watershed activities at the State
level as well as at the ground level. The Secretary during the course
of evidence has acknowledged the need for some Centralized agency
at the State level. The Secretary has further emphasized on the need
for Centralized agency at the State level by giving a typical example
of the number of cases which have to be dealt with at the National
level. He has stated that at present 500 hectare proposals are coming
to the Ministry at the National level and as such 45,000 live files are
there with the Department of Land Resources. Once the State level
organization is established, the power to look into the various
projects can be delegated. The Central level agency will develop a
small programme for a block or a mini watershed kind of programme
and bring it at the State level where the representatives of the
Department of Land Resources can go and the projects can be
sanctioned. On the PMGSY model the funds can be released to State
level agency and State level agency can do the day-to-day
management with district level interaction. The Committee feel that
the aforesaid mechanism is on the lines suggested by the Committee
in their respective reports and therefore, emphasize for an early
decision in this regard. The Committee feel that with the Centralized
agency in every State the national level authority can concentrate
more on the policy issues as well as evaluating the different
programmes which may eventually bring noticeable impact on the
implementation of various schemes of watershed management. The

25
Committee while endorsing the decision of the Department in this
regard recommend for early constitution of State level agencies and
some district level mechanism to coordinate the ground level
activities.
Data with regard to the extent of wastelands in the country
4.14 The data indicated in the various documents of the
Department with regard to an estimated wastelands in the country is
55.27 million hectares. However, it has been stated in the Approach
Paper to Eleventh Plan that 80 million hectares is the degraded land.
When asked about the aforesaid confusion in the data, the Department
has stated that the Department is not aware of the basis on which the
Planning Commission has taken 80 million hectares as degraded land.
When further clarification was taken as to whether the Department
was not consulted while finalizing Approach Paper the Department
has submitted that the draft was sent to Department for comments
and the Department had clarified that these may be an estimated
125 million hectares of degraded land in rainfed areas including
80 million hectares of land under dryland farming which may actually
need to be developed.
4.15 Further, the conflicting data of untreatable land has been
indicated in the various documents. At one place, the Department has
stated that 12.65 million hectares of wastelands is untreatable at another
place thus data has been shown as 12.12 million hectares. When further
clarification was sought, the Department in the supplementary replies
has stated that the extent of untreatable wastelands as per Wastelands
Atlas of India is 12.12 million hectares. The data given earlier by the
Department of the order of 12.65 million hectares of untreatable land
has been substantiated by the data given in the Wasteland Atlas –
2005 as under:
(in hectares)
Waterlogged and marshy permanent — 5,34,115
Barren rocky/stony waste area — 57,74711
Steep Sloping area — 9,09,738
Snow covered and or glacial area — 54,32,816
Total — 1,26,5,380

26
4.16 Further, clarifying the position of data with regard to total
wastelands in the country, the representative from the Department has
elaborated as under:
“Now the first Wastelands Atlas was prepared in the year 2000.
At that time, the Wastelands Atlas told us that about 63.87 million
hectares was then the estimated quantity of wastelands. This
question keeps cropping up that over a period of time are we
reducing the extent of waste lands or it is going up. So again at
the initiative of the Department we commissioned a fresh
Wastelands Atlas whose results were made available in 2005. We
were happy to note that according to the results of this
Wastelands Atlas, the total wastelands comes to 55.27 million
hectares. So, over a period of five years, there was an over all
reduction of 8.6 million hectares which all said and done is a
fair achievement. We also would just like to inform the Committee
for its own information that out of this balance that remains
about 55.27 approximately 12.12 million hectares is not treatable
because these are barren rocks or stony wastelands areas or very
steep slopes or snow covered area, glacier areas and that leaves
us with a balance of 43.15 million hectares. So, this is what the
Wastelands Atlas in terms of the satellite imagery is telling us.
So, what I would say is that this is what we should take. Aside
all this, of course, we have identified areas of DPAP and DDP .
If we total this figures up, we get about 132 to 134 million. The
Parthasarthy Committee’s estimate is 125 million hectares. There
is slight over lap between our DDP areas and DPAP areas with
the satellite imagery. So our 134 approximates roughly to 125
which estimate Parthasarthy Committee has now formalized in
its report of January , 2006. So, the Department’s view is that we
should take Parthasarthy Committee’s recommendations as
currently the most correct one based on the data available. That
is why, we had said that about 60 per cent of this total area
which is about 75 million, is what our Department should try to
tackle over three plan periods covering 5 million each year. That
was the target we wanted to achieve.”
State-wise position of Wasteland Atlas
4.17 State-wise position of wastelands and area covered under
IWDP since 1995 is given in Appendix-VI. It could be seen therefrom
that since 1995 under IWDP 10.56 million hectares could be covered
under IWDP . Very good achievement i.e. 50 percent or more
development of area in term of total area and the coverage is in Assam,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Mizoram and Nagaland.

27
4.18 The targets fixed during different plan period by the
Department of Land Resource are as under (refer para 2.34 of 10th
Report).
Target (in million hectares)
Ninth Plan (1997-2002) 5
Tenth Plan (2002-2007) 15
Eleventh Plan (2007-2012) 20
4.19 As per the revised targets for Eleventh Plan, 25 million
hectares area is projected to be developed.
4.20 As regards the achievement of targets, the Department has
informed as under:
“As per the revised data indicated in the Atlas (2000) and Atlas
(2005), 8.6 million hectare was the reduction in the wastelands.
The Department usually achieves the targets as mentioned in the
various Budget Documents. For instance during 2005-06, the
Department has informed that the targets fixed under the three
area development programmes were fully achieved in that year
as under IWDP against the target of 340 new projects to cover
an area of 16.31 lakh hectares, 497 new projects were sanctioned
to treat an area of 22.62 lakh hectares exceeding the target. Under
DPAP and DDP , the targets of 3000 new projects cover to an
area of 15 lakh hectares and 2000 new projects with an area of
10 lakh hectares respectively, have also been fully achieved.”
4.21 The Committee find that even when the Atlas (2000) and
updated Atlas (2005), is available with the Government which
contains the Scientific data of wastelands in the country mapped in
collaboration with National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA),
different data of wastelands/untreatable land are indicated in various
documents of the Government. Untreatable land as per the Atlas is
12.65 million hectares, whereas the Department has indicated it as
12.12 million hectares at one place. The Committee fail to understand
how the untreatable land can further increase or decrease. The
Department may explain the position in this regard.
4.22 As regards the projections for treating the wastelands, it is
imperative to have the exact information about the task ahead so as
to have proper planning. In this regard different data of wastelands
are given in different documents. Whereas, the Approach Paper to

28
Eleventh Plan has estimated requirement of Rs. 80,000 crore for
treatment of 80 million hectares of wastelands, as per the Parthasarthy
Committee Report the projections have been made based on the
data of 125 million hectares of wastelands. Further, the updated Atlas
indicates the area of wastelands as 55.27 million hectares. Further
clarifying the position the Secretary informed the Committee that
estimates of 125 million hectares include area of DDP and DPAP
land. As regards the estimates of Approach Paper, the Department
at one place has indicated that they are not aware of this data
whereas at another place it has been stated that when the draft of
Approach Paper came to the Department for comments, it was
clarified that there may be an estimated 125 million hectare of
degraded land in rainfed area including 80 million hectares of land
under dryland farming. The Committee conclude from what has been
stated above that perhaps there is no clarity of the exact area which
is rainfed area under DDP and DPAP blocks as well as dryland
farming in the country. As regards wastelands since the district-wise
data is available as per the scientifically obtained data in updated
Atlas, perhaps the data can be relied upon. However, there is too
much confusion when the data of wastelands is combined with data
of other degraded /rainfed land which need treatment. In this scenario
the Committee would like the Department to clarify whether the
separate district based data of rainfed/degraded land other than the
wastelands data of Atlas is available with the Government and
whether the outlays required for degraded/rainfed area are different
from those for the wastelands.
4.23 The Committee further note that whereas wastelands is
spread all over the country, DDP/DPAP blocks are area specific and
identified in various States. DDP blocks have been identified in
seven States/UTs and DPAP blocks have been identified in sixteen
States/UTs whereas wastelands are there in almost every State.
However, the extent of wastelands may vary from State to State.
Besides, the DDP , DPAP blocks may vary with the passage of time.
Such frequent change may not be there in wastelands. In this scenario
perhaps, there is a need to set targets separately for wastelands/
other degraded areas. Otherwise there will be utter confusion. The
Committee would like the clarification from the Department on the
aforesaid observation so as to analyse the position further.
4.24 As regards the claim of the Department that 8.6 million
hectares of wastelands was covered as reported in the updated Atlas,
the Committee would like to be informed of the States where the
extent of wastelands has considerably come down. Besides, as per

29
the data indicated by the Department in Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Kerala, Mizoram, Nagaland, considerable part of the wastelands have
been covered. The Committee would also like to be informed whether
the achievements reflected in these States match with the position
of wastelands coming down in the updated Atlas which contain
district-wise data obtained through Satellite imagery so as to draw
the meaningful conclusion about the progress of work with regard
to development of wastelands in the country and to chalk out further
strategy in this regard.
4.25 The Committee further note that as per the planning made
by the Department 5 million hectares was proposed to be covered
during Ninth Plan, 15 million hectares during Tenth Plan and
20 million hectares during Eleventh Plan. Now the targets for
Eleventh Plan have been revised to 25 million hectares. The
Committee may like to be clarified whether the aforesaid targets
include the targets fixed for rainfed/degraded land other than
wastelands areas. The Committee further observe that the Department
is drawing the conclusion/making strategy with regard to the
achievement/development of the wastelands keeping in view the
efforts being made by the Department of Land Resources. However,
besides the Department of Land Resources, the other Departments
viz. the Department of Rural Development under NREGA and SGRY,
the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Forest and
Environment and the various State Governments are making
substantial allocation and doing considerable work for the treatment
of wastelands. With the setting up of the National Rainfed Area
Authority, there is an urgent need to study the impact of the schemes
at the ground level. Perhaps, there is an urgent need to have district
based planning. The achievements need to be reflected district wise
while noting the actual work done in each State. Such district-wise
data should be merged to know the State plans which should
ultimately lead to the National Plan. Such district based monitoring
of the data should be an annual exercise so as to have the exact
idea of the ground position. The Committee would like the
Department to convey the concerns of the Committee in this regard
to the National Rainfed Area Authority and do the national planning
on the lines suggested by the Committee.
Per hectare cost of wastelands
4.26 Rs. 6,000 per hectare is the existing cost of development of
wastelands under different schemes as per the watershed guidelines.
As regards the projections for Eleventh Plan, the Department has

30
estimated the required outlay on the basis of Rs. 12,000 per hectare as
proposed in Parthasarthy Committee Report. In the Approach Paper,
the projections for Eleventh Plan have been made on the basis of
Rs. 10,000 per hectare.
4.27 The following observations of Parthasarthy Committee have
been indicated by the Department justifying the projected cost of
Rs. 12,000 per hectare:
“In the course of our tour of watershed programmes across the
country, we received repeated representations from various state
governments urging an upward revision of the cost norm. We
are now proposing that the programme be of an 8-year period
and the norm be raised to Rs. 12000 per hectare. The per-year
per-ha norm becomes Rs. 1500. This rise of 25% over the figure
for the year 2000 is certainly warranted by the annual rate of
inflation (4%) in this period. To put it another way , if we take
into account the rate of inflation between 2000 and 2006, the
figure of Rs. 6000 per hectare comes to Rs. 7500 per hectare. This
is for 5 years. For 8 years this figure comes to over Rs. 12,000
per hectare. Also we must note that since the norm will be frozen
for 8 years, we are already discounting for inflation in this
8 year period. Finally, we must also remember that Rs. 12,000 is
a maximal figure. The projects will be funded as per the actual
cost of the action plan. The tendency of PIAs to simply multiply
the area of the watershed with the per hectare norm is to be
very strongly discouraged. The norm only sets a ceiling and is
no way indicative of the actual budget, which must be determined
on the basis of ground realities – the need and possibilities
inherent in each watershed.”
4.28 It could be seen from the aforesaid observation of Parthasarthy
Committee that Rs. 12,000 per hectare has been estimated to be the
maximal figure. The actual cost of treatment per hectare of wastelands
may as such be between Rs. 6,000 and Rs. 12,000 per hectare. When
asked how the projections for Eleventh Plan would be justified when
Rs. 12,000 is the maximum limit as projected by Parthasarthy
Committee, the Department has tried to justify the position by the
following reasoning:
(a) “It is true that the Parthasarthy Committee has suggested
that the cost norm of Rs. 12,000 per hectare. Is a maximal
figure. The Committee has also indicated that the projects
will be funded as per the actual cost indicated in the Action

31
Plan. The Department acknowledges that the cost norms
would be fixed in line with the detailed project report and
after taking into consideration all the relevant factors. As
such, it is quite possible that the cost norms in some cases
may be less than Rs. 12,000 per hectare.
(b) The Department will carefully assess the actual costing that
is desirable for each project and treat the matter on a case
by case basis.
(c) For the purposes of the proposed outlay for the Eleventh
Plan, the figure of Rs. 12,000 per hectares was used in order
to prepare a credible projection. The purpose is not to
indicate that every single project will have a cost norm of
Rs. 12,000 per hectare only. The projections for the Eleventh
Plan may be seen in this light.”
4.29 As regards the final decision with regard to the projected per
hectare cost of development of wastelands amounting to Rs. 12,000,
the Department has stated that after careful consideration and
comprehensive review the matter will be taken up to the Expenditure
Finance Committee of the Ministry of Finance and thereafter to the
Cabinet for final decision.
4.30 The Committee note that the cost of development of
wastelands at the rate of Rs. 6,000 per hectare was fixed way back
during the year 2001. With the increase in costs, there is an urgent
need to hike the existing cost of development and make projections
accordingly. In this regard, the Committee find that the Department
has made projections for Eleventh Plan at the rate of Rs. 12,000 per
hectare. However, the Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan has indicated
the estimated requirement of outlay on the basis of Rs. 10,000 per
hectare. Besides, another noticeable fact is that the projections, of
the Department are based on the Parthasarthy Committee Report.
While noting the contents of the Parthasarthy Committee Report,
the Committee find that Rs. 12,000 per hectare cost is a maximal
figure. The Department has further clarified that the figure of
Rs. 12,000 per hectare has been used in order to prepare a credible
projection. As far as, the question of actual costing is concerned, it
will be done on project to project basis.
In this regard the Committee would like to be informed about
the existing practice indicating clearly whether the allocation is being
made on project to project basis or at the existing rate i.e. Rs. 6,000
per hectare. Besides, the Committee may also be informed whether

32
there is any noticeable cost difference between the development of
wastelands and the rainfed area. The Committee feel that the major
portion of the cost of wastelands/rainfed area goes towards the wages
of labourers, since, these are labour intensive work. As such another
fact which needs to be considered while fixing the cost of treatment
of wastelands is the hike in the wages of labourers in different
States.
The Committee would like all the aforesaid observations to be
taken into consideration while arriving at the decision on revised
per hectare cost norms.
The comparative position of financial and physical achievements
and review of various schemes of watershed development i.e. DDP ,
DPAP and IWDP during Tenth Plan and projections for Eleventh
Plan for Total Watershed Programmes.
4.31 The proposed outlay, agreed B.E., R.E. and actual expenditure
during each year of the Tenth Plan for total watershed programme:
Year Proposed B.E. R.E. Expenditure
2002-03 920 822 815 789.45
2003-04 890 895 819 822.90
2004-05 950 883 883 849.80
2005-06 1075 1106 1106 1108.09
2006-07 1250 1115 1115 1061.52
Total Tenth Plan 4985 4821 4738 4631.73
4.32 Statements and the overall position with regard to Tenth Plan
and proposed outlay for Eleventh Plan and agreed to B.E. for the year
2007-08 are indicated in Appendix-VII:
Proposed Allocation for Task 47,00
Agreed by Planning Commission 44,00
B.E. 4821
R.E. 4738
Expenditure 4631.76

33
4.33 Comparative position of outlay during 2007-08 i.e. the first
year of Eleventh Plan for Watershed Programmes:
Year Proposed Outlay B.E. R.E.
2006-2007 1250 1115 1115
2007-2008 2000 1114.54
4.34 Pr ojections made for Eleventh Plan by the Department
Rs. 11,700 crore.
Projections as per the Approach Paper to — Rs. 80,000 crore
Eleventh Plan
Projections made in the Parthasarthy — 1,50,000 crore
Committee Report
4.35 The Parthasarthy Committee Report has also indicated that at
the current level of outlay, it would take around 75 years for treatment
to be completed. For the work to be completed by the year 2020, the
Government needs to allocate around Rs. 10,000 crore per annum every
year for the next 15 years to meet the target. The doubling of current
outlay has been suggested. Another Rs. 5,000 crore would be dovetailed
from NREGS.
4.36 The following observations can be made after the detailed
analysis of the aforesaid data:
(a) there is marginal difference between the proposed and
agreed B.E. during each year of Tenth Plan i.e. the period
between 2002-2003 to 2006-2007. However, for the first year
of Eleventh Plan, the Planning Commission has agreed to
around 55 percent of the projected outlay;
(b) there was some cut of outlay at R.E. stage during the year
2002-03 and 2003-04. However, no cut has been imposed at
R.E. stage during the subsequent years i.e. 2004-05 to 2006-
07;
(c) there was some hike in outlay of each year of Tenth Plan
as compared to the previous year. However the outlay of
the year 2007-08 has been pegged at the outlay provided
during the year 2006-07;
(d) the expenditure reported is more than 100 percent during
the year 2003-04 and 2005-06. During the year 2002-2003

34
and 2004-2005, the underspending was to the tune of
Rs. 25.55 crore and 33.20 crore respectively. During 2006-07
upto 15 March, 2007, the expenditure reported is
1061.52 crore as compared to B.E. and R.E. of Rs. 1115 crore.
Physical Achievement
IWDP
4.37 During Tenth Plan no year-wise targets were fixed. However,
against the overall targets of development of 68 lakh hectares, the
achievement was 68,26,557 hectares which is more than the targets.
DPAP
4.38 Under DPAP during the years 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07
the position of targets and achievement is as follows:
Year Targets Achievement
(No. of the projects) (No. of the projects)
2004-05 2800 2550
2005-06 2800 3000
2006-07 3000 3076
DDP
4.39 The details of the targets and achievement is as under :
Year Targets Achievement
(No. of the projects) (No. of the projects)
2004-05 1800 1600
2005-06 1800 2000
2006-07 2230 2270 (upto 31.1.2007)
4.40 The aforesaid data of physical achievement indicates that the
overall targets were almost accomplished under the three major schemes
of Watershed Development viz. IWDP , DDP and DPAP .
4.41 The Committee find that during each year of Tenth Plan,
the Department has achieved almost 100 per cent physical as well as
financial achievements as compared to the allocation made and the
targets fixed under different schemes of wastelands development.

35
Further during each year of the Tenth Plan, the Department has
been allocated nearly the same amount as proposed to Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance. However, during the first year of
Eleventh Plan, the Department has been provided a little over
50 per cent of the proposed outlay. Not only that, during each year
of Tenth Plan, there has been some enhancement in outlay as
compared to previous year, however, the outlay provided during first
year of Eleventh Plan has been pegged at the outlay provided during
the terminal year of Tenth Plan i.e. 2006-07. The Committee strongly
recommend the Government to enhance the allocation during the
year 2007-08 specifically when the Department has achieved
100 percent physical and financial targets and the year 2007-08 is the
first year of Eleventh Plan which will reflect the priorities of the
Government during the Plan.
4.42 As regards the strategy of the Department during Eleventh
Plan, Rs. 11,700 crore has been proposed for Eleventh Plan. The
proposed allocation during Eleventh Plan is more than double the
projections made during Tenth Plan. Further the Parthasarthy
Committee has projected the requirement of outlay of Rs. 1,50,000
crore to complete the target of wastelands development by the year
2020. The Parthasarthy Committee has projected the annual allocation
of Rs. 10,000 crore. To meet this Rs. 10,000 crore, it has been proposed
that the current outlay should be doubled and another Rs. 5,000
crore would be dovetailed from NREGS. Against the proposed
allocation of Rs. 1,50,000 crore, Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan has
estimated the requirement of Rs. 80,000 crore. Perhaps the difference
between the projections made in the Approach Paper and
Parthasarthy Committee report is due to the difference in per hectare
cost of wastelands development. While Approach paper has estimated
Rs. 10,000 as the projected per hectare cost of development, the
Parthasarthy Committee has projected Rs. 12,000 as the per hectare
cost of development. Besides, the projections made in regard to the
total work ahead in the Approach Paper and Parthasarthy Committee
report also differ. The aforesaid issues have been dealt in detail in
the preceding part of the report where the Committee has emphasised
the need to resolve the aforesaid issues. Here the Committee would
like to emphasize that the development of wastelands/degraded land
is the top most priority area of the Government as indicated in the
President’s Address to Parliament and as indicated in the Approach
Paper. However, from the allocation made during 2007-08, it seems
that adequate priority has not been given to this sector. The
Committee also note that in the present scenario of mismatch between
the demand and availability of foodgrains, it is extremely necessary

36
to increase the area of agriculture in the country. Besides, with the
pressure on land for industries etc., there is pressure on the
Government to develop the area of wastelands. The aforesaid issues
have been adequately addressed in the third chapter of the report.
Here the Committee strongly recommend the Government to provide
adequate outlay under the different schemes after the detailed
planning to be made at the national level by the Centralized agency
viz. National Rainfed Area Authority.
The issue of unspent balances and the monitoring of programmes
related to Watershed Development .
4.43 The scenario of physical and financial achievement during
Tenth Plan reflects a very favourable scenario of implementation of
various watershed schemes of the Department of Land Resources.
However, certain areas viz. unspent balances, foreclosure of project,
pendancy of utlisation certificates raise serious concerns over the system
of analysing physical and financial achievements. The relevant issues
are dealt with in the succeeding paras of the report.
Unspent Balances
4.44 The Statement indicating the details of unspent balances
under different schemes of the Department has been given at
Appendix-VIII.
4.45 The analysis of the data indicates the position of unspent
balances under DPAP , DDP and IWDP as under:
(Rs. in crore)
DPAP — 321.21
DDP — 306.08
IWDP — 341.86
Total — 969.15
4.46 Another noticeable fact noted from the statement is that
nothing has been mentioned in various columns in respect of the
following number of States:
(i) DPAP The information has been furnished for
14 States, whereas DPAP is applicable in
16 States. No information has been furnished
for Jharkhand and Orissa.

37
(ii) DDP The information has been furnished for all
7 States where DDP is being implemented.
(iii) IWDP In Manipur, Kerala, although the allocations are
being made, nothing has been indicated about
the unspent balances.
Foreclosure of projects
4.47 The number of projects foreclosed under DPAP , DDP , & IWDP
are as under:-
DPAP — 1764
DDP — 300
IWDP — 7
4.48 The Committee have persistently been recommending to
indicate the data of foreclosure of projects under various watershed
scheme in the various Budget Documents. Even then the Department
has not bothered to furnish the information in the Budget documents
of 2007-08. In this regard during the course of examination of Demands
for Grants (2007-08), the Department has assured the compliance of
the recommendation of the Committee.
Pendency of Utilisation Certificates
4.49 As per the information furnished in the Budget documents,
221 total utilisation certificates amounting to Rs 201.51 crore were
outstanding as on 31 December, 2006.
4.50 When asked the reasons for pendency of Utilisation Certificate,
the Department has stated as under:
“Area Development Programmes – IWDP , DPAP and DDP are
need based. The sanctioned projects under these programmes are
funded in installments towards contributions of Central Share
and second and onward installments are released when 50 per
cent Utilisation Certificate of the earlier installments is received.
Thus, there remains some funds unutilised in case of ongoing
projects. However, these funds remain under the process of
utilisation and provide continuity to the implementation of the
projects. In essence unspent balance is a continuous concept
rolling over the project life and hence any utilization can not be
pin pointed against the existing unspent balance.”

38
4.51 The basic reasons for non-submission of utilization certificates
by various States/Union Territories mainly comprise of following:-
1. “Utilisation certificate is submitted project-wise at the time
of release of second and onward installments. Sometimes
there is a time lag in the implementation of the projects
which result into non-submission of Utilisation Certificates
of the earlier installments taken.
2. The Utilisation Certificate is submitted in respect of
installments already released at the time of making the
proposals for fresh installment in each project. Therefore,
the Utilisation Certificate of new installments always are
reflected as unsubmitted.”
4.52 The Department has informed that Bihar, Assam, Manipur
and Arunachal Pradesh are the main defaulter States. State-wise
information is furnished as per Appendix-IX.
Area Officers Scheme
4.53 Area Officers scheme in the Ministry of Rural Development
is an important mechanism for monitoring the implementation of major
programmes of the Ministry with special reference to quality, adherence
to implementation schedule, flow of funds, proper utilization of funds
and achievement of physical and financial targets etc. through field
visits. Senior officers of the level of Deputy Secretary and above are
assigned specific States for periodic visit and monitoring. After the
visits tour reports containing the observations and facts are submitted.
Shortcoming in the implementation of visited projects as observed in
the said report are taken up with the concerned implementing agency
at the different level of review/monitoring meetings. Major findings
in such visits are project specific depending upon the objective of the
project and are addressed to while releasing the funds and adopting
the system of monitoring.
4.54 During the year 2006, the schemes of Department of Land
Resources were monitored in the following manner:-
(i) Under online monitoring system most of the districts in the
States/ Union Territories have started feeding the data
online.
(ii) Monthly review meeting of nodal officers representing the
various States/ Union Territories were conducted regularly.
(iii) Evaluation studies for major projects by independent
agencies were conducted in the State of Nagaland.

39
(iv) The performance of 17 States was reviewed in a special
and focused manner for giving the impetus to the
implementation of the programmes.
4.55 Following improvements in the monitoring mechanism of the
Ministry (DoLR) were envisaged during the year 2006-07:
(i) Development of website and online monitoring – during
the year 2006-07 the system of online monitoring by the
States in the website developed by the Department has been
introduced. The work has commenced, however, many State
functionaries are under the process of getting familiarization
of the system through training.
(ii) Every month a meeting for reviewing the progress made
and funds utilized by the States is conducted which is
attended by the nodal officers of the States amongst others.
(iii) Evaluation studies of ongoing projects have been entrusted
to independent evaluators for assessing the performance of
ongoing projects.
(iv) A special review meeting of the States meeding impetus for
implementation is conducted in the department where the
pace of performance is examined.
4.56 The Committee while examining Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department of Land Resources had noted that the
Budget Documents of the Department indicate that the releases for the
State Governments/ Implementing Agencies are considered as spending
and as such a favourable performance of the Department indicating
100 per cent physical and financial achievement is indicated. The data
of unspent balances, foreclosure of projects, pendency of utilisation
certificates present the other side of the picture. The Committee while
observing that there was no system to analyse the performance of
different projects had recommended for periodic evaluation of projects
at different stages and grading of the projects as poor, satisfactory,
very good. In this regard para 2.15 and 2.16 of Tenth Report of the
Committee are reproduced below:
“The Committee conclude from what has been stated above that
the data indicate quite a favourble performance of the Department
as compared to the other counterpart Departments of the Ministry
of Rural Development viz the Department of Rural Development
and Drinking Water Supply where the actual allocation is far
less than the proposed outlay of those Departments. The better

40
allocation position is also due to very good expenditure position
shown by the Department under several schemes. The allocation
and the efforts made by the Department need to be continued in
a bigger way keeping in view the gigantic task of huge areas
falling under wastelands in the country.”
“xxxThe Committee may like to highlight that the Budget
documents of the Department indicate that the releases to the
State Governments/ implementing agencies are considered as
spending. There is no mechanism to analyse the performance of
projects being undertaken under different schemes due to long
gestation period. Further the foreclosure of projects specifically
under watershed schemes indicate that the physical performance
of the projects may not be so satisfactory as the data with regard
to financial achievement indicate. The Committee feel that there
is an urgent need to evolve some sort of mechanism for
evaluating the performance of different projects. Some sort of
grading indicating poor, satisfactory or very good may be
indicated against the number of projects being undertaken in
various States. Besides, another mechanism can be to have some
system indicating the projects at First stage, Second stage, Third
stage etc. Such type of analysis would enable a critical evaluation
of the projects. The Committee would like the Department to
consider the said aspect and apprise the Committee accordingly.”
4.57 The Committee further pursued the issue of evaluation of
projects in 19th Report (14th Lok Sabha).
4.58 The Department in Chapter III of the Outcome Budget has
stated that it has revamped the monitoring mechanism which has the
following feature:
(i) Mandatory mid term evaluation of the projects by an
independent evaluator after release of 45% of the project
cost;
(ii) For effective monitoring, grading of projects has been done
from the basis of performance as:
a. Preparatory Stage;
b. Implementing/execution stage; and
c. Completion stage.
(iii) State Rural Development Departments have been involved
at the three stages to monitor the projects through a
State level Committee.

41
(iv) Benchmarking of projects as poor, satisfactory, good, very
good and excellent on the basis of performance was
discussed with State Secretaries and it has been suggested
that minimum measurable criteria for activities in three
stages may be fixed by the Government of India and the
suggestion is under consideration of the Ministry.
4.59 The Committee have reviewed the physical and financial
achievement during each year of the Tenth Plan in the preceding
chapter of the report whereby it has been noted that Department
has achieved almost 100 per cent physical and financial targets. While
examining the Demands for Grants of the previous years, the
Committee have noted that the position is not so favourable if the
ground situation in this regard is analyzed. The various Budget
documents of the Department indicate that the releases to the State
Governments/implementing agencies are considered as spending.
Besides, the area covered by different projects is considered to be
developed without analyzing the ground situation. There is no
mechanism to analyze the performance of projects being undertaken
under different schemes due to long gestation period. The data
indicated with regard to unspent balances to the tune of Rs. 969.15
crore under the three major schemes Desert Development Programme
(DDP), Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP) and Integrated
Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP) further substantiates
the aforesaid observation of the Committee. As many as 1764 projects
under DPAP , 300 projects under DDP and 7 projects under IWDP
have been foreclosed by now. The Committee have repeatedly been
recommending to the Department to indicate the position of unspent
balances as well as foreclosure of projects in the various Budget
documents so as to know the position with regard to real achievement
at the ground level. The Committee express strong exception at the
information is not being furnished in the Outcome Budget of the
Department inspite of the insistence by the Committee in the
respective Reports.
The Standing Committee on Rural Development while
examining the Demands for Grants 2005-06 of the Department [refer
Para 2.16 of Tenth Report (14th Lok Sabha)] had suggested a
mechanism to evaluate the performance of different projects under
the aforesaid three major schemes at various stages of
implementation. The recommendation of the Committee in this regard
is reproduced below.
“The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to evolve
some sort of mechanism for evaluating the performance of

42
different projects. Some sort of grading indicating poor,
satisfactory or very good may be indicated against the number
of projects being undertaken in various States. Besides, another
mechanism can be to have some system indicating the projects
at First stage, Second stage, Third stage etc. Such type of
analysis would enable a critical evaluation of the projects. The
Committee would like the Department to consider the said
aspect and apprise the Committee accordingly.”
The Committee note with satisfaction from the written replies
that the Department has agreed to adopt the monitoring system
suggested by the Committee. To conclude, the Committee again
emphasize the strict monitoring of the projects being undertaken
under the major schemes related to wastelands through various
systems of monitoring viz. monitoring of projects at various stages,
grading of projects, monitoring through area officers schemes.
Besides, another mechanism to evaluate the performance of the
project is through Vigilance Committees. The Committee strongly
recommend to strengthen the monitoring mechanism as suggested
above. Besides, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation
to indicate the data with regard to unspent balances and foreclosure
of projects in the various Budget documents. The aforesaid data
may also be made available on the website of Department to bring
transparency as well as to put pressure on the implementing agencies
to perform better in this regard. Besides, the data and outcome of
the meetings of Vigilance Committees as well as the area officers’
schemes should also be given in the Budget documents. Besides the
Department should categorically inform the Committee the reasons
for huge under-spending under the three major schemes DDP , DPAP
and IWDP and take corrective action to ensure that the allocation
made under different programmes is meaningfully utilized. The
Committee may also be kept apprised about this.
Review of IWDP in the context of the task of wastelands
development in North-Eastern Region
4.60 The following is the position of total wastelands and
percentage of wastelands to the geographical area in North Eastern
States including Sikkim.
Geographical Area — 262179 Square Kilometeres
Wastelands — 62106.64 Square Kilometres
Percentage of wastelands — 23.69 per cent
to geographical area

43
4.61 North Eastern States have no DDP and DPAP blocks and as
such only IWDP is being implemented in these States. So far
558 projects covering 27,56,860 hectares of wastelands were undertaken
during 8th, 9th, and 10th Plan under IWDP . The Department has further
indicated the data of the area actually treated according to which out
of 27,56,860 hectares covered so far only 1,19,324 hectares  i.e. around
4 per cent could actually be treated. Out of 558 projects undertaken
under IWDP two projects have been foreclosed and Rs. 20.85 crore is
lying unspent with the various North-Eastern States as indicate in
Appendix-VIII of the written replies.
4.62 As regards the strategy of the Department during Eleventh
Plan with specific reference to wastelands development in North Eastern
States, the Department has informed that out of 6.21 million hectares
of total wastelands in North-Eastern States around 2.76 million hectares
have already been covered under IWDP . Thus around 3.45 million
hectares still remains to be covered. During the Eleventh Plan at
National level an area of 250 lakh hectares is proposed to be covered
under Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP). Since
10 per cent of the allocations are earmarked for North-Eastern States,
about 2.5 million hectares of wastelands will be covered under IWMP .
4.63 The Committee find that out of total geographical area of
2,62,179 sq. Kms. of North-Eastern States including Sikkim, 62,106.64
sq. kms. i.e. 23.69 per cent of the total area is wastelands. In the
North-Eastern States, out of the three schemes DDP , DPAP and IWDP
related to watershed development, only one scheme i.e. IWDP is
being implemented since these States have no DPAP and DDP
blocks. As regards the achievement made with regard to the various
projects being implemented in these areas, so far 558 projects were
taken up during Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Plan under IWDP covering
2.76 million hectares of land. Out of this 2.76 million hectares only
1,19,324 hectares i.e. around 4 per cent of the total land could actually
be treated as per the information provided by the Department.
Another noticeable fact is that the strategy for Eleventh Plan is being
chalked out based on the data of coverage i.e. 2.76 million hectares
and as such the Department is very optimistic to cover the remaining
2.50 million hectares during the Eleventh Plan thus leaving only
0.95 million hectares in North-Eastern States. Further Rs. 20.85 crore
is lying unspent with various North-Eastern States. The Committee
have dealt with in detail the issue of releases being considered as
spending as well as coverage being treated as really developed by
the Department in the preceding chapter of the report. Similar trends
are noticeable in the case of North Eastern States. The Committee
disapprove the way the projections are being made without noting

44
the ground situtation. There is an urgent need to understand the
ground situation with regard to the implementations of various
projects so as to know the real impact of these programmes. The
Committee strongly recommend to the Department to review the
policy of monitoring as given in detail in earlier part of the report
and give adequate emphasis on the development of wastelands in
North-Eastern States which have a sizeable area of wastelands.
(i) Slipped back areas falling from the developed category to
again wastelands.
(ii) The post project maintenance.
(iii) Status of ownership of the wastelands.
Slipped back area falling from the developed category to again
wastelands
4.64 When asked whether the Department has made any study to
know about the slipping back of area from the developed category
again to degraded land, the Secretary during the course of oral evidence
submitted that some studies by the Satellite technology have been
done in this regard. However, as on today no detailed study has been
done. The Department will make it as a part of on going programme
so as to monitor the position of the real recovered area as well as the
position of lapsing back areas.
Watershed Development Fund and the Post Project Maintenance
4.65 The extracts of the guidelines are reproduced below:
“One of the mandatory conditions for selection of villages in
Watershed Development Programmes is people’s contribution
towards Watershed Development Fund (WDF). The contribution
to WDF shall be a minimum 10 per cent of the cost of works
executed on individual lands. However, in case of SC/ST and
persons identified below the poverty line, the minimum
contribution to the Fund in respect of community property may
come from all the beneficiaries, which shall be a minimum of
5 per cent of the development cost incurred. It should be ensured
that the contribution comes from the beneficiary farmers and is
not deducted from the wages paid to the labourers who are
engaged to treat the private lands. These contributions would be
acceptable either in cash/voluntary labour or material. A sum
equivalent to the monetary value of the voluntary labour and
materials would be taken from the watershed project account

45
and deposited in this fund. The Gram Panchayat shall maintain
the Watershed Development Fund separately. The Chairman and
Secretary, Gram Panchayat will operate the WDF account jointly.
Individuals as well as charitable institutions should be encouraged
to contribute generously to this Fund. The proceeds of this Fund
shall be utilised in maintenance of assets created on community
land or for common use after completion of project period. Works
taken up for individual benefit shall not be eligible for repair/
maintenance out of this fund.”
4.66 On the issue of capacity building in terms of PRIs and
individuals the Secretary of the Department stated as under:
“Capacity building at all levels will be something very important
and capacity building particularly in terms of interacting with
the common people, the farmers and other landless people who
are going to work on wasteland or the common property . The
role of PRIs is also very critical. This is how we are trying to
have a new approach and would really like to take it upon a
mission mode, what the Parthasarthy Committee has also
suggested.”
Status of ownership of wastelands
4.67 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence submitted
before the Committee that the Department do not have information
from different areas as to who own which land.
Merger of IWDP , DDP and DPAP under Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWDP)
4.68 The Department has informed that the existing three area
development programmes viz. IWDP , DPAP and DDP from 2007-08
onwards have been merged into a scheme ‘Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWDP)’ with a view to consolidate and
coverage these programmes for the purpose of integrated planning
and optimum use of resources. The Department has further stated that
the programme will however, retain its operational identify besides
State Wasteland Resource Centre will be formed by training experts
from different areas for project planning, monitoring, training and MIS/
GIS data base.
4.69 It has further been informed that the Department has
undertaken the task of preparing the guidelines on priority and propose
to submit the common guidelines on IWMP to the National Rainfed
Area Authority for approval by the end of June, 2007.

46
4.70 The Department has informed that IWMP would be
implemented by adopting three tier approach one for upper reaches
like hills and forest areas, second for intermediate slopes and the third
for plains and flat areas.
4.71 While submitted the detail of three tier approach the
Department has stated as under:
“In order to bring about broad based conceptualization and
integration of all the area development programmes, it is proposed
to integrate the related schemes within the Ministry of Rural
Development for strong synergy and convergence among the
programmes of IWDP , DPAP and DDP . For integrated planning,
sustainable outcomes, clear conceptualization of rural livelihoods
of the communities, the revised concept of the Integrated
Watershed Management Programme has been proposed.
In the revised watershed programme, a holistic view is
proposed to be taken so that the treatment effected, covers all
the three major components of a watershed project. The purpose
is to ensure that coverage and treatment are taken up right from
the upper, forested areas which are the beginning of the water
source, down to the plain areas where most of the labour
intensive works are taken up.
Hence, a three-tier approach would be adopted towards the
implementation of the Integrated Watershed Management
Programme. In the upper reaches, which are mostly hilly and
forested, the onus of implementation would lie with the Forest
Departments and the Joint Forest Management Committees
(JFMC). In the intermediate slopes, the Integrated Watershed
Management Programme would address all the necessary issues.
The Project Implementing Agency under the programme would
be responsible for good quality implementation and progress of
all works and other related items. As to the third level of the
plains and flat areas, where there would be a large concentration
of labour intensive works, the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) will operate so that there is a strong
convergence between the IWMP and NREGS. While this is the
broad approach, the actual allocation of work at different reaches
will depend on sources of funds and detailed coordination at the
district level”

47
Recommendation of the Parthasarthy Committee on integrating the
livestock management, involvement of PRIs and Self Help Groups
(SHGs).
4.72 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence submitted
that Parthasarthy Committee has recommended to integrate the
livestock management as a key part of the programme and the
Department is in agreement with it. Parthasarthy Committee has also
recommended for the involvement of PRIs and Self Help Groups
(SHGs) and User Groups who are to be involved in the programme.
The fate of ongoing projects under IWDP , DPAP and DDP which
have been merged under IWMP
4.73 IWDP , DPAP and DDP have been merged with a new
programme Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP)
from 2007-08.
4.74 The Department has informed that since these programmes
are proposed to be merged, new modalities have to be evolved for
which approval of the Cabinet and Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC) is to be sought.
4.75 As regards the issue of committed liability that would need
to be handled in respect of IWDP , DPAP and DDP the following data
with regard to the ongoing projects has been given by the Department.
Year Name of the Scheme Ongoing Project
2006-07 IWDP 1314
2006-07 DPAP 16789
2006-07 DDP 10411
Total 28514
4.76 The Committee note that the existing area development
programmes viz. IWDP , DPAP and DDP have been converged into
a comprehensive scheme Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP) w.e.f. 2007-08. The Committee hope that the
revised scheme would look into the various aspects with regard to
monitoring of programme at the ground level and the issue of
convergence as raised by the Committee from time to time in the
earlier reports and re-emphasised in the preceding chapters of the
report.

48
4.77 The Committee note that under the ambitious programme
‘National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme’, most of the
permissible activities relate to land development. As indicated in
the earlier part of the report, Parthasarthy Committee while projecting
the annual allocation of the Department has suggested that out of
the annual requirement of Rs. 10,000 crore, Rs. 5,000 crore would be
dovetailed from NREGS. In this context, the Committee find that
perhaps there is an urgent need to consider allowing development
of wastelands as an activity under NREGS. This would further ensure
sufficient works under the Guarantee Legislation to provide
minimum 100 days of employment to each family who demand work
as per the provisions made under the Act. The Department of Land
Resources in this regard should discuss this matter with the sister
Department of Rural Development and the outcome arrived at should
be indicated to the Committee.
4.78 The Committee note that although the new programme
IWMP has been proposed to be implemented from the year 2007-08,
the modalities of revised programme has so far not been finalized.
The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the Ministry
of Rural Development to have the detailed homework done before
launching a new scheme or restructuring a programme. It is difficult
to understand how the subsumed programme would be implemented
in the absence of the detailed guidelines and pending the finalisation
of the detailed modalities. The year 2007-08 has already commenced
w.e.f. 1st April 2007 and the Committee fail to understand how the
revised programme would be implemented in this year in the absence
of the detailed modalities. In view of the aforesaid scenario the
Committee strongly recommend expeditious finalization of the
guidelines and the detailed modalities.
4.79 The Committee note that DDP and DPAP are being
implemented in the specified identified DDP and DPAP blocks in
various States of the country. Although the Department has informed
that the operational identity of different programmes would be
maintained in the revised programme, the Committee would strongly
recommend to provide adequate priority to the DDP and DPAP
blocks in the revised programme.
4.80 The Committee further find that as many as 28,500 projects
under IWDP , DDP and DPAP are continuing at present. The
Committee strongly recommend to the Department to ensure that
the issue of committed liabilities for these ongoing projects is
handled carefully while switching on from the earlier programmes

49
to the new programmes so as to have meaningful utilization of the
outlays spent on these projects.
Professional Support
4.81 The Department has stated that for successful implementation
of the area development programme, it has been decided to strengthen
the professional support by taking up measures in large scale in
following areas:
(i) Capacity Building;
(ii) Monitoring and Evaluation (M&P);
(iii) Information, Education and Communication (IEC); and
(iv) Technology Development, Extension and Training (TDET).
4.82 For this, TDET Scheme has been merged with the scheme
‘Professional Support’ with an outlay of Rs. 89.10 crore during
2007-2008. The old scheme of TDET is being implemented by ICAR
Institutes, Agricultural Universities etc. The Secretary during the course
of oral evidence has stated as under:
“In a dedicated institutional support, today, although we have a
reasonable size support at the national level, but the professional
components are not adequate. I think, there is a need for having
people from disciplines like soil science and people with
background in forestry, in agriculture, in horticulture and other
fields so that they can give us technical support. In addition,
there has to be a strong support in terms of people who
understand GIS, spatial data, land records and can then integrate
them because that is how a total plan for a small area can be
prepared.
We also wanted to have a professional team at the State level.
Only Andhra Pradesh and Orissa have started with this.
Otherwise, today even with a large programme, there is not a
dedicated team. We are going to support this programme at the
end, at the district level. In some of the livelihood programmes,
in the watershed programme, some of the programmes which
are supported by World Bank and IFED and other agencies, we
have started doing it in a few States. Western Orissa Livelihood
Project is one such project. Then there are some watershed
programmes in a few States. At the district level also, some
professional support is there. We would like to replicate it in all
the districts where the size of the programme is reasonable.”

50
4.83 The Committee note that a laudable initiative has been taken
by the Department to strengthen the professional support for the
successful implementation of various area development programmes.
The Secretary has informed the Committee about the dedicated team
of professionals so as to provide the technical support for these
programmes. In some of the States like Andhra Pradesh, Orissa there
is a dedicated team of professionals at the State level. Besides, at
the district level also some professional support is there. The
Secretary has assured that the experience of having dedicated team
at State and district levels would be replicated in all the districts
where the size of the programme is reasonable. While appreciating
the idea given by the Secretary in this regard, the Committee would
like that it should be implemented expeditiously so as to ensure the
successful implementation of various programmes.

51
CHAPTER V
THE ISSUES RELATED TO IMPLEMENTATION OF CENTRALLY
SPONSORED SCHEMES FOR COMPUTERISATION OF LAND
RECORDS AND STRENGTHENING OF REVENUE ADMINIS-
TRATION AND UPDATING OF LAND RECORDS
Review of the performance of :—
(i) Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and Updating of Land Records and
(ii) Computerisation of Land Records.
5.2 The features of newly launched scheme of National Programme
for Comprehensive Land Records Management (NPCLRM) after
merging the aforesaid two programmes.
Computerisation of Land Records (CLR)
5.3 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Computerisation of Land
Records (CLR) was started in 1988-89 on pilot basis in eight States.
The scheme was approved as a separate Centrally Sponsored Scheme
of Computerisation of Land Records during the 8th Plan. The scheme
envisages computerization of ownership and plot-wise details for
ensuring that landowners get computerized copies of Records of Rights
(RoRs) on demand. By the end of the 8th Plan, 323 districts in the
country were brought under the scheme with an expenditure of
Rs. 64.44 crore. During the first year of the Ninth Five Year Plan  i.e.
1997-98, it was decided that funds should be provided for
operationalisation of the scheme at Tehsil/Taluka level also. During
the Ninth Five Year Plan, Rs. 169.14 crore was released to various
States under the scheme by covering 259 more districts. At present,
the scheme is being implemented in 582 districts covering the entire
country, except the State of Meghalaya and Union Territory of Andaman
and Nicobar Island, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep.
Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records (SRA & ULR)
5.4 With a view to assist the States/UTs in the task of updating
of land records, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Strengthening of
Revenue Administration and Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR)

52
was started in 1987. Initially, the scheme was approved for the States
of Bihar and Orissa in 1987-88 and extended to other States/UTs, during
1989-90. The scheme is being implemented by the State Governments
through their Revenue/Land Reforms Departments. It is financed by
the Centre and the State on 50:50 funds sharing basis. However, Union
Territories are provided full Central assistance. All the States/UTs have
been covered under the scheme. The Scheme of SRA & ULR is being
implemented in the entire country.
5.5 The position of total funds released and the expenditure under
both the programmes since inception is as below:
(Rs. in Crore)
Name of the Programme Outlay Released Expenditure Percentage of
(Upto Dec. 2006) Expenditure
Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) 461.79 292.52 63%
Strengthening of Revenue Administration and 330.67 253.81 77%
Updating of Land Records
(a) Financial Performance during 10th Plan
5.6 The total Tenth Plan B.E., R.E., Expenditure and shortfall in
utilization under CLR and SRA & ULR are as under:
Scheme B.E. R.E. Expenditure Shortfall
(Upto Jan., 07)
CLR 325 325 262.95 62.05
SRA & ULR 179 154 112.60 66.40
(b) Financial performance during 2006-2007
(i) Computerization of Land Records
5.7 In respect of Computerization of Land Records (CLR) during
2006-2007 (upto December 2006) against the outlay of Rs. 100 crore,
only 16.41 crore have been released and following reasons have been
attributed for less release:
(i) Delay in release of funds by States to implementing
Agencies;
(ii) Non-availability of data entry agencies in some States; and
(iii) Lack of trained staff to manage computer centers.

53
(ii) Strengthening of Revenue Administration & Updating of Land
Records (SRA & ULR)
5.8 Similarly for Strengthening of Revenue Administration &
Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR), during 2006-2007, as against
the outlay of Rs. 49 crore, the total releases were only Rs. 5.78 crore
(upto December, 2006) and the reasons furnished are delay in State
Governments providing matching share and time consuming survey
settlement operations.
5.9 During the course of evidence , the Secretary of the Department
detailing out the progress made with regard to updation of data on
Land Records in different States has stated as under:
“ Goa, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal are the States which
have completed RoR data entry. There are a couple of other
States which have also done very well but we have not included
them like Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. The States which have
stopped manual issue of record of rights are Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Guajarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal. A few States have also placed
data on the website. These are Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and Orissa. Now different
States are in different stages”.
5.10 Giving the overall review of the aforesaid two programmes
the Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated as under:
“This programme has been going on for some time. One is the
computerization of land records and the other is the
modernization and strengthening of revenue administration. In
the second programme, what we have found in the last few
years is that more or less it has been reduced into a building
programme that is strengthening of land revenue administration.
It is because perhaps that is the easiest thing to do. The States
do not have the resources and the Ministry had also been
sanctioning them. But we feel that is not the genuine priority. At
our level, we should start something more concrete which is
going to be beneficial. On the computerization of land records,
almost 15 to 20 years have gone. Initially, there were a lot of
technology issues like computing in Indian languages. Then the
productivity , then the capacity in the private sector to do the
data entry and other things come. That phase is more or less

54
over. Today, we have a much better understanding of the
technology and also the productivity has increased in the sense
that we can tackle large volumes of data over reasonably short
period.”
5.11 The Secretary also informed that there are unspent balances
to the tune of Rs. 219 crore under Computerisation of Land Records
and 94 crore under Strengthening of Revenue Administration &
Updating of Land Records (SRA&ULR).
Progress in North Eastern States
5.12 The Department in the written replies has informed that the
subject of modernization of the land revenue administration system
has been taken up with the North-Eastern States in the Conferences of
Revenue Ministers/Revenue Secretaries of the States from time to time
as well as in video conferences organized specially for the purpose. Of
late, the North Eastern States have shown significant interest in taking
up the work in right earnest. The tempo is being maintained by
working closely with the concerned officials of these State Governments.
The Department is also insisting on proper utilization certificates for
the same, while offering to release further funds. Similar approach
will continue in the coming years as well.
5.13 Further, the issue of these States facing difficulty in providing
50 percent State share for the scheme of SRA & ULR will not exist
any longer, because the components covered by that scheme will be
funded @ 100 percent by the Central Government under the National
Programme for Comprehensive Land Resource Management (NPCLRM)
from the year 2007-08.
5.14 While reviewing the position of land records in North Eastern
States the Committee had observed (refer para 5.27 of 19th Report) as
under:
“the Committee find that the system of land records and land
administration prevalent in the rest of the country does not exist
in the hilly and tribal areas of North Eastern States. In most of
the areas even the cadastral survey has not been done and so no
land records exist. With regard to the programme
‘Computerisation of Land Records’, the Committee have been
informed that the basic data entry work in the States of Assam,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura
has already started. The Committee observed that computerisation
of Land Records is not possible when the basic data of land
records is not available in an area.”

55
National Programme for Comprehensive Land Resources Management
(NPCLRM)
5.15 The Department has stated that with a view to provide
computerized Record of Rights (RoRs) with maps to scales, other data
based certificates etc. to citizens for securing agricultural and non-
agricultural credit based on land assets, the new programme of National
Programme for Comprehensive Land Resources Management
(NPCLRM) has been started from 2007-2008 by merging the two
schemes of Computerization of Land Records (CLR) and Strengthening
of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land Records (SRA &
ULR). The Department has stated that Rs. 3,104 crore have been
proposed during Eleventh Plan and Rs. 145 crore for 2007-2008. In
Outcome Budget 2007-2008 it has been stated that it seeks to pilot the
programme in 60 districts including a mix of developed, developing
and backward districts. However, the on going works under the existing
schemes of CLR and SRA & ULR, for which funds have already been
provided or are being provided up to the end of 2006-07 will continue;
the same will be dovetailed with the activities under the NPCLRM as
the districts will move to the next level.
5.16 The Programme will cover all the districts in the country
over a period of time, beginning with pilot projects in a selected
number of districts. The pilot districts will be selected from across the
country, and the selection will be made in consultation with the
respective State Governments and UT Administrations and will take
into consideration the levels of preparedness of the different States.
5.17 The Secretary highlighted the various activities to be
undertaken under the restructured programme (NPCLRM) as given
under:
“Now, we have tried to integrate all these programmes. I would
just again briefly outline what are the activities which we want
to take up and how we are going to integrate these things. We
are trying to put a very clear focus on deliverables because we
would like to start from what we want to achieve and then try
to work out a road map towards that. The first thing will be
that we will have a citizen focus in this programme. We would
see ultimately how the citizen is going to be benefited. That
means if people come across a window, can they get a copy of
their records and a copy of the map. It is because map is the
other component which practically has remained unaddressed in
the programme of computerisation of land records. There are

56
some technical problems. Basically, there are two issues—one is
that old maps are there and some of them are not in good shape.
So, there has been a constant debate whether we should really
computerize them or whether we should wait for doing a
completely new survey using the latest technology like global
positioning system and modern survey instruments. Our approach
will be that whatever is there, with that land record management
work is going on. So the first of all that should be available and
the re-survey and other things which are going to take a longer
time, that can be started. But we should not wait for that and
keep these things pending because records of rights actually
consist of two parts. One is the Khatian or what contains the
name of the land holder and the plot number etc. and other is
the map. So, we will complete this. The technical problem is that
this is available in what is known as analogue data, so, we just
take a photograph of that. Then you convert that into what is
know as vectorisation that means you can extract the area from
the computer with reference to a particular point and position of
all other points are known. It is the vectorisation activity. We
want to take it up in a time bound programme whatever map
is available we will try to complete that and hopefully in three
years’ period we would complete it. That is a mission mode
programme which would be one of the key components of this
so that the citizens can get a benefit of it.”
5.18 As regards the updation of the land records, the Secretary
informed that the Department would support case management system
so that once the land records are computerized these are updated on
a continuous basis.
5.19 When asked about the fate of some of the States particularly
North Eastern States where no land records exist the Secretary clarified
as under:
“at present there is no proposal for taking up any survey .
Preparation of land records is basically the task of the State
Governments. The original work has to be done by the States.”
5.20 The Secretary further explained that under the restructured
programme it is proposed to have much more professional input at
the State as well as national level that is missing under the existing
programme. GIS experts and people familiar with land records and
people having good idea about survey would be involved. On some
of technical issue, like the Indian language Interface, efforts would be

57
made to associate IT industry to find a standards Digitization maps.
Since the volume of work is too large, it cannot be taken as a
departmental activity, it has to be decided how to outsource the various
activities.
5.21 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of
2006-07 had observed that the necessary revenue rules/regulations have
to be amended by the various State Governments to provide legal
sanctity to computerized copies of Record of Rights. In this regard the
observance of the Committee (refer para 5.17 of 19th Report) is
reproduced below:
“The Committee note that one of the important tasks for the
successful implementation of programme is to stop issue of
manual copies of Record of Rights and to provide legal sanctity
to computrised copies of RoR by amending the necessary revenue
rules/regulations. Whereas the States of Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have already
amended the necessary revenue rules/regulations in this regard,
the action is pending in other States. Various reasons like lack of
administrative and political will at State level, waiting for
complete stabilization of computerized system etc. have been
indicated as the reasons for not providing legal sanctity to
computerized copies of RoR in these States. The Committee feel
that more interaction through various seminars, conferences is
required with the State Governments to persuade them to amend
the revenue rules/regulations so that the computerized system
of land records may be given legal sanctity. Besides the Committee
feel that once the land records are computerized and the people
are made aware of the system, the other issues related to giving
legal sanctity to computerized copies of RoR would automatically
be demanded by the public at large. As such there is an urgent
need to first complete the system of computerisation by the
initiatives of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme and make
maintenance as well as updation of land records a reality.”
Linking land records with the computer of the lending bankers
5.22 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) had been informed that thinking was being given for linking
the land records with the computers of the lending bankers so as to
facilitate easy accountability of loan to poor persons.

58
5.23 The observation of the Committee (refer para 5.18 of
19th report) has been reproduced under:
“The Committee note the laudable idea given by the Secretary,
Department of Land Resources whereby a thought is being given
to link up the land record information with the computers of the
lending Bankers so that the farmer does not even need to procure
the copy of land records every time. The Bankers can access the
land records directly without any charge. The Committee
appreciate the idea and feel that if it is made possible, it will
help the general public specifically farmers. Not only it will
reduce the transaction cost, but also would be a great relief for
the poor persons whose applications are rejected by the Banks
due to non-availability of proper copy of land records. Besides,
the assistance under various Centrally Sponsored Schemes
provided through Banks like Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
(SGSY) can easily be made available.”
5.24 The Committee observe that the existing Centrally Sponsored
Schemes relating to Land records viz. (i) Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR) and
(ii) Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) have been integrated
into a comprehensive programme ‘National Programme for
Comprehensive Land Resources Management (NPCLRM)’ w.e.f.
2007-08. The new feature of the restructured programme consists of
emphasis on computerisation of whatever land records are available
with professional input at State as well as Central level and the
time bound approach to complete the task on a mission mode within
three years. The Committee appreciate the firm resolve of the
Department to computerize the existing maps and land records within
a time bound period of three years and hope that the various
shortcomings of the existing programmes which include the matching
share to be provided by the State Governments, training etc. would
be properly addressed in the restructured programme. The Committee
would like that the observations/recommendations made by the
Committee in various reports, year after year should be considered
while finalizing the modalities of the programme. Besides, the
Committee would like to emphasise that the modalities of the
programme which include the outsourcing of certain activities should
be finalised expeditiously. The guidelines of the programme should
be framed at the earliest. The Committee may be kept apprised of
the same.

59
5.25 As regards the transition from the existing programme to
the restructured programme, the Committee strongly recommend that
the various issues related to the existing projects including committed
liability and unspent balances should be taken care of very carefully
by the Department and the Committee may be kept apprised of the
modalities finalised in this regard.
5.26 The Committee further observe that at present two schemes
are being undertaken for land records viz. SRA & ULR to supplement
the efforts made by the State Governments to monitor/update land
records and the other for Computerisation of Land Records.
Maintenance and updation of land records are inter-related issues
and no purpose can be served by computerisation unless the land
records are properly maintained. Thus the core data is the essential
input for the success of the computerisation programme. The
Committee also agree that it is of utmost importance to save in
whatever way the information of maps/land records as available with
the Revenue Departments so as to ensure that these maps do not
decay further. The restructured programme would be addressing the
aforesaid system. The Committee while supporting the Department
in this regard strongly recommend to the Government to provide
adequate outlay so as to enable the Department to complete the task
in the country within the envisaged time frame of three years.
5.27 The Committee while supporting the Department on the
issue of restructuring the programme find that another area of
concern is having correct land records. The proposed restructured
scheme of computerisation of land records on the basis of the existing
records would only serve the purpose of saving the decaying maps/
land records but the real purpose of land records can be achieved
only when the land records are correct and reflect the true ground
position in this regard. In this regard, the State Governments’ efforts
were being supplemented by the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for
Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records. The Secretary has informed that under the restructured
programme, there is no proposal for taking up any survey. He has
also stated that preparation of land records is basically the task of
State Governments and the original work has to be done by the
States. The Secretary has also observed that SRA & ULR has been
reduced into a building programme i.e. strengthening of land revenue
administration which is not the genuine priority of the programme.
The Committee differ here from the observation of the Secretary
and note that very good work has been done under the programme
by some of the States as admitted by the Department in the various

60
documents. Goa, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal have been
stated to be the States which have completed RoR data entry work
with the assistance provided under the programme. It has also been
mentioned that Orissa and Andhra Pradesh have also done good
work. In this scenario, the Committee express strong concern over
discontinuing the programme meant for maintenance and updating
of land records i.e. SRA & ULR. While agreeing that there may be
some problems in the implementation of the programme in some of
the States, the Committee feel that the same can be addressed through
bringing reforms in the various modalities of the programme. Since
some States could do very good work, other States can also be
motivated to emulate the good performing States. Besides, the
Committee observe that with the proposed restructured programme
only the States who could do something to have very good land
records can be benefited. Again the worst performing States would
be at a disadvantageous situation since these States have land records
in a form which will serve no purpose after computerization.
The Committee further observe that in North Eastern States, the
position of land records is further worse. In this regard, it is pertinent
to highlight the observation of the Committee while examining the
Demands for Grants 2006-07 that the system of land records and
land administration prevalent in the rest of the country does not
exist in the hilly and tribal areas of North Eastern States. In most
of the States even the cadastral survey has not been done and so no
land records exist. The Committee had been informed at that stage
that under the existing schemes some of the North Eastern States
have done some work like Arunachal Pradesh has some land records
and Manipur has land records for five valley districts and these
States have started data entry work. The State Government of
Meghalaya has no proper land records and has been requested to
carry out survey and settlement. State Governments of Mizoram and
Nagaland have already started survey and settlement with the
financial support from Government of India under the scheme of
SRA & ULR. The Committee find that the restructured scheme of
Computerization of Land Records would be of no help to North
Eastern States because these States have no land records. Some
initiatives were being undertaken by these States under the existing
SRA & ULR Scheme and with the closure of that support, there is
no hope of having proper land records in these States. In view of
the aforesaid observation, the Committee strongly recommend to the
Government to continue SRA & ULR. However, the shortcomings of
the existing scheme can be addressed by restructuring some of its
components.

61
Keeping in view the existing position of land records in North
Eastern States, the Committee strongly recommend as under:
(i) Detailed survey of the land resources including watershed
areas, catchment areas, drainage, forest areas, arable land
areas etc. of each village through satellite and remote
sensing devices should be carried out;
(ii) Nodal authorities at the State and District level for
coordinated functioning among the departments engaged
for the upliftment of rural economy through the use of
land and its resources should be set up;
(iii) The Expert Committee on land management of the hill
areas at the State and District level should be set up;
(iv) The recommendations of the Expert Committee should be
mandatorily followed by all the Departments.
(v) The detailed survey of District and Sub-Divisional
Headquarter areas for maintaining land records of
Government office plots, individual plots, public land etc.
should be carried out.
The Committee further observe that there is an urgent need to
assure the people in North-East that the aforesaid Schemes are meant
for the upkeep and maintenance of existing land records and in no
way proposed to change the age old traditions and customs. Such
an assurance is altogether required keeping in view the peculiar
position of land records in North-East.
5.28 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants
of the previous year had been informed that some of the States viz.
Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have amended
the necessary revenue rules/regulations to stop issue of manual copies
of Record of Rights (RoR) and to provide legal sanctity to
computerised copies of RoR. The Committee had recommended to
persuade the remaining States through various seminars, conferences
to amend the revenue rules/regulations so that the computerized
system of land records may be given legal sanctity. The Committee
feel that the real purpose of the computerization of land records can
be achieved only when the legal sanctity to computerized copies of
RoR is provided by the various State Governments. While reiterating
the earlier recommendation of the Committee, the Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to pursue further with the remaining
State Governments to amend the revenue rules/regulations to provide
legal sanctity to computerized RoRs.

62
5.29 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants
of the previous year was also informed that some thinking was
being given to link the data of land records with the computers of
the lending bankers so that the bankers can access the land records
directly without any charge. The Committee feel that such a move
can not only reduce the transaction cost but also would be a great
relief to the poor persons whose applications are rejected by the
Banks due to non-availability of proper copy of land records. Besides,
the loan can easily be made available under various schemes of the
Government as well as State Governments relating to housing,
agriculture self-help groups etc. The Committee strongly recommend
to the Department to evolve some modalities whereby the aforesaid
proposed initiative can be transformed into reality.

63
CHAPTER VI
BIO-FUEL
During the year 2004-05, Rs. 10 crore were allocated for a new
initiative bio-fuel, out of which Rs. 0.20 crore could actually be spent.
Subsequently, during the year 2005-06 Rs. 50 crore were allocated under
the new initiative and the expenditure indicated in the Budget
document is Rs. 49 crore. For the year 2007-08 also again Rs. 50 crore
has been allocated for the aforesaid initiative. The following information
giving the history of the aforesaid initiative is given in the Outcome
Budget:
“The Planning Commission had set up a Committee on the
development of Bio-fuels. The Committee, in its report of April
2003, made recommendations relating to Ethanol and Bio-diesel.
On Bio-diesel, the Report suggested that a National Mission on
Bio-diesel with special focus on plantation of Jatropha curcas (tree
bearing non-edible oilseed) be launched with the ultimate objective
of producing Bio-diesel to be blended with diesel to the extent
of 20 per cent. Jatropha curcas was chosen for propagation
because of its adaptability to different agro-climatic conditions,
shorter gestation period, ease of harvesting fruits, higher oil
content etc.
The proposed National Mission is to be implemented in two
phases i.e. Phase-I as Demonstration Project and Phase-II a self-
sustaining expansion of Bio-diesel Programme to cover enough
land to produce the required quantity of Jatropha curcas seed.
The Demonstration Project under the National Mission on Bio-
diesel will be taken up in a Mission Mode and will be a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme. Under the Demonstration Phase, it is proposed
to take up 5 lakh hectare Jatropha/Pongamia plantations on forest
and non-forest lands.
The Planning Commission made a presentation to the Prime
Minister on the report of the Committee on Development of Bio-
fuel on 11 July, 2003 wherein it was decided that the Ministry of
Rural Development (MoRD) would act as a Nodal Ministry for
operationalizing the Demonstration Phase.
In October, 2006, the EFC recommended the implementation of
the demonstration programme by the Ministry of Rural
Development. The Note for the CCEA for obtaining the approval
of the CCEA is under circulation for eliciting the comments of
the concerned Ministries/Departments.”

64
6.2 Further the Department has informed in the written note that
the basic emphasis in the demonstration phase of the National Mission
on Bio-diesel is on development of quality seed for wide scale
plantation through convergence of R&D efforts. Under the
demonstration phase, it is proposed to take up over a period of five
years, plantation of jatropha and pongamia in five lakh hectares. The
plantation would be taken up on waste, degraded and marginal lands
belonging predominantly to public agencies. The activities to be funded
are nursery development, plantation and research and development.
While nursery development and plantation on five lakh hectares would
be implemented by the States on 100 per cent Central assistance basis,
R&D component would be coordinated by the Ministry of Rural
Development. The Department has further informed that promotional
and R&D efforts are scattered in different Departments and agencies
of the Central and State Governments. The Department of Land
Resources would coordinate these efforts under the demonstration
phase.
6.3 The Committee note that a new initiative viz. development
of Bio-fuel has been undertaken by the Government with the
ultimate objective of producing bio-diesel to be blended with diesel
to the extent of 20 per cent. To achieve this objective under the first
phase i.e. demonstration phase, it is proposed to take up over a
period of five years plantation of jatropha and pongamia in five
lakh hectares. The basic emphasis in the demonstration phase is on
the development of quality seed material for wide scale plantation
through convergence of R&D efforts. The Committee also note that
different Ministries/Departments/Agencies are involved in the R&D
efforts and the Department of Land Resources has been given the
responsibility to coordinate these efforts in the demonstration phase.
The Committee recommend that the efforts of the Department in
this regard should be intensified with a view to achieve the desired
objectives. The Committee further note that out of Rs. 50 crore
allocated during the year 2005-06, Rs. 49 crore were actually utilized.
The Committee note from the various documents and have been
informed during the course of oral evidence that the aforesaid project
has not been cleared by the Group of Ministers. The Committee
would like to know how the expenditure to the tune of Rs. 49 crore
was done even when the programme has not been finalized so far.
The Committee would like the Department to clarify the position in
this regard.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
 9 May, 2007 Chairman,
19 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

65
APPENDIX I
CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF STATEMENT MADE BY MINISTER
UNDER DIRECTION 73A REGARDING STATUS OF
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS
MADE IN DRSCS REPORTS
Subject of the Report : Tenth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of
Standing Committee on Rural
Development on Demands for
Grants (2005-2006) of Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development)
Date of Presentation : 5 April, 2005
Date of receipt of Action : 25 August, 2005
Taken Notes
Date of Presentation of : 21 December, 2005
Action Taken Report
Date of Minister’s Statement : 12 May, 2006
The Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) was presented to Parliament on
20 April, 2005. As per direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker,
the Hon’ble Minister for Rural Development was supposed to make a
statement in Lok Sabha on the Status of implementation of each
recommendation contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee within
six months of the presentation of Report i.e. by 20 October, 2005. The
Hon’ble Minister for Rural Development, however, made a delayed
statement in the Lok Sabha on 12 May, 2006. the analysis of the
aforesaid statement is given below:
Name of Committee Ministry/ Total Number Total No. of Nos. of No of Recs. No of Recs.
Department of Reco- No. Recs. Recs. Not Yet to be
mmenda- of Recs. Imple- Under Imple- Implemented
tions Accepted mented Process mented
Standing Committee on Ministry of Rural 36 16 09* 26** 01*** 26 (25 under
Rural Development Development process + 1 not
(Department of implemented)
Land Resources)
*1  Recommendation at para No. 2.37 is under do not desire to pursue category.
** 15 Recommendations categorised under not accepted category and are under process.
*** 1 Recommendation at para No. 3.76 is under not accepted category has not been
implemented.

66
APPENDIX II
DETAILS OF DISTRIBUTION OF CEILING SURPLUS LAND
(SEPTEMBER, 2006)
(Area in acres)
Sl.No. States/UTs Area Declared Area Taken Area Total No.
Surplus Possession Distributed to of
Individual Benefi-
Beneficieries ciaries
1. Andhra Pradesh 8,43,183 6,51,823 5,88,925 5,30,852
2. Assam 6,13,405 5,75,337 5,45,875 4,45,862
3. Bihar 4,15,447 3,90,752 3,06,964 3,79,528
4. Chhattisgarh 30,397 29,224 24,568 27,452
5. Gujarat 2,27,643 1,74,585 1,56,353 35,410
6. Haryana 1,05,783 1,01,932 1,01,166 29,351
7. Himachal Pradesh 3,16,556 3,04,895 6,167 6,259
8. Jammu & Kashmir 8,836 Nil Nil Nil
9. Karnataka 2,68,783 1,64,601 1,23,775 34,039
10. Kerala 1,70,588 99,193 76,664 1,65,142
11. Madhya Pradesh 2,23,264 1,90,449 1,34,178 47,054
12. Maharashtra 7,11,727 6,34,813 6,14,913 1,35,599
13. Manipur 1,830 1,685 1,682 1,258
14. Orissa 1,82,828 1,70,244 1,59,246 1,42,291
15. Punjab 1,58,250 1,17,915 1,12,580 30,067
16. Rajasthan 6,14,417 5,70,462 4,64,799 83,255
17. Tamil Nadu 2,06,933 1,98,413 1,88,110 1,48,834
18. Tripura 1,995 1,944 1,599 1,424
19. Uttar Pradesh 3,69,362 3,39,385 2,63,225 3,03,867
20. West Bengal 13,98,139 13,07,848 10,20,373 28,47,821
21. Dadar & Nagar Haveli NR NR 7,267 3,749
22. Delhi 1,132 394 394 654
23. Pondicherry 2,326 1,286 1,070 1,464
Total 68,72,824 60,27,180 48,99,893 54,01,232

67
APPENDIX III
DETAILS OF DISTRIBUTION OF GOVERNMENT WASTELANDS
(September, 2006)
Sl.No. Name of State/UT Area Distributed in
Lakh Acres
1. Andhra Pradesh 42.02
2. Assam 5.89
3. Bihar* 13.21
4. Gujarat 13.81
5. Haryana 0.00
6. Himacal Pradesh 0.17
7. Karnataka 13.72
8. Kerala 4.57
9. Madhya Pradesh# 0.79
10. Maharashtra 10.23
11. Manipur 0.32
12. Punjab 1.10
13. Orissa 7.33
14. Tamil Nadu 2.89
15. Tripura 1.32
16. Uttar Pradesh@ 24.89
17. West Bengal 4.32
18. Goa 0.05
19. Mizoram 0.74
20. Rajasthan 1.12
21. Delhi 0.06
22. Dadar & Nagar Haveli No Wasteland
Total 148.55
*Including Jharkhand
#Including Chhattisgarh
@Including Uttaranchal

68
APPENDIX IV
DETAILS OF NUMBER OF TENANTS CONFERRED OWNERSHIP
RIGHTS (OR RIGHTS PROTECTED) AND AREA
ACCRUED TO THEM
(September, 2006)
Sl.No. States No. of Tenants Area Accrued
(In lakhs) (lakh acres)
 12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 1.07 5.95
2. Arunachal Pradesh Tenancy law not enacted
3. Assam 29.08 31.75
4. Bihar NR NR
5. Chhattisgarh Nil Nil
6. Gujarat 12.76 25.92
7. Goa NR NR
8. Haryana Tenancy not prevalent
9. Himachal Pradesh 4.01 NR
10. Jammu and Kashmir 6.10 NR
11. Jharkhand NR NR
12. Karnataka 6.05 26.32
13. Kerala 28.42 14.50
14. Madhya Pradesh Tenancy not prevalent
15. Maharashtra 14.92 42.90
16. Manipur NR NR
17. Meghalaya Nil Nil
18. Mizoram Nil Nil
19. Nagaland NR NR

69
12 3 4
20. Orissa 2.97 1.15
21. Punjab NR NR
22. Rajasthan 0.18 NR
23. Sikkim NR NR
24. Tamil Nadu 4.98 6.95
25. Tripura 0.14 0.39
26. Uttar Pradesh NR NR
27. Uttaranchal NR NR
28. West Bengal 15.07 11.11
Union Territories
29. Andaman & Nicobar Islands Nil Nil
30. Chandigarh Nil Nil
31. Dadar & Nagar Haveli 0.07 0.21
32. Delhi NR NR
33. Daman & Diu NR NR
34. Lakshadweep Neg Neg
35. Pondicherry 0.03 0.007
Total 125.85 167.157
NR-Not reported.

70
APPENDIX V
DETAILS OF STATE-WISE INFORMATION ON ALLIENATION
AND RESTORATION OF TRIBAL LANDS
(September, 2006)
(Area in acres)
Sl.No. State Cases Decided Area Cases Area
In favour of in which land
Tribals was restored
to Tribals
1. Andhra Pradesh 2,64,75 1,06,225 23,383 94,312
2. Assam 50 19 50 19
3. Bihar* 44,634 45,421 44,634 45,421
4. Gujarat 19,320 1,77,751 376 4,797
5. Karnataka 21,834 67,862 21,834 67,862
6. Madhya Pradesh# NR NR NR NR
7. Maharashtra 19,943 99,486 19,943 99,486
8. Orissa 61,431 56,879 61,364 56,854
9. Rajasthan 187 587 187 587
10. Tripura 9,027 7,255 8,932 7,144
Total: 2,02,901 5,61,485 1,80,703 3,76,482
*Including Jharkhand
#Including Chhattisgarh

71
APPENDIX VI
STATE-WISE DATA OF TOTAL WASTELANDS AND AREAS
COVERED UNDER IWDP SINCE 1995
(Area in million hectares)
Sl.No. State Total Area covered
wasteland under IWDP
since 1995
 12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 4.53 0.75
2. Arunachal Pradesh 1.82 0.35
3. Assam 1.40 0.90
4. Bihar 0.54 0.32
5. Chhattisgarh 0.76 0.38
6. Goa 0.05 0.01
7. Gujarat 2.04 0.55
8. Haryana 0.33 0.13
9. Himachal Pradesh 2.83 0.44
10. Jammu & Kashmir 7.02 0.22
11. Jharkhand 1.12 0.14
12. Karnataka 1.35 0.56
13. Kerala 0.18 0.15
14. Madhya Pradesh 5.71 0.76
15. Maharashtra 4.93 0.53
16. Manipur 1.32 0.27
17. Meghalaya 0.34 0.18
18. Mizoram 0.45 0.43
19. Nagland 0.37 0.38

72
12 3 4
20. Orissa 1.90 0.52
21. Punjab 0.12 0.07
22. Rajasthan 10.15 0.54
23. Sikkim 0.38 0.15
24. Tripura 0.13 0.09
25. Tamil Nadu 1.73 0.46
26. Uttarakhand 1.61 0.30
27. Uttar Pradesh 1.69 0.86
28. West Bengal 0.44 0.12
29. Union Territories 0.03 —
Total 55.27 10.56

73
APPENDIX VII (A)
STATEMENT SHOWING PROPOSED ALLOCATION,
B.E./R.E. & ACTUAL EXPENDITURE
(Rs. in crore)
        10th Plan
Sl.No. Name of Scheme Proposed Approved Budget Revised Actual Percentage
Allocation by Estimates Estimates upto 15 utilization
Planning March,
Commission 2007
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 1,600.00 1,500.00 1,558.00 1,558.00 1,530.63 98.24
2. Desert Development Programme 1,200.00 1,100.00 1,203.00 1,133.00 1,146.18 101.16
3. I.W.D.P . 1,900.00 1,800.00 2,060.00 2,047.00 1,954.95 95.50
TOTAL WATERSHED PROGRAMME 4,700.00 4,400.00 4,821.00 4,738.00 4,631.76 97.76
4. Computerisation of Land Records 500.00 400.00 345.00 325.00 278.87 85.81
5. SRA&ULR 200.00 200.00 169.00 154.00 130.81 84.94
6. Comprehensive Modernization of — — 1.00 1.00 0.00 0.00
Land Records (CMLR)
7. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 365.00 365.00 369.00 351.00 335.18 95.49
8. Tech. Dev . Ext. and Training 100.00 90.00 86.00 82.00 76.77 93.62
Scheme
9. Investment Promotional Scheme — — — — — —
10. Appraisal, Monitoring and 100.00 71.00 23.00 12.80 6.43 50.23
Evaluation
11.C ommunication — — — — — —
New Initiatives — 1,000.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
12. Pradhan Mantri Grameen — — 200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Jal Samvardhan Yojana
13. Bio Fuels — — 110.00 100.20 49;00 48.90
Total Plan 5,965.00 6,526.00 6,125.00 5,764.00 5,508.82 95.57

74
APPENDIX VII (B)
STATEMENT SHOWING OUTLAY AND CORRESPONDING
EXPENDITURE DURING TENTH PLAN
(FROM 2002-2003 TO 2006-2007 UPTO 15 MARCH 2007)
For The Year 2002-2003 (Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme         2002-2003
As Agreed RE Actual
Proposed to/BE Exp.
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 270.00 250.00 250.00 250.00
2. Desert Development Programme 210.00 185.00 185.00 185.00
3. I.W.D.P . 440.00 387.00 380.00 354.45
4. Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP)
TOTAL WATERSHED PROGRAMME 920.00 822.00 815.00 789.45
5. Computerisation of Land Records 100.00 55.00 35.00 31.18
6. SRA&ULR 40.00 35.00 20.00 20.73
7. Comprehensive Modernization of Land
Records (CMLR)
8. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 63.00 63.00 60.00 59.00
9. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 20.00 17.00 16.00 13.70
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 1.00 0.10 3.13
11. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation 20.00 5.95 2.95
12. Communication 1.05 0.95
New Initiatives
13. Pradhan Mantri Grameen
Jal Samvardhan Yojana
14. Bio Fuels
15. National Programme for
Comprehensive Land Resources
Management (NPCLRM)
16. Professional Support, Capacity
Building, M&E, IEC, TDET etc.
Total Plan 1163.00 1000.00 95.00 917.19
Non-Plan
Secretariat Economic Services 3.81 3.62 2.68
Total Plan & Non Plan 1163.00 1003.81 953.62 919.87

75
APPENDIX VII (C)
STATEMENT SHOWING OUTLAY AND CORRESPONDING
EXPENDITURE DURING TENTH PLAN
(FROM 2002-2003 TO 2006-2007 UPTO 15 MARCH 2007)
For The Year 2003-2004 (Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme         2003-2004
As Agreed RE Actual
Proposed to/BE Exp.
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 310.00 295.00 295.00 295.00
2. Desert Development Programme 230.00 265.00 195.00 215.00
3. I.W.D.P . 350.00 335.00 329.00 312.90
4. Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP)
TOTAL WATERSHED PROGRAMME 890.00 895.00 819.00 822.90
5. Computerisation of Land Records 55.00 40.00 40.00 35.77
6. SRA&ULR 35.00 25.00 25.00 24.46
7. Comprehensive Modernization of Land
Records (CMLR)
8. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 66.00 66.00 51.00 55.28
9. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 20.00 17.00 14.00 15.08
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 10.00 0.10 0.10 0.96
11. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation 4.85 0.54
12. Communication 1.05 0.36
New Initiatives 100.00 1.00 0.00 0.00
13. Pradhan Mantri Grameen
Jal Samvardhan Yojana
14. Bio Fuels
15. National Programme for
Comprehensive Land Resources
Management (NPCLRM)
16. Professional Support, Capacity
Building, M&E, IEC, TDET etc.
Total Plan 1176.00 1050.00 950.00 954.45
Non-Plan
Secretariat Economic Services 3.66 2.83
Total Plan & Non Plan 1176.00 1053.66 950.00 957.28

76
APPENDIX VII (D)
STATEMENT SHOWING OUTLAY AND CORRESPONDING
EXPENDITURE DURING TENTH PLAN
(FROM 2002-2003 TO 2006-2007 UPTO 15 MARCH 2007)
For The Year 2004-2005 (Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme         2004-2005
As Agreed RE Actual
Proposed to/BE Exp.
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 330.00 300.00 300.00 300.19
2. Desert Development Programme 240.00 215.00 215.00 215.19
3. I.W.D.P . 380.00 368.00 368.00 334.42
4. Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP)
TOTAL WATERSHED PROGRAMME 950.00 883.00 883.00 849.80
5. Computerisation of Land Records 65.00 50.00 50.00 45.62
6. SRA&ULR 35.00 20.00 20.00 19.66
7. Comprehensive Modernization of Land
Records (CMLR)
8. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 80.00 80.00 80.00 80.00
9. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 15.00 15.00 15.00 14.99
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 6.00 0.10 0.10 0.54
11. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation 1.20 0.50
12. Communication 1.70 1.20
New Initiatives
13. Pradhan Mantri Grameen 200.00 200.00 0.00 0.00
Jal Samvardhan Yojana
14. Bio Fuels 10.00 10.00 0.20 0.00
15. National Programme for
Comprehensive Land Resources
Management (NPCLRM)
16. Professional Support, Capacity
Building, M&E, IEC, TDET etc.
Total Plan 1361.00 1261.00 1050.00 1010.61
Non-Plan
Secretariat Economic Services 3.48 3.43 3.00
Total Plan & Non Plan 1361.00 1264.48 1053.43 1013.61

77
APPENDIX VII (E)
STATEMENT SHOWING OUTLAY AND CORRESPONDING
EXPENDITURE DURING TENTH PLAN
(FROM 2002-2003 TO 2006-2007 UPTO 15 MARCH 2007)
For The Year 2005-2006 (Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme         2005-2006
As Agreed RE Actual
Proposed to/BE Exp.
1. Drought Prone Area Programme 375.00 353.00 353.00 353.18
2. Desert Development Programme 285.00 268.00 268.00 268.17
3. I.W.D.P . 415.00 485.00 485.00 486.74
4. Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP)
TOTAL WATERSHED PROGRAMME 1075.00 1106.00 1106.00 1108.09
5. Computerisation of Land Records 125.00 100.00 100.00 99.74
6. SRA&ULR 65.00 40.00 40.00 39.99
7. Comprehensive Modernization of Land
Records (CMLR)
8. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 80.00 80.00 80.00 80.99
9. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 20.00 17.00 17.00 17.00
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 3.00 0.10 0.10 1.18
11. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation 1.20 1.20
12. Communication 1.70 1.70
New Initiatives
13. Pradhan Mantri Grameen 0.00 0.00
Jal Samvardhan Yojana
14. Bio Fuels 120.00 50.00 50.00 49.00
15. National Programme for
Comprehensive Land Resources
Management (NPCLRM)
16. Professional Support, Capacity
Building, M&E, IEC, TDET etc.
Total Plan 1488.00 1396.00 1396.00 1395.99
Non-Plan
Secretariat Economic Services 3.44 3.29 3.29
Total Plan & Non Plan 1488.00 1399.44 1399.29 1399.28

78
APPENDIX VII (F)
STATEMENT SHOWING OUTLAY AND CORRESPONDING
EXPENDITURE DURING TENTH PLAN
(FROM 2002-2003 TO 2006-2007 UPTO 15 MARCH 2007)
For The Year 2006-2007 (Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme         2006-2007
As Agreed RE Actual
Proposed to/BE Exp.
upto
15.3.2007
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 400.00 360.00 360.00 332.26
2. Desert Development Programme 300.00 270.00 270.00 262.82
3. I.W.D.P . 550.00 485.00 485.00 466.44
4. Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP)
TOTAL WATERSHED PROGRAMME 1250.00 1115.00 1115.00 1061.52
5. Computerisation of Land Records 175.00 100.00 100.00 66.56
6. SRA&ULR 90.00 49.00 49.0-0 25.97
7. Comprehensive Modernization of Land 280.00 1.00 1.00 0
Records (CMLR)
8. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 90.00 80.00 80.00 59.91
9. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 20.00 20.00 20.00 16
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 5.00 3.00 3.00 0.62
11. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation
12. Communication
New Initiatives
13. Pradhan Mantri Grameen
Jal Samvardhan Yojana
14. Bio Fuels 200.00 50.00 50.00 0
15. National Programme for
Comprehensive Land Resources
Management (NPCLRM)
16. Professional Support, Capacity
Building, M&E, IEC, TDET etc.
Total Plan 2110.00 1418.00 1418.00 1230.58
Non-Plan
Secretariat Economic Services 3.70 3.66 3.56
Total Plan & Non Plan 2110.00 1421.70 1421.66 1234.14

79
APPENDIX VII (G)
STATEMENT SHOWING PROPOSED AND AGREED
TO BE FOR THE YEAR 2007-2008
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme                    2007-08
As Proposed Agreed to B/E
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 775.00 0.00
2. Desert Development Programme 425.00 0.00
3. I.W.D.P . 800.00 0.00
4. Integrated Watershed Management 1114.54
Programme (IWMP)
TOTAL WATERSHED PROGRAMME 2000.00 1114.54
5. Computerisation of Land Records
6. SRA&ULR
7. Comprehensive Modernization of Land
Records (CMLR)
8. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 86.46 86.46
9. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 21.00 —
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 5.50 5.00
11. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation — —
12. Communication — —
New Initiatives — —
13. Pradhan Mantri Grameen — —
Jal Samvardhan Yojana
14. Bio Fuels 250.00 50.00
15. National Programme for 477.50 145.00
Comprehensive Land Resources
Management (NPCLRM)
16. Professional Support, Capacity — 99.00
Building, M&E, IEC, TDET etc.
Total Plan 2840.46 1500.00
Non-Plan
Secretariat Economic Services 3.90 3.78
Total Plan & Non Plan 2844.36 1503.78
The provisions for these
schemes indicated against the
scheme (NPCLRM)




80
APPENDIX VII (H)
STATEMENT SHOWING PROPOSED OUTLAY FOR THE
ACTIVITIES/SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES FOR ELEVENTH PLAN
For the Year 2007-2012 (Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme 2007-2012
As Proposed by DoLR
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 4,280.00
2. Desert Development Programme 2,140.00
3. I.W.D.P . 5,280.00
4. Integrated Watershed Management —
Programme (IWMP)
TOTAL WATERSHED PROGRAMME 11,700.00
5. Computerisation of Land Records
6. SRA&ULR
7. Comprehensive Modernization of Land
Records (CMLR)
8. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 176.34
9. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 110.00
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 16.50
11. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation —
12. Communication —
New Initiatives
13. Pradhan Mantri Grameen —
Jal Samvardhan Yojana
14. Bio Fuels 1,304.00
15. National Programme for Comprehensive 3,104.00
Land Resources Management
(NPCLRM)
16. Professional Support, Capacity —
Building, M&E, IEC, TDET etc.
17. Implementation of Monitoring of National 10.00
Rehabilitation Policy
Total Plan 16,420.84
The provisions for these
schemes indicated against
the scheme (NPCLRM)




81
APPENDIX VIII
PROGRAMME & STATE-WISE UNSPENT BALANCE
OF FUNDS AS ON 31.12.2006
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of State/UT DPAP DDP IWDP CLR SRA& Total
ULR
 12 3 4 56 7 8
1. Andhra Pradesh 33.65 9.18 29.87 12.12 1.53 86.35
2. Arunachal Pradesh 1.51 0.02 0.23 1.76
3. Assam 1.32 6.66 2.47 10.45
4. Bihar 14.48 19.85 6.58 2.62 43.53
5. Chhattisgarh 6.14 11.65 3.24 1.03 22.06
6. Gujarat 36.12 85.23 31.79 7.20 1.64 161.98
7. Goa 0.56 0.35 4.47 5.38
8. Haryana 22.89 6.71 8.61 0.22 38.43
9. Himachal Pradesh 8.95 23.18 26.32 4.03 2.00 64.48
10. Jammu & Kashmir 14.07 2.09 8.65 0.21 2.91 27.93
11. Jharkhand 4.43 1.02 2.50 7.95
12. Karnataka 14.65 29.03 8.61 8.60 2.10 62.99
13. Kerala 3.07 0.40 3.47
14. Madhya Pradesh 53.82 17.88 9.61 3.20 84.51
15. Maharashtra 56.75 17.46 1.21 4.23 79.65
16. Manipur 1.28 0.60 1.88
17. Meghalaya 1.26 0.00 1.26
18. Mizoram 4.54 1.27 0.00 5.81
19. Nagaland 3.16 0.86 3.83 7.85

82
12 3 4 56 7 8
20. Orissa 29.51 9.48 1.04 40.03
21. Punjab 1.78 2.06 4.50 8.34
22. Rajasthan 11.76 134.48 29.81 13.62 6.62 196.29
23. Sikkim 5.75 0.27 0.83 6.85
24. Tamil Nadu 14.07 23.04 18.98 3.16 59.25
25. Tripura 3.31 0.62 1.04 4.97
26. Uttar Pradesh 39.69 28.48 17.31 4.72 90.20
27. Uttaranchal 9.12 14.01 15.40 1.70 40.23
28. West Bengal 7.94 10.60 12.94 7.73 39.21
29. Andaman & Nicobar 0.15 0.15
Islands
30. Dadar & Nagar Haveli 0.12 0.50 0.62
31. Delhi 0.97 0.18 1.15
32. Pondicherry 0.88 0.50 1.38
33. Chandigarh 0.15 0.06 0.21
34. Daman & Diu 0.25 0.00 0.25
35. Lakshadweep 0.05 0.05
Total 321.21 306.08 341.86 168.99 68.76 1206.90

86
APPENDIX X
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON THURSDAY, THE 29 MARCH, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E‘, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah— in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Zora Singh Mann
4. Shri D. Narbula
5. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
5. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
7. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
9. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Balihari
11. Shri Jayantilal Barot
12. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
13. Shri Payarelal Khandelwal
14. Dr. Chandan Mitra
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
17. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary

87
Representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of
Rural Development)
1. Dr. Subas Pani, Secretary (LR)
2. Shri Atul Chaturvedi, AS&FA
3. Shri Bhaskar Chatterjee, AS (LR)
4. Shri D.P . Roy, JS (LR)
2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, the Committee chose Shri
Hannan Mollah, MP to act as Chairman for the sitting under Rule 258
(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened to take oral evidence of the Department
of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) on Demands for
Grants (2007-2008).
[The representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of
Rural Development), were then called in.]
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department
of Land Resources and drew their attention to the provisions of
Direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’.
5. The Committee thereafter took evidence of the representatives
of the Department of Land Resources on Demands for Grants (2007-
2008). The Committee during the course of oral evidence deliberated
at length the issues related to the proposed amendments to Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 and the proposed legislation on rehabilitation. In
the context of widely debated issues of acquiring land for setting up
economic zones, industries and related activities and urbanization, the
Secretary apprised the Committee about the stand of the Government
on the various issues related to ensuring the interest of the persons
whose land is acquired for the aforesaid purposes. The Committee
also deliberated at length on the need of devising a land use policy
by the Government.
6. The Committee thereafter discussed issues related to the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of Watershed Management with specific reference
to Demands for Grants (2007-08). The issues discussed in detail included
extent of wastelands in the country, confusing data about the targets
and achievements and provision made for Tenth/Eleventh Plan for
development of wastelands required for the purpose, merger of
Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP), Desert

88
Development Programme (DDP) and Drought Prone Areas Programme
(DPAP) into a comprehensive programme ‘Integrated Watershed
Management Programme’ and setting up of National Rainfed Area
Authority in order to achieve the convergence of programmes of
wastelands development being run by different Ministries/Departments
of the Government of India.
7. The Committee thereafter discussed the various issues related
to the land records with specific reference to the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes. The issues dealt with in detail included merger of the
Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records (SRA & ULR) and Computerisation of Land Records (CLR)
into a comprehensive programme ‘National Programme for
Comprehensive Land Resources Management (NPCLRM)’. The
Committee also discussed in detail the position of Land Records in
North-Eastern States and the peculiar problems of these States with
specific reference to maintenance and updating of land records. The
Committee also discussed the various issues related to the proposed
programme of the Department ‘Bio-fuel’.
8. During the deliberations valuable suggestions emerged on the
various issues as made above. The representatives of the Department
clarified the queries of the Members.
The Committee then adjourned.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.

89
APPENDIX XI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 12 APRIL, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E‘, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo— in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Zora Singh Mann
4. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri D. Narbula
7. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
8. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
9. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
10. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
13. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Balihari
15. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
16. Shri Payarelal Khandelwal
17. Dr. Chandan Mitra
18. Shri P .R. Rajan
19. Shri Bhagwati Singh
20. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

90
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary
2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, the Committee chose Shri
V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo, MP to act as Chairman for the sitting
under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the
draft Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development).
4. The Committee adopted the said draft Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) with certain modifications as indicated in the Annexure.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Report on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Department and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

91
ANNEXURE
(See Para 4 of the Minutes dated 12.4.2007)
Sl. Page Para Modifications
No. No. No.
12 3 4
1. 17 3.32 Add after para 3.31:
“The Committee further note that in various
States, there is a peculiar problem of people
occupying land and using it for several
years but not having the proper title. As
dealt in detail in the preceding part of the
report, the Secretary has assured that the
proposed amendments to the Land
Acquisition Act and the proposed
Rehabilitation Legislation would address to
the issue of providing due compensation
to these categories of land holders. The
Committee note that land acquisition is not
the only area where these people are at a
disadvantageous position, but otherwise
also they are debarred from various
facilities like availing of loan under different
Central/State Schemes or for housing etc.
There is an urgent need to address to this
issue by bringing various reforms in land
laws of various State Governments. The
Union Government can play a role of
facilitator by guiding these States through
various guidelines to bring such reforms.
The Committee recommend to the
Department to take action in view of the
aforesaid observation of the Committee.”
2. 41 4.59 Add after ground level.
“The Committee express strong exception
at the information not being furnished in

92
12 3 4
the Outcome Budget of the Department,
inspite of the insistence by the Committee
in the respective Reports.”
3. 42 4.59 Add At the end:
“Besides the Department should
categorically inform the Committee the
reasons for huge under-spending under the
three major schemes DDP , DPAP and IWDP
and take corrective action to ensure that
the allocation made under different
programmes is meaningfully utilized. The
Committee may also be kept apprised about
this.”
4. 47 4.77 Add after para 4.76
“The Committee note that under the
ambitious programme ‘National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme, most of
the permissible activities relate to land
development. As indicated in the earlier
part of the report, Parthasarthy Committee
while projecting the annual allocation of the
Department has suggested that out of the
annual requirement of Rs. 10,000 crore,
Rs. 5,000 crore would be dovetailed from
NREGS. In this context, the Committee find
that perhaps there is an urgent need to
consider allowing development of
wastelands as an activity under NREGS.
This would further ensure sufficient works
under the Guarantee Legislation to provide
minimum 100 days of employment to each
family who demand work as per the
provisions made under the Act. The
Department of Land Resources in this
regard should discuss this matter with the
sister Department of Rural Development
and the outcome arrived at should be
indicated to the Committee.

93
5. 60 5.27 Add at the end:
“The Committee further observe that there
is an urgent need to assure the people in
North-East that the aforesaid Schemes are
meant for the upkeep and maintenance of
existing land records and in no way
proposed to change the age old traditions
and customs. Such an assurance is
altogether required keeping in view the
peculiar position of land records in North-
East.”
12 3 4

94
APPENDIX XII
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl. No. Para Recommendation/Observations
12 3
1. 3.15 Land is one of the biggest resources for any
country. With the enormous expansion of the
State’s role in promoting public welfare and
economic development since Independence,
acquisition of land for public purposes has
become far more important than ever before.
Further, with the changing scenario of
industrialization, liberalization, urbanization and
new economic policy there is an immense
pressure on land. Now-a-days, land is being
acquired for setting up Special Economic Zones
(SEZs) so as to generate employment through
industries and related activities. With the
increased activity of land acquisition for public
purposes as well as for setting up industries,
the issues related to land acquisition and
rehabilitation of the affected persons whose
land is being acquired have been the matter of
debate recently .
The Committee note that land and its
management falls under the State List.
However, the Union Government has played a
crucial role in the advisory capacity as well as
a facilitator since Independence. In this scenario,
the responsibility of the Department of Land
Resources, being the nodal Union Department,
to deal with the issues related to land is
immense. On the one hand, there is a need to
bring amendments to the old and outdated
laws related to land acquisition to protect the
interests of the persons whose land is being
acquired, on the other hand, there is a need to

95
12 3
ensure that there is no reduction in total
agricultural land which may further aggravate
the demand and supply mis-match of
agricultural products. On both the accounts, the
Department of Land Resources has the key
responsibility . On the issue of bringing
amendments to the old and outdated Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 and rehabilitation policy,
the Committee have persistently been
recommending in the respective reports to
expedite the same.
As regards the status of the amendments to
Land Acquisition Act and rehabilitation policy,
the Committee have been informed that the
new rehabilitation policy has been drafted and
is in the public domain at the websites of the
Department of Land Resources and Ministry
of Rural Development. The Ministry of Law
and Justice has been requested to draft the
amendments to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
on the lines of the new rehabilitation policy.
The Committee also find that it is proposed to
give the rehabilitation policy a statutory
backing. As such, two separate legislations on
the Land Acquisition and rehabilitation are
proposed to be drafted and placed before the
Parliament. As regards the major changes
proposed in the revised Land Acquisition and
Rehabilitation Legislations, the Secretary has
informed that in the revised legislations,
attempt is being made to protect the interests
of the following three categories of persons:—
(a) people whose land is being acquired
directly;
(b) people who are utilizing the land, they may
not have title; and
(c) labourers who derive livelihood from land
though they may not have interest directly
in the land either as owners or encroachers.

96
12 3
Further, the Secretary has also informed that
the issue of giving land for land is being
addressed in the aforesaid proposed legislations.
As regards the deadline for bringing the
aforesaid legislations, the Secretary has
informed that the Department would like to
do it as early as possible. While noting the
aforesaid contents of the proposed legislations
on Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation, the
Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to expedite finalisation of the
aforesaid legislations and if possible, bring the
same before Parliament during the second part
of the current Session of Parliament.
2 3.16 The Committee would also emphasize that
there is an urgent need to balance the larger
interests of the community for which the land
is being acquired and the right of the individual
whose land is being acquired thereby depriving
him/her of means of livelihood. Besides, there
is an urgent need to address the issue of
acquisition of land for private enterprises. The
acquisition of land for private enterprises
cannot be at the same footing as the land
acquired for various projects of public welfare.
The Committee also note the stand of the
Department according to which land should be
acquired absolutely for the functional needs of
a particular industry or a project and should
not exceed the particular purpose so as to
include quotas of builders etc. The Committee
find that there are various issues in this regard
which need to be addressed strongly in the
legislations, the foremost of which is the policy
of giving land for land. The Committee note
that land besides being the source of livelihood
for a person is also a symbol of social status
in the society where a person lives. Besides,
with the land various emotional issues are also
attached. In this scenario, it is of utmost

97
12 3
importance to address all these concerns and
compensate the persons whose land is acquired
not only with land but with the land of the
same quality.
Besides, another issue which needs to be
addressed is that the projects for which land is
being acquired should be constructed within a
specified time period and not extended unduly
to get more profits with the rising prices of
land. There is a need to ensure that only the
specific project for which land is acquired is
constructed on the land and not used for other
commercial purposes. The Committee would
like the Department to address to the aforesaid
concerns of the Committee in the proposed
legislations on Land Acquisition and
Rehabilitation.
3. 3.17 On the issue of bringing two legislations, one
for the purpose of land acquisition and the
other for rehabilitation, the Department has
informed that the Law Ministry and Attorney
General have strongly advised to have two
separate legislations in this regard because the
rehabilitation policy is going beyond land
acquisition. The Committee feel that the issues
of land acquisition and rehabilitation are inter-
linked and as such need to be addressed in a
single legislation. The Committee would like
the Department to furnish the details of the
interactions and deliberations held with the
Law Ministry and Attorney General in this
regard so as to understand the matter in detail
and recommend further in this respect.
4. 3.18 The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban
and Rural Development during Tenth Lok
Sabha had examined various provisions made
under Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and presented
Eighth Report on ‘Land Acquisition Act, 1894’

98
12 3
to Lok Sabha on 15 December, 1994. Therafter,
the Standing Committee on Rural Development
pursued various issues related to land
acquisition and rehabilitation of the persons
whose land is being acquired, in their various
Reports presented to Parliament. The
Committee would like that their various
observations/recommendations made in the
respective reports should be taken into
consideration while making amendments to
Land Acquisition Act and bringing in a new
law related to the issue of rehabilitation.
5. 3.19 As stated earlier, there is an urgent need to
ensure that there is no reduction in total
agricultural land in the country. In this regard,
the Committee note the stand of the
Department according to which industries,
Special Economic Zones should be established
preferably on wastelands. Degraded forest land
could also be considered but with higher than
the usual norms for compensatory afforestation
or reforestation. To the extent agricultural land
is used for industries etc., there should be
compensatory development of wastelands for
the sake of food security of the country. The
Committee also note that the data with regard
to the land acquired for Special Economic Zones
so far is being collected by the Department
from the concerned Ministry of Commerce and
Industry. The Committee also note that
legislative provisions restricting use of
agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes
exist in most of the States. In this regard, the
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to
study the laws in various States. Further the
Committee note that land is a non-renewable
resource and is finite. It cannot be further
extended. In view of this, there is an urgent
need to ensure a balanced use of land for
different purposes viz agriculture, industries,

99
12 3
forestation, housing etc. While noting the stand
of the Department that industries, SEZs should
preferably be set up on wastelands/degraded
forest land, the Committee recommend that the
Government should permit acquisition of land
cautiously keeping in view the limited land
resources of the country. In this scenario,
perhaps there is an urgent need to have a
National Land use Policy which can guide the
various State Governments in having laws with
regard to the use of land for different purposes
with the objective of balanced and harmonious
use of land for different purposes. In this
regard, the Committee also note that the
Department has requested the Ministry of
Agriculture to convene the meeting of the
National Land Use and Conversion Board to
discuss the issues related to acquisition of
agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes.
The aforesaid concerns of the Committee should
specifically be brought before all concerned.
Besides, the concern of Committee to have a
National Land use Policy should also be
brought to the knowledge of the concerned
Ministries/Departments. The Committee should
also be kept apprised about the follow up of
the aforesaid recommendation of the
Committee.
6. 3.29 The Committee note that the Department
monitors the data with regard to distribution
of surplus land to landless labourers. Besides,
the Department persuades the State
Governments from time to time to conduct
special drives for distribution of surplus land
over and above the ceiling to the eligible rural
poor. The Department has furnished various
data indicating the progress in regard to – (a)
distribution of surplus land, (b) distribution of
Government wastelands (c) number of tenants
conferred ownership rights (d) information of

100
12 3
alienation and restoration of tribal land. The
analysis of the data indicates that out of area
of 68,72,824 acres declared surplus 60,27,180
acres could be taken possession of and out of
that 48,99,893 acres could be distributed to
54,01,232 beneficiaries, out of which 39 per cent
of the beneficiaries are Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes. As regards distribution of
Government wastelands so far, 148.55 lakh acres
could be distributed in various States. As
regards number of tenants conferred ownership
rights, 125.85 lakh could be given 167.157 lakh
acres of land. As regards alienation and
restoration of tribal land, out of 2,02,901 cases
decided in favour of tribals, in 1,80,703 cases,
the land was restored to tribals. The analysis
of the data indicates that there is much
difference between the area taken possession
of and area distributed to individual
beneficiaries and between the cases decided in
favour of tribals and cases in which land was
restored to tribals. The Committee would like
the Department to further pursue the matter
with the various State Governments so that
maximum number of beneficiaries could be
helped in this regard.
As regards the distribution of Government’s
wastelands to individual beneficiaries, the
Committee feel that besides distributing land
to individuals, there is an urgent need to
provide the facilities and technical know-how
to the beneficiaries so that the wastelands can
be developed and can become the means of
livelihood for the individual beneficiaries.
7. 3.30 The Committee would like to point out an
interesting situation. Whereby on the one hand
land is being acquired for setting up industries,
Special Economic Zones and urbanization, on
the other hand, the emphasis is being given to

101
12 3
distribute the land to landless persons. The
Committee also feel that the agenda of
distribution of land to the landless persons
would have got a backseat due to the current
priorities of acquisition of land for setting up
industries etc. The Committee would like the
Department to furnish the data with regard to
distribution of land/wastelands year-wise so as
to understand the aforesaid change of priorities
and comment further in this regard.
8. 3.31 The Committee note from the statement given
with regard to number of tenants conferred
ownership rights and area accrued to them in
various States that in Arunachal Pradesh
tenancy laws are not enacted. The Committee
note that in the rural areas at present there
may not be trend of renting the property but
with the changing scenario of economic
development there may be pressure on renting
property for housing and other things. There
is an urgent need to foresee the changing
realities and bring tenancy reforms in rural
areas too. The Committee would like to have
the detailed information about the tenancy laws
in various States so as to enable them to
analyze the position.
9. 3.32 The Committee fu rther note that in various
States, there is a peculiar problem of people
occupying land and using it for several years
but not having the proper title. As dealt in
detail in the preceding part of the report, the
Secretary has assured that the proposed
amendments to the Land Acquisition Act and
the proposed Rehabilitation Legislation would
address to the issue of providing due
compensation to these categories of land
holders. The Committee note that land
acquisition is not the only area where these
people are at a disadvantageous position, but

102
12 3
otherwise also they are debarred from various
facilities like availing of loan under different
Central/State Schemes or for housing etc. There
is an urgent need to address to this issue by
bringing various reforms in land laws of
various State Governments. The Union
Government can play a role of facilitator by
guiding these States through various guidelines
to bring such reforms. The Committee
recommend to the Department to take action
in view of the aforesaid observation of the
Committee.
10. 4.12 The Standing Committee have persistently been
recommending in their respective reports since
the year 1998-1999 to bring all the activities
related to wastelands being undertaken by
different Ministries of Union Government under
one umbrella. Pursuant to the aforesaid
recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry
of Rural Development initially transferred DDP ,
DPAP and watershed component of erstwhile
Employment Assurance Scheme from the
Department of Rural Development to the
Department of Land Resources to bring
convergence of the activities related to
watershed schemes in their own Ministry. The
Committee continued pursuing the issue of
bringing the watershed activities of the different
Ministries under one umbrella and the
Government have now finally agreed to the
recommendation of the Committee and the
National Rainfed Area Authority has been
constituted under the Ministry of Agriculture
with the initial allocation of Rs. 100 crore for
the year 2007-08. With regard to the
composition of the aforesaid authority , the
Committee note that the authority has a two-
tier structure consisting of a Governing Board
and an Executive Committee. The Minister of
Agriculture is the Chairman of Governing

103
12 3
Board and Ministers of Rural Development,
Water Resources and Environment & Forests
are Members of the Board. Further the
Secretaries of various Ministries are also
members of the aforesaid Board. As regards the
Executive Committee, on the top is Chief
Executive Officer, National Rainfed Area
Authority. Besides, five eminent experts in the
field of Water Management, Agriculture/
Horticulture, Animal Husbandry & Fisheries,
Forestry and Watershed Development are also
in the Executive Committee. One representative
each from various concerned Ministries are also
in the Executive Committee. Besides, Advisor,
Agriculture, Planning Commission, Director
(CAZRI), Director (CRIDA) and Subject matter
Specialists are also in the Executive Committee.
The Committee also note from the information
furnished by the Department of Land Resources
that with the implementation of National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme under which
bulk of the works under watershed
development would be undertaken, the
Ministry of Rural Development is the largest
implementing agency of the watershed
programme. The Committee appreciate the
convergence of activities related to watershed
development under one Central Authority i.e.
National Rainfed Area Authority and hope that
tangible results would be seen in the coming
years. The Committee feel that the said
Authority should best have been located under
the Ministry of Rural Development being the
largest implementing agency of the watershed
activities. The Committee would like to know
from the Department of Land Resources the
initiatives taken in this regard so as to analyze
the position and comment further.
11. 4.13 Besides the convergence of the activities related
to watershed development at the Union

104
12 3
Government level, the Committee have been
recommending convergence of watershed
activities at the State level as well as at the
ground level. The Secretary during the course
of evidence has acknowledged the need for
some Centralized agency at the State level. The
Secretary has further emphasized on the need
for Centralized agency at the State level by
giving a typical example of the number of cases
which have to be dealt with at the National
level. He has stated that at present 500 hectare
proposals are coming to the Ministry at the
National level and as such 45,000 live files are
there with the Department of Land Resources.
Once the State level organization is established,
the power to look into the various projects can
be delegated. The Central level agency will
develop a small programme for a block or a
mini watershed kind of programme and bring
it at the State level where the representatives
of the Department of Land Resources can go
and the projects can be sanctioned. On the
PMGSY model the funds can be released to
State level agency and State level agency can
do the day-to-day management with district
level interaction. The Committee feel that the
aforesaid mechanism is on the lines suggested
by the Committee in their respective reports
and therefore, emphasize for an early decision
in this regard. The Committee feel that with
the Centralized agency in every State the
national level authority can concentrate more
on the policy issues as well as evaluating the
different programmes which may eventually
bring noticeable impact on the implementation
of various schemes of watershed management.
The Committee while endorsing the decision
of the Department in this regard recommend
for early constitution of State level agencies and
some district level mechanism to coordinate the
ground level activities.

105
12 3
12. 4.21 The Committee find that even when the Atlas
(2000) and updated Atlas (2005), is available
with the Government which contains the
Scientific data of wastelands in the country
mapped in collaboration with National Remote
Sensing Agency (NRSA), different data of
wastelands/untreatable land are indicated in
various documents of the Government.
Untreatable land as per the Atlas is
12.65 million hectares, whereas the Department
has indicated it as 12.12 million hectares at one
place. The Committee fail to understand how
the untreatable land can further increase or
decrease. The Department may explain the
position in this regard.
13. 4.22 As r egards the projections for treating the
wastelands, it is imperative to have the exact
information about the task ahead so as to have
proper planning. In this regard different data
of wastelands are given in different documents.
Whereas, the Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan
has estimated requirement of Rs. 80,000 crore
for treatment of 80 million hectares of
wastelands, as per the Parthasarthy Committee
Report the projections have been made based
on the data of 125 million hectares of
wastelands. Further, the updated Atlas indicates
the area of wastelands as 55.27 million hectares.
Further clarifying the position the Secretary
informed the Committee that estimates of
125 million hectares include area of DDP and
DPAP land. As regards the estimates of
Approach Paper, the Department at one place
has indicated that they are not aware of this
data whereas at another place it has been stated
that when the draft of Approach Paper came
to the Department for comments, it was
clarified that there may be an estimated
125 million hectare of degraded land in rainfed
area including 80 million hectares of land under

106
12 3
dryland farming. The Committee conclude from
what has been stated above that perhaps there
is no clarity of the exact area which is rainfed
area under DDP and DPAP blocks as well as
dryland farming in the country. As regards
wastelands since the district-wise data is
available as per the scientifically obtained data
in updated Atlas, perhaps the data can be relied
upon. However, there is too much confusion
when the data of wastelands is combined with
data of other degraded/rainfed land which
need treatment. In this scenario the Committee
would like the Department to clarify whether
the separate district based data of rainfed/
degraded land other than the wastelands data
of Atlas is available with the Government and
whether the outlays required for degraded/
rainfed area are different from those for the
wastelands.
14. 4.23 The Committee further note that whereas
wastelands is spread all over the country, DDP/
DPAP blocks are area specific and identified in
various States. DDP blocks have been identified
in seven States/UTs and DPAP blocks have
been identified in sixteen States/UTs whereas
wastelands are there in almost every State.
However, the extent of wastelands may vary
from State to State. Besides, the DDP , DPAP
blocks may vary with the passage of time. Such
frequent change may not be there in
wastelands. In this scenario perhaps, there is a
need to set targets separately for wastelands/
other degraded areas. Otherwise there will be
utter confusion. The Committee would like the
clarification from the Department on the
aforesaid observation so as to analyse the
position further.
15. 4.24 As regards the claim of the Department that
8.6 million hectares of wastelands was covered
as reported in the updated Atlas, the

107
12 3
Committee would like to be informed of the
States where the extent of wastelands has
considerably come down. Besides, as per the
data indicated by the Department in Assam,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Mizoram, Nagaland,
considerable part of the wastelands have been
covered. The Committee would also like to be
informed whether the achievements reflected in
these States match with the position of
wastelands coming down in the updated Atlas
which contain district-wise data obtained
through Satellite imagery so as to draw the
meaningful conclusion about the progress of
work with regard to development of wastelands
in the country and to chalk out further strategy
in this regard.
16. 4.25 The Committee further note that as per the
planning made by the Department 5 million
hectares was proposed to be covered during
Ninth Plan, 15 million hectares during Tenth
Plan and 20 million hectares during Eleventh
Plan. Now the targets for Eleventh Plan have
been revised to 25 million hectares. The
Committee may like to be clarified whether the
aforesaid targets include the targets fixed for
rainfed/degraded land other than wastelands
areas. The Committee further observe that the
Department is drawing the conclusion/making
strategy with regard to the achievement/
development of the wastelands keeping in view
the efforts being made by the Department of
Land Resources. However, besides the
Department of Land Resources, the other
Departments viz. the Department of Rural
Development under NREGA and SGRY, the
Department of Agriculture, the Department of
Forest and Environment and the various State
Governments are making substantial allocation
and doing considerable work for the treatment
of wastelands. With the setting up of the

108
12 3
National Rainfed Area Authority , there is an
urgent need to study the impact of the schemes
at the ground level. Perhaps, there is an urgent
need to have district based planning. The
achievements need to be reflected district-wise
while noting the actual work done in each
State. Such district-wise data should be merged
to know the State plans which should
ultimately lead to the National Plan. Such
district based monitoring of the data should be
an annual exercise so as to have the exact idea
of the ground position. The Committee would
like the Department to convey the concerns of
the Committee in this regard to the National
Rainfed Area Authority and do the national
planning on the lines suggested by the
Committee.
17. 4.30 The Committee note that the cost of
development of wastelands at the rate of
Rs. 6,000 per hectare was fixed way back
during the year 2001. With the increase in costs,
there is an urgent need to hike the existing
cost of development and make projections
accordingly. In this regard, the Committee find
that the Department has made projections for
Eleventh Plan at the rate of Rs. 12,000 per hectare.
However, the Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan
has indicated the estimated r equirement of
outlay on the basis of Rs. 10,000 per hectare.
Besides, another noticeable fact is that the
projections, of the Department are based on the
Parthasarthy Committee Report. While noting
the contents of the Parthasarthy Committee
Report, the Committee find that Rs. 12,000 per
hectare cost is a maximal figure. The
Department has further clarified that the figure
of Rs. 12,000 per hectare has been used in order
to prepare a credible projection. As far as, the
question of actual costing is concerned, it will
be done on project to project basis.

109
12 3
In this regard the Committee would like to be
informed about the existing practice indicating
clearly whether the allocation is being made
on project to project basis or at the existing
rate i.e. Rs. 6,000 per hectare. Besides, the
Committee may also be informed whether there
is any noticeable cost difference between the
development of wastelands and the rainfed
area. The Committee feel that the major portion
of the cost of wastelands/rainfed area goes
towards the wages of labourers, since, these
are labour intensive work. As such another fact
which needs to be considered while fixing the
cost of treatment of wastelands is the hike in
the wages of labourers in different States.
The Committee would like all the aforesaid
observations to be taken into consideration
while arriving at the decision on revised per
hectare cost norms.
18. 4.41 The Committee find that during each year of
Tenth Plan, the Department has achieved almost
100 per cent physical as well as financial
achievements as compared to the allocation
made and the targets fixed under different
schemes of wastelands development. Further
during each year of the Tenth Plan, the
Department has been allocated nearly the same
amount as proposed to Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance. However, during the first
year of Eleventh Plan, the Department has been
provided a little over 50 per cent of the
proposed outlay. Not only that, during each
year of Tenth Plan, there has been some
enhancement in outlay as compared to previous
year, however, the outlay provided during first
year of Eleventh Plan has been pegged at the
outlay provided during the terminal year of
Tenth Plan i.e. 2006-07. The Committee strongly
recommend the Government to enhance the

110
12 3
allocation during the year 2007-08 specifically
when the Department has achieved 100 percent
physical and financial targets and the year 2007-
08 is the first year of Eleventh Plan which will
reflect the priorities of the Government during
the Plan.
19. 4.42 As r egards the strategy of the Department
during Eleventh Plan, Rs. 11,700 crore has been
proposed for Eleventh Plan. The proposed
allocation during Eleventh Plan is more than
double the projections made during Tenth Plan.
Further the Parthasarthy Committee has
projected the requirement of outlay of
Rs. 1,50,000 crore to complete the target of
wastelands development by the year 2020. The
Parthasarthy Committee has projected the
annual allocation of Rs. 10,000 crore. To meet
this Rs. 10,000 crore, it has been proposed that
the current outlay should be doubled and
another Rs. 5,000 crore would be dovetailed
from NREGS. Against the proposed allocation
of Rs. 1,50,000 crore, Approach Paper to
Eleventh Plan has estimated the requirement
of Rs. 80,000 crore. Perhaps the difference
between the projections made in the Approach
Paper and Parthasarthy Committee report is
due to the difference in per hectare cost of
wastelands development. While Approach
Paper has estimated Rs. 10,000 as the projected
per hectare cost of development, the
Parthasarthy Committee has projected Rs. 12,000
as the per hectare cost of development. Besides,
the projections made in regard to the total work
ahead in the Approach Paper and Parthasarthy
Committee report also differ. The aforesaid
issues have been dealt in detail in the preceding
part of the report where the Committee has
emphasised the need to resolve the aforesaid
issues. Here the Committee would like to
emphasize that the development of wastelands/

111
12 3
degraded land is the top most priority area of
the Government as indicated in the President’s
Address to Parliament and as indicated in the
Approach Paper. However, from the allocation
made during 2007-08, it seems that adequate
priority has not been given to this sector. The
Committee also note that in the present scenario
of mismatch between the demand and
availability of foodgrains, it is extremely
necessary to increase the area of agriculture in
the country. Besides, with the pressure on land
for industries etc., there is pressure on the
Government to develop the area of wastelands.
The aforesaid issues have been adequately
addressed in the third chapter of the report.
Here the Committee strongly recommend the
Government to provide adequate outlay under
the different schemes after the detailed planning
to be made at the national level by the
Centralized agency viz. National Rainfed Area
Authority.
20. 4.59 The Committee have r eviewed the physical and
financial achievement during each year of the
Tenth Plan in the preceding chapter of the
report whereby it has been noted that
Department has achieved almost 100 per cent
physical and financial targets. While examining
the Demands for Grants of the previous years,
the Committee have noted that the position is
not so favourable if the ground situation in
this regard is analyzed. The various Budget
documents of the Department indicate that the
releases to the State Governments/
implementing agencies are considered as
spending. Besides, the area covered by different
projects is considered to be developed without
analyzing the ground situation. There is no
mechanism to analyze the performance of
projects being undertaken under different
schemes due to long gestation period. The data

112
12 3
indicated with regard to unspent balances to
the tune of Rs. 969.15 crore under the three
major schemes—Desert Development Programme
(DDP), Drought Prone Areas Programme
(DPAP) and Integrated Wastelands
Development Programme (IWDP) further
substantiates the aforesaid observation of the
Committee. As many as 1764 projects under
DPAP , 300 projects under DDP and 7 projects
under IWDP have been foreclosed by now. The
Committee have repeatedly been recommending
to the Department to indicate the position of
unspent balances as well as foreclosure of
projects in the various Budget documents so
as to know the position with regard to real
achievement at the ground level. The
Committee express strong exception at the
information is not being furnished in the
Outcome Budget of the Department in spite of
the insistence by the Committee in the
respective Reports.
The Standing Committee on Rural Development
while examining the Demands for Grants 2005-
06 of the Department [refer Para 2.16 of Tenth
Report (14th Lok Sabha)] had suggested a
mechanism to evaluate the performance of
different projects under the aforesaid three
major schemes at various stages of
implementation. The recommendation of the
Committee in this regard is reproduced below:
“The Committee feel that there is an urgent
need to evolve some sort of mechanism for
evaluating the performance of different projects.
Some sort of grading indicating poor,
satisfactory or very good may be indicated
against the number of projects being
undertaken in various States. Besides, another
mechanism can be to have some system
indicating the projects at First stage, Second

113
12 3
stage, Third stage etc. Such type of analysis
would enable a critical evaluation of the
projects. The Committee would like the
Department to consider the said aspect and
apprise the Committee accordingly.”
The Committee note with satisfaction from the
written replies that the Department has agreed
to adopt the monitoring system suggested by
the Committee. To conclude, the Committee
again emphasize the strict monitoring of the
projects being undertaken under the major
schemes related to wastelands through various
systems of monitoring viz.  monitoring of
projects at various stages, grading of projects,
monitoring through area officers schemes.
Besides, another mechanism to evaluate the
performance of the project is through Vigilance
Committees. The Committee strongly
recommend to strengthen the monitoring
mechanism as suggested above. Besides, the
Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation to indicate the data with
regard to unspent balances and foreclosure of
projects in the various Budget documents. The
aforesaid data may also be made available on
the website of Department to bring
transparency as well as to put pressure on the
implementing agencies to perform better in this
regard. Besides, the data and outcome of the
meetings of Vigilance Committees as well as
the area officers’ schemes should also be given
in the Budget documents. Besides the
Department should categorically inform the
Committee the reasons for huge under-spending
under the three major schemes DDP , DPAP and
IWDP and take corrective action to ensure that
the allocation made under different programmes
is meaningfully utilized. The Committee may
also be kept apprised about this.

114
12 3
21. 4.63 The Committee find that out of total
geographical area of 2,62,179 sq. Kms. of North-
Eastern States including Sikkim, 62,106.64 sq.
kms. i.e. 23.69 per cent of the total area is
wastelands. In the North-Eastern States, out of
the three schemes DDP , DPAP and IWDP
related to watershed development, only one
scheme i.e. IWDP is being implemented since
these States have no DPAP and DDP blocks.
As regards the achievement made with regard
to the various projects being implemented in
these areas, so far 558 projects were taken up
during Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Plans under
IWDP covering 2.76 million hectares of land.
Out of this 2.76 million hectares only 1,19,324
hectares i.e. around 4 per cent of the total land
could actually be treated as per the information
provided by the Department. Another
noticeable fact is that the strategy for Eleventh
Plan is being chalked out based on the data of
coverage i.e. 2.76 million hectares and as such
the Department is very optimistic to cover the
remaining 2.50 million hectares during the
Eleventh Plan thus leaving only 0.95 million
hectares in North-Eastern States. Further
Rs. 20.85 crore is lying unspent with various
North-Eastern States. The Committee have dealt
with in detail the issue of releases being
considered as spending as well as coverage
being treated as really developed by the
Department in the preceding chapter of the
report. Similar trends are noticeable in the case
of North-Eastern States. The Committee
disapprove the way the projections are being
made without noting the ground situtation.
There is an urgent need to understand the
ground situation with regard to the
implementations of various projects so as to
know the real impact of these programmes. The
Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to review the policy of monitoring

115
12 3
as given in detail in earlier part of the report
and give adequate emphasis on the
development of wastelands in North Eastern
States which have a sizeable area of wastelands.
22. 4.76 The Committee note that the existing area
development programmes viz. IWDP , DPAP and
DDP have been converged into a
comprehensive scheme Integrated Watershed
Management Programme (IWMP) w.e.f. 2007-08.
The Committee hope that the revised scheme
would look into the various aspects with regard
to monitoring of programme at the ground
level and the issue of convergence as raised by
the Committee from time to time in the earlier
reports and re-emphasised in the preceding
chapters of the report.
23. 4.77 The Committee note that under the ambitious
programme ‘National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme, most of the permissible
activities relate to land development. As
indicated in the earlier part of the report,
Parthasarthy Committee while projecting the
annual allocation of the Department has
suggested that out of the annual requirement
of Rs. 10,000 crore, Rs. 5,000 crore would be
dovetailed from NREGS. In this context, the
Committee find that perhaps there is an urgent
need to consider allowing development of
wastelands as an activity under NREGS. This
would further ensure sufficient works under the
Guarantee Legislation to provide minimum
100 days of employment to each family who
demand work as per the provisions made
under the Act. The Department of Land
Resources in this regard should discuss this
matter with the sister Department of Rural
Development and the outcome arrived at
should be indicated to the Committee.

116
12 3
24. 4.78 The Committee note that although the new
programme IWMP has been proposed to be
implemented from the year 2007-08, the
modalities of revised programme has so far not
been finalized. The Committee have repeatedly
been recommending to the Ministry of Rural
Development to have the detailed homework
done before launching a new scheme or
restructuring a programme. It is difficult to
understand how the subsumed programme
would be implemented in the absence of the
detailed guidelines and pending the finalisation
of the detailed modalities. The year 2007-08 has
already commenced w.e.f. 1st April 2007 and
the Committee fail to understand how the
revised programme would be implemented in
this year in the absence of the detailed
modalities. In view of the aforesaid scenario
the Committee strongly recommend expeditious
finalization of the guidelines and the detailed
modalities.
25. 4.79 The Committee note that DDP and DPAP are
being implemented in the specified identified
DDP and DPAP blocks in various States of the
country. Although the Department has informed
that the operational identity of different
programmes would be maintained in the
revised programme, the Committee would
strongly recommend to provide adequate
priority to the DDP and DPAP blocks in the
revised programme.
26. 4.80 The Committee further find that as many as
28,500 projects under IWDP , DDP and DPAP
are continuing at present. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to
ensure that the issue of committed liabilities
for these ongoing projects is handled carefully
while switching on from the earlier
programmes to the new programmes so as to

117
12 3
have meaningful utilization of the outlays spent
on these projects.
27. 4.83 The Committee note that a laudable initiative
has been taken by the Department to strengthen
the professional support for the successful
implementation of various area development
programmes. The Secretary has informed the
Committee about the dedicated team of
professionals so as to provide the technical
support for these programmes. In some of the
States like Andhra Pradesh, Orissa there is a
dedicated team of professionals at the State
level. Besides, at the district level also some
professional support is there. The Secretary has
assured that the experience of having dedicated
team at State and district levels would be
replicated in all the districts where the size of
the programme is reasonable. While
appreciating the idea given by the Secretary in
this regard, the Committee would like that it
should be implemented expeditiously so as to
ensure the successful implementation of various
programmes.
28. 5.24 The Committee observe that the existing
Centrally Sponsored Schemes relating to Land
records viz . (i) Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and updating of Land Records
(SRA & ULR) and (ii) Computerisation of Land
Records (CLR) have been integrated into a
comprehensive programme ‘National
Programme for Comprehensive Land Resources
Management (NPCLRM)’ w.e.f. 2007-08. The
new feature of the restructured programme
consists of emphasis on computerisation of
whatever land records are available with
professional input at State as well as Central
level and the time bound approach to complete
the task on a mission mode within three years.
The Committee appreciate the firm resolve of

118
12 3
the Department to computerize the existing
maps and land records within a time bound
period of three years and hope that the various
shortcomings of the existing programmes which
include the matching share to be provided by
the State Governments, training etc. would be
properly addressed in the restructured
programme. The Committee would like that the
observations/recommendations made by the
Committee in various reports, year after year
should be considered while finalizing the
modalities of the programme. Besides, the
Committee would like to emphasise that the
modalities of the programme which include the
outsourcing of certain activities should be
finalised expeditiously. The guidelines of the
programme should be framed at the earliest.
The Committee may be kept apprised of the
same.
29. 5.25 As r egards the transition from the existing
programme to the restructured programme, the
Committee strongly recommend that the
various issues related to the existing projects
including committed liability and unspent
balances should be taken care of very carefully
by the Department and the Committee may be
kept apprised of the modalities finalised in this
regard.
30. 5.26 The Committee further observe that at present
two schemes are being undertaken for land
records viz. SRA&ULR to supplement the efforts
made by the State Governments to monitor/
update land records and the other for
Computerisation of Land Records. Maintenance
and updation of land records are inter-related
issues and no purpose can be served by
computerisation unless the land records are
properly maintained. Thus the core data is the
essential input for the success of the

119
12 3
computerisation programme. The Committee
also agree that it is of utmost importance to
save in whatever way the information of maps/
land records as available with the Revenue
Departments so as to ensure that these maps
do not decay further. The restructured
programme would be addressing the aforesaid
system. The Committee while supporting the
Department in this regard strongly recommend
to the Government to provide adequate outlay
so as to enable the Department to complete
the task in the country within the envisaged
time frame of three years.
31. 5.27 The Committee while supporting the
Department on the issue of restructuring the
programme find that another area of concern
is having correct land records. The proposed
restructured scheme of computerisation of land
records on the basis of the existing records
would only serve the purpose of saving the
decaying maps/land records but the real
purpose of land records can be achieved only
when the land records are correct and reflect
the true ground position in this regard. In this
regard, the State Governments’ efforts were
being supplemented by the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and Updating of Land Records.
The Secretary has informed that under the
restructured programme, there is no proposal
for taking up any survey. He has also stated
that preparation of land records is basically the
task of State Governments and the original
work has to be done by the States. The
Secretary has also observed that SRA & ULR
has been reduced into a building programme
i.e. strengthening of land revenue administration
which is not the genuine priority of the
programme. The Committee differ here from
the observation of the Secretary and note that

120
12 3
very good work has been done under the
programme by some of the States as admitted
by the Department in the various documents.
Goa, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal have been stated
to be the States which have completed RoR
data entry work with the assistance provided
under the programme. It has also been
mentioned that Orissa and Andhra Pradesh
have also done good work. In this scenario,
the Committee express strong concern over
discontinuing the programme meant for
maintenance and updating of land records i.e.
SRA & ULR. While agreeing that there may be
some problems in the implementation of the
programme in some of the States, the
Committee feel that the same can be addressed
through bringing reforms in the various
modalities of the programme. Since some States
could do very good work, other States can also
be motivated to emulate the good performing
States. Besides, the Committee observe that with
the proposed restructured programme only the
States who could do something to have very
good land records can be benefited. Again the
worst performing States would be at a
disadvantageous situation since these States
have land records in a form which will serve
no purpose after computerization.
The Committee further observe that in North
Eastern States, the position of land records is
further worse. In this regard, it is pertinent to
highlight the observation of the Committee
while examining the Demands for Grants 2006-
07 that the system of land records and land
administration prevalent in the rest of the
country does not exist in the hilly and tribal
areas of North Eastern States. In most of the
States even the cadastral survey has not been

121
12 3
done and so no land records exist. The
Committee had been informed at that stage that
under the existing schemes some of the North
Eastern States have done some work like
Arunachal Pradesh has some land records and
Manipur has land records for five valley
districts and these States have started data entry
work. The State Government of Meghalaya has
no proper land records and has been requested
to carry out survey and settlement. State
Governments of Mizoram and Nagaland have
already started survey and settlement with the
financial support from Government of India
under the scheme of SRA&ULR. The Committee
find that the restructured scheme of
Computerization of Land Records would be of
no help to North Eastern States because these
States have no land records. Some initiatives
were being undertaken by these States under
the existing SRA&ULR Scheme and with the
closure of that support, there is no hope of
having proper land records in these States. In
view of the aforesaid observation, the
Committee strongly recommend to the
Government to continue SRA & ULR. However,
the shortcomings of the existing scheme can be
addressed by restructuring some of its
components.
Keeping in view the existing position of land
records in North Eastern States, the Committee
strongly recommend as under:—
(i) Detailed survey of the land resources
including watershed areas, catchment areas,
drainage, forest areas, arable land areas etc.
of each village through satellite and remote
sensing devices should be carried out;
(ii) Nodal authorities at the State and District
level for coordinated functioning among

122
the Departments engaged for the upliftment
of rural economy through the use of land
and its resources should be set up;
(iii) The Expert Committee on land
management of the hill areas at the State
and District level should be set up;
(iv) The recommendations of the Expert
Committee should be mandatorily followed
by all the Departments.
(v) The detailed survey of District and Sub-
Divisional Headquarter areas for
maintaining land records of Government
office plots, individual plots, public land
etc. should be carried out.
The Committee further observe that there is an
urgent need to assure the people in North-East
that the aforesaid Schemes are meant for the
upkeep and maintenance of existing land
records and in no way proposed to change the
age old traditions and customs. Such an
assurance is altogether required keeping in view
the peculiar position of land records in North-
East.
32. 5.28 The Committee while examining the Demands
for Grants of the previous year had been
informed that some of the States viz. Goa,
Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal have amended the necessary revenue
rules/regulations to stop issue of manual copies
of Record of Rights (RoR) and to provide legal
sanctity to computerised copies of RoR. The
Committee had recommended to persuade the
remaining States through various seminars,
conferences to amend the revenue rules/
regulations so that the computerized system of
land records may be given legal sanctity . The
Committee feel that the real purpose of the
12 3

123
computerization of land records can be
achieved only when the legal sanctity to
computerized copies of RoR is provided by the
various State Governments. While reiterating
the earlier recommendation of the Committee,
the Committee strongly recommend to the
Government to pursue further with the
remaining State Governments to amend the
revenue rules/regulations to provide legal
sanctity to computerized RoRs.
33. 5.29 The Committee while examining the Demands
for Grants of the previous year was also
informed that some thinking was being given
to link the data of land records with the
computers of the lending bankers so that the
bankers can access the land records directly
without any charge. The Committee feel that
such a move can not only reduce the
transaction cost but also would be a great relief
to the poor persons whose applications are
rejected by the Banks due to non-availability
of proper copy of land records. Besides, the
loan can easily be made available under various
schemes of the Government as well as State
Governments relating to housing, agriculture
self-help groups etc. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Department to evolve some
modalities whereby the aforesaid proposed
initiative can be transformed into reality.
34. 6.3 The Committee note that a new initiative viz.
development of Bio-fuel has been undertaken
by the Government with the ultimate objective
of producing bio-diesel to be blended with
diesel to the extent of 20 per cent. To achieve
this objective under the first phase i.e.
demonstration phase , it is proposed to take
up over a period of five years plantation of
jatropha and pongamia in five lakh hectares.
The basic emphasis in the demonstration phase
12 3

124
12 3
is on the development of quality seed material
for wide scale plantation through convergence
of R&D efforts. The Committee also note that
different Ministries/Departments/agencies are
involved in the R&D efforts and the
Department of Land Resources has been given
the responsibility to coordinate these efforts in
the demonstration phase. The Committee
recommend that the efforts of the Department
in this regard should be intensified with a view
to achieve the desired objectives. The
Committee further note that out of Rs. 50 crore
allocated during the year 2005-06, Rs. 49 crore
were actually utilized. The Committee note
from the various documents and have been
informed during the course of oral evidence
that the aforesaid project has not been cleared
by the Group of Ministers. The Committee
would like to know how the expenditure to
the tune of Rs. 49 crore was done even when
the programme has not been finalized so far.
The Committee would like the Department to
clarify the position in this regard.