13
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE BILL, 2004
THIRTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


THIRTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE BILL, 2004
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 21.6.2005
Presented to Lok Sabha on …………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on …………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
June, 2005/Jyaistha, 1927 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 016
Price : Rs. 66.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
REPORT
PART I
Background of ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill,
2004’ .......................................................................................................... 1
PART II
Analysis of ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill,
2004
(i) Experience with regard to implementation of earlier
rural employment schemes in the country ................... 6
(ii) To whom the provisions enshrined in the Bill will
apply ........................................................................................ 9
(iii) Extending the scope of the legislation ........................... 17
(iv) Date of applicability of the employment guarantee
legislation ................................................................................ 17
(v) Disbursement of daily wages ........................................... 20
(vi) Period for notification of the guarantee scheme by
States ........................................................................................ 20
(vii) Wage Rate .............................................................................. 21
(viii) Sharing of financial implication by the State
Governments .......................................................................... 25
(ix) Unemployment allowance .................................................. 27
(x) Disentitlement of receiving unemployment allowance
in certain circumstances ...................................................... 29
(xi) Composition of Central Employment Council and
State Employment Council ................................................ 29

PAGE
(xii) Multiplicity of authorities vis-a-vis role of
Panchayats .............................................................................. 31
(xiii) Appointment of Programme Officer ............................... 33
(xiv) Applicability of the legislation to areas under Fifth
and Sixth Schedule of the constitution .......................... 34
(xv) Powers to amend Schedules ............................................. 35
(xvi) Penalty for non-compliance ............................................... 36
(xvii) Provisions made under Schedule I ................................. 39
(xviii) Quality and Quantity of works specified under
Schedule I ............................................................................... 41
(xix) Transparency and Accountability under Schedule I ... 42
(xx) Compensation ........................................................................ 43
(xxi) Minimum number of persons required for commen-
cement of a new work ....................................................... 44
(xxii) Provision for women ........................................................... 45
(xxiii) Rate to be fixed for foodgrains component to be
provided as wages ............................................................... 47
(xxiv) Provisions for disabled persons ....................................... 47
(xxv) Miscellaneous ......................................................................... 48
(i) Expeditions enactment of the Employment Guarantee
Legislation .............................................................................. 48
(ii) Capacity building of the Panchayats .............................. 48
(iii) Other related issues ............................................................. 49
APPENDICES
I. ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill,
2004’. ........................................................................................ 51
II. The list of experts/representatives of organizations/
individuals who appeared before the Committee. ...... 105
III. Comparative position of the provisions indicated in
‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill,
2004’ and the Maharashtra Employment Guarantee
Scheme. ................................................................................... 107
(ii)

PAGE
(iii)
IV . Primitive Tribal Groups and their population in India
from 1961 to 1991 ................................................................ 116
V. Extracts of Paras from Ninth Report of the Standing
Committee of Rural Development on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Rural Development. ... 120
VI. Minutes of the Eighth sitting held on
19 January, 2005.................................................................... 125
VII. Minutes of the Ninth sitting held on
2 February, 2005 ................................................................... 129
VIII. Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting held on
31 May, 2005 ......................................................................... 132
IX. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting held on
31 May, 2005 ......................................................................... 136
X. Minutes of the Twentieth sitting held on
1 June, 2005 ........................................................................... 139
XI. Minutes of the Twenty First sitting held on
1 June, 2005 ........................................................................... 142
XII. Minutes of the Twenty Second sitting held on
13 June, 2005 ......................................................................... 145
XIII. Minutes of the Twenty Third sitting held on
13 June, 2005 ......................................................................... 148
XIV. Minutes of the Twenty Fourth sitting held on
14 June, 2005 ......................................................................... 151
XV. Minutes of the Twenty Fifth sitting held on
20 June, 2005. ........................................................................ 153

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
12. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
14. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
15. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
(v)

(vi)
Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
24. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
25. Shri Penumalli Madhu
26. Vacant@
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Vacant*
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
@ Vice Shri Stephen Marandi ceased to be a member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 16 March,
2005 consequent upon his election to the Jharkhand Legislative Assembly vide
Rajya Sabha Secretariat Notification No. RS. 10/2005-T dated 11 April, 2005.
* Vice Shri Keshubhai S. Patel ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.
22 March, 2005 consequent upon his resignation from the membership of Standing
Committee on Rural Development.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf present this Thirteenth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘The
National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’.
2. ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2004 and was referred to
the Standing Committee on Rural Development by the Hon’ble Speaker,
Lok Sabha under Rural 331 E (1) (b) of the ‘Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’ on 23rd December, 2004 for
examination and report.
3. ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ seeks to
enhance the livelihood security of the poor households in rural areas
of the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed
wage employment in every financial year to every household whose
adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. As per the
proposed legislation, the State Government shall in such rural areas in
the State and for such period as may be notified by the Central
Government, provide to every poor household whose adult members
volunteer to do unskilled manual work, not less than one hundred
days of such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme.
4. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the Bill from the nodal Ministry i.e. the Ministry
of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development). The
preliminary meetings of the Committee were held on 19 January, 2005
and 2 February, 2005 wherein the Committee were briefed about various
provisions of the Bill by the nodal Ministry and other concerned
Ministries, viz. Panchayati Raj, Agriculture, Labour and Employment
and Tribal Affairs. The representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure), Planning Commission and Ministry of
Law and Justice (Legislative Department) also assisted the Committee
by clarifying various legal and financial matters at the said sittings.
As the Bill intends to bring about far reaching consequences for rural
population, the Committee at their sitting held on 19 January, 2005
decided to invite the views of experts, organisations and individuals
through print and electronic media.
(vii)

5. In response to Press Communiqué, the Secretariat received 610
memoranda out of which 105 were related to the Bill. Fifteen experts/
representatives of organisations/associations and individuals comprising
of leading economists, researchers, social workers and representatives
of various organisations related to agricultural workers, women and
disabled persons etc., deposed before the Committee at their sittings
held on 31 May and 1 June, 2005.
6. The Committee, in view of the fact that the provisions enshrined
in the Bill can be made applicable only with the cooperation of the
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations decided to invite
their views with the permission of Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha in
pursuance of direction 60 of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
Fifteen State Governments and three Union Territory Administrations
furnished their comments in this regard.
7. The Committee at their sitting held on 13 June, 2005 took oral
evidence of the nodal Ministry. The representatives of the Ministries
of  (i) Panchayati Raj, (ii) Tribal Affairs, (iii) Finance (Department of
Expenditure), (iv) Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) and
Planning Commission assisted the Committee during evidence.
Subsequently, the Committee undertook clause-by-clause consideration
of the Bill at the sittings held on 13 June and 14 June, 2005.
8. The Draft Report was adopted by Standing Committee on Rural
Development at their sitting held on 20 June, 2005. The Committee
was benefited immensely by the contribution made by the Members
of the Committee for which I express my sincere thanks to them.
9. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)
who appeared before the Committee and placed their considered views.
They further wish to thank the officers of the other concerned Ministries
as mentioned above, who assisted the Committee and offered their
valuable suggestions. The Committee express their gratitude to officials
of State Governments/Union Territory Administrations for furnishing
valuable information and suggestions which the Committee desired in
connection with the examination of ‘The National Rural Employment
Guarantee Bill, 2004’.
10. The Committee are greatly benefited from the perspectives/
suggestions of various individuals/associations/experts on various
provisions of the Bill. The Committee express their gratitude to experts/
individuals who furnished memoranda or tendered evidence before
the Committee.
(viii)

11. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation of the invaluable assistance rendered to them
from time to time by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached
to the Committee.
12. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold type in
the body of the report.
   N EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
21 June, 2005 Chairman,
31 Jyaistha, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(ix)

REPORT
PART 1
Background of ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’
1.1 The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004
(Appendix I)  was introduced in Lok Sabha on 21 December, 2004 and
was referred to the Standing Committee on Rural Development on
23 December, 2004 for examination and report.
1.2 Productive absorption of under-employed and surplus labour
force in the rural sector has been a major focus of planning for rural
development. The gravity of the situation of unemployment has been
compounded by the absence of social security mechanism. In order to
provide direct supplementary wage-employment to the rural poor
through public works, many programmes were initiated by the
Government of India, namely, National Rural Employment Programme
(NREP), Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme (RLEGP)
and Jawahar Rozgar Yojana (JRY). Currently, Sampoorna Grameen
Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) is being implemented all over the country with
the objective to provide supplementary wage employment in rural
areas, create durable rural infrastructure and to ensure food security .
It has been indicated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons annexed
to the Bill that the scale of employment generation under SGRY in
2002-03 and 2003-04 was barely adequate to provide an average 20
days of employment to each below poverty line (BPL) household in
the rural areas.
Recognising the urgent need to ensure a certain minimum days of
wage employment, the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) Government
in its National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) has declared
as under:
“It (UPA Government) will immediately enact a National
Employment Guarantee Act. This will provide legal guarantee for
at least 100 days of employment, to begin with, on asset creating
public works programmes every year at minimum wages for at
least one able-bodied person in the rural areas, urban poor and
lower middle class household.”

2
1.3 In the aforesaid background ‘The National Rural Employment
Guarantee Bill, 2004’ has been introduced in Parliament. As stated in
the Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the proposed legislation seeks to
enhance the livelihood security of the poor households in rural areas
of the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed
wage employment to every poor household whose adult members
volunteer to do unskilled manual work.
1.4 It has also been mentioned in the Objects and Reasons of the
Bill that the proposed legislation takes into account the experience
gained under the Employment Guarantee Scheme in Maharashtra.
Further it has also been indicated that considering that a proposal of
this kind is being contemplated on such a massive scale for the first
time, it has to be necessarily implemented in phases so as to eventually
cover all the rural areas of the country, subject to the economic capacity
of the Central and State Governments.
1.5 The salient features of the proposed legislation are as under:
(i) The State Government shall, in such rural areas in the State
and for such period as may be notified by the Central
Government, provide to every poor household guaranteed
wage employment in unskilled manual work at least for a
period of one hundred days in a financial year in accordance
with the provisions made in the legislation;
(ii) Every State Government shall, within six months from the
date of commencement of this legislation, prepare a scheme
to give effect to the guarantee proposed under the
legislation;
(iii) The one hundred days of employment under the legislation
will be provided at the wage rate to be specified by the
Central Government for the purpose of this legislation. Until
such time a wage rate is specified by the Central
Government for an area, the minimum wage rate fixed by
the State Government under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948
for agricultural labourers shall be considered as the wage
rate applicable to that area;
(iv) If an eligible applicant is not provided work as per the
provisions of this legislation within the prescribed limit, it
will be obligatory on the part of the State Government to
pay unemployment allowance at the prescribed rate;

3
(v) A Central Employment Guarantee Council at the Central
level and State Employment Guarantee Councils at the State
level in all States where the legislation is made applicable
will be constituted for review, monitoring and effective
implementation of the legislation in their respective areas;
(vi) The Standing Committee of the District Panchayat, District
Programme Coordinator, Programme Officers and Gram
Panchayats have been assigned specific responsibilities in
implementation of various provisions of the legislation at
the Gram Panchayat, Block and District levels;
(vii) The Central Government shall establish a fund to be called
‘National Employment Guarantee Fund’ for the purposes of
this legislation. Similarly, the State Governments may
constitute ‘State Employment Guarantee Funds’;
(viii) Pr ovisions for transparency and accountability, audit,
establishment of grievance and redressal mechanisms and
penalty of non-compliance are also envisaged;
(ix) Pr ovisions for minimum features of Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme and conditions for guaranteed Rural
Employment under a scheme and minimum entitlements of
labourers have been laid.
1.6 As stated above, ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee
Bill, 2004’ was referred to the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2004-2005) on 23 December, 2004. The Committee
accordingly obtained written information on various issues which might
have a direct bearing on the Bill from the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry
of Rural Development. The preliminary meetings of the Committee
were held on 19 January, 2005 and 2 February, 2005 whereby the
Committee were briefed about the various provisions of the Bill by
the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Rural Development (Department of
Rural Development) and other concerned Ministries, viz. Panchayati
Raj, Agriculture, Labour and Employment and Tribal Affairs. The
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure),
Planning Commission, Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative
Department) also assisted the Committee by clarifying various legal
and financial matters. The Committee at their sitting held on 19 January,
2005 decided to invite the views of experts, organizations and
individuals through print and electronic media since the provisions
made in the Bill relate to the millions of poorest of the poor in rural
areas. In response to Press Communiqué, the Secretariat received 610

4
memoranda out of which 285 memoranda were not related to the Bill.
Besides 220 memoranda received were in regional languages whereas
the Press Communiqué clearly indicated that the memoranda should
be furnished in English and Hindi versions only. Fifteen experts/
representatives of organizations/associations and individuals (the list
indicated in Appendix-II) which include top economists, researchers,
social workers and representatives of various organizations related to
agricultural workers, women and handicapped persons etc., deposed
before the Committee at their sittings held on 31 May and 1 June,
2005. The experts, representatives of organizations and individuals in
the memoranda and during the course of oral evidence raised serious
reservations on the various clauses of the Bill. Such issues include
restricting the employment guarantee to BPL families, definition of
family, lack of commitment in the Bill for a time bound expansion of
the guarantee to the entire country, provisions empowering the
government to switch off the guarantee anywhere at any time, in
sensitiveness to women and handicapped persons, limited role of
Panchayat Raj Institutions, etc.
1.7 The Committee at their sitting held on 19 January, 2005 also
noted that the provisions enshrined in the Bill have to be implemented
by the State Governments/Union territory Administration. Besides, the
State Governments have to bear some of the financial burden. The
Committee in view of the fact that the provisions enshrined in the Bill
can be made applicable only with the cooperation of State Government,
decided to invite the views of State Governments and Union territory
Administration with the permission of Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha in
pursuance of direction 60 of ‘Direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.’ 15
States Governments of Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh and 3 Union
territories of Delhi, Lakshadweep and Pondicherry have furnished their
comments in this regard. The State Governments/Union territory
Administrations too raised certain serious issues particularly the
inability of the State Governments to bear the financial implication.
1.8 The Committee took oral evidence of the administrative Ministry
i.e.  the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural
Development) at the sitting held on 13 June, 2005. The representatives
of the Ministries of (i) Panchayati Raj, (ii) Tribal Affairs, (iii) Finance
(Department of Expenditure), (iv) Law and Justice (Department of Legal
Affairs) and Planning Commission assisted the Committee during
evidence. Subsequently the Committee undertook clause-by-clause

5
consideration of the Bill at the sitting held on 13 June (afternoon
meeting) and 14 June, 2005.
1.9 The comparative position of the provisions indicated in the Bill
and the Maharashtra Guarantee Act has been given at Appendix-III.
1.10 The Committee deliberated on the various provisions of the
Bill in detail in view of the suggestions received from various quarters.
The detailed position with regard to the deliberations alongwith the
suggested amendments on the various clauses of the Bill has been
given in the subsequent chapter of the Bill.

PART II
Analysis of ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’.
(i) Experience with regard to implementation of earlier rural employment
schemes in the country.
2.1 As stated in Part-I of the report, a number of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes have been implemented in past by the Ministry of
Rural Development to address the problem of unemployment in rural
areas in the country. At present Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
(SGRY) and National Food for Work Programme, the rural employment
programmes are being implemented. When asked about the reasons
for inadequate and ineffective implementation of earlier rural
employment schemes, the Department indicated that in order to make
the implementation of these schemes more effective and result-oriented,
changes in the schemes have been made from time to time. As
submitted by the Department of Rural Development, Evaluation studies
of SGRY undertaken by independent agencies as well as the Ministry
indicate that though the programme is well targeted and quality of
assets created is satisfactory, the employment opportunities created
under the programme are limited, given the thin spread of resources.
The scheme provides wage employment, on an average of ten to thirty
days per year, to persons requiring employment. Thus, sub-optimal
level of funding is a major limitation of the existing wage employment
programme.
Experience under Food for Work Programme
2.2 The Committee while examining Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) had noted that ‘National Food for Work Programme’
alongwith Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) is being
implemented at present in 150 selected districts. When the National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act will be implemented, these two
programmes will be merged together and shall be known by the name
of the Act.
Experience of Maharashtra Employment Guarantee Legislation
2.3 As stated in Part-I of the report, the aforesaid legislation is
based on the Maharashtra Guarantee Legislation. When asked about
the experience of Maharashtra Guarantee Legislation, the Department
of Rural Development informed that the Government of Maharashtra
6

7
had been requested to make available impact assessment studies/
evaluation studies undertaken on the implementation of Maharashtra
Employment Guarantee Scheme. They had also been requested to share
problems/constraints faced in its implementation. The same were,
however, not made available to the Committee till the finalisation of
the Report. Nevertheless, some of the views/comment of researchers
and academicians on Maharashtra Legislation which were brought to
the notice of the Committee, are given below.
The important achievements of the scheme reported are:
(i) financial sustainability arising from separate funds;
(ii) organisation of EGS workers and their impressive collective
strength in some pockets;
(iii) generation of supplementary income and employment for
many workers by way of relief;
(iv) some pockets of success in terms of agricultural growth,
development of dairy industry, and horticulture through the
assets generated under the programme; and
(v) some of the sub-schemes of the EGS, like the Jawahar well
scheme, horticulture scheme, and watershed development
programmes have resulted in some pockets of success in
the State.
Inspite of these achievements, however, there have been the
following reported failures of the scheme:
(i) the programme still continues after 30 years without any
decline in the demand for unskilled wage work under the
scheme;
(ii) modest impact in poverty reduction or in unemployment
reduction in the State;
(iii) distressed seasonal migration of workers from backward
regions continues, as the guarantee is not really implemented
in many cases;
(iv) social security measures, maternity benefits, and facilities at
work sites are implemented poorly;
(v) skill training is given, if at all, on a negligible scale;

8
(vi) unemployment allowance is not paid to anybody so far as
(i) continuous work of 75 days (which is a precondition for
unemployment allowance) is not provided to most persons,
and (ii) even when provided, adequate records from one
site to another are not maintained;
(vii) quality of the assets created and their maintenance/use are
frequently not satisfactory; and
(viii) delay in payment of wages ranging from one month to
three months.
2.4 The Department of Rural Development has informed the
Committee that before bringing the Rural Employment Guarantee Bill,
2004, State Governments have not been formally consulted about the
aforesaid legislation. It has also been stated that at a meeting of the
State Secretaries of Rural Development, the State Secretaries expressed
concerns about (a) capacity of the State Governments to provide their
share of funds under the scheme, (b) capacity of the States to
implement the programme at the ground level, and (c) the likely
increase in the number of court cases due to the proposed legislation.
2.5 The Committee note that ‘The National Rural Employment
Guarantee Bill, 2004’ is a path breaking piece of legislation brought
forward by the Government of India. The Bill is one of the most
important Bills introduced in Parliament after Independence. The
proposed Bill is the first step of the Government towards ensuring
some sort of economic and social security by way of guaranteed
wage employment to the millions of poor in the rural areas in the
country.
2.6 The Committee, however feel that before drafting such an
important and historical legislation, adequate preparation should have
been done. The Department did not even bother to obtain impact
assessment/evaluation study of a similar scheme of the Maharashtra
Government and problems faced by that Government in the
implementation of that scheme. The success of the guarantee scheme
proposed in the Bill depends on the cooperation of State
Governments and Union Territory Administrations which may be
implementing the provisions of the Bill. Inspite of the fact that
serious concerns were expressed by the State Secretaries in informal
meetings with regard to the implementation of the guarantee
legislation as enumerated above, the Department did not care to
have formal consultation and find out ways to address various
problems indicated by the State Governments.

9
Further experts, representatives of various organizations and
individuals who submitted memoranda or deposed before the
Committee were almost unanimous in expressing their concerns about
restricting employment guarantee to households living Below Poverty
Line (BPL), restrictive definition of family, lack of commitment on
the part of the Government to implement the scheme in a time
bound manner, provision in the Bill enabling the Government to
switch off the guarantee, and not providing Panchayats the central
position in implementation of the scheme etc.
The Committee after exhaustive deliberations at the sittings, the
details of which have been given in Part-I of the report, are inclined
to unanimously recommend a large number of amendments to certain
provisions of the Bill. The suggested amendments to the respective
clauses are given in the clause-by-clause analysis of the Bill which
follows.
(ii) T o whom the provisions enshrined in the Bill will apply
(Clause 3 (1) of the Bill read with clause 2 (f) 2 (k) and 2 (p) of the
Bill)
2.7 The aforesaid legislation aims to provide at least one hundred
days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every
below poverty line household whose adult members volunteer to do
unskilled manual work. Further, as per clause 2(f) of the Bill, household
has been defined as the members of a family related to each other by
blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing
meals or holding a common ration card. The definition of the poor
household has been given in clause 2(k) of the Bill according to which
poor household means a household living, during the relevant financial
year, below the poverty line and includes the households of all
primitive tribal groups as approved, by notification, by the Ministry of
the Central Government dealing with tribal affairs. Clause 2(p) of the
Bill defines rural area as any area in a State except those areas covered
by any urban local body or a Cantonment Board established or
constituted under any law for the time being in force.
2.8 There was a universal view among the experts including
economists and researchers that the applicability of the law should be
universal and self targeting which means any one who offers for
manual work should be provided employment at the specified rate of
wages.

10
2.9 The rational for suggesting universal application for the
applicability of the guarantee as given by experts is as below:
(i) BPL concept is defective. The results of BPL census 2002
are still to be made available due to Supreme Court
direction. Further, as per the directions of Planning
Commission an arbitrary cut off limit of indetification of
BPL persons has been imposed, according to which the
number of BPL persons identified should not exceed those
as identified as per 1999-2000 survey. However, an additional
10 per cent may be permitted to account for the transit
period. Thus the benefits will not reach the targeted poor
household.
(ii) The wages offered for manual work in various States various
from Rs. 25 i.e. minimum in Nagaland to Rs. 134 i.e.
maximum in Kerala. A person’s willingness to work at such
a low minimum wage is a clear indictor of his absolute
poverty and no further indicators are required.
(iii) The identification of BPL families requires a lot of
administrative work. Moreover powers being provided to
the agency/officer involved in the identification of BPL
families may lead to corruption and malpractices. The
experience with regard to the implementation of different
poverty alleviation programmes in the country is an
indicator of this aspect.
(iv) There is no method for periodic evaluation of the data of
Below Poverty Line (BPL) converting into Above Poverty
Line (APL) and APL to BPL and as such it is very difficult
to ensure that the benefits reach the genuine BPL category
i.e. poorest of the poor.
(v) By providing universal application, there will be a multiplier
effect on employment in all the fields. Money in the hands
of deprived millions of families will shoot up further
demand for various consummable items thereby having a
multiplier effect on demand and supply of goods in the
economy resulting in overall growth in employment in all
the sectors.
(vi) National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) of UPA
Government promises at least 100 days of employment for
at least one persons in rural and urban poor, including lower

11
middle class households. The legislation in the present from
is a dilution of the promises made in NCMP .
(vii) Maharashtra employment guarantee legislation on which this
Bill is based enunciates the principal of self targeting. As
per section 3 of that Act, every adult person in rural areas
has the right to work.
(viii) The really needy class of society i.e. the poorest of the poor
will be marginalized.
(ix) It would be really very difficult to ascertain that a family/
person availing benefits under the scheme is not getting
the benefits under the plethora of other Centrally sponsored/
State sponsored schemes of the Central/State Government.
The criteria for ascertaining below poverty line households in
various States/Union Territories Administration for extension of the
guarantee scheme to rural areas.
2.10 The Department of Rural Development has clarified that the
issue of ascertaining the BPL status of rural households is a matter of
detail and will be addressed while preparing the detailed rules or
guidelines for implementation of the scheme under the proposed
legislation. However, in the past, the Ministry of Rural Development
has been conducting at the beginning of each Five Year Plan through
the State Governments, a Below Poverty Line (BPL) census in rural
areas all over the country to identify the BPL households. The list of
BPL families prepared under the BPL census are vetted by the
concerned Gram Sabhas. The BPL list may be used for ascertaining
the eligibility of the household or a poor household under the proposed
legislation.
2.11 The Committee have been apprised that the BPL census 2002
has already been completed but the BPL lists have not been made
operational due to the stay by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The
Department has further stated that it is taking necessary steps to get
the stay vacated at the earliest. The Department has further informed
that although the BPL census is conducted once in five years, there is
a provision for annual updation of the BPL list by the Gram Sabha.
Besides, the Department is considering to include a provision for appeal
by the affected households to the Gram Sabha and concerned district
officials.

12
2.12 The Department has also informed that as per the methodology
of BPL census 2002, all rural households have been graded in
descending order based on a pre-determined formula based on thirteen
socio-economic indicators. The State Governments have been allowed
freedom to select the bottom most families of the poor households
such that the total percentage of families selected is in consonance
with the number of BPL households estimated by the Planning
Commission. A margin of ten percent has been allowed over the
Planning Commission’s estimate. The cur to off points to be determined
by the State Governments can be at the district, block and any other
level.
The position in tribal areas
2.13 As per clause 2(k) of the Bill, poor household includes the
households of all primitive tribal groups. As clarified by the Ministry
of Tribal Affairs, the criteria for identification of such primitive tribal
groups are as under:
(i) Pre agricultural level of technology;
(ii) V ery low level of literacy;
(iii) Declining or stagnant population; and
(iv) Economic backwardness
2.14 Based on the aforesaid criteria, 75 tribal communities were
identified as primitive tribal groups spread over what are now
17 States and one Union Territory . The list of such identified
communities alongwith their population according to different census
figures are given at Appendix-IV. As per 1991 census, the population of
primitive tribal groups is 24,12,664 constituting approximately 5 lakh
families. The community-wise population as per 2001 ensues has not
been released by the Registrar General of India. The State Government
of Tripura in the comments furnished to the Committee has stated
that the definition is too narrow in the context of Tripura as it excludes
‘poor tribal Jhumias’ (Shifting cultivators) who are as poor as primitive
tribals and living in remote hill areas. The State Government has
suggested that the word ‘poor tribal Jhumias’ may be added alongwith
the last word ‘tribal affairs’. The representatives of the Ministry of
Tribal Affairs while briefing before the Committee advocated that tribal
population at large which is eight per cent of the total population
should also be fully covered.

13
The definition of household
2.15 Clause 2(f) of the Bill defines household as the members of
a family related to each other by blood, marriage or adoption and
normally residing together and sharing meals or holding a common
ration card.
2.16 The experts who deposed before the Committee expressed the
following apprehensions:
(i) such a provision would lead to a competition in the family
for seeking employment and led to social tension. Besides,
joint families will be in a disadvantageous position;
(ii) women and handicapped persons in the family would be
marginalized; and
(iii) it is very difficult to find out whether the members of a
family whose one member is an applicant under the
guarantee scheme have not availed of the benefits of
employment under any other Central Government Scheme.
Financial Implication
2.17 When asked for the data indicating the number of unemployed
in the country and the data separately for unemployed BPL persons,
skilled labourers and unskilled labourers in the country, the Ministry
of Rural Development, the administrative Ministry of the Bill, stated
that the said data is not being maintained. The National Sample Survey
Organisation (NSSO) conducts quinquenial surveys to estimate the
number of unemployed persons in the country. The representatives of
the Ministry of Labour submitted before the Committee that number
of persons who do not have a single day’s job in a year is of the
order of 95 lakh, majority of whom are in rural areas.
2.18 As per the Financial Memorandum appended to the Bill, if
the whole country is covered under the legislation, the total requirement
of funds on material and wage components including the State share
of funds is estimated to be approximately thirty-eight thousand six
hundred crore rupees of which the Central share will be thirty-four
thousand seven hundred forty crore rupees (excluding administration
expenses). Although the total expenditure would depend on the extent
of coverage of areas of the country under the proposed legislation, it
has been estimated that if the legislation is extended to 150 districts
where the National Food for Work Programme is being implemented,

14
the requirement of funds will be approximately eight thousand nine
hundred eighty-four crore seventy lakh rupees. The basis of calculation
of financial implication has been stated to be the cost of providing
100 days of employment @ Rs. 100/- per manday which has been
stipulated to be Rs. 10,000. It was clarified during the course of oral
evidence that Rs. 100 include the average wage amounting to
Rs. 60 and Rs. 40 as the material component.
2.19 As stated by the Ministry of Labour before the Committee the
estimated outlay for urban and poor, in case the universal application
is provided may be of the order or Rs. 98,000 crore. Further as per the
data indicated by the Department of Rural Development, the number
of rural persons in the age group of 18 to 64 is 38.91 crore, making
their ratio of persons in the age group 18 to 64 to the total rural
population as 0.52. Using this ratio on the number of total BPL persons
in the rural areas, the estimated number of BPL persons in rural areas
in the age group of 18 to 64 will be Rs. 10.04 crore. If all these
persons are to be provided 100 days of employment @ Rs. 100 per
manday, then Rs. 1,00,464 crore will be needed. However, as stated by
the nodal Ministry, the general experience has been that all persons
do not demand work through wage employment. The requirement of
funds, if a certain percentage of persons demand work is given in the
table below:
Sl.No. Percentage of people Requirement of funds
demanding work
 1. 100 Rs. 1,00,464.00 crore
 2. 50 Rs. 50,232.00 crore
 3. 30 Rs. 30,139.20 crore
 4. 20 Rs. 20,092.80 crore
If we divide the number of persons below poverty line by 5 which
is taken as equivalent to a nuclear family, the number of families
comes to 3.86 crore. The cost of implementing employment guarantee
for all these 3.86 crore families for providing 100 days of employment
is estimated to be Rs. 39,372 crore (including administrative cost of
2 per cent of the programme cost).
2.20 When asked how the Government would arrange for the huge
finances required for providing guarantee under the scheme, the
Department of Rural Development has informed that Finance Minister

15
in his Budget Speech of 2005 has indicated that enough funds would
be provided for implementation of the Employment Guarantee.
2.21 When the concerns expressed by various quarters as explained
in the aforesaid paras of the report were brought to the notice of the
Department of Rural Development, it conceded that considering the
nature of guarantee being offered through unskilled manual work and
the experience in implementing Jawahar Rozgar Yojana (JRY),
Employment Assurance Scheme (EAS) and Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar
Yojana (SGRY), if sufficient care is taken to implement the programme
strictly, it will be possible to restrict the benefits to the really needy
and removing the poverty qualification in the guarantee can be
considered.
2.22 Further during the course of oral evidence, the Secretary of
the Department of Rural Development agreed that the best option will
be universal application and self-targeting. As regards the financial
implication, representatives stated that the Government is committed
to bear the financial burden. The representative of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) too stated that Government is
ready to bear the financial burden even if universal application is
agreed to by the Government. Further, stressing on the need for
universal application the Secretary stated:
“A suggestion has been received from the Committee that (* * *)
any person who wants to work and is willing to work should be
given employment. We will consider this suggestion. The
Government in principle agrees to this.…… I as a person think
that it should be universal, in the sense that irrespective of even
in the family, if there are four people who want to work, they all
should be given work. There may be a family where may be one
person is in a position to work that person should be given work.
But as I mentioned to you, it was felt necessary initially to keep
within certain limit some sort of financial discipline so that it does
not exceed all our estimates (and all that, that it was kept). But I
am quite certain that even that even if it is universal can be
reconsidered****”
2.23 The Committee deliberated on the issue of applicability of
the legislation in the context of beneficiaries to whom the benefits
are proposed to be extended by the guarantee scheme at length with
the experts, representatives of various organizations, individuals and
the representatives of various Ministries of the Government of India.
The Committee also took cognizance of the views furnished by some

16
of the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. After
considering the existing provisions specifically in clause 3(1), read
with clauses 2(f), 2(k) and 2(p) of the Bill, in the light of the concerns
expressed by various quarters, the details of which have been given
above, the Committee note that the ideal position is universal
application and self-targeting which means whoever offers himself/
herself for work at the prescribed wages is to be provided guaranteed
employment under the provisions of the Bill. The Committee also
note that if such an amendment is made in the Bill, all the concerns
expressed with regard to BPL concept, primitive tribals and restricted
definition of family, etc. would be addressed. The scheme will be
very simple. Minimum administrative machinery will be required as
there will be no need for identification and selection of beneficiaries.
Since it will be of universal application, the scope for corruption or
misuse of power by the bureaucracy or the implementing agency
involved will be minimised. Further, the universal application will
ensure equal opportunity for men and women irrespective of caste
consideration. There will be no social tension. Not only that, each
adult member of the family who volunteers for work will be given
employment and as such the apprehensions expressed by various
quarters that the existing provision may tend to encourage
competition in the family for seeking employment will be duly
addressed.
2.24 The Committee are further happy to note that the nodal
Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural
Development) also agrees that universal application is the desired
and the best way of providing the guarantee under the scheme. Not
only that the Department is ready to consider the universal
application concept as acknowledged by the Secretary. Besides, the
Committee are further pleased to note that, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) has agreed to shoulder the financial
liability under the Bill as acknowledged by the representative of the
Department during oral evidence.
2.25 In view of what has been stated above, the Committee
strongly recommend that application of the legislation should be
made universal and self-targeting meaning clearly that whoever
volunteers to do the work at the wages specified under the legislation
will be provided employment under the provisions of the Bill. The
Committee would like that the long title of the Bill, alongwith
Clauses 3(1), 2(f), 2(k) and 2(p) and other relevant provisions should
be suitably amended.

17
(iii) Extending the scope of the legislation
2.26 As per the provisions of the Bill, households in rural areas
will be benefited by the Guarantee scheme. Further as per Clause 2(p)
of the Bill, such area has been defined as any area in a State except
those areas covered by any urban local body or a Cantonment Board
established/constituted under any law for the time being in force.
2.27 Some of the experts who deposed before the Committee
desired that B and C class Municipalities should also be included
under the provisions of the Bill since these are not strictly urban and
border on rural areas. It has further been contended that present
legislation is a dilution of the NCMP agenda, since it proposed to
provide such guarantee to every rural, urban poor and lower middle
class household. The Department of Rural Development has stated
that ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ aims to
provide employment guarantee only in rural areas hence B and C
class Municipalities cannot be covered at this stage.
2.28 The Committee appreciate the views expressed by some of
the experts in favour of extending the said guarantee to B and C
class Municipalities. However, the Committee find that the proposed
legislation aims to provide employment guarantee only in rural areas.
The Committee urge the Government to bring forward a suitable
legislation for urban areas also which may cover B and C class
Municipalities. The Committee would like that the concerns in this
regard should be communicated to the Government.
(iv) Date of applicability of the employment guarantee legislation
(Clause 1(3) of the Bill)
2.29 Clause 1(3) of the Bill states as under:
“It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different
dates may be appointed for different States of the different areas
in a State and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision in such State or, as the case
may be, in such area.”
2.30 Experts, and organizations who submitted memoranda/gave
evidence before the Committee expressed concern over the lack of
commitment on the part of the Government to implement the legislation

18
throughout the country in a time-bound manner and regarding the
provision empowering the Government to switch off the guarantee at
any time in any State. There was a unanimous view among experts
who deposed before the Committee that the provisions once applicable
should not be withdrawn at the discretion of Central/State Government.
Otherwise, it will be a mockery of the guarantee. The scheme could
be withdrawn only by the approval of the Parliament. Further, it was
also suggested that the legislation should be implemented in a time-
bound manner. Most of the experts suggested that it should be
implemented in all parts of the country in a stipulated time frame.
This period should be specified in the legislation itself.
2.31 The Department of Rural Development contended that no
time limit for extending the legislation to the whole country can be
set at this stage. Further the Department has clarified that the proposed
legislation constitutes a pioneering endeavour to secure wage
employment for the poor households in the rural areas as a guaranteed
entitlement on this scale. Considering that a provision of this kind is
being contemplated on such a massive scale for the first time, it has
to be necessarily implemented in phases so as to eventually cover all
the rural areas of the country. It may be possible to provide a time
frame for all India extension of the proposed legislation after experience
of one year of its working.
2.32 As regards apprehension of experts with regard to switch off
of the guarantee, the Department has stated that the basic objective of
the proposed legislation is to provide supplementary wage employment
to the rural poor while the mainstream employment would continue
to be provided through normal channels of economy. Since the Indian
economy is developing fast and special efforts are being taken to
develop rural areas, it is envisaged that after some time, the need for
providing supplementary employment through unskilled manual work
will disappear. The Ministry has presumed that the demand for
supplementary employment through unskilled manual work will
disappear because of the growth in the Indian economy and the special
efforts to develop rural areas. It is for this reason that an enabling
provision has been kept in the Bill to implement the proposed
legislation in an area for such period as needed. However, based on
the experience of Maharashtra in implementing the Employment
Guarantee, enforcing the proposed legislation in the notified areas for
a specified period may be reconsidered. Further the evaluation of
Maharashtra Guarantee legislation by researchers indicates that the
programme continue even after thirty years without any decline in the
demand for unskilled wage work under the scheme.

19
2.33 When the apprehension from various quarters with regard to
applicability of the legislation as stated above was deliberated during
the course of oral evidence, the Secretary stated as under:
“As far as the time-bound implementation is concerned, I am sure
the Government would consider it. If the Committee recommend,
the Government would seriously consider as to whether there can
be some time-bound sort of a thing. Eventually it would be
extended to the country as a whole.”
The Committee wanted to know as a whether the proposed
employment guarantee scheme will be covering Schedule Fifth and
Schedule Sixth areas of the Constitution. The representative of Planning
Commission while deposing before the Committee during the oral
evidence of the nodal Ministry stated that if the Committee so suggest,
they can consider covering all Schedule Fifth and Schedule Sixth areas
of the Constitution during the next phase of implementation of the
provisions of the proposed legislation.
2.34 The Committee note that the Secretary during the course of
oral evidence has acknowledged the need for making a provision
for time-bound extension of the legislation to the country as a whole.
The Secretary, also expressed sensitivity towards the concern of switch
off of guarantee at any time. Considering the concerns expressed by
various quarters and shared by the Secretary, Rural Development,
the Committee strongly recommend that the provisions of the
guarantee legislation once applicable should not be withdrawn at
the discretion of Central/State Government. Otherwise the purpose
of the guarantee will be defeated. The Committee also recommend
that the scheme once applicable, could be withdrawn only with the
approval of the Parliament.
2.35 As far as the time-bound extension of the legislation to the
whole of the country is concerned, the Committee appreciate that a
programme of this nature can be implemented only in phases.
However, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to indicate
a specified time limit in the legislation itself so as to indicate clearly
the government’s intention to extend the legislation to each rural
area in the country. Not only that, such a provision will reassure the
parts of the country about the applicability of the legislation where
it may not be applicable initially.
2.36 In view of this, the Committee would like to recommend
that it should be clearly indicated in the legislation that the guarantee

20
will be extended to the rural areas in whole of the country within
four years. The Committee would like that Clause 1 (3) of the Bill
should accordingly be amended.
2.36A The Committee also strongly recommend that in view of
the fact that the Schedule Fifth and Schedule Sixth areas in the
country are the most backward and people residing there are the
poorest, these areas should be included in the first phase of
implementation of employment guarantee legislation.
(v) Disbursement of daily wages
(Clause 3(3) of the Bill)
2.37 Clause 3(3) of the Bill states as under:
“Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily
wages shall be made on weekly basis or in any case not later than
a fortnight after the date on which such work was done.”
2.38 The Government of Kerala has suggested that the words ‘or
in any case not later than a fortnight’ should be deleted to ensure that
the wages are paid at least on weekly basis. Some of the experts/
organizations have also expressed concerns that fortnight is a long
period and the workers may need wages on a daily basis.
2.39 The Committee after considering the suggestion made by
the State Government of Kerala and experts, recommend that the
words ‘or in any case not later than a fortnight’ should be deleted
from Clause 3(3) of the Bill so that wages can be ensured on weekly
basis.
(vi) Period for notification of the Guarantee Scheme by States
(Clause 4 (1) of the Bill)
2.40 Clause 4 (1) of the Bill states as under:
“For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3,
every State Government shall, within six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification, make a Scheme, for
providing not less than one hundred days of guaranteed
employment in a financial year to every household in the rural
areas covered under the Scheme and whose adult members, by
application, volunteer to do unskilled manual work subject to the
conditions laid down by or under this Act and in the Scheme.”

21
2.41 The Government of Assam has stated that the time limit of
six months is inadequate. The Union Ministry of Rural Development
has stated that the aforesaid time limit is sufficient. However, as per
the information provided by the Ministry, the State Secretaries during
a meeting had expressed concern over the implementation of the
guarantee legislation. One of the concern was the capacity of the States
to implement the programme at ground level.
2.42 The Department of Rural Development has stated that the
State Governments have been implementing the wage employment
programme for a long time. The Centre will issue the necessary
guidelines to facilitate the work of State Governments. Hence, it was
felt by the Department that the period of six months was sufficient to
prepare the scheme as envisaged in the Bill.
2.43 The Committee take note of the concern expressed by the
Government of Assam. However, the Committee feel that six months’
time provided under the legislation is enough and therefore they
observe that status quo in this regard should be maintained.
(vii) Wage rate
(Clause 6 of the Bill)
2.44 Sub-clauses (1) and (2) of Clause 6 of the Bill provide as under:
(1) “Notwithstanding anything contained in the Minimum Wages
Act, 1948, the Central Government may, by notification, specify the
wage rate for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that different rates of wages may be specified for different
areas.
(2) Until such time as a wage rate is fixed by the Central
Government in respect of any area in a State, the minimum wage
fixed by the State Government under section 3 of the Minimum Wages
Act, 1948 for agricultural labourers, shall be considered as the wage
rate applicable to that area.
2.45 Some of the experts and representatives of various
organizations in memoranda submitted to the Committee as well as
under evidence expressed the opinion that the overriding authority
given to Union Government in fixation of wages to be provided for
the purpose of the legislation is not justified. Concerns have been
expressed that the wages decided by the Union Government may be

22
lower than the wages fixed by the State Government. Besides, it has
also been apprehended that in case the wages offered under the
guarantee scheme are higher than the wages offered in that area for
different schemes, then an unusual attraction may be for the works
under the guarantee scheme which may create an imbalance in labour
market in that area. As regards variation in wage rates in different
States and Districts, most of the experts were in favour of the
differential rate of wages in view of the variation in living standards
and economy of that State/District. A view has also been expressed
that provision should be made for periodic revision in the wage rate
keeping in view the rise in inflation.
2.46 The representative of the Ministry of Labour and Employment
submitted before the Committee that they have mooted the concept of
national floor level minimum wage. Although the concept has not
legal backing it has got persuasive value. The national floor level
minimum wage was fixed at Rs. 35 in 1996 and subsequently increased
to Rs. 40, Rs. 45 and Rs. 50 and now it stands at Rs. 66.
2.47 When asked for the justification of providing different rates
of wages in different areas of the country, the Department of Rural
Development has stated that labour market conditions and the cost of
living various from State to State. It is for this reason that different
minimum wage rates have been fixed by different States. The proposed
legislation, accordingly, provides for different wage rates in different
areas of the country.
2.48 The Minimum wage rates prevalent in different State/UTs (as
per the information made available by the Department of Rural
Development) are given as under:
Minimum wages fixed by the State Governments under the SGRY
Sl.No. Name of States/UTs Rate of Minimum Wage
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh* 80.00
2. Arunachal Pradesh 35.00
3. Assam 48.00
4. Bihar 58.64
5. Chhattisgarh 52.66
6. Goa —
7. Gujarat 61.00

23
 12 3
 8. Haryana 80.00
 9. Himachal Pradesh 60.00
10. Jammu and Kashmir 60.00
11. Jharkhand 64.61
12. Karnataka 46.25
13. Kerala 134.00
14. Madhya Pradesh 54.56
15. Maharashtra 47.00
16. Manipur 44.65
17. Meghalaya 50.00
18. Mizoram 84.00
19. Nagaland 25.00
20. Orissa 50.00
21. Punjab 84.00
22. Rajasthan 60.00
23. Sikkim 50.00
24. Tamil Nadu 54.00
25. Tripura 50.00
26. Uttar Pradesh 58.00
27. Uttaranchal 58.00
28. West Bengal 62.00
29. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 70.00
30. Daman & Diu Haveli 60.00
31. Daman & Diu 57.50
32. Lakshadweep 50.00
33. Pondicherry 80.00
*Minimum wage rate varies from district to district. Rupees 80.00 is average wage rate
for the State as a whole.

24
2.49  On the concerns expressed by various quarters regarding
overriding authority given to Union Government in fixation of wages
to be provided for the purpose of the legislation, the Department of
Rural Development has stated that the minimum wages fixed by the
State Governments under section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948
for agricultural labourers, shall be considered as the wage rate
applicable to that area. Hence, the minimum wages to be paid and
the wage rate to be specified by the Central Government is just an
enabling provision to protect the interest of the rural poor in certain
States whenever minimum wages may not keep up with the increase
in costs or there is steep rise in the minimum wages which are not in
consonance with the market wages. The Committee in their earlier
reports have also expressed concern over the difference in wage rate
which is not only inter-State but also inter-District (refer Para 34 of
Eighth Report, Fourteenth Lok Sabha).
2.50 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence also submitted
that the provision of fixation of wages by Union Government for the
purpose of the Bill is an enabling provision and the Government has
no intention of implementing it at present.
2.51 The Committee after considering the detail the provisions
of ‘The Minimum Wages Act, 1948’, find that there is a lot of
disparity in the wages fixed by the State Governments. Wages in
certain States are as low as Rs. 25 (in Nagaland) and in certain other
States as high as Rs. 134 (in Kerala). The Committee also took into
consideration the concept of the national floor level minimum wage
and found that the national floor level minimum wage at present is
Rs. 66. The Committee noted that the national floor level wage has
no legal backing but has got persuasive value. The Committee also
noted that there is a system of periodic revision of the national
floor level wage.
2.52 The Committee, in the aforesaid background, consider that
the best option may be to consider the minimum wages fixed by
the State Governments for agricultural labourers as the wages for
the purpose of this Bill. The advantage of this system may be that
there will be no disparity between the wages offered under the
guarantee scheme and other Government schemes being implemented
in a particular area, where guarantee scheme will be implemented.
The Committee, however feel that there is an urgent need to address
the problem of sharp disparity in the wages offered by different
State Governments. As already stated, disparity is not inter-State

25
but inter-Region/District too. The Committee observe that this concern
can be addressed, if a provision is made that the wages fixed by the
State Government for the purpose of this Bill may not be lesser
than the national floor level minimum wages. The Committee are,
nevertheless aware that in case such a provision is made, it will add
more financial implication.
2.53 After considering in detail the aforesaid factors, the
Committee may like to recommend that the wages for the purpose
of the legislation should be the minimum wages fixed by the State
Government under Section 3 of ‘The Minimum Wages Act, 1948’ for
agricultural labourers. However, a proviso may be added that such
wages may not be lesser than 75 per cent of national floor level
wage (Rupees 66 at present), which may come to around Rs. 49. The
Committee have recommended for 75 per cent of the national floor
level minimum wage keeping in view the fact that most of the State
Governments have wages which are near Rupees 50 or more. Such
a provision will add minimum of the financial implication. The
wages may be fixed by the State Governments so that wages may
either be 75 per cent of national floor level wage or the minimum
wages of the State Governments, whichever is higher.
2.54 While recommending 75 per cent of the national floor level
minimum wage as the minimum wage to be offered for the purpose
of the Bill, the Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Government that national floor level minimum wage should be
provided statutory backing. The matter should be decided in
consultation with the Ministry of Labour and Employment.
(viii) Sharing of Financial Implication by the State Governments
(Clause 7 and 12 of the Bill and para 27 of Schedule II of the Bill
read with Financial Memorandum of the Bill)
2.55 As per Financial Memorandum of the Bill, the State
Governments will bear twenty five per cent of the material component
(including the wages of skilled and semi-skilled workers), expenditure
with regard to unemployment allowance as per clause 7 of the Bill,
administrative expenses for State Council to be constituted as per clause
12 of the Bill and the expenditure with regard to facilities of safe
drinking water, shade for children, period of rest and first aid box
with adequate material for emergency treatment as per para 27 of
Schedule II of the Bill. As per the views furnished by the nodal
Ministry, the liabilities of expenditure will not be more than 10 per

26
cent with regard to 25 per cent of the material component. Further
maximum of 2 per cent may be the administrative expense. Besides as
per clause 7 (2) of the Bill, the payment of unemployment allowance
is subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be
prescribed by the State Governments and subject to the provisions of
the Act and the Scheme and the economic capacity of the State
Governments.
2.56 When asked whether any consultation with the State
Governments was held before finalising the said legislation, the
Department of Rural Development has stated that no formal
consultations have been held with the State Governments. However in
a meeting of the State Secretaries of Rural Development, the features
of the proposed legislation were discussed. The State Secretaries
expressed concern about capacity of the State Governments to provide
their share of the funds under the scheme.
2.57 Most of the State Governments have expressed the inability
to bear the financial implication as per the proposed Bill. Besides,
some of the State Governments are of the view that administrative
expenses in a programme of this nature may be much more. The
Government of Kerala has stated that administrative costs may be
upto 6 per cent of the project cost.
2.58 Most of the experts and State Government are of the view
that 100 per cent expenditure with regard to the implementation of
various provisions of the Bill should be borne by the Union
Government keeping in view the financial position of the State
Governments and specifically when the scheme is of the Union
Government. The experts have however, suggested that unemployment
allowance should be borne by the State governments since it will put
a pressure on State Governments to implement the scheme.
2.59 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence while replying
to the concerns of the Committee towards the inability of the State
Governments to bear the financial implication arising out of the
provisions of the Bill stated as under:
“I am sure, the Government will take it up in all seriousness and
we will try to see that.”
2.60 The Committee find that as per the existing provisions made
under the Bill, liabilities of expenditure of State Governments may

27
be over 10 per cent. The Committee after considering the
apprehensions expressed by the various State Governments and
experts feel that with the existing provisions, there is a danger that
some of the State Governments may not be in a positions to
implement the Employment Guarantee Scheme which may meet the
same fate as most of the Centrally sponsored schemes. Not only
that, since the wage employment is being provided through
enactment in the form of guarantee, it may lead to unnecessary
litigation.
2.61 Keeping in view all these factors, the Committee would
like to recommend that 100 per cent financial burden should be
borne by the Union Government. While recommending for 100 per
cent financial burden on the Union Government, the Committee,
however, would like that the expenditure on account of the
unemployment allowance should be borne by the State Governments
since it may act as a mechanism to put pressure on the State
Governments to ensure employment to the applicants. However, the
cost of unemployment allowance should be borne by the Central
Government in the event where inability to provide work is due to
the Central Government’s failure to devolve requisite funds in time.
(ix) Unemployment Allowance
(Clause 7 of the Bill)
2.62 Clause 7 of the Bill provides as under:
“7 (1) If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is not
provided such employment within fifteen days of receipt of
his application seeking employment or from the date on
which the employment has been sought in the case of an
advance application, whichever is  later, he shall be entitled
to a daily unemployment allowance in accordance with this
section.
(2)  Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may
be prescribed by the State Government and subject to the
provisions of this Act and the Scheme and the economic
capacity of the State Government, the unemployment
allowance payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid to
the applicants of a household subject to the entitlement of
the household at such rate as may be specified by the State
Government, by notification in consultation with the State
Council:

28
Provided that no such rate shall be less than one-fourth of the
wage rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and
not less than one-half of the wage rate for the remaining period
of the financial year.”
2.63 Some of the experts who deposed before the Committee were
of the view that the rate of unemployment allowance was much low
and it should be increased. They were also of the view that the
payment of unemployment allowance should not be conditional.
2.64 The Committee after considering the opinion expressed by
experts note that the question of payment of unemployment
allowance will arise only when the State Government/Implementing
Authority is not able to provide employment to an applicant. Such
a provision is a mechanism to put pressure on State Governments to
perform and deliver results. In view of the aforesaid background,
the Committee feel that the rate of unemployment allowance
prescribed in the Bill i.e. not less than one-fourth of the wage rate
for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than
one half of the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial
year is too low specifically when the existing wage in some of the
State governments is as low as Rs. 25 per day as in case of Nagaland.
The Committee would, therefore, like to recommend that the rate of
unemployment allowance should be increased to one half of the
wage rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not
less than three fourth for the remaining period of the financial
year.
2.65 Besides, the Committee note that as per the provisions made
in Clause 7(2) of the Bill, payment of unemployment allowance is
subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be
prescribed by the State Government and subject to the provisions of
the Act and schemes and economic capacity of the State Governments.
The Committee observe that making the unemployment allowance
conditional, will provide discretion to the State Governments/
Implementing Agencies to delay or not to pay unemployment
allowance. In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend that
the payment of unemployment allowance should be unconditional.
It should be made a mandatory provision, irrespective of the
economic capacity of State Governments. Clause 7 of the Bill should
be accordingly amended.

29
(x) Disentitlement to receive unemployment allowance in certain
circumstances
(Clause 9 of the Bill)
2.66 Clause 9 of the Bill states as under:
An applicant who-
(a) does not accept the employment provided to his household
under a Scheme; or
(b) does not report for work within fifteen days of being notified
by the Programme Officer or the implementing agency to
report for the work; or
(c) continuously remains absent from work, without obtaining
a permission from the concerned implementing agency for
a period of more than one week or remains absent for a
total period of more than one week in any month, shall not
be eligible to claim the unemployment allowance payable
under this Act for a period of three months but shall be
eligible to seek employment under the Scheme at any time.
2.67 The experts who deposed before the Committee were of the
view that the aforesaid provision is unduly harsh on the poor jobless
persons of rural areas especially women beneficiaries.
2.68 The Committee, after considering the suggestions of experts,
feel that the said provision of debarring the applicant from
unemployment allowance for such a long period of three months is
not justified and as such the applicant should be debarred from
unemployment allowance only for the period for which he does not
report for work. The Committee, therefore, recommend that clause 9
of the Bill may be suitably amended accordingly.
(xi) Composition of Central Employment Council and State Employment
Council
Clause 10(3) of the Bill
2.69 As per third proviso to Clause 10 (3) of the Bill, not less than
one-third of the non-official members of Central Employment Guarantee
Council shall be belonging to Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and Minorities. Similar provision has been made in the State
Employment Guarantee Council.

30
2.70 The experts were of the view that provision for backward
classes should also be included in the aforesaid provision.
2.71 The Committee feel that backward classes should also be
adequately represented in the Central Employment Guarantee Council
as well as State Employment Guarantee Council as suggested under
Clause 10 and Clause 12 of the Bill. The formula for providing
representation to backward classes in the said Council was debated
widely by the Committee. After detailed discussion the Committee
concluded that the following Clause may be added after Clause 10
(d) of the Bill;
“such number of representatives of backward classes as the
Central Government may, by rule, determine in this behalf”.
2.72 Similarly, the following proviso may be added after second
proviso to Clause 12 (1) of the Bill;
“Provided further that such number of representatives of
backward classes as the State Government may, by rule determine
in this behalf shall be members of the State Employment
Guarantee Council.”
2.73 Besides as per Clause 10(3) (c) of the Bill not less than such
number of representatives of the State Governments as may be
determined by the Central Government shall be the members of the
Central Employment Guarantee Council and State Employment Council.
Further, Clause 10(3) (e) states that the said Council shall consists of
such number of representatives of the States as the Central Government
may, by rule, determine in this behalf.
2.74 The Department of Rural Development has clarified that the
difference between Clauses 10(3)(c) and 10(3)(e) is that while
representatives in Clause 10(3)(c) are from State Government, the
representative under Clause 10(3)(e) may be representatives belonging
to Panchayati Raj Institutions, Non-Governmental Organisations or other
types of agencies. Again as per Clause 10(3)(d) of the Bill, such Council
shall consists of not more than fifteen non-official members representing
Panchayati Raj Institutions, organizations of workers and disadvantaged
groups.
2.75 After considering the clarification furnished by the
Department the Committee recommend for deletion of Clause 10(3)(e),
of the Bill since, as per the Department, the intention of this Clause
and Clause 10(3)(d) is the same. The word ‘Non-Governmental

31
Agencies’ may, however be included in Clause 10(3) (d) of the
Bill.
(xii) Multiplicity of authorities vis-a-vis role of Panchayats
(Chapter IV and V of the Bill)
2.76 A multi-tier and multi-agency bureaucratic delivery mechanism
is proposed to be created for the implementation of the guarantee
scheme. There will be a Central Council at the Central level, State
Councils at the State level, Standing Committees at district level, District
Programme Coordinator at district level and Programme Officers at
Block level. Then 50 per cent of the works may be implemented by
Panchayats. Besides National Employment Guarantee Fund at Central
level and State Employment Guarantee Fund at the State level has to
be created. Certain redressal mechanisms at block and district level
have to be set up.
2.77 Most of the experts have expressed concern on Clause 16(4)
of the Bill as per which Gram Panchayat should forward its proposals
for the development projects to the Programme Officer for scrutiny
and preliminary approval. Further, specific role has not been assigned
to Intermediate Panchayats. Similar concerns have been expressed by
almost all the experts including economists and researchers. The
implementing mechanism suggested in the Bill is not in consonance
with the spirit of Part IX of the Constitution. Many parallel bodies are
proposed to be created.
2.78 As per Clause 16(5) of the Bill, the Programme Officer may
allot at least fifty per cent of the works in terms of its cost under a
scheme to be implemented through the Gram Panchayats. The Ministry
of Panchayati Raj during the briefing before the Committee has strongly
objected to the overriding powers provided to the Programme Officer.
The Ministry has stated that as per provisions of the Bill, Panchayats
are not central. It is the discretion of Programme Officer to allot the
works to Panchayats.
2.79 The Committee note that almost all the works to be
undertaken under the guarantee scheme are contained in the list
mentioned in Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution, which are
mandatorily to be devolved to Panchayats as per article 243 G of the
Constitution. Thus the provisions made under the Bill are not in
tune with the spirit of the Constitution. The Committee also feel
that the guarantee scheme may be the best opportunity to empower
the Panchayats.

32
2.80 The Committee  debated the Implementing and Monitoring
mechanism proposed in Chapter IV and Chapter V of the Bill in
detail. After in depth consideration, the Committee find that the
position of Panchayats is not central to the Scheme of the Bill. Clause
16(5) of the Bill provides discretion to the Programme Officer to
allot a minimum of fifty per cent of the works in terms of its cost
under a scheme to be implemented through the Gram Panchayats.
Not only that, Clause 16(4) provides that the Gram Panchayat has to
forward its proposals for the development projects including the
order of priority between different works to the Programme Officer
for scrutiny and preliminary approval. Besides, many parallel bodies
at district and block level are proposed to be created under Chapter
IV and Chapter V of the Bill.
2.81 In view of the aforesaid background the Committee strongly
recommend as under:
(i) PRIs should be the sole implementing and monitoring
agencies. The bureaucratic structure at district, block and
Panchayat level may assist PRIs in making plans and
implementing the scheme.
(ii) All the projects should be implemented by PRIs or
through PRIs.
(iii) Registration of applicants should be made by the Gram
Panchayats.
(iv) Initially the shelf of projects to be undertaken in a
Panchayat should be decided by the Gram Sabha. The
list of applicants alongwith the shelf of projects at a
village level may be placed before Gram Sabha and
approved at the Gram Sabha meeting. Intermediate
Panchayat may consolidate the plans at block level.
Similarly, District level Panchayat may consolidate the plan
at the district level.
(v) There should be constituted a Standing Committee of
Panchayat at each level so that the proposals are processed
by this Committee and are brought before the general
body of the Gram Sabha or the general body of respective
Panchayats at block and district levels for approval before,
during and after the execution of the work.
(vi) All Panchayats may maintain a separate and distinct
Employment Guarantee Fund to account for the purpose

33
of implementing the provisions of the Bill including wages
for the execution of work undertaken within the scheme
and for payment of unemployment allowance. The Chief
Executive Officer of the District Panchayat, the Executive
Officer of the Intermediate Panchayat and the Secretary
of the village Panchayat may be responsible for the funds
placed at their disposal and maintain account of
employment and expenditure.
(vii) Utilisation certificates may be issued by the Panchayats
as a whole and at the village level after securing the
endorsement of the Gram Sabha.
(viii) Village Panchayat should be made accountable to Gram
Sabha.
(ix) Social audit should be done at the Gram Sabha level
whereby all accounts and list of beneficiaries shall be
made available by public servants free of cost.
The Committee strongly recommend that the Chapter IV and V
of the Bill may be redrafted in consultation with the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj in the light of the aforesaid suggested provisions.
(xiii) Appointment of the Programme Officer
[Clause 15(1) of the Bill]
2.82 Clause 15(1) of the Bill states as under:
“For every Block, the State Government shall appoint a person
with such qualifications and experience as may be determined by
the State Government, as Programme Officer for implementing the
Scheme in that Block.”
The functions assigned to the Programme Officer as given in Clause
15 (4) of the Bill are as follows:
(a) monitoring of projects taken up by the Gram Panchayats
and other implementing agencies within the Block;
(b) sanctioning and ensuring payment of unemployment
allowance to the eligible poor households;
(c) ensuring prompt and fair payment of wages to all labourers
employed under a programme of the Scheme within the
Block;

34
(d) ensuring that regular social audits of all works within the
jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat are carried out by the
Gram Sabha and that prompt action is taken on the
objections raised in the social audit;
(e) dealing promptly with all complaints that may arise in
connection with the implementation of the Scheme within
the Block; and
(f) any other work as may be assigned to him by the District
Programme Coordinator or the State Government.
2.83 The Committee note that Programme Officer has been
provided a very important position in respect of the implementation
of guarantee scheme. The Committee also find that it has been left
to the State Government to appoint a person with such qualification
and experience as may be determined by the State Government.
The Committee feel that in view of the important position
assigned to the Programme Officer, certain qualifications should be
indicated in the legislation. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that it should be indicated in the Bill that the Officer appointed as
Programme Officer by the State Government should not be below
the rank of Block Development Officer (BDO). Clause 15(1) of the
Bill may accordingly be suitably amended.
(xiv) Applicability of the legislation to areas under the Fifth and Sixth
Schedule of the Constitution
2.84 In Scheduled areas under the Fifth Schedule and Tribal Areas
under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution, the constitution of local
bodies is different after the implementation of PESA. Similarly, in some
of the Sixth Schedule areas viz. Nagaland, Mizoram and Meghalaya
where Part IX of the Constitution is not applicable, the constitution of
local bodies is different. Besides, in Jharkhand and Pondicherry where
Panchayat elections have not been held so far, the constitution of local
bodies may be quite different. In Delhi and J&K too the status of local
bodies is different. Nothing specific about the role of local bodies of
such areas has been mentioned in the Bill. The Department of Rural
Development has stated that a clarification in this regard may be
included in the Bill.
2.85 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has further suggested as under:
(i) in each of the Monitoring Committee at Central, State and
District/Block level, at least one member should be from
Scheduled Tribes, instead of clubbing with Scheduled Castes
and others.

35
(ii) at the District/Block level, the Ministry has integrated Tribal
Development Project (ITDPs)/Integrated Tribal Development
Agencies (ITDAs) who should also be associated in the tribal
areas.
2.86 The Committee note that the constitution of local bodies is
quite different in areas falling under the Fifth and Sixth Schedule
of the Constitution. Besides, in some of the States/Union Territories,
Panchayat elections have not been held or have been deferred. In
view of there aforesaid position, the Committee recommend that a
clarification may be included in the Bill that where Panchayats are
not in existence, the roles and responsibilities assigned to the Gram
Panchayats shall be carried out by appropriate local bodies in those
areas.
2.87 Besides, at the district/block level, Integrated Tribal
Development Project (ITDPs) and Integrated Tribal Development
Agencies (ITDAs) should also be associated in the tribal areas.
2.88 The Committee further note that demographic constitution
in Fifth Schedule and Sixth Schedule areas is quite different.
Population in said areas is Scheduled Tribes dominated. In view of
this the Committee while agreeing to the suggestion made by the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs recommend that in each of the Monitoring
Committee at Central, State and district/block level at least one
member should be from Scheduled Tribes, instead of clubbing with
Scheduled Castes as provided in the Bill. The Committee would
like that the concerned provisions of the Bill, in the light of what
has been stated above, are suitably amended.
(xv) Power to amend Schedules
(Clause 29 of the Bill)
2.89 Clause 29 of the Bill provides as under:
(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or
expedient so to do, it may, by notification, amend Schedule
I or Schedule II and thereupon Schedule I or Schedule II,
as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended
accordingly.
(2) A copy of every notification made under sub-section (1)
shall be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as
may be after it is made.

36
2.90 Most of the experts in their memoranda as well as during the
evidence before the Committee were of the view that the matters
indicated in Schedule I and Schedule II should be included in the
main Bill so that these cannot be amended arbitrarily by the Union
Government.
2.91 The Department of Rural Development has stated that the
enabling provision to amend Schedule I and Schedule II has been kept
to have flexibility to meet the future requirements of implementation
of proposed legislation and make changes if necessary in expeditious
manner.
2.92 The Committee find that Clause 29 of the Bill provides for
amendment of the Schedules by the Central Government by way of
notification. As per the provision made in the Bill, there is no need
for bringing such amendment before Parliament for its approval.
The Committee also find that all the matters indicated in
Schedule-I and Schedule-II are the fundamental issues on which the
Employment Guarantee Scheme will depend. The Committee,
therefore recommend that the matters enumerated in Schedule-I and
Schedule-II of the Bill should be included in the main body of the
Bill so that any of the matters listed in these Schedules are not
amended arbitrarily by the Union Government.
(xvi) Penalty for non-compliance
(Clause 25 of the Bill)
2.93 Clause 25 of the Bill provides as under:
“Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall on conviction
be liable to a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.”
2.94 The concerns expressed by experts with regard to the aforesaid
provision made in the Bill are as under:
(i) in case of officers responsible for implementation of the
provisions enshrined in the Bill, the existing service rules
are sufficient;
(ii) the penalty of Rs. one thousand is too less. There should
be provision for penalty for imprisonment, which may act
as a strong deterrent for the officials;
(iii) in case of persons holding public office other than the
Government employees, it was suggested that the person

37
who contravenes the provision of the Bill should be debarred
from that office for a particular period;
(iv) concerns were expressed as to situation arising out of default
by the State Governments/Union Government; and
(v) some sort of protection should be provided to Government
employees where the officer concerned is not able to
implement the provision of the Bill due to the fact that
funds have not been released by the State Government/
Union Government and the works can not be created due
to the reasons beyond his control.
2.95 On the aforesaid concerns expressed by the experts, the
Department of Rural Development has commented that it would be
appropriate to prescribe penalty of upto Rs. one thousand considering
the fact that the proposed legislation is a new piece of social welfare
legislation. Besides, the Department has clarified that the persons
holding public office are also covered by the penalty provision made
under clause 25. Similarly, in case of defaulter States and Union
Territories, there may be same officers or public representatives who
will be at fault and they will be covered under clause 25 of the Bill.
2.96 The Committee find that a penalty of Rs. one thousand for
contravening the provisions of the Act is too less. They feel that
some sort of accountability should be fixed specifically with this
type of legislation meant to provide guaranteed employment to
millions of rural poor.
2.97 The Committee note that provision of imprisonment
alongwith the financial penalty will act as a deterrent. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that any official who contravenes
the provision of the Act shall on conviction be liable to a fine of
Rs. five thousand or three months imprisonment. Besides, the
Committee also recommend that adverse entry in this regard should
be made in the Confidential Report of the concerned official.
2.98 While recommending for penalty on the aforesaid lines, the
Committee would like that sufficient protection should be provided
to such cases where the official is not able to implement the
provisions of the Bill not due to his own default but due to default
of some authority constituted under the provisions of the Bill like
office held by elected representatives, State Governments or the
Union Government.

38
2.99 The Committee further find that in case of a public
representative, the penalty as prescribed in Clause 25 may not be
applicable. In case where a public representative contravenes the
provisions of the Bill, provision should be made to debar such public
representative from any public office for five years. The Committee
would also like to recommend that provision should be made in the
Bill whereby State Governments may frame rules for providing
judicial mechanism to deal with the aforesaid cases of default by
officials as well as public representatives.
2.100 The Committee further feel that in case the default is by
the State Government/Union Territory Administrations, there should
be some mechanism to put pressure on that Government to
implement the provision of the Bill. Such cases of default may
include (i) not notifying the Employment Guarantee Scheme within
the prescribed period as per clause 4 of the Bill; (ii) not providing
finances for the purposes of the Bill; and (iii)non-constitution of
State Council etc. To put public pressure on the State Governments/
Union Government, provision may be made to lay on the Table of
each House of Parliament a report indicating the achievements/
shortcomings under the scheme alongwith the budget documents of
the Ministry. The report may be like Performance Budget of the
Ministry. Similarly in case of State Governments, such report may
be laid in each House of the State Legislature.
The Committee would like to recommend that Clause 25 of the
Bill may be amended suitably so as to include all the aforesaid
provisions.
2.101 Besides, Clause 8(1) of the Bill states that if Programme Officer
is not in a position to disburse the unemployment allowance in time
or at all, he shall report the matter to the District Programme
Coordinator and display reasons on his notice board and notice board
of Gram Panchayat. Clause 8 (2) states that every case of non-payment
or delayed payment of employment allowance shall be reported in the
annual report submitted by the District Programme Coordinator to the
State Government alongwith the reasons.
2.102 Experts and public have observed that such lenient provision
for non-payment of unemployment allowance makes a mockery of the
guarantee.
2.103 The Committee feel that non-disbursement of
unemployment allowance by an official should also be considered a
default. The provisions made under the aforesaid clauses are not

39
sufficient. The Committee would like that more stringent provisions
are made in this regard. Besides, the Committee would also like to
recommend for an in built procedure whereby criminal liability on
the implementing agency for non-payment of unemployment
allowance should devolve. Clause 8(1) and Clause 8(2) of the Bill
may be amended accordingly.
(xvii) Provision made under Schedule I
(Para 1 and 2 of Schedule 1)
2.104 Para 1 and 2 of Schedule-1 provides as under:
“(1) The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works in
their order of priority:
(i) water conservation and water harvesting;
(ii) dr ought proofing (including afforestation and tree
plantation);
(iii) irrigation canals including micro and minor irrigation works;
(iv) provision of irrigation facility to land owned by households
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes;
(v) renovation of traditional water bodies including desilting of
tanks;
(vi) land development;
(vii) flood control and protection works including drainage in
water logged areas;
(viii) rural connectivity to provide all weather access; and
(ix) any other work which may be notified by the Central
Government.
(2) Creation of durable assets and strengthening the livelihood
resource base of the rural poor shall be an important
objective of the Scheme.”
2.105 Most of the experts/organisations who deposed before the
Committee maintained that the priority of list of works mentioned in
Schedule-I is restrictive and all productive works should be permitted
under the category. Productive works should be redefined in a broader
sense to include all works that contribute directly or indirectly to the
increase of production; the creation or maintenance of assets, the

40
preservation of environment or improving the quality of life. Experts
have also made suggestion for creation of social assets including social
infrastructure for improving the quality of life of the rural poor such
as opening of primary schools and health centres. Observations of
experts also brought to surface the view that creation of durable assets
will be difficult with strict adherence to wage material ratio of 60: 40
and restricting performance of tasks to manual labour and not machines
as mentioned in the Bill. A novel suggestion was made to expand the
area of works by including employment to poor who may be skilled
and semi-skilled in the Service Sector like Schools and Dispensaries, if
such persons offer for employment at the specified wage.
2.106 Many State Governments have expressed reservations that
listing of works under Schedule-I is inappropriate as it may not be
possible for States to take up such works within the State due to
different geographical and local conditions. Hence, most State
Governments have made suggestion to remove prioritization of work
under the scheme.
2.107 The Department of Rural Development however conceded
that the present list of permissible works is appropriate and may be
modified in future if the need arises. The Ministry has also stated that
the list can be expanded to meet the incremental requirements based
on the experience of implementation of the scheme.
2.108 The Committee while agreeing to the suggestion made by
the experts and State Governments note that restricting the works to
be undertaken for the purposes of the guarantee scheme may not be
appropriate. Such restriction is not required specifically keeping in
view the fact that different States/Union Territories have different
geographical and local conditions. The Committee also note that
specifications given in para 1 on works which include earthworks
and water works is unnecessary. The list of works should also include
works involved in the construction of social infrastructure,
maintenance of assets as well as services like sanitation, etc. The
Committee would, therefore, like to recommend that the State
Governments/Union Territory Administrations should be provided
flexibility in selection of the shelf of projects for the said guarantee.
The Committee would like to recommend that para 1 of
Schedule I may accordingly be amended. The Committee further
note that the main objective of the guarantee scheme is to provide
employment to rural poor. As such the Committee feel that the
existing provision made under Paras 9 and 12 of Schedule I according

41
to which the material component should not exceed forty per cent
of the total project cost and as far as practicable the task should be
performed by manual labour and not machines is appropriate and
status-quo may be maintained in this regard.
(xviii) Quality and quantity of work as specified under Schedule I
(Paras 7, 8 and 14 under Schedule I)
2.109 Para 7, 8 and 14 of Schedule I provide as under:
“(7) When wages are directly linked with the quantity of work,
the wages shall be paid according to the Schedule of rates fixed
by the State Government for different types of work every year, in
consultation with the State Council.”
“(8) The schedule of rates of wages for unskilled labourers shall
be so fixed that a person working diligently for seven hours would
normally earn a wage equal to the wage rate.”
“(14) Provisions for regular inspection and supervision of works
taken up under the Scheme shall be made to ensure proper quality
of work as well as to ensure that the total wages paid for the
completion of the work is commensurate with the quality and
quantity of work done.”
Experts who tendered evidence before the Committee have
suggested that Para 8 of the Schedule-I of the Bill is most dangerous
as it will allow the most unreasonable productivity rate to be imposed
on the workers. Besides, the said clause is discriminatory to persons
with disabilities. Similar views were expressed by the experts as regards
Para 14 of Schedule-I where wages shall be paid for completion of the
work commensurating with the quality and quantity of work done.
2.110 The Committee find that Paras 7, 8 and 14 of the Ist
Schedule specify certain standards for the works to be undertaken
for the purposes of the Bill. The Committee note that the word
diligently used in the Schedule can be interpreted adversely for the
labourers by the implementing authority. The works to be undertaken
under the guarantee scheme are usually earthworks and as such in
unfavourable weather condition, it may not be possible for a labourer
to work for seven or eight hours diligently. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the word diligently should be removed from Para
8 of the Schedule I and normally a person working for seven hours
should earn a wage equal to wage rate.

42
2.111 Further the Committee feel that linking wage with the
quality and quantity of work is not appropriate as it leaves scope
for the implementing authorities to reduce the wages. Such standards
should be excluded from Para 14 of Schedule I so as to ensure
guaranteed wages to labourers for their well-beings. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that paras 7, 8 and 14 of the Bill should be
amended accordingly.
(xix) Transparency and Accountability under Schedule I
(Para 15, 16 and 17 of Schedule I)
2.112 Para 15, 16 and 17 of Schedule-I provide as under:
“(15) The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme Officer
and the Gram Panchayat implementing the Scheme shall prepare
annually a report containing the facts and figures and achievements
relating to the implementation of the Scheme.
(16) All accounts and records and records relating to the Scheme
shall be made available for public scrutiny and any person desirous
of obtaining a copy or relevant extracts therefrom may be provided
such copies or extracts on demand and after paying such fee as
may be specified in the Scheme.
(17) A copy of the muster rolls of each Scheme or project under
a Scheme shall be made available in the offices of the Gram
Panchayat and the Programme Officer for inspection by any person
interested after paying such fee as may be specified in the scheme.”
2.113 Most experts have expressed concern over the fact that as
far as social audit of the scheme is concerned, implementing authority
shall merely prepare an annual report regarding implementation of
scheme, a copy of which shall be made available on demand by
payment of fees. Hence it was suggested that the provision for payment
of fee is against the right to information and transparency.
The Department of Rural Development has stated that the provision
made under Right to Information Bill, 2005 will also be applicable
under the said scheme. It has further been stated that Section 4 of the
Right to Information Bill, 2005 provides that all materials shall be
disseminated taking into consideration the cost effectiveness, local
language and the most effective method of communication in that
local area and the information should be easily accessible, to the extent
possible in electronic format with the Central Public Information officer

43
or State Public Information officer, as the case may be, available free
or at such cost of the medium or the print cost price as may be
prescribed.
2.114 As already recommended in earlier paras of the report, the
Committee would like to reiterate that Gram Sabha should be the
designated elected body for the purpose of social audit. All facts
and figures relating to the implementation of the scheme should be
made available for public scrutiny in Gram Sabha. Besides, copies
of the muster rolls of each scheme and project should also be made
available to the people at the Gram Sabha meetings. Not only that,
the information regarding works should be displayed in the Gram
Panchayats for the information of the public from time to time but
it should be ensured that the information is displayed on a monthly
basis.
2.115 The Committee further find that as per Clause 16 of the
Bill all accounts and records relating to the scheme shall be made
available for public scrutiny after paying the prescribed fee. The
Committee also note that the Right to Information Bill is yet to be
enacted. The Committee also find that the provisions of said
legislation when enacted will be applicable for the purposes of the
Bill. In view of the aforesaid position, the Committee feel that there
is no need of indicating fee in the guarantee legislation as it can be
interpreted by the State Governments arbitrarily and unreasonable
amount may be charged from the rural poor for accessing
information. Provision made under the Right to Information Bill
when enacted will take care of the cost for providing information.
The Committee would like to recommend that the paras 15, 16
and 17 of Schedule I may be amended in the light of the aforesaid
recommendations.
(xx) Compensation
(Para 26 of Schedule II)
2.116 Para 26 of Schedule II provide as under:
“If a person employed under a Scheme dies or becomes
permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the course
of employment, he shall be paid by the implementing agency an
ex-gratia payment at the rate of ten thousand rupees or such amount
as may be notified by the Central Government, and the amount
shall be paid to the legal heirs of the deceased or the disabled, as
the case may be”.

44
2.117 Experts have suggested that the ex-gratia payment of ten
thousand rupees or such amount as may be notified by the Central
Government in case of death or permanent disability should be
enhanced.
2.118 The Committee note that the ex-gratia payment of Rs. ten
thousand in case a person employed under the guarantee scheme
dies or becomes permanently disabled by accident arising out of
and in the course of employment is inadequate. The amount of
compensation should be enhanced to Rs. twenty five thousand.
Besides, the Committee also recommend to the Government to
consider whether persons provided employment under the guarantee
scheme can be covered by insurance. The Committee recommend
that Para 26 of Schedule II should accordingly be amended.
(xxi) Minimum number of persons required for commencement of a new work
(Para 13 of Schedule II)
2.119 Para 13 of Schedule II states as under:
“(13) A new work under the Scheme shall be commenced only
if—
(a) at least fifty labourers become available for such work; and
(b) the labourers cannot be absorbed in the ongoing works:
Provided that this condition shall not be applicable for new
works, as determined by the State Government, in hilly areas and
in respect of aforestation”.
2.120 Experts who deposed before the Committee or submitted
memoranda have expressed almost unanimous opinion that the said
provision displays highly centralised tendency and tries to unduly
schematise and bureaucratise the guarantee. It was proposed that State
Government should be provided flexibility to take work according to
local and geographical conditions. Similar, views were expressed by
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations, which submitted
memoranda to the Committee.
2.121 The Department of Rural Development has conceded the
point made by experts and opined that in view of varying socio-
economic conditions across the country, the number of persons required
for a new work may be reconsidered.

45
2.122 The Committee feel that the prescribed number of labourers
i.e. 50 for starting a new work is very much on the higher side.
Such a provision may restrict the scope of taking small works under
the scheme. The Committee also note that the Department of Rural
Development has agreed to reconsider the said provision. The
Committee would like that the prescribed number of minimum
labourers should be reduced to ten. Besides the implementing
authority may be empowered to take up new work with even lesser
than ten number of labourers. Para 13 of Schedule II may accordingly
be amended.
(xxii) Provisions for women
2.123 Experts who deposed before the Committee categorically
stated that under the Bill, specific provisions for women have been
conspicuous by their absence. The Bill, they felt contained provisions,
which are discriminatory to women. Some of the issues raised in this
regard are as under:
(i) Definition of ‘household’ for the purpose of targeting
beneficiaries includes persons living under one roof and
sharing a common ration card. Deserted, separated or
divorced women in such a definition may be excluded from
the guarantee scheme although they are the most needy.
(ii) It was suggested that one third beneficiaries under the
scheme should be women as stated in Planning Commission
guidelines accepted by successive governments regarding
all employment guarantee scheme. Experts and
representatives of women’s organizations also came forward
with the idea that forty per cent reservation should be
provided to women if BPL criteria for identification of
beneficiaries is maintained under the said Bill.
(iii) Experts were also of the view that works under Schedule I
to be undertaken should include such works for which
women are physically capable. Besides, productive assets
should include assets which enhance the quality of life and
which can easily be performed by women.
(iv) Besides, it was suggested that harsh penalties for absence
from work such as non-payment of unemployment
allowance should not be made applicable for pregnant
women.

46
2.124 The Committee in the earlier paras of the report have
suggested for universal application of the provisions of the Bill. In
case the aforesaid recommendation is accepted, the concerns expressed
by various quarters relating to gender bias will be addressed since
the employment will be available to a man/women who offers
himself/herself for work irrespective of gender/caste or any other
considerations.
2.125 The Committee further note that the works to be done
under the guarantee scheme are usually manual work and as such
women workers may be unwilling to do some of the works. To
ensure employment to women, the Committee recommend that design
of the works to be undertaken under the guarantee scheme should
include such works which can be conveniently performed by women.
Besides certain basic facilities like separate toilets and adequate
safeguards for pregnant women etc should be made available to
made the women labourers comfortable at the work site. The
Committee would also like that pregnant women should be provided
full wages for a specified period in line with the maternity leave.
The Committee would like to recommend that the aforesaid
provisions should be included in the guarantee legislation to ensure
gender sensitivity.
Provision for creche facilities
(Para 28 of Schedule II)
2.126 Para 28 of Schedule II states as under:
“(28) In case where at least twenty women are employed at a
work site, provision shall be made for one of them to be deputed
to look after any children under the age of six years who may be
brought to the work site, if need arises.”
2.127 The experts were of the opinion that minimum requirement
of twenty women for providing creche type facility was unjustified as
maintaining rigidity of minimum of twenty women workers was
considered too deterministic and restrictive.
2.128 The Committee note that the minimum number of twenty
women workers for making creche type arrangements to look after
the children of women labourers under the age of six years at the
work site is very much on the higher side. The number is specifically
high keeping in view the recommendation made in the earlier para

47
of the report to reduce the number of workers to ten for starting a
new work. In view of this the Committee recommend that minimum
number of women workers for providing aforesaid creche type
facilities should be reduced to five. Para 28 of Schedule II may
accordingly be amended.
(xxiii) Rate to be fixed for foodgrains component to be provided as wages
2.129 Para 32 of Schedule II states as under:
“(32) The State Government may prescribe that a portion of the
wages in cash may be paid to the labourers on a daily basis during
the period of employment.”
2.130 Experts suggested that in case wages are paid in kind instead
of cash under the scheme, the APL rate for calculation should not be
used as it will reduce the amount of entitlement for beneficiaries under
the scheme.
2.131 The Secretary during the evidence clarified that the intention
of the Government is to fix BPL rate of foodgrains to be supplied as
portion of wages to be paid to workers under the guarantee legislation.
2.132 The Committee appreciate the intention of the Government
to fix BPL rates of foodgrains to be supplied as a part of the wages
as per para 32 of Schedule II. The Committee strongly recommend
that the intention of the Government should clearly be indicated in
the Bill so as not to leave any scope for fixing APL/market rate for
foodgrains by the State Governments. Para 32 of Schedule II may
be amended accordingly.
(xxiv) Provision for disabled persons
2.133 The Bill does not contain any specific provisions for inclusion
of persons with disability under the guaranteed legislation.
Experts have suggested that emphasis on manual work under
works listed in Schedule I is unwarranted and will exclude disabled
persons from the guarantee.
It was also suggested that organisations working in disability sector
should be included in both implementing and monitoring of the
scheme. Experts have made important suggestion that at least three
per cent benefits should be made available to persons with disabilities
under the scheme.

48
2.134 The Department of Rural Development has stated that issues
regarding persons with disability shall be taken care of while
formulating guidelines of the scheme and being demand based, it is
not possible to provide reservation under the scheme.
2.135 The Committee note that the guarantee legislation is not
sensitive towards handicapped persons. The Committee feel that the
usual tendency of implementing agencies will be not to provide
work to handicapped persons specifically when the works to be
undertaken under the guarantee scheme are usually manual work.
The Committee would like to strongly recommend that a provision
may be made in the Bill whereby States in their respective Acts
should be required to make specific provisions for inclusion of
handicapped persons particularly as per ‘Persons with Disabilities
(Equal Opportunity, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act,
1996’. Besides, it should also be provided in the Bill that the design
of the work may be such that it includes the works to be done by
physically handicapped persons.
(XXV) MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Expeditious enactment of the employment guarantee legislation
2.136 The Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Government that the said legislation should be considered by the
Parliament and enacted expeditiously so that the employment
guarantee envisaged in this Bill is ensured to the millions of poor
in rural areas at the earliest.
(ii) Capacity Building of Panchayats
2.137 The State Governments in the comments furnished to the
Committee have expressed concerns over the training and upgradation
cost involved in capacity building of Panchayats. The Department of
Rural Development has commented that the Central Government
may consider meeting the cost of capacity building of Gram
Panchayats and officials out of the administrative expenses.
The Committee in their earlier paras of the report have
recommended that all the projects to be undertaken under the
guarantee legislation should be implemented by Panchayati Raj
Institutions. While making the aforesaid recommendation, the
Committee are conscious of the fact that capacity building of
Panchayats is the biggest challenge. The Committee also note that

49
the Department of Rural Development has conceded to meet the
cost of capacity building of Gram Panchayats and officials out of
the administrative expenses. The Committee hope that the
Department may provide the adequate funds in this regard to the
State Governments to enable Gram Panchayats to perform better
and take up the challenge of implementing the provisions enshrined
under the guarantee legislation.
(iii) Other related issues
2.138 The Committee while considering Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Department of Rural Development had raised certain
issues with regard to ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill
2004’. The details of the recommendations made in the report and the
comments of the Department of Rural Development on each of the
issues are indicated at Appendix-V
2.139 The Committee would like to reiterate the following
recommendations made in their Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
which are relevant in the context of rural employment guarantee
Bill:
(i) Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana should be merged
with Food for Work Programme where at present Food
for Work Programme is being implemented or when the
guarantee scheme when enacted will be implemented;
(ii) While selecting districts for the guarantee legislation, when
enacted, it should be strictly ensured that parameters for
selection of districts are such that first of all the most
backward districts in a State get due priority under the
programme;
(iii) Due priority should be accorded to Sampoorna Grameen
Rozgar Yojana which will continue to be implemented in
the districts where National Food for Work Programme
(NFWP) is being implemented or guarantee scheme when
enacted is to implemented.
(iv) The outlay under National Food for Work Programme
should  not be at the cost of Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar
Yojana since the districts not covered by NFWP or
Employment Guarantee Scheme, will be covered by the
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY).

50
(v) Specific allocation and outstanding dues with regard to
foodgrains supplied under Food for Work Programme and
Employment Guarantee Legislation when enacted, to Food
Corporation of India should invariably be indicated in
the Budget documents irrespective of the fact whether
payment is made by the Ministry of Finance to the Food
Corporation of India or to the Department of Food and
Public Distribution (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food
and Public Distribution).
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
21 June, 2005 Chairman,
31 Jyaistha, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

APPENDIX I
AS I NTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
21 Dec. 2004
THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE BILL, 2004
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
GUARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT IN RURAL AREAS
3. Guarantee of rural employment to poor households.
CHAPTER III
EMPLOYMENT G UARANTEE S CHEMES AND UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE
4. Employment Guarantee Schemes for rural areas.
5. Conditions for providing guaranteed employment.
6. Wage rate.
7. Payment of unemployment allowance.
8. Non-disbursement of unemployment allowance in certain
circumstances.
9. Disentitlement to receive unemployment allowance in certain
circumstances.
51

52
CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTING AND M ONITORING A UTHORITIES
10. Central Employment Guarantee Council.
11. Functions and duties of Central Council.
12. State Employment Guarantee Council.
13. Standing Committee at district level.
14. District Programme Coordinator.
15. Programme Officer.
16. Responsibilities of the Gram Panchayats.
17. Social audit of work by Gram Sabha.
18. Responsibilities of State Government in implementing
Scheme.
19. Grievance redressal mechanism.
CHAPTER V
E
STABLISHMENT OF N ATIONAL AND S TATE E MPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE F UNDS AND A UDIT
20. National Employment Guarantee Fund.
21. State Employment Guarantee Fund.
22. Funding pattern.
23. Transparency and accountability.
24. Audit of accounts.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. Penalty for non-compliance.
26. Power to delegate.
27. Power of Central Government to give directions.
28. Act to have overriding effect.
29. Power to amend Schedules.
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.

53
31. Power of Central Government to make rules.
32. Power of State Government to make rules.
33. Laying of rules and schemes.
34. Power to remove difficulties.
SCHEDULE I
SCHEDULE II

Bill No. 106 of 2004
THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE BILL, 2004
A
BILL
to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the poor households
in rural areas of the country by providing at least one hundred days
of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual
work and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2004.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different
dates may be appointed for different States or
for different areas in a State and any reference
in any such provision to the commencement of
this Act shall be construed as a reference to
the coming into force of that provision in such
State or, as the case may be, in such area.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “adult” means a person who has
completed his eighteenth year of age;
(b) “applicant” means the head of a
household or any of its other adult
members who has applied for employment
under the Scheme;
54
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions

55
(c) “Block” means a community
development area within a district
comprising a group of Gram Panchayats;
(d) “ Central Council” means the Central
Employment Guarantee Council constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 10;
(e) “District Programme Coordinator”
means an officer of the State Government
designated as such under sub-section (1)
of section 14 for implementation of the
Scheme in a district;
(f) “household” means the members of a
family related to each other by blood,
marriage or adoption and normally residing
together and sharing meals or holding a
common ration card;'
(g) “implementing agency” includes any
department of the Central Government or
a State Government, a Zila Parishad,
Panchayat Samiti, Gram Panchayat or any
local authority or Government undertaking
or non-governmental organization
authorized by the Central Government or
the State Government to undertake the
implementation of any work taken up
under a Scheme;
(h) “minimum wage”, in relation to any
area, means the minimum wage fixed by
the State Government under section 3 of
the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for
agricultural labourers as applicable in that
area;
(i) “National Fund” means the National
Employment Guarantee Fund established
under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(j) “notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette;
(k) “poor household” means a household
living, during the relevant financial year,
below the poverty line and includes the
households of all primitive tribal groups as
11 of 1948

56
approved, by notification, by the Ministry
of the Central Government dealing with
tribal affairs;
(l) “preferred work” means any work
which is taken up for implementation on a
priority basis under a Scheme;
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(n) “Programme Officer” means an officer
appointed under sub-section (1) of section
15 for implementing the Scheme in a Block;
(o) “project” means any work taken up
under a Scheme for the purpose of
providing employment to the applicants;
(p) “rural area” means any area in a State
except those areas covered by any urban
local body or a Cantonment Board
established or constituted under any law
for the time being in force;
(q) “Scheme” means a Scheme notified
by the State Government under sub-section
(1) of section 4;
(r) “State Council” means the State
Employment Guarantee Council constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(s) “unskilled manual work” means any
physical work which any adult person is
capable of doing without any skill or
special training;
(t) “wage rate” means the wage rate
referred to in section 6.
CHAPTER II
G
UARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT IN RURAL AREAS
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State
Government shall, in such rural area in the
State and for such period as may be notified
by the Central Government, provide to every
Guarantee
of rural
employment
to poor
households.

57
poor household whose adult members
volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less
than one hundred days of such work in a
financial year in accordance with the Scheme
made under this Act.
(2) Every person who has done the work
given to him under the Scheme shall be entitled
to receive wages at the wage rate for each day
of work.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
the disbursement of daily wages shall be made
on a weekly basis or in any case to later than
a fortnight after the date on which such work
was done.
(4) The Central Government or the State
Government may, within the limits of its
economic capacity and development, make
provisions for securing work to every adult
member of a household under a Scheme for
any period beyond the period guaranteed under
sub-section (1), as may be expedient.
CHAPTER III
E
MPLOYMENT G UARANTEE S CHEMES AND
UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE
4. (1) For the purposes of giving effect to
the provisions of section 3, every State
Government shall, within six months from the
date of commencement of this Act, by
notification, make a Scheme, for providing not
less than one hundred days of guaranteed
employment in a financial year to every
household in the rural areas covered under the
Scheme and whose adult members, by
application, volunteer to do unskilled manual
work subject to the conditions laid down by
or under this Act and in the Scheme:
Provided that until any such Scheme is
notified by the State Government, the Annual
Employment
Guarantee
Schemes
for rural
areas.

58
Action Plan or Perspective Plan for the
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) or the
National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP)
whichever is in force in the concerned area
immediately before such notification shall be
deemed to be the action plan for the Scheme
for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Government shall publish a
summary of the Scheme made by it in at least
two local newspapers, one of which shall be in
a vernacular language circulating in the area
or areas to which such Scheme shall apply.
(3) The Scheme made under sub-section (1)
shall provide for the minimum features
specified in Schedule I.
5. (1) The State Government may, without
prejudice to the conditions specified in Schedule
II, specify in the Scheme the conditions for
providing guaranteed employment under this
Act.
(2) The persons employed under any
Scheme made under this Act shall be entitled
to such facilities not less than the minimum
facilities specified in Schedule II.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Central
Government may, by notification, specify the
wage rate for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that different rates of wages may
be specified for different areas.
(2) Until such time as a wage rate is fixed
by the Central Government in respect of any
area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by
the State Government under section 3 of the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for agricultural
labourers, shall be considered as the wage rate
applicable to that area.
Conditions
for
providing
guaranteed
employment.
Wage rate.
11 of 1948
11 of 1948

59
7. (1) If an applicant for employment under
the Scheme is not provided such employment
within fifteen days of receipt of his application
seeking employment or from the date on which
the employment has been sought in the case
of an advance application, whichever is later,
he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment
allowance in accordance with this section.
(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of
eligibility as may be prescribed by the State
Government and subject to the provisions of
this Act and the Schemes and the economic
capacity of the State Government, the
unemployment allowance payable under sub-
section (1) shall be paid to the applicants of a
household subject to the entitlement of the
household at such rate as may be specified by
the State Government, by notification, in
consultation with the State Council:
Provided that no such rate shall be less
than one-fourth of the wage rate for the first
thirty days during the financial year and not
less than one-half of the wage rate for the
remaining period of the financial year.
(3) The liability of the State Government to
pay unemployment allowance to a household
during any financial year shall cease as soon
as—
(a) the applicant is directed by the Gram
Panchayat or the Programme Officer to
report for work either by himself or depute
at least one adult member of his household;
or
(b) the period for which employment is
sought comes to an end and no member
of the household of the applicant had
turned up for employment; or
(c) the adult members of the household
of the applicant have received in total at
Payment of
unemploy-
ment
allowance.

60
least one hundred days of work within the
financial year; or
(d) the household of the applicant has
earned as much from the wages and
unemployment allowance taken together
which is equal to the wages for one
hundred days of work during the financial
year.
(4) The unemployment allowance payable
to the household of an applicant jointly
shall be sanctioned and disbursed by the
Programme Officer or such local authority
as the State Government may, by
notification, authorise in this behalf.
(5) Every payment of unemployment
allowance under sub-section (1) shall be
made or offered not later than fifteen days
from the date on which it became due for
payment.
(6) The State Government may prescribe
the procedure for payment of
unemployment allowance under this Act.
8. (1) If the Programme Officer is not in a
position to disburse the unemployment
allowance in time or at all for any reason
beyond his control, he shall report the matter
to the District Programme Coordinator and
announce such reasons in a notice to be
displayed on his notice board and the notice
board of the Gram Panchayat at and such other
conspicuous places as he may deem necessary.
(2) Every case of non-payment or delayed
payment of unemployment allowance shall be
reported in the annual report submitted by the
District Programme Coordinator to the State
Government alongwith the reasons for such
non-payment or delayed payment.
Non-
disbursement
of
unemploy-
ment
allowance
in certain
circumstances.

61
(3) The State Government shall take all
measures to make the payment of
unemployment allowance reported under sub-
section (1) to the concerned household as
expeditiously as possible.
9. An applicant who—
(a) does not accept the employment
provided to his household under a scheme;
or
(b) does not report for work within fifteen
days of being notified by the Programme
Officer or the implementing agency to
report for the work; or
(c) continuously remains absent from
work, without obtaining a permission from
the concerned implementing agency for a
period of more than one week or remains
absent for a total period of more than one
week in any month, shall not be eligible to
claim the unemployment allowance payable
under this Act for a period of three months
but shall be eligible to seek employment
under the Scheme at any time.
CHAPTER IV
I
MPLEMENTING AND M ONITORING A UTHORITIES
10. (1) With effect from such date as the
Central Government may, by notification
specify, there shall be constituted a Council to
be called the Central Employment Guarantee
Council to discharge the functions, and perform
the duties, assigned to it by or under this Act.
(2) The headquarters of the Central Council
shall be at Delhi.
(3) The Central Council shall consist of the
following members to be appointed by the
Central Government, namely:
(a) a Chairperson;
Disentitle-
ment to
receive
unemploy-
ment
allowance
in certain
circumsta-
nces.
Central
Employment
Guarantee
Council.

62
(b) not more than such number of
representatives of the Central Ministries
including the Planning Commission not
below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India as may be determined
by the Central Government;
(c) not more than such number of
representatives of the State Governments as
may be determined by the Central
Government;
(d) not more than fifteen non-official
members representing Panchayati Raj
Institutions, organizations of workers and
disadvantaged groups:
Provided that such non-official members
shall include two chairpersons or District
Panchayats nominated by the Central
Government by rotation for a period of one
year at a time:
Provided further that not less than one-
third of the non-official members nominated
under this clause shall be women:
Provided also that not less than one-third
of the non-official members shall be
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and Minorities;
(e) such number of representatives of the
States as the Central Government may, by
rules, determine in this behalf;
(f) a Member-Secretary not below the
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government
of India.
(4) The terms and conditions subject to
which the Chairperson and other members of
the Central Council may be appointed and the
time, place and procedure of the meetings
(including the quorum at such meetings) of the
Central council shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.

63
11. (1) The Central Council shall perform
and discharge the following functions and
duties, namely:
(a) establish a central evaluation and
monitoring system;
(b) advise the Central Government on all
matters concerning the implementation of
this Act;
(c) review the monitoring and redressal
mechanism from time to time and
recommend improvements required;
(d) promote the widest possible
dissemination of information about the
Schemes made under this Act;
(e) monitoring the implementation of this
Act;
(f) preparation of annual reports to be
laid before Parliament by the Central
Government on the implementation of this
Act;
(g) any other duty or function as may be
assigned to it by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Council shall have the
power to undertake evaluation of the various
Schemes made under this Act and for that
purpose collect or cause to be collected statistics
pertaining to the rural economy and the
implementation of the Schemes.
12. (1) For the purposes of regular
monitoring and reviewing the implementation
of this Act at the State level, every State
Government shall constitute a State Council to
be known as the .....(name of the State) State
Employment Guarantee Council with a
Chairperson and such number of official
members as may be determined by the State
Government and not more than fifteen non-
Functions
and duties
of Central
Council.
State
Employment
Guarantee
Council.

64
official members nominated by the State
Government from Panchayati Raj institutions,
organizations of workers and disadvantaged
groups:
Provided that not less than one-third of the
non-official members nominated under this
clause shall be women:
Provided further that not less than one-
third of the non-official members shall be
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and Minorities.
(2) The terms and conditions subject to
which the Chairperson and members of the
State Council may be appointed and the time,
place and procedure of the meetings (including
the quorum at such meetings) of the State
Council shall be such as may be prescribed by
the State Government.
(3) The duties and functions of the State
Council shall include—
(a) advising the State Government on all
matters concerning the Scheme and its
implementation in the State;
(b) determining the preferred works;
(c) reviewing the monitoring and
redressal mechanisms from time to time
and recommending improvements;
(d) promoting the widest possible
dissemination of information about this Act
and the Schemes under it;
(e) monitoring the implementation of this
Act and the Schemes in the State and
coordianting such implementation with the
Central Council;
(f) preparing the annual report to be laid
before the State Legislature by the State
Government;

65
(g) any other duty or function as may be
assigned to it by the Central Council or
the State Government.
(3) The State Council shall have the power
to undertake an evaluation of the Schemes
operating in the State and for that purpose to
collect or cause to be collected statistics
pertaining to the rural economy and the
implementation of the Schemes and
Programmes in the State.
13. (1) The Panchayat at district level in
every district within which a Scheme is being
implemented shall constitute a Standing
Committee consisting of such number of its
members and subject to such terms and
conditions as may be prescribed by the State
Government to supervise, monitor and oversee
the implementation of the Scheme within the
district.
(2) The Standing Committee shall co-opt not
more than seven representatives of intermediate
panchayats, Gram Panchayats, organization of
workers, women’s organizations, non-
governmental organizations and disadvantaged
groups as special invitees.
(3) The functions of the Standing
Committee shall be—
(a) to finalise and approve blockwise shelf
of projects to be taken up under a
programme under the scheme;
(b) to supervise and monitor the projects
taken up at the Block level and district
level; and
(c) to carry out such other functions as
may be assigned to it by the State Council,
from time to time.
(4) The District Programme Coordinator
shall assist the Standing Committee in
discharging its functions under this Act and
any Scheme made thereunder.
Standing
Committee
at district
level.

66
14. (1) The Chief Executive Officer of the
District Panchayat or the Collector of the district
or any other district level officer of appropriate
rank as the State Government may decide shall
be designated as the District Programme
Coordinator for the implementation of the
Scheme in the district.
(2) The District Programme Coordinator
shall be responsible for the implementation of
the Scheme in the district in accordance with
the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder.
(3) The functions of the District Programme
Coordinator shall be—
(a) to assist the Standing Committee
constituted under sub-section (1) of section
13;
(b) to consolidate the plans prepared by
the Blocks and project proposals received
from other implementing agencies for
inclusion in the shelf of projects to be
approved by the Standing Committee;
(c) to accord necessary sanction and
administrative clearance, wherever
necessary;
(d) to coordinate with the Programme
Officers functioning with his jurisdiction
and the implementing agencies to ensure
that the applicants are provided
employment as per their entitlements under
this Act;
(e) to review, monitor and supervise the
performance of the Programme Officers;
(f) to conduct periodic inspection of the
works in progress; and
(g) to redress the grievances of the
applicants.
District
Programme
Coordinator.

67
(4) The State Government shall delegate
such administrative and financial powers to the
District Programme Coordinator as may be
required to enable him to carry out his
functions under this Act.
(5) The Programme Officer appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 15 and all other
officers of the State Government and local
authorities and bodies functioning within the
district shall be responsible to assist the District
Programme Coordinator in carrying out his
functions under this Act and the Schemes made
thereunder.
(6) The District Programme Coordinator
shall prepare in the month of December every
year a labour budget for the next financial year
containing the details of anticipated demand for
unskilled manual work in the district and the
plan for engagement of labourers in the works
covered under the Scheme and submit it to the
Standing Committee of the district panchayat.
15. (1) For every Block, the State
Government shall appoint a person with such
qualifications and experience as may be
determined by the State Government, as
Programme Officer for implementing the
Scheme in that Block.
(2) The Programme Officer shall be
responsible for matching the demand for
employment with the employment
opportunities arising from projects in the area
under his jurisdiction.
(3) The Programme Officer shall prepare a
plan for the Block under his jurisdiction by
consolidating the project proposals prepared by
the Gram Panchayats and the proposals
received from intermediate panchayats.
(4) The functions of the Programme Officer
shall include—
Programme
Officer.

68
(a) monitoring of projects taken by the
Gram Panchayats and other implementing
within the Block;
(b) sanctioning and ensuring payment of
unemployment allowance to the eligible
poor households;
(c) ensuring prompt and fair payment of
wages to all labourers employed under a
programme of the Scheme within the Block;
(d) ensuring that regular social audits of
all works within the jurisdiction of the
Gram Panchayat are carried out by the
Gram Sabha and that prompt action is
taken on the objections raised in the social
audit;
(e) dealing promptly with all complaints
that may arise in connection with the
implementation of the Scheme within the
Block; and
(f) any other work as may be assigned
to him the District Programme Coordinator
or the State Government.
(5) The Programme Officers shall function
under the direction, control and
superintendence of the District Programme
Coordinator.
(6) The State Government may, by order,
direct that all or any of the functions of a
Programme Officer shall be discharged by the
Gram Panchayat or a local authority.
16. (1) The Gram Panchayat shall be
responsible for identification of the projects in
the Gram Panchayat area to be taken up under
a Scheme as per the recommendations of the
Gram Sabha and the Ward Sabhas and for
executing and supervising such works.
Responsibi-
lities of the
Gram
Panchayats.

69
(2) A Gram Panchayat may take up any
project under a Scheme within the area of the
Gram Panchayat as may be sanctioned by the
Programme Officer.
(3) Every Gram Panchayat shall, after
considering the recommendations of the Gram
Sabha and the Ward Sabhas, prepare a
development plan and maintain a shelf of
possible works to be taken up under the
Scheme as and when demand for work arises.
(4) The Gram Panchayat shall forward its
proposals for the development projects
including the order of priority between different
works to the Programme Officer for scrutiny
and preliminary approval prior to the
commencement of the year in which it is
proposed to be executed.
(5) The Programme Officer may allot at
least fifty per cent of the works in terms of its
cost under a Scheme to be implemented
through the Gram Panchayats.
(6) The Programme Officer shall supply
each Gram Panchayat with—
(a) the muster rolls for the works
sanctioned to be executed by it; and
(b) a list of employment opportunities
available elsewhere to the residents of the
Gram Panchayat.
(7) The Gram Panchayat shall allocate
employment opportunities among the applicants
and ask them to report for work.
(8) The works taken up by a Gram
Panchayat under a Scheme shall meet the
required technical standards and measurements.
17. (1) The Gram Sabha shall monitor the
execution of works within the Gram Panchayat.
(2) The Gram Sabha shall conduct regular
social audits of all the projects under the
Scheme taken up within the Gram Panchayat.
Social audit
of work by
Gram
Sabha.

70
(3) The Gram Panchayat shall make
available all relevant documents including the
muster rolls, bills, vouchers, measurement
books, copies of sanction orders and other
connected books of account and papers to the
Gram Sabha for the purpose of conducting the
social audit.
18. The State Government shall make
available to the District Programme Coordinator
and the Programme Officers necessary staff and
technical support as may be necessary for the
effective implementation of the Scheme.
19. The State Government shall, by rules,
determine appropriate grievance redressal
mechanisms at the Block level and the district
level for dealing with any complaint by any
person in respect of implementation of the
Scheme and lay down the procedure for
disposal of such complaints.
CHAPTER V
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL AND
STATE EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE
FUNDS AND AUDIT
20. (1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, establish a fund to be called the
National Employment Guarantee Fund for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans
such sums of money as the Central Government
may consider necessary to the National Fund.
(3) The amount standing to the credit of
the National Fund shall be utilized in such
manner and subject to such conditions and
limitations as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
Responsi-
bilities of
State
Government
in
implementing
Scheme.
Grievance
redressal
mechanism.
National
Employment
Guarnatee
Fund.

71
21. (1) The State Government may, by
notification, establish a fund to be called the
State Employment Guarantee Fund for the
purposes of implementation of the Scheme.
(2) The amount standing to the credit of
the State Fund shall be expended in such
manner and subject to such conditions and
limitations as may be prescribed by the State
Government for the purposes of implementation
of this Act and the Schemes made thereunder
and for meeting the administrative expenses in
connection with the implementation of this Act.
(3) The State Fund shall be held and
administered on behalf of the State Government
in such manner and by such authority as may
be prescribed by the State Government.
22. (1) Subject to the rules as may be made
by the Central Government in this behalf, the
Central Government shall meet the cost of the
following, namely:—
(a) the amount required for payment of
wages for unskilled manual work under the
Scheme;
(b) up to three-fourths of the material cost
of the Scheme including payment of wages
to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject
to the provisions of Schedule II;
(c) such percentage of the total cost of
the Scheme as may be determined by the
Central Government towards the
administrative expenses, which may include
the salary and allowances of the
Programme Officers and his supporting
staff, the administrative expenses of the
Central Council, facilities to be provided
under Schedule II and such other item as
may be decided by the Central
Government.
State
Employment
Guarantee
Fund.
Funding
pattern.

72
(2) The State Government shall meet the
cost of the following, namely:—
(a) the cost of unemployment allowance
payable under the Scheme;
(b) one-fourth of the material cost of the
Scheme including payment of wages to
skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to
the provisions of Schedule II;
(c) the administrative expenses of the
State Council.
23. (1) The District Programme Coordinator
and all implementing agencies in the District
shall be responsible for the proper utilization
and management of the funds placed at their
disposal for the purpose of implementing a
Scheme.
(2) The State Government may prescribe the
manner of maintaining proper books and
accounts of employment of labourers and the
expenditure incurred in connection with the
implementation of the provisions of this Act
and the Schemes made thereunder.
(3) The State Government may, by rules,
determine the arrangements to be made for the
proper execution of Schemes and programmes
under the Schemes and to ensure transparency
and accountability at all levels in the
implementation of the Schemes.
(4) All payments of wages in cash and
unemployment allowances shall be made
directly to the person concerned and in the
presence of independent persons of the
community on pre-announced dates.
(5) If any dispute or complaint arises
concerning the implementation of a Scheme by
the Gram Panchayat, the matter shall be
referred to the Programme Officer.
Transparency
and
accounta-
bility.

73
(6) The Programme Officer shall enter every
complaint in a complaint register maintained
by him and shall dispose of the disputes and
complaints within seven days of its receipt and
in case it relates to a matter to be resolved by
any other authority it shall be forwarded to
such authority under intimation to the
complainant.
24. (1) The Central Government may, in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, prescribe appropriate
arrangements for audits of the accounts of the
Schemes at all levels.
(2) The accounts of the Scheme shall be
maintained in such form and in such manner
as may be prescribed by the State Government.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
25. Whoever contravenes the provisions of
this Act shall on conviction be liable to a fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees.
26. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, direct that the powers exercisable
by it (excluding the power to make rules) may,
in such circumstances and subject to such
conditions and limitations, be exercisable also
by the State Government or such officer
subordinate to the Central Government or the
State Government as it may specify in such
notification.
(2) The State Government may, by
notification, direct that the powers exercisable
by it (excluding the power to make rules and
Schemes) may, in such circumstances and
subject to such conditions and limitations, be
exercisable also by such officer subordinate to
it as it may specify in such notification.
Audit of
accounts.
Penalty for
non-
compliance.
Power to
delegate.

74
27. The Central Government may give such
directions as it may consider necessary to the
State Government for the effective
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
28. The provisions of this Act or the
Schemes made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being
in force or in any instrument having effect by
virtue to such law:
Provided that where a State enactment
exists or is enacted to provide employment
guarantee for unskilled manual work to rural
households consistent with the provisions of
this Act under which the entitlement of the
households is not less than and the conditions
of employment are not inferior to what is
guaranteed under this Act, the State
Government shall have the option of
implementing its own enactment:
Provided further that in such cases the
financial assistance shall be paid to the
concerned State Government in such manner
as shall be determined by the Central
Government, which shall not exceed what the
State would have been entitled to receive under
this Act had a Scheme made under this Act
had to be implemented.
29. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied
that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it
may, by notification, amend Schedule I or
Schedule II and thereupon Schedule I or
Schedule II, as the case may be, shall be
deemed to have been amended accordingly.
(2) A copy of every notification made under
sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House
of Parliament as soon as may be after it is
made.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
Power to
amend
Schedules.
Act to
have
overriding
effect.

75
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against the District
Programme Coordinator, Programme Officer or
any other person who is, or who is deemed to
be, a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code in respect
of anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act or the rules
or Schemes made thereunder.
31. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, and subject to the condition of
previous publication, make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without the prejudice
of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the number of representatives of the
State Governments under clause (e) of sub-
section (3) of section 10;
(b) the terms and conditions subject to
which the Chairman and other members
of the Central Council may be appointed,
and the time, place and procedure of the
meetings (including the quorum at such
meetings) of the Central Council, under
sub-section (4) of section 10;
(c) the manner in which and the
conditions and limitations subject to which
the National Fund shall be utilized under
sub-section (3) of section 20;
(d) the rules relating to funding pattern
to meet the cost of certain items under sub-
section (1) of section 22;
(e) any other matter which is to be, or
may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the Central
Government by rules.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
45 of 1860

76
32. (1) The State Government may, by
notification, and subject to the condition of
previous publication, and consistent with this
Act and the rules made by the Central
Government, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the terms and conditions upon which
eligibility for unemployment allowance may
be determined under sub-section (2) of
section 7;
(b) the procedure for payment of
unemployment allowance under sub-section
(6) of section 7;
(c) the terms and conditions subject to
which the Chairperson and members of the
State Council may be appointed, and the
time, place and procedure of the meetings
(including the quorum at such meetings)
of their appointment to the State Council,
under sub-section (2) of section 12;
(d) the number of members of the
Standing Committee at district level and
their terms and conditions of their
appointment under sub-section (1) of
section 13;
(e) the grievance redressal mechanism at
the Block level and the District level and
the procedure to be followed in such matter
under section 19;
(f) the manner in which and the
conditions and limitations subject to which
the State Fund shall be utilized under sub-
section (2) of section 21;
Power of
State
Government
to make
rules.

77
(g) the authority who may administer and
the manner in which he may hold the State
Fund under sub-section (3) of section 21;
(h) the manner of maintaining books of
account of employment of labourers and
the expenditure under sub-section (2) of
section 23;
(i) the arrangements required for proper
execution of Schemes under sub-section (3)
of section 23;
(j) the form and manner in which the
accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained
under sub-section (2) of section 24;
(k) any other matter which is to be, or
may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the State
Government by rules.
33. (1) Every rule made by the Central
Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall have
thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that
rule.
(2) Every rule or Scheme made by the State
Government under this Act shall, as soon as
may be after it is made, be laid before each
House of the State Legislature where there are
Laying of
rules and
Schemes.

78
two Houses, and where there is one House of
the State Legislature, before that House.
34. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under
this section after the expiry of three years from
the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section
shall be laid, a soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties

SCHEDULE I
[See section 4(3)]
MINIMUM FEATURES OF A RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE SCHEME
——————
1. The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works in
their order of priority:—
(i) water conservation and water harvesting;
(ii) dr ought proofing (including afforestation and tree
plantation);
(iii) irrigation canals including micro and minor irrigation works;
(iv) provision of irrigation facility to land owned by households
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes;
(v) renovation of traditional water bodies including desilting of
tanks;
(vi) land development;
(vii) flood control and protection  works including drainage in
water logged areas;
(viii) rural connectivity to provide all-weather access; and
(ix) any other work which may be notified by the Central
Government.
2. Creation of durable assets and strengthening the livelihood
resource base of the rural poor shall be an important objective of the
Scheme.
3. The works taken up under the scheme shall be in rural areas.
4. The State Council shall prepare a list of preferred works for
different areas based on their ability to create durable assets.
5. The Scheme shall be subject to appropriate arrangements as
may be laid down by the State Government under the rules issued by
it for proper maintenance of the public assets created under the Scheme.
79

80
6. Under no circumstances shall the labourers be paid less than
the wage rate.
7. When wages are directly linked with the quantity of work, the
wages shall be paid according to the schedule of rates fixed by the
State Government for different types of work every year, in consultation
with the State Council.
8. The schedule of rates of wages for unskilled albourers shall be
so fixed that a person working diligently for seven hours would
normally earn a wage equal to the wage rate.
9. The cost of material component of projects including the wages
of the skilled and semi-skilled workers taken up under the Scheme
shall not exceed forty per cent of the total project costs.
10. It shall be open to the Programme Officer and Gram Panchayat
to direct any person who applied for employment under the Scheme
to do work of any type permissible under it.
11. The Scheme shall not permit engaging any contractor for
implementation of the projects under it.
12. As far as practicable, a task funded under the Scheme shall be
performed by using manual labour and not machines.
13. Every Scheme shall contain adequate provisions for ensuring
transparency and accountability at all level of implementation.
14. Provisions for regular inspection and supervision of works taken
up under the Scheme shall be made to ensure proper quality of work
as well as to ensure that the total wages paid for the completion of
the work is commensurate with the quality and quantity of work
done.
15. The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme Officer
and the Gram Panchayat implementing the Scheme shall prepare
annually a report containing the facts and figures and achievements
relating to the implementation of the Scheme within his or its
jurisdiction and a copy of the same shall be made available to the
public on demand and on payment of such fee as may be specified in
the Scheme.
16. All accounts and records relating to the Scheme shall be made
available for public scrutiny and any person desirous of obtaining a

81
copy or relevant extracts therefrom may be provided such copies or
extracts on demand and after paying such fee as may be specified in
the Scheme.
17. A copy of the muster rolls of each Scheme or project under a
Scheme shall be made available in the offices of the Gram Panchayat
and the Programme Officer for inspection by any person interested
after paying such fee as may be specified in the Scheme.
SCHEDULE II
(See section 5)
CONDITIONS FOR GUARANTEED RURAL EMPLOYMENT
UNDER A SCHEME AND MINIMUM ENTITLEMENTS OF
LABOURERS
1. The adult members of every household who—
(i) reside in any rural areas; and
(ii) are willing to do unskilled manual work,
may submit their names, age and the address of the household to the
Gram Panchayat in the jurisdiction of which they reside for registration
of their household for issuance of a job card.
2. It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat to register the
household, after making such enquiry as it deems fit and issue a job
card containing such details of adult members of the household affixing
their photographs, as may be specified by the State Government in
the Scheme.
3. The registration made under paragraph 2 shall be for such period
as may be laid in the Scheme, but in any case not less than five years,
and may be renewed from time to time.
4. Every adult member of a registered household whose name
appears in the job card shall be entitled to apply for unskilled manual
work under the Scheme.
5. All registered persons belonging to a household shall be entitled
to employment in accordance with the Scheme made under the
provisions of this Act, for as many days as each applicant may request,
subject to a maximum of one hundred days per household in a given
financial year.

82
6. The Programme Officer shall ensure that every applicant referred
to in paragraph 5 shall be provided unskilled manual work in
accordance with the provisions of the Scheme within fifteen days of
receipt of an application or from the date he seeks work in case of
advance application, whichever is later.
7. Applications for work must be for at least fourteen days of
continuous work.
8. There shall be no limit on the number of days of employment
for which a person may apply, or on the number of days of
employment actually provided to him subject to the aggregate
entitlement of the household.
9. Applications for work may be submitted in writing either to the
Gram Panchayat or to the Programme Officer, as may be specified in
the Scheme.
10. The Gram Panchayat and Programme Officer, as the case may
be, shall be bound to accept valid applications and to issue a dated
receipt to the applicant. Group applications may also be submitted.
11. Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated
in writing, by means of a letter sent to him at the address given in
the job card and by a public notice displayed at the office of the
Gram Panchayat Office.
12. As far as possible, employment shall be provided within a
radius of five kilometres of the village where the applicant resides at
the time of applying.
13. A new work under the Scheme shall be commenced only if—
(a) at least fifty labourers become available for such work; and
(b) the labourers cannot be absorbed in the ongoing works:
Provided that this condition shall not be applicable for new works,
as determined by the State Government, in hilly areas and in respect
of aforestation.
14. In cases the employment is provided outside such radius, it
must be provided within the Block, and the labourers shall be paid
ten per cent of the wage rate as extra wages to meet additional
transportation and living expenses.

83
15. A period of employment shall ordinarily be at least fourteen
days continuously with not more than six days in a week.
16. In all cases where unemployment allowance is paid, or due to
be paid, the Programme Officer shall inform the District Programme
Coordinator in writing the reasons why it was not possible for him to
provide employment or cause to provide employment to the applicants.
17. The District Programme Coordinator shall, in his Annual Report
to the State Council, explain as to why employment could not be
provided in cases where payment of unemployment allowance is
involved.
18. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance applications,
that is, applications which may be submitted in advance of the date
from which employment is sought.
19. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for submission of
multiple applications by the same person provided that the
corresponding periods for which employment is sought do not overlap.
20. The Gram Panchayat shall prepare and maintain or cause to
be prepared and maintained such registers, vouchers and other
documents in such form and in such manner as may be specified in
the Scheme containing particular of job cards and passbooks issued,
name age and address of the head of the household and the adult
members of the household registered with the Gram Panchayat.
21. The Gram Panchayat shall send such list or lists of the names
and addresses of households and their adult members registered with
it and supply such other information to the concerned Programme
Officer at such periods and in such form as may be specified in the
Scheme.
22. A list of persons who are provided with the work shall be
displayed on the notice board of the Gram Panchayat and at the office
of the Programme Officer and at such other places as the Programme
Officer may deem necessary and the list shall be open for inspection
by the State Government and any person interested.
23. If the Gram Panchayat is satisfied at any time that a person
has registered with it by furnishing false information, it may direct
the Programme Officer to direct his name to be struck off from the
register and direct the applicant to return the job card:

84
Provided that no such action under this paragraph shall be directed
unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard in
the presence of two independent persons.
24. If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under
the Scheme by accident arising out of and in the course of his
employment, he shall be entitled to, free of charge, such medical
treatment as is admissible under the Scheme.
25. Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the
State Government shall arrange for such hospitalisation including
accommodation, treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance
not less than half of the wage rate required to be paid had the injured
been engaged in the work.
26. If a person employed under a Scheme dies or becomes
permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of
employment, he shall be paid by the implementing agency an ex gratia
payment at the rate of ten thousand rupees or such amount as may
be notified by the Central Government, and the amount shall be paid
to the legal heirs of the deceased or the disabled, as the case may be.
27. The facilities of safe drinking water, shade for children and
periods of rest, first-aid box with adequate material for emergency
treatment for minor injuries and other health hazards connected with
the work being performed shall be provided at the work site.
28. In case where at least twenty women are employed at a work
site, provisions shall be made for one of them to be deputed to look
after any children under the age of six years who may be brought to
the work site, if need arises.
29. The person deputed under paragraph 28 shall be paid wage
rate.
30. In case the payment of wages is not made within the period
specified under the Scheme, the labourers shall be entitled to receive
payment of compensation as per the provisions of the Payment of
Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).
31. The wages under a Scheme may be paid either wholly in cash
or in cash and kind provided that at least one-fourth of the wages
shall be paid in cash only.
32. The State Government may prescribe that a portion of the
wages in cash may be paid to the labourers on a daily wages basis
during the period of employment.

85
33. If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child
accompanying any person who is employed under a Scheme, such
person shall be entitled to, free of charge, such medical treatment for
the child as may be specified in the Scheme and in case of death or
disablement, through an ex gratia  payment as may be determined by
the State Government.
34. In case of every employment under the Scheme, there shall be
no discrimination solely on the ground of gender and the provisions
of the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976), shall be complied
with.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Productive absorption of under-employed and surplus labour force
in the rural sector has been a major focus of planning for rural
development. In order to provide direct supplementary wage-
employment to the rural poor through public works, many programmes
were initiated by the Government of India, namely, National Rural
Employment Programme (NREP), Rural Landless Employment
Guarantee Programme (RLEGP) and Jawahar Rozgar Yojana (JRY).
Currently, Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) is being
implemented all over the country with the objective to provide
supplementary wage employment in rural areas, create durable rural
infrastructure and to ensure food security. Though the SGRY is
providing some relief to the rural poor, its reach has been inadequate
in view of the dimension of the unemployment in rural areas. It has
been observed that the scale of employment generation under SGRY
in 2002-03 and 2003-04 was barely adequate to provide on an average
20 days of employment to each Below Poverty Line (BPL) household
in the rural areas. Secondly, there is no guarantee that employment
will be available to the rural households on demand as SGRY is an
allocation based programme. The situation of unemployment has been
compounded by the absence of any social security mechanism. There
is, therefore, an urgent need to ensure at least some minimum days of
employment in the shape of manual labour to every household in the
rural areas. Recognizing the urgent need to ensure a certain minimum
days of wage-employment, the United Progressive Alliance (UPA)
Government has declared in its National Common Minimum
Programme (NCMP) that it “....will immediately enact a National
Employment Guarantee Act. This will provide a legal guarantee for at
least 100 days of employment, to begin with, on asset-creating public
works programmes every year at minimum wages for at least one
able-bodied person in every rural, urban poor and lower middle class
household.” It is also necessary to empower the poor in the rural
areas by appropriate enactment so that they can demand work on the
strength of this legal entitlement.
2. The proposed legislation constitutes a pioneering endeavour to
secure wage employment for the poor households in the rural areas
as a guaranteed entitlement on this scale. It takes into account the
experience gained under the Employment Guarantee Scheme in
Maharashtra. Considering that a programme of this kind is being
86

87
contemplated on such a massive scale for the first time, it has to be
necessarily implemented in phases so as to eventually cover all the
rural areas of the country , subject to the economic capacity of the
Central and State Governments.
3. In view of the above, it is proposed to enact a new legislation
through the National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004. The
salient features of the proposed legislation are the following:—
(i) The objective of the legisation is to enhance the livelihood
security of the poor households in rural areas of the country
by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage
employment to every poor household whose adult members
volunteer to do unskilled manual work.
(ii) The State Government shall, in such rural areas in the State
and for such period as may be notified by the Central
Government, provide to every poor household guaranteed
wage employment in unskilled manual work at least for a
period of one hundred days in a financial year in accordance
with the provisions made in the legislation.
(iii) Every State Government shall, within six months from the
date of commencement of this legislation, prepare a scheme
to give effect to the guarantee proposed under the
legislation.
(iv) The one hundred days of employment under the legislation
will be provided at the wage rate to be specified by the
Central Government for the purpose of this legislation. Until
such time a wage rate is specified by the Central
Government for an area, the minimum wage rate fixed by
the State Government under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948
for agricultural labourers shall be considered as the wage
rate applicable to that area.
(v) If an eligible applicant is not provided work as per the
provisions of this legislation within the prescribed time limit,
it will be obligatory on the part of the State Government to
pay unemployment allowance at the prescribed rate.
(vi) A Central Employment Guarantee Council at the Central
level and State Employment Guarantee Councils at the State
level in all States where the legislation is made applicable
will be constituted for review, monitoring and effective
implementation of the legislation in their respective areas.

88
(vii) The Standing Committee of the District Panchayat, District
Programme Coordinator, Programme Officers and Gram
Panchayats have been assigned specific responsibilities in
implementation of various provisions of the legislation at
the Gram Panchayat, Block and District levels.
(viii) The Central Government shall establish a fund to be called
‘National Employment Guarantee Fund’ for the purposes of
this legislation. Similarly, the State Governments may
constitute State Employment Guarantee Funds.
(ix) Pr ovisions for transparency and accountability, audit,
establishment of grievance and redressal mechanisms and
penalty of non-compliance are also envisaged.
(x) Provisions for Minimum features of Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme and conditions for guaranteed rural
Employment under a scheme and minimum entitlements of
labourers have been laid.
4. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions
contained in the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
New Delhi; RAGHUV ANSH PRASAD SINGH
The 17th December, 2004.

NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1. —This clause gives the short title of the Bill and the area
to which it extends. Sub-clause (3) provides that the proposed
legislation shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and
different dates may be appointed for different States or for different
areas in a State and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of the proposed legislation shall be construed as a
reference to the coming into force of that provision in such State or,
as the case may be, in such area.
Clause 2. —This clause contains definition of certain terms used in
the Bill. The definitions of “adult”, “applicant”, “Block”, “Central
Council”, “District Programme Coordinator”, “Household”,
“implementing agency”, “minimum wage”, “National Fund”,
“notification”, “poor household”, “preferred work”, “prescribed”,
“Programme Officer, “Project”, “Rural area”, “Scheme”, “State Council”,
“unskilled manual work” and “wage rate” have been given in this
clause. The expression “poor household” means a household living
during the relevant financial year below the poverty line and includes
the households of all primitive tribal groups as approved by the
Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Tribal Affairs.
Clause 3. —This clause describes the guarantee of employment to
poor rural households. As per this Clause, the State Government shall,
in such rural area in the State and for such period as may be notified
by the Central Government, provide to every poor household whose
adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than
one hundred days of such work in a financial year in accordance with
the Scheme made under the proposed legislation. This clause further
provides that every person who has done the work given to him
under the Scheme shall be entitled to receive wages at the wage rate
for each day of work on a weekly basis or in any case not later than
a fortnight after the date on which such work was done. This clause
also provides that the Central Government or the State Government
may within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make
provisions for securing work to every adult member of a household
under a Scheme for any period beyond the period guaranteed under
sub-clause (1), as may be expedient.
89

90
Clause 4. —This clause provides that for the purposes of giving
effect to the provisions of clause 3, every State Government shall,
within six months from the date of commencement of the proposed
legislation, by notification, make a Scheme, for providing not less than
one hundred days of guaranteed employment in a financial year to
every household in the rural areas covered under the Scheme and
whose adult members, by application, volunteer to do unskilled manual
work subject to the conditions laid down by or under the proposed
legislation and in the Scheme. This clause also requires that the State
Governments shall provide adequate publicity to the Scheme in the
areas where it is to be implemented. The minimum features of the
Scheme are specified in Schedule I.
Clause 5. —This clause provides that the State Government may,
without prejudice to the conditions specified in Schedule II, specify in
the Scheme the conditions for providing guaranteed employment under
the proposed legislation. The persons employed under any Scheme
made under the proposed legislation shall be entitled to such facilities
not less than the minimum facilities specified in Schedule II.
Clause 6. —This clause defines the wage rate for the purpose of
this Bill. This clause also provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Central Government,
may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of the
proposed legislation, which may be different for different areas. Until
such time as a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect
of any area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State
Government under section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for
agricultural labourers shall be considered as the wage rate applicable
to that area.
Clause 7. —This clause lays down the terms and conditions for
payment of unemployment allowance. If an applicant for employment
under the Scheme is not provided employment as per the provisions
of the proposed legislation within fifteen days of receipt of his
application seeking employment or from the date on which the
employment has been sought in the case of an advance application,
whichever is later, he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment
allowance in accordance with this clause. The unemployment allowance
payable shall be paid to the applicants of a household subject to the
entitlement of the household at such rate as may be specified by the
State Government, by notification, in consultation with the State
Council, provided that no such rate shall be less than one-fourth of

91
the wage rate for the first thirty days during the relevant financial
year and not less than one-half of the wage rate for the remaining
period of the financial year. This clause further lays down the
conditions under which the liability of the State Government to pay
unemployment allowance to a household during any financial year
shall cease. It also provides for the mechanism for payment of
unemployment allowance.
Clause 8. —This clause provides for the measures to be taken if the
Programme Officer is not in a position to disburse the unemployment
allowance in time or at all for any reasons beyond his control.
Clause 9.—This clause lays down the conditions which would make
an applicant ineligible to claim the unemployment allowance payable
under the proposed legislation for a period of three months. The
applicant will, however, be eligible to seek employment under the
Scheme at any time including that period.
Clause 10.—This clause provides that the Central Government shall,
by notification, constitute a Council to be called the Central
Employment Guarantee Council to discharge the functions and perform
the duties, assigned to it by or under the proposed legislation. This
clause further provides for the composition of the Central Council and
the terms and conditions of appointment of the Chairperson and other
members and the time, place and procedure of the meetings of the
Central Council.
Clause 11. —This clause lays down the functions and duties of the
Central Council.
Clause 12. —This clause provides that the State Government shall,
by notification, constitute a State Council to be know as the....(name of
the State) State Employment Guarantee Council for the purposes of
regular monitoring and reviewing the implementation of the proposed
legislation at the State level. This clause further provides for the
composition of the State Council and the terms and conditions of their
appointment of the Chairperson and other members, the time, place
and procedure of the meetings of the State Council and its functions
and duties.
Clause 13.—This clause provides that the Panchayat at district level
in every district within which a Scheme is being implemented shall
constitute a Standing Committee consisting of such number of its
members and subject to such terms and conditions as may be laid

92
down by rules by the State Government, to supervise, monitor and
oversee the implementation of the Scheme within the District. This
clause further provides for the co-option of members, the functions of
the Standing Committee and the role of the District Programme
Coordinator to assist the Standing Committee in discharging its
functions under the proposed legislation and any scheme made
thereunder.
Clause 14. —This clause provides that the Chief Executive Officer
of the District Panchayat or the Collector of the district or any other
district level officer of appropriate rank as the State Government may
decide shall be designated as the District Programme Coordinator for
the implementation of the Scheme in the district. If further provides
the responsibilities and functions of the District Programme Coordinator.
It also prescribes various modalities to facilitate effective functioning
of the District Programme Coordinator.
Clause 15. —This clause provides that for every Block, the State
Government shall appoint a person with such qualifications and
experience as may be determined by the State Government, as the
Programme Officer for implementing the Scheme in that Block. If
further lays down the responsibilities and functions of the Programme
Officers.
Clause 16. —This clause sets out the responsibilities of the Gram
Panchayat in implementation of the provisions of the proposed
legislation and the Scheme made there under. It also defines the role
of the Programme Officer vis-a-vis the Gram Panchayat.
Clause 17.—This clause provides that the Gram Sabha shall monitor
the execution of works within the Gram Panchayat and conduct regular
social audit of all projects under the scheme taken up within the Gram
Panchayat. The Gram panchayat shall make available all relevant
documents to the Gram Sabha for the purpose of conducting the social
audit.
Clause 18. —This clause provides that the State Government shall
make available to the District Programme Coordinator and the
Programme Officers necessary staff and technical support as may be
necessary for the effective implementation of the Scheme.
Clause 19. —This clause relates to the grievance redressal
mechanisms under the proposed legislation. The State Government
shall, by rules, determine appropriate grievance redressal mechanisms

93
at the Block level and the district level for dealing with any complaint
by any person in respect of implementation of the Scheme and lay
down the procedure for disposal of such complaints.
Clause 20.—This clause provides that the Central Government shall,
by notification, establish a fund to be called the National Employment
Guarantee Fund for the purposes of the proposed legislation. The
Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans such sums of
money as the Central Government may consider necessary to the
National Fund. This Clause further provides that the amount standing
to the credit of the National Fund shall be utilized in such manner
and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed
by the Central Government, by rules.
Clause 21. —This clause provides that the State Government may ,
by notification, establish a fund to be called the State Employment
Guarantee Fund for the purposes of the implementation of the Scheme.
It further lays down the conditions for operationalisation and
functioning of the State Employment Guarantee Fund.
Clause 22. —This clause lays down the funding pattern for
implementation of the proposed legislation and defines the liabilities
of the Centre and the State Government.
Clause 23. —This clause provides for various mechanisms for
ensuring transparency and accountability in the implementation of the
Scheme under the proposed legislation.
Clause 24. —This clause provides for arrangements to be put in
place for audit of accounts of the Scheme at all levels.
Clause 25. —This clause relates to penalty for non-compliance. It
provides that any person who contravenes the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees.
Clause 26. —This clause seeks to empower the Central Government
to delegate its powers (except the power to make rules) to the State
Governments or such officers of the Central Government or State
Governments. Such delegation shall be subject to the conditions and
limitation as may be imposed by the Central Government.
Clause 27. —This clause seeks to empower the Central Government
to give directions to the State Governments, for effective implementation
of the provisions of the proposed legislation.

94
Clause 28. —This clause provides that the proposed legislation will
have over-riding effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained
in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument
having effect by virtue of such law. It further provides that where a
State enactment exists or is enacted to provide employment guarantee
for unskilled manual work to rural household consistent with the
provisions of this Bill under which the entitlement of the households
is not less than and the conditions of employment are not inferior to
what is guaranteed under this legislation, the State Government shall
have the option of implementing its own enactment.
Clause 29. —This clause seeks to empower the Central Government
to amend Schedule I or Schedule II if that Government is satisfied
that it is necessary or expedient to do so.
Clause 30. —This clause seeks to provide for protection of action
taken in good faith by the District Programme Coordinator, Programme
Officer or any other person who is, or who is deemed to be, a public
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 31.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make
rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause
(2) thereof enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may
be made. The rule making under this clause is subject to previous
publication.
Clause 32. —This clause empowers the State Government to make
rules to carry out provisions of the proposed legislation. Such rules
shall be consistent with the Act and the rules made by the Central
Government. The rule making under this clause is subject to previous
publication.
Clause 33. —This clause provides for laying of rules made by the
Central Government before each House of Parliament and the rules
and schemes made by the State Government before each House of the
State Legislature.
Clause 34. —This clause empowers the Central Government to
remove difficulties, if any, arising in giving effect to the provision of
the proposed legislation by order. Such orders can be issued before
the expiry of three years from the commencement of the proposed
legislation.
Schedule I. —This Schedule lays down the minimum features of a
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme to be made under the provisions
of the proposed legislation.

95
Schedule II.—This Schedule lays down the conditions for Guaranteed
Rural Employment under a Scheme and the minimum entitlements of
labourers.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the bill provides that a State Government shall, in
such rural area in the State and for such period as may be notified by
the Central Government, provide to every poor household whose adult
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one
hundred days of such work in a financial year in accordance with the
Scheme made under the proposed legislation. This will require a large
number of works to be taken up under the Scheme to be prepared in
each State where the legislation is to be implemented. This will entail
expenditure on execution of works on material and wage components
of the projects. The wage component of projects will be entirely borne
by the Central Government while seventy-five per cent of the cost of
material components (including the wages of skilled and semi-skilled
workers) would be borne by the Central Government. The expenditure
under the Scheme will depend on the number of persons reporting
for work, wage rate and the composition of the wage and material
components of the works. Assuming that wage and material
components would be in the ratio of sixty is to forty and the average
wage rate would be sixty rupees per day, the cost of generating
employment is estimated to be one hundred rupees per person per
diem. Hence, the cost of providing one hundred days of employment
to a poor household in a financial year is estimated to be ten thousand
rupees. If the whole country is covered under the legislation, the total
requirement of funds on material and wage components including the
State share of funds is estimated to be approximately thirty-eight
thousand six hundred crore rupees of which the Central share will be
thirty-four thousand seven hundred forty crores rupees (this does not
include administrative expenses). Although the total expenditure would
depend on the extent of coverage of areas of the country under the
proposed legislation, it has estimated that if the legislation is extended
to 150 districts where the National Food for Work Programme is being
implemented, the requirement of central funds will be approximately
eight thousand nine hundred eighty-four crore seventy lakh rupees.
The State Government will bear twenty five per cent, of the material
component (including the wages of skilled and semi-skilled workers).
Since the employment is to be provided every year this expenditure
would be a recurring expenditure.
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, by
notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of the proposed
96

97
legislation which may be different for different areas. Until such time
the wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of any
area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government
under section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for agricultural
labourers shall be considered as the wage rate applicable to that area.
The wages under this legislation are to be paid to the labourers at the
wage rate. At present, the minimum wage rates for agricultural
labourers in the State vary from twenty-five rupees to one hundred
thirty-five rupees. For the purpose of financial estimates, an average
wage rate of sixty rupees per person per diem has been assumed.
While fixing the wage rate, the Central Government may take into
consideration the criteria and factors in addition to and other than
those provided in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. The financial liability
of the Central Government will vary according to the wage rate fixed
for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
Clause 7 of the bill provides that if an applicant for employment
under the Scheme made under the proposed legislation is not provided
employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking
employment or from the date on which the employment has been
sought in the case of an advance application, whichever is later, he
shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance. The
unemployment allowance shall be paid to the applicants of a household
subject to the entitlement of the household as a unit at such rate as
may be specified by the State Government, by notification, in
consultation with the State Council provided that no such rate shall
be less than one-fourth of the wage rate for the first thirty days during
the relevant financial year and not less than one-half of the wage rate
for the remaining period of that year. The liability of the State
Government to pay unemployment allowance to a household during
any financial year shall cease as soon as the household of the applicant
has earned as much from the wages and unemployment allowance
taken together which is equal to the wages for one hundred days of
work during the financial year. The entire expenditure on account of
unemployment allowance is to be borne by the State Government.
However, the principal objective of the legislation is to guarantee wage-
employment to the rural poor household and adequate provisions have
been made enabling the State Government to formulate an appropriate
Scheme in such a manner that the need for payment of unemployment
allowance will be minimum.
Clause 10 of the Bill provides that there shall be constituted a
Council to be called the Central Employment Guarantee Council to

98
discharge the functions, and perform the duties, assigned to it by or
under this legislation. The Council shall have both official and non-
official members. The terms and conditions subject to which the
Chairperson and other members of the Central Council may be
appointed and the time, place and procedure of the meetings of the
Central Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government. The Central Government will bear all expenses of the
Central Council which will be of a recurring nature and would be a
part of the administrative costs permissible under the Scheme.
Clause 12 of the Bill provides that the State Government shall
constitute a Council to be called the... (name of the State) State
Employment Guarantee Council for the purposes of regular monitoring
and reviewing the implementation of this legislation at the State level.
The Council shall have both official and non-official members. The
terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and other
members of the State Council may be appointed and the time, place
and procedure of the meetings of the State Council shall be such as
may be prescribed by the State Government. The State Government
will bear all expenses of the State Council which will be of a recurring
nature. In so far the State Councils for Union territories are concerned,
the Central Government will have to bear the expenditure.
Clause 13 of the Bill provides that the Panchayat at district level
in every district within which a Scheme is being implemented shall
constitute a Standing Committee consisting of such number of its
members and subject to such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed by the State Government to supervise, monitor and oversee
the implementation of the Scheme within the district. This is the normal
function of the District Panchayats and expenditure for this purpose
would be borne by the District Panchayats.
Clause 15 of the Bill provides that for every Block, the State
Government shall appoint a person with such qualifications and
experience as may be determined by the State Government, as
Programme Officer for implementing the Scheme in that Block. The
Programme Officer would be a crucial person for the implementation
of the Scheme. The salary and allowances of the Programme Officer
and his supporting staff would be borne by the Central Government
out of the admissible administrative expenses, which will be a recurring
expenditure.
Clauses 16 and 17 of the Bill lay down the role and responsibilities
of the Gram Panchayats in implementation of the Scheme made under

99
this legislation. In order to effectively carry out their responsibilities,
the capacity building of the Gram Panchayats will be needed and its
expenditure will be borne by the Central Government from the funds
provided for administrative expenses.
Clause 18 of the Bill provides that the State Government shall
make available to the District Programme Coordinator and the
Programme Officers necessary staff and technical support as may be
necessary for the effective implementation of the Scheme. The cost of
the staff support to the Programme Officers will be borne by the
Central Government while all other incidental expenses, if any, needed
to operationalise this clause will be borne by the State Government.
Clause 20 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall,
by notification, establish a fund to be called the National Employment
Guarantee Fund for the purposes of this legislation. The Central
Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans such sums of money
as the Central Government may consider necessary to the National
Fund.
Clause 21 of the Bill provides that the State Government may, by
notification, establish a fund to be called the State Employment
Guarantee Fund for the purposes of the implementation of the Scheme.
Clause 22 of the Bill provides the funding pattern of various costs
of implementation of the proposed legislation Sub-clause (1) provides
that the Central Government shall meet the costs of wages for unskilled
manual work under the Scheme, upto three-fourths of the material
cost of the Scheme including payment of wages to skilled and semi-
skilled workers subject to the provision that the material component
does not exceed 40 per cent under the projects, and such percentage
of the total cost of Scheme as may be determined by the Central
Government towards administrative expenses, which may include the
salary and allowances of the Programme Officers and their supporting
staff, the administrative expenses of the Central Council, various
facilities to be provided to the labourers and such other items as may
be decided by the Central Government. It is estimated that if two
percent of the programme cost is earmarked for administrative
expneses, it would be adequate for effective implementation of the
programme. Sub-clause (2) provides that the State Government shall
meet the costs of unemployment allowance payable under the Scheme,
one-fourth of the material cost of the Scheme including payment of
wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the provision that

100
the material component does not exceed 40 per cent under the projects,
and the administrative expenses of the State Council. These costs will
be of a recurring nature.
Clause 28 of the Bill provides that where a State enactment exists
or is enacted to provide employment guarantee for unskilled mannual
work to rural households consistent with the provisions of this Bill
under which the entitlement of the Households is not less than and
the conditions of employment are not inferior to what is guaranteed
under this Bill, the State Government shall have the option of
implementing its own enactment. It further provided that in such cases
the financial assistance shall be paid to the concerned State Government
in such manner as shall be determined  by the Central Government,
which shall not exceed what the state would have been entitled to
receive under this Act had a Scheme made under this Act had to be
implemented. It is estimated that there will be no additional financial
liability for the Central Government under this clause.
Paragraph 24 of Schedule II of the Bill provides that if any personal
injury is caused to any person employed under the Scheme by accident
arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shall be entitled
to, free of charge, such medical treatment as is admissible under the
Scheme. Paragraph 25 of Schedule II further provides that where
hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State Government
shall arrange for such hospitalisation including accommodation,
treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance not less than
half of the wage rate required to be paid had the injured been engaged
in the work. The expenditure on such medical expenses, hospitalisation
and daily wages would be borne by the Central Government within
the limit fixed for admissible administrative expenses and will be a
recurring expenditure.
Paragraph 26 of Schedule II provides that if a person employed
under a Scheme dies or becomes permanently disabled by accident
arising out of and in the course of employment, he shall be paid by
the implementing agency an ex gratia  payment at the rate of ten
thousand rupees or such amount as may be notified by the Central
Government, and the amount shall be paid to the legal heirs of the
deceased or the disabled, as the case may be. The expenditure on
such payments would be borne by the Central Government within the
limit fixed for admissible administrative expenses and will be a
recurring expenditure.
Paragraph 27 of Schedule II provides that the facilities of safe
drinking water, shade for children and periods of rest, first aid box

101
with adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries
and for other health hazards connected with the work being performed
shall be provided at the work site. These are normal amenities to be
provided by any employer and as such State Government would be
required to provided sufficient safeguards and meet consequential
expenses, which will be a recurring nature.
Paragraph 28 of Schedule II of the Bill provides that in case where
at least twenty women are employed at a worksite, provision shall be
made for one of them to be deputed to look after any children under
the age of six years who may be brought to the work site, if need
arises. Paragraph 29 provides further that the person deputed under
paragraph 28 shall be paid wage rate. The expenditure on such
payments would be borne by the Central Government under the
admissible unskilled wage component and will be of a recurring
expenditure.
Paragraph 33 of Schedule II of the Bill provides that if any personal
injury is caused be accident to a child accompanying any person who
is employed under a Scheme, such person shall be entitled to, free of
charge, within the limit fixed for admissible administrative expenses,
such medical treatment for the child as may be specified in the Scheme
and in case of death or disablement, through an ex gratia  payment as
may be determined by the State Government. The expenditure on such
payments would be borne by the Central Government and will be of
a recurring expenditure.
The Central Government will have to bear the expenditure in
relation to implementation of the proposed legislation in so far as the
Union territories are concerned.
Apart from the estimates given above, as the exact expenditure
which will be involved in implementing the proposed legislation will
depend upon the areas in which the Schemes will be implemented
and these are required to be decided after the Bill is passed, it is not
practicable to make an exact estimate of the recurring and non-recurring
expenditure for the financial year 2004-05.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 of the Bill empowers every State
Government to make a scheme for providing not less than one hundred
days of guaranteed employment in a financial year to every household
in the rural areas covered under such scheme and whose adult
members by application volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The
scheme is intended to give effect to the provisions of clause 3 of the
Bill. Sub-clause (2) of clause 4 requires that the State Government
shall publish a summary of the scheme made by it in atleast two local
newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular language circulating
in the area or areas to which the scheme shall apply. Sub-clause (3) of
clause 4 provides that the scheme should have the minimum features
as specified in Schedule I of the Bill.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to amend Schedule I and Schedule II, by notification, if
it considers it necessary or expedient to do so. Every notification issued
under this sub-clause is required to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates the
matters in respect of which such rules may be made under the
proposed legislation. These matters, inter alia,  relates to the number of
representatives of the State Governments under clause (e) of sub-section
(3) of section 10, the terms and conditions subject to which the
Chairman and other members of the Central Council may be appointed,
and the time, place and procedure of the meetings (including the
quorum at such meetings) of their appointment to the Central Council,
under sub-section (4) of section 10, the manner in which and the
conditions and limitations subject to which the National Fund shall be
utilized under sub-section (3) of section 20 and the rules relating to
funding pattern to meet the cost of certain items under sub-section (1)
of section 22.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 32 of the Bill empowers the State
Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates the
matters in respect of which such rules may be made under the
102

103
proposed legislation. These matters, inter alia,  relates to the terms and
conditions upon which eligibility for unemployment allowance may
be determined under sub-section (2) of section 7, the procedure for
payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (6) of section
7, the terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and
members of the State Council may be appointed, and the time, place
and procedure of the meetings (including the quorum at such meetings)
of their appointment to the State Council, under sub-section (2) of
section 12, the number of members of the Standing Committee at
district level and their terms and conditions of their appointment, under
sub-section (1) of section 13, the grievance redressal mechanism at the
Block level and the District level and the procedure to be followed in
such matter under section 19, the manner in which and the conditions
and limitations subject to which the State Fund shall be utilized under
sub-section (2) of section 21, the authority who may administer and
the manner in which he may hold the State Fund under sub-section
(3) of section 21, the manner of maintaining books of accounts of
employment of labourers and the expenditure under sub-section (2) of
section 23, the arrangement required for proper execution of Schemes
under sub-section (3) of section 23 and the form and manner in which
the accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained under sub-section (2)
of section 24.
5. The scheme made by the State Government is required to be
laid before the State Legislature. The rules which may be made by the
Central Government or the State Government under the proposed
legislation shall be subject to previous publication and shall be required
to be laid before the Parliament and the State Legislature respectively.
6. The aforesaid matters in respect of which schemes or rules may
be made or notification may be issued under clause 29 relate to matters
of procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power
is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the poor
households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one
hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial
year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do
unskilled manual work and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
——————
(Shri Raghuvansh Prasad Singh, Minister of Rural Development)
104

APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
THE LIST OF EXPERTS/REPRESENTATIVES OF ORGANIZATIONS/
INDIVIDUALS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
Sl.No. Name of the experts/organizations
12
1. All India Democratic Women’s Association
(i) Smt. Brinda Karat, Vice-President
(ii) Smt. Subhashini Ali
2. National Federation of Indian Women
(i) Ms. Sehba Farooqui, General Secretary
(ii) Ms. Primla Loomba
3. (i) Dr. Jean Dre’ze, Honorary Professor
(Delhi School of Economics)
(ii) Shri Nikhil Dey
(Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan)
4. (i) Prof. Prabhat Patnaik, Professor (Centre for
Economic Studies and Planning, School of Social
Sciences, JNU)
(ii) Prof. Jayati Ghosh, Professor (Centre for Economic
Studies and Planning, School of Social Sciences, JNU)
5. National Commission on Farmers, Ministry of
Agriculture
Shri Atul Sinha, Member Secretary
6. Centre of Indian Trade Unions
Shri W.R. Varada Rajan, National Secretary
7. Centre for Women’s Development Studies
(i) Shri Narayan Banerjee, Director
(ii) Smt. Indrani Majumdar
8. Shri V .P . Singh, Former Prime Minister
9. All India Agricultural Workers Union
Shri Suneet Chopra, Joint Secretary
105

106
12
10. Hind Mazdoor Sabha
Shri R.A. Mittal, Secretary
11. Peoples Action for Employment Guarantee
(i) Shri Subhash Bhatnagar,
(ii) Smt. Annie Raja,
(iii) Prof. Kamal Mitra Chinoy
(iv) Shri R.A. Mittal, Hind Mazdoor Sabha
12. Shri Bimal Jalan, M.P . Rajya Sabha
13. Institute of Social Sciences
Shri George Mathew
14. National Federation of Blind
(i) Shri S.K. Rungta, General Secretary ,
(ii) Prof. Miss Amita Dhanda
15. Shri V .K. Saxena, Former Chief Secretary Government
of Uttar Pradesh

APPENDIX III
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF MAHARASHTRA EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE SCHEME AND THE NATIONAL RURAL
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE BILL, 2004
Maharashtra National Rural
Employment Guarantee Employment Guarantee
Scheme Bill, 2004
12
107
Scope:
It extends to the whole of rural
areas of the State of Maharashtra.
Target:
It is self targeted.
It extends to the whole of India
except the State of J&K. In
accordance with Clause 1(3) of the
Bill, it shall come into force on
such date as the Central Govt.
may, by notification appoint and
different dates may be appointed
for different States or for different
areas in a State.
In the present formulation the
proposed Bill will target families
living below the poverty lines in
rural areas. However, considering
the nature of guarantee being
offered through unskilled manual
work and the experience of the
Ministry in implementing Jawahar
Rozgar Yojana (JRY), Employment
Guarantee Scheme (EAS) and
Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana
(SGRY), which shows that these
programmes were self-targeting, if
sufficient care is taken to
implement the programme strictly,

108
12
it should be possible to restrict the
benefits to the really needy by
removing the poverty-qualification
in the guarantee can be
considered.
A minimum of 100 days of
guaranteed wage employment in
every financial year.
The Bill extends to every rural
poor household whose adult
members volunteer to do
unskilled manual work.
The Bill seeks to provide work at
minimum wage rates for
agricultural labourers as fixed by
the State Governments. However,
the Bill contains an enabling
provision that the Central Govt.
may specify the wage rate for the
purposes of this Act provided that
different rates of wages may be
specified for different areas.
If an applicant is not provided
employment within 15 days of
Extent of Guaranteed Wage:
No minimum duration for the
guaranteed wage employment is
prescribed under the Act.
Every Adult person in the rural
areas in Maharashtra has a right
to work, i.e.  a Right to get
Guaranteed Employment for doing
unskilled manual work and
receive wages there. Where there
is no able bodied adult member
in a family, a minor member of
such family, who has completed
his age of fifteen years, shall also
be entitled to register his name
and address for employment and
shall be paid wages according to
the quantum of his work.
Statutory Minimum Wages:
Wages to be paid according to the
schedule of rates which shall be
fixed by the State Govt. for
different types of work from time
to time. The schedule of rates shall
be so fixed that a person working
diligently for 7 hrs. a day would
normally get a total wage subject
to the minimum wage for
agricultural labourer as fixed by
the State Govt. from time to time.
Unemployment Allowance:
If within 15 days of the receipt of
the letter for employment under

109
12
the scheme, the State Govt. is
unable to provide employment
subject to the conditions for
employment, the person shall be
entitled to receive from the
Employment Guarantee Fund an
Unemployment Allowance at such
rate as may be fixed by the State
Govt. from time to time but not
less than Rs. 1/- per day.
Funding:
Employment Guarantee Fund has
been established for carrying out
the purposes under the Act. The
payments under the Fund are
made as follows:-
(i) Amounts transferred to the
Fund under Section 30 of the
Maharashtra State Tax on
Professions, Trade, Calling and
Employment Act, 1975 and under
Section 4 of the Maharashtra Tax
Acts (Amendments) 1975 and
amounts of matching contribution
made by the State Govts. as laid
down in the said Acts.
(ii) Any contributions/grants
made by the State Govts., the
Central Govt. or any local
authorities.
(iii) Any sums received from other
Bodies or individuals whether
incorporated or not.
receipt of his application subject
to all other terms & conditions for
eligibility as prescribed by the
State Govt., the State Govt. shall
pay unemployment allowance at
a rate which shall not be less 1/
4th of the wage rate for the first
30 days during the financial year
and not less than 1/2 of the wage
rate for the remaining period of
the financial year.
The Bill provides for establishment
of National Employment
Guarantee Fund and State
Employment Guarantee Fund for
the purposes of the Act.
The Central Govt. may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament
by Law in this behalf, credit by
way of grants or loans such sums
of money as the Central Govt.
may consider necessary to the
National Fund.
The State Employment Guarantee
Fund shall be established by the
State Govt.
Financial liabilities of the Central
Govt.
(i) Amount required for payment
of wages for unskilled manual
work under the Scheme.
(ii) Upto 3/4th of the material cost
of the scheme including payment
of wages to skilled and semi
skilled workers subject to the
provisions of the Schedule II.

110
12
(iii) Such percentage of the total
cost of the scheme as may be
determined by the Central Govt.
towards administrative expenses
which may include salary and
allowances of the programme
Officers and his staff, the
administrative expenses of the
Central Council, facilities to be
provided under Schedule II and
other items as may be decided by
the Central Govt.
Financial liabilities of the State
Govt.
(i) Cost of unemployment
allowance.
(ii) 1/4th of the material cost of
the scheme including payment of
wages to skilled and semi-skilled
workers subject to the provisions
of Schedule II.
(iii) Administrative expenses of the
State Council.
Fiscal burden on States
If the proposed legislation comes
into force the fiscal burden of the
State Government towards any
Employment Guarantee Scheme of
the State will be mainly shared by
the Central Government.
Besides Gram Panchayats the
other implementing agencies for
taking up various projects under
the scheme can be deptts. of
Central or State Govt., other
Panchayati Raj Institutions, NGOs
Implementing Agencies:
Any Deptt. of the State Govt.,
Zilla Parishad, any other local
authority or State Govt.
undertaking which is entrusted by
State Govt. with the task of

111
12
implementing any works taken up
under the scheme.
Implementation Structure:
The Maharashtra Employment
Guarantee Act provides the
following implementation
structure:
The Collector of the District shall
be responsible for the
implementation of the Scheme in
the District and for this purpose
all other officers of the State
Government, the Zilla Parishad
and other local authorities or
bodies functioning in the District
and having for their jurisdiction
an area not bigger than the
District shall be responsible to the
Collector.
The Commissioner of the Division,
or any officer or officers not below
the rank of Assistant
Commissioner designated by him
in this behalf, shall be competent
to supervise and review the
implementation of the Scheme in
the Division. The Commissioner
shall be competent to issue
directions to the Collectors, other
officers (including divisional level
officers), local authorities and
other bodies regarding
implementation of the Scheme,
and it shall be incumbent on all
of them to carry out such
directions.
or any other local authority or
Govt. undertaking.
The implementation structure
suggested in the Bill is as udner:
District Level:  The Chief
Executive Officer (CEO) of the
District Panchayat or the Collector
of the District or any other district
level officer of equivalent rank as
the State Govt. may decide shall
be designated as the District
Programme Coordinator for the
implementation of the scheme in
the district.
Block Level: The State Govt. shall
appoint a Programme Officer for
administering the scheme in the
area. The Programme Officer
would be responsible to the
District Programme Coordinator.
Gram Panchayat Level:  The
primary responsibility of the Gram
Panchayat shall be to register the
household and provide them job
cards. Each Gram Panchayat shall
identify the felt needs of their area
and prepare a development plan.
The Programme Officer may allot
at least fifty percent of the works
in terms of its cost under the
Scheme to be implemented
through the Gram Panchayats.

112
12
For the purpose of implementation
of the Scheme, the Collectors,
other officers, local authorities and
other Commissioner to such extent
and in such manner as the State
Government may direct.
Monitoring Authorities:
For the purposes of periodical
review and supervision of the
implementation of the Act, there
is a Council called Maharashtra
State Employment Guarantee
Council. The other functions of the
Council are:
—T o advice the State Govt. on
all maters concerning this Act
and the scheme for their
implementation.
—T o undertake an evaluation
of the scheme and for this
purpose collect Statistics
pertaining to the rural
economy of the State in
general and the socio-
economic condition of the
rural labour and the
implementation of the
scheme in particular.
—T o recommend to the State
Govt. appointment of one or
more study groups for
undertaking a study of
specific questions and
problems connected with the
implementation of the Act
and the scheme.
—T o coordinate the working of
the District Level
Committees.
There shall be Central
Employment Guarantee Council
constituted by the Central Govt.
and State Employment Guarantee
Council constituted by the State
Govt. for the purpose of
monitoring various schemes
formulated under the Act.
The Councils would periodically
review, supervise and monitor the
implementation of the Scheme,
widely publicizing the Scheme,
and would advise the concerned
Governments on all matters
concerning the implementation of
the Act from time to time in their
areas.
The Panchayat at District Level in
every district shall constitute a
Standing Committee to supervise,
monitor and oversee the
implementation of the scheme
within the district. The District
Programme Coordinator in a
district shall be responsible for
implementation of the schemes
under the Act.
For every block a Programme
Officer shall be appointed for
monitoring the implementation of

113
12
The State Government shall
constitute a District Employment
Guarantee Committee in every
District and Panchayat Samiti
Employment Guarantee
Committee in every Panchayat
Samiti area. These Committees
shall, within their respective
jurisdictions, supervise and review
the implementation of the Scheme,
from time to time and shall
suggest to the State Government
such steps as in their opinion are
necessary for a more effective
implementation of this Act. The
Collector and the Samiti Officers
concerned shall from time to time,
report to the Committees the
action taken by them or the State
Government on the suggestions
made by the Committees. Every
District Level Committee shall co-
ordinate the working of the
Panchayat Samiti Committees in
the District.
Planning:
Every collector shall be asked to
prepare blue prints shall be
prepared by him as a part of the
District plan, but be based on the
Panchayat Samiti area
development plans prepared with
a view to give employment
guarantee to all adult persons for
unskilled manual work and to
make use of natural resources
actual or potential, which are
readily available in the respective
Panchayat Samiti areas. The
Collector shall place the blue
the scheme in that Block. He shall
function under the directions of
the District Programme
Coordinator.
The Gram Panchayat shall be
responsible for identification of the
projects in the Gram Panchayat
area to be taken up under a
scheme as per the
recommendations of the Gram
Sabha and the Ward Sabhas and
for executing and supervising such
works.
The Gram Sabha shall monitor the
execution of works and shall
conduct the social audit of all the
works taken up under the scheme
within the Gram Panchayat.
Clause 16(3) of the Bill provides
that every Gram Panchayat shall
after considering the
recommendations of the Gram
Sabha and the Ward Sabhas,
prepare a development plan and
maintain a shelf of possible works
to be taken up under the Scheme
as and when demand for work
arises. As per Clause 15(3) the
Programme Officer is to prepare
a plan for his Block by
consolidating the project proposals
prepared by the Gram Panchayat

114
12
and the proposals received from
intermediate Panchayats. The
Standing Committee of Panchayat
at district level is to finalise and
approve Blockwise shelf of
projects under the scheme. Hence,
it may be seen that the approach
is clearly bottom-up.
The Gram Panchayat shall register
the applicants. Applications for
work may be submitted in writing
either to the Gram Panchayat or
to the Programme Officer, as may
be specified in the Scheme.
The Gram Panchayat and
Programme Officer, as the case
may be, shall be bound to accept
valid applications and to issue a
dated receipt to the applicant.
Group applications may also be
submitted.
Applicants who are provided with
work shall be so intimated in
writing by means of a letter sent
to him at the address given in the
job card and by a public notice
displayed at the office of the
Gram Panchayat Office.
The type of work executed under
the various schemes would be:
—W ater Conservation & water
harvesting
—D rought proofing (including
afforestation & tree
plantation)
prints for approval before the
District Level Committee, which
shall give its approval after taking
into consideration the view of the
Panchayat Samiti Level
Committees.
Registration:
The Samiti Officer may direct any
person who volunteer for
employment under the scheme to
do work of any type permissible
under the Scheme.
Types of Work:
Only productive works are taken
up under the scheme. However,
if in the opinion of the State Govt.
it is necessary to provide
employment in any area on any
works to meet the conditions
created by natural calamities like
heavy rains, floods, earthquakes,

115
12
droughts, scarcity or cyclones, the
State Govt. may permit such
works being taken up under the
scheme for such temporary period
as the State Govt. may decide
from time to time.
Rationing Device:
There are no such provisions
under this Act.
Public/Private Nature of Work:
Works can be undertaken on
private lands which would
directly benefit the holders of the
land.
— Irrigation canals including
micro & mini irrigation
works.
—P rovision of irrigation facility
to land owned by households
belonging to SCs/STs.
— Renovation of traditional
water bodies, including
desilting of tanks.
— Land Development
— Flood control & protection
works, including drainage in
water logged areas.
— Rural connectivity to provide
all-weather access.
— Any other work which may
be notified by the Central
Govt.
There are no such provisions
under this Bill. The aim is to
provide wage employment to
eligible applicants.
The Bill provides for irrigation
facility to land owned by
households belong to the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes.

APPENDIX IV
PRIMITIVE TRIBAL GROUPS AND THEIR POPULATION IN
INDIA FROM 1961 TO 1991
(Figures in actual)
States/ Name of      Population
UTs. P .T.G.
1961 1971 1981 1991
12 3456
Andhra Pradesh 1. Chenchu 17609 24178 28434 40869
2. Bodo Gadaba 21840 25108 27732 33127
3. Gutob Gadaba ————
4. Dongria Khond 21754 34382 39408 66629
5. Kultia Khond ————
6. Kolam 16731 26498 21842 41254
7. Konda Reddi 35439 42777 54685 76391
8. Kondasavara — 28189 — —
9. Bondo Porja ————
10. Khond Porja 9350 12347 16479 24154
11. Parengi Porja ————
12. Thoti 546 1785 1388 3654
Total 123269 195264 189968 286078
Bihar 13. Asur 5819 7026 7783 9623
(Including
Jhakhand) 14. Birhor 2438 3461 4377 8083
15. Birjia 4029 3628 4057 6191
16. Hill Kharia 108983 127002 141771 151634
17. Korwa 21162 18717 219940 24871
116

117
12 3456
18. Mal Paharia 45423 48636 79322 86790
19. Parhaiya 12268 14651 24012 30421
20. Sauria Paharia 55605 59047 39269 48761
21. Savar 1561 3548 3014 4264
Total 257289 285719 325545 370638
Gujarat 22. Kolgha — 29464 62232 82679
23. Kathodi — 2939 2546 4773
24. Kotwalia — 12902 17759 19569
25. Padhar — 4758 10587 15896
26. Siddi — 4482 5429 6336
Total — 54545 98553 129253
Karnataka 27. Jenu Kuruba 3623 6656 34747 29371
28. Koraga 6382 7620 15146 16322
Total 10005 14276 49893 45693
Kerala 29. Cholanaikayan — 306 234 —
30. Kadar — 1120 1503 2021
31. Kattunayakan — 5565 8803 12155
32. Koraga — 1200 1098 1651
33. Kurumba — 1319 1283 1820
Total — 9510 12921 17647
Madhya Pradesh 34. Abujh Maria 11115 13000 15500 —
(including
Chhattisgarh) 35. Baiga — 6194 248949 317549
36. Bharia — 1589 1614 —
37. Birhor 513 738 561 2206
38. Hill Korwa 23605 67000 19041 —

118
12 3456
39. Kamar — 13600 17517 20565
40. Sahariya 174320 207174 281816 332748
Total 209551 309295 564998 673068
Maharashtra 41. Katkari/Kathodi — 146785 174602 202203
42. Kolam — 56061 118073 147843
43. Maria Gond — 53400 66750 —
Total — 256246 359425 350046
Manipur 44. Maram Naga — 5123 6544 9592
Orissa 45. Chuktia Bhunjia ————
46. Birhor — 248 142 825
47. Bondo — 3870 5895 7315
48. Didayi — 3055 1978 5471
49. Dongria Khond — 2676 6067 —
50. Juang — 3181 30876 35665
51. Kharia — 1259 1259 —
52. Kutia Khond — 3016 4735 —
53. Lanjia Saura — 4233 8421 —
54. Lodha — 1598 5100 7458
55. Mankirdia — 133 1005 1491
56. Paudi Bhuyan — 4424 8872 —
57. Saura — 2845 2917 —
Total — 30528 77267 58225
Rajasthan 58. Saharia 23125 26796 40945 59810
Tamil Nadu 59. Irular 79835 89025 105757 138827
60. Kattunayakan 6459 5042 26383 42761
61. Kota 833 1188 604 752

119
12 3456
62. Korumba 1174 2574 4354 4768
63. Paniyan 4779 6093 6393 7124
64. Toda 714 930 875 1100
Total 93794 105032 144366 195332
Tripura 65. Riang 56579 64722 84004 111606
Uttar Pradesh 66. Buksa — — 31807 34621
(including
Uttaranchal) 67. Raji — — 1087 1728
Total — — 32894 36349
West Bengal 68. Birhor — — 658 855
69. Lodha — 45906 53718 68095
70. Toto — — 675 —
Total — 45906 55051 68950
Andaman & 71. Great — — 42 32
Nicobar Andamanese
Islands
72. Jarawa — — 31 89
73. Onge — — 97 101
74. Sentinelesle — — _ 24
75. Shom Pen 71 212 223 131
Total 71 212 393 377
All India Grand Total 773704 1403174 2042767 2412664

APPENDIX V
EXTRACTS OF PARAS FROM THE NINTH REPORT OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-06) THE DEPARTMENT OF
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
2.42 The Committee note that in the schemes meant for providing
wage employment for manual labour work, like SGRY and Food for
Work Programme the participation of women, may not be so
encouraging. The data with regard to SGRY, as well as the observation
of the Committee during the Study-visit to Varanasi and Lucknow in
Uttar Pradesh substantiate this point. The Committee find that the
Government propose to provide 100 days of wage employment to
each family in rural area. To achieve this objective the Government
has brought a legislation. ‘The National Employment Guarantee Bill,
2004’ which is under examination of this Standing Committee. At
present National Food for Work Programme is being launched in
150 districts to achieve the said objective. The Committee feel that
serious efforts have to be made by taking the suitable action in this
regard so as to encourage participation of women under the
Employment Guarantee Scheme. The Committee would further like to
hear from the Government their experience under the National Food
For Work Programme as well as the efforts envisaged to protect the
interests of women at the work fields to enable the Committee to
analyse the position and comment further in this regard.
Reply
The participation of women in manual labour work under SGRY
and FFWP varies from State to State. In 13 States & UTs more than
30% women are getting employment under SGRY. The percentage varies
between 20-30%. Only in nine States/UTs the employment generated
for women is less than 20%. The SGRY guidelines have a provision
for facilities for creches for children coming with working mothers.
The National Food for Work Programmes also has a similar provision.
The National Food for Work Programmes was launched in November
2004. The percentage to women worker under NFFWP is 34.25% in
year 2004-05.
3.12 The Committee find from the information and clarification
provided by the Department that at present National Food for Work
120

121
Programme along with Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) is
being implemented in 150 selected districts. In the remaining district
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana is being implemented. When, the
National Employment Guarantee Act will be applicable, these two
programmes will be merged together and shall be known by the name
of the Act. While nothing the aforesaid scheme of things, the Committee
are at a loss to understand the plethora of schemes with the some
objective. Not only that it is not clear where the National Employment
Scheme will be applicable, indicating clearly where it is the replacement
of Food for Work Programme. The Committee strongly recommend
that SGRY and Food for Work Programme should be merged together
in the 150 districts selected so far which will pave the way for
100 days guarantee. The merged scheme should be known as National
Employment Guarantee Scheme which will ultimately be proposed to
take the shape of legal guarantee after the aforesaid enactment.
Reply
The SGRY and Food for Work Programme would be merged in
150 districts after the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
comes in force in these districts. The National Rural Employment
Guarantee Bill is already introduced in Lok Sabha.
3.13 The Committee find from the Budget documents as well as
replies furnished by the Department that allocation and utilisation has
been indicated state-wise. The Committee note that in view of the
existing system of indicating and monitoring data, it is not possible to
know the performance of the programme in the selected 150 districts.
The Committee would like to recommend that district-wise physical
and financial achievement should be indicated against each of the
districts so as to know the impact of the programme in each of the
districts. Such data will also enable the Government to know the
various shortcomings in the programme which will ultimately be taking
the shape of guarantee scheme.
Reply
The district-wise physical and financial achievements will be given
at the time of submitting Action Taken Report on Paras.
3.14 The Committee further fail to understand the difference
between the most backward districts selected by the Department for
the purpose of National Food for Work Programme with those of
170 most backward districts mentioned by the Finance Minister in his

122
Budget speech. The Committee would like the Department to analyse
the position in this regard and furnish explanation to the Committee.
The Committee would also like to strongly recommend that while
selecting the districts for National Food for Work Programme, it should
be strictly ensured that parameters for selection of districts are such
that first of all the most backward districts in a State get the due
priority in the Programme.
Reply
The district under National Food for Work Programme was selected
on the basis of exercise undertaken by the Planning Commission based
on three para-metres namely; SC/ST populations, inverse of agricultural
productivity and agricultural wage. The districts mentioned by the
Finance Minister is a later exercise by the Planning Commission based
on different para-metres.
3.15 The National Employment Guarantee Bill (2004) is being
examined by this Committee and all related matters will be analysed
and suitably recommended in the report. At this stage, the Committee
would like to say that although the Government has started the Food
for Work Programme in 150 districts meant to achieve the similar
objective as of the said legislation, there is no planning on the part of
the Government as to how the Guarantee Scheme will be applicable
throughout the country. The Committee are constrained to find that so
far no exercise has been made to know that the estimated outlay that
will be required to cover the whole country with the said guarantee.
The Committee fail to understand how the Government would be
achieving the objective of such an ambitious legislation. The Committee
strongly recommend that the Government should do the desired home-
work so that such a big programme with laudable objectives could be
translated into reality.
Reply
The estimate of outlay has been given in reply to question No. of
the questionnaire.
3.31 The Committee find that during 10th Plan under Sampoorna
Grameen Rozgar Yojana Planning Commission has allocated for cash
component Rs. 18,538 crores lesser than the proposed allocation.
Similarly during 2005-06, the allocation is 1,428 crore lesser than the
proposed allocation. Under National Food for Work Programme during
2005-06, the allocation for cash compnent is Rs. 573 crore higher than
the proposed allocation. The Committee further note that SGRY will

123
be applicable in the districts where National Food for Work Programme
which eventually will be converted into Guarantee Scheme is not
applicable. In such a situation, the Committee hold the view that till
the scope of NFFWP is further extended, the majority of the districts
will be covered by SGRY. In such a situation the Committee recommend
that due priority should be accorded to SGRY. The outlay under
National Food for Work Programme should not be provided at the
cost of SGRY.
Reply
Due priority shall continue to be given to SGRY and outlay of
National Food for Work Programme will not be at the cost of SGRY.
3.32 The Committee further find that with regard to the payment
for foodgrains component under SGRY as well as NFFWP , there is
utter confusion. They note that as per the recent decision, the payment
for foodgrains component will directly be managed by the Ministry of
Finance. As per the data reported by the Secretary during evidence
Rs. 15,000 crore is the outstanding payment to Food Corporation of
India. The Committee also note that during 2005-06, no allocation has
been indicated against the proposed allocation of Rs. 27,375.87 crore
under SGRY and Rs. 2,313 crore under NFFWP for foodgrains
component. In such a scenario the Committee fail to understand how
the Government will fulfil the commitment of providing adequate
allocation under the wage employment programme of the Department.
The Committee feel that, the specific allocation and outstanding due
to Food Corporation of India should invariably be indicated in the
Budget documents irrespective of the fact whether payment is made
by the Ministry of Rural Development or Ministry of Finance to the
Food Corporation of India or to the Department of Food and Public
Distribution (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution)
so as to know about the clear picture of the allocation. The Committee
would like to be clearly informed how the Government propose to
arrange for the outlay for the employment guarantee for which
ambitious commitments have been made in the National Common
Minimum Programme as well as in the Budget announcements.
Reply
Under the National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, the
foodgrains are not essential to be given as part of the wages.
3.33 The Committee are disappointed to note the implementation
of SGRY in some of the States particularly Uts. The Committee are
further constrained to note the reply of the Department stating that

124
Union Territories have never utilized their allocated resources to the
fullest extent under SGRY and as such no district under Food for
Work Programme was included for Union Territories. The Committee
strongly recommend to analyse the reasons for poor performance in
each of the States as indicated in the preceding para of the report and
take the corrective action immediately. The Committee may also be
kept informed about this. The Committee are unable to understand
poor performance of SGRY in Union Territories which are directly
under the administrative control of the Union Government. They would
like the explanation of the Department in this regard.
Reply
The UTs are getting resources under various schemes and due to
their small size, the demand for wage employment is less.

APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 19 JANUARY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room
‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shri L. Ganesan
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri Dawa Narbula
7. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
8. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
9. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
13. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
15. Shri Penumalli Madhu
16. Shri Kalraj Mishra
17. Dr. Chandan Mitra
18. Dr. Faguni Ram
19. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
125

126
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
Representatives of Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development)
1. Shri M. Shankar, Secretary
2. Shri V . Subramanian, Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
3. Shri J.K. Mohapatran, Joint Secretary (SGSY)
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
(Legislative Department)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure)
1. Shri Anurag Goel, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Vivek Rae, Joint Secretary (PF-II)
Representative of Planning Commission
1. Dr. (Smt.) Rohini Nayyar, Advisor (RD)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened for briefing by the representatives of
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)
on ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ referred to
the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 23 December,
2004.
3. The Hon’ble Chairman thereafter, outlined the importance of
the Bill which seeks to secure wage employment for the poor
households in rural areas as a guaranteed entitlement. He also
highlighted certain critical areas which needed to be addressed carefully
by the Committee. These included extension of the Act in a time bound
manner, minimum wages, targeting Below Poverty Line (BPL)
households for coverage under the said Bill, mobilization of resources
etc.

127
4. The Chairman then invited the suggestions of the Committee
for examination of the Bill. The Committee after deliberations decided
to invite memoranda on the Bill from the public in general and experts/
professionals/organizations/associations interested in the subject in
particular through print and electronic media followed by oral evidence.
The Committee also noted that the responsibility of implementation of
various provisions of the Bill was with the respective State/UT
Governments. Besides, as stated by the Ministry, 25 per cent of the
material component, the expenditure to be incurred on unemployment
allowance and administrative expenses etc. had to be borne by the
respective State/UT Governments. The Committee noted with concern
that inspite of all these factors, the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of
Rural Development did not hold any formal consultation with the
State Governments before finalisation of the said legislation. Since the
cooperation of the State Governments and Union territory
Administrations is the pre-requisite for the implementation of various
provisions of the Bill, the Committee decided that views of all the
State Governments/Union territory Administrations followed by
evidence at a later stage should be taken by the Committee after
seeking the permission of Hon’ble Speaker as per direction 60(1) of
the ‘Directions by the Speaker’, Lok Sabha.
[The representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development), Ministry of Law and Justice
(Legislative Department), Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) and Planning Commission were then called in].
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministries of
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development), Law and
Justice (Legislative Department), Finance (Department of Expenditure)
and Planning Commission to the sitting and drew their attention to
direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’.
6. The Committee was then briefed by the representatives of the
Ministry of Rural Development. A presentation on the various aspects
of the Bill was made by the Ministry. The main issues that came up
during the course of briefing were role of the State Governments/
Union territory Administrations with regard to implementation of the
Bill, if enacted in terms of availability of funds, difficulty in
implementation at ground level and likely increase in litigation,
widening the scope of the Bill for the reach of beneficiaries, absence
of time bound implementation of the Bill etc.

128
7. The Committee, thereafter, decided that officials of Standing
Committee on Rural Development be invariably invited in review
meetings of the Ministry of Rural Development convened for
monitoring of different schemes of Rural Development in the country
and in seminars being organised by the Ministry with a view to have
closer view about implementation of schemes. The same was agreed
to by the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development.
8. The representatives thereafter withdrew.
9. The Committee then, decided to hold the next sitting on
2 February, 2005 for further examination of the Bill.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX VII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 2 FEBRUARY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shri Mohan Jena
4. Shri Dawa Narbula
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
6. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
7. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
8. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
9. Shri Mohan Singh
10. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
Rajya Sabha
11. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
12. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
13. Shri Penumalli Madhu
14. Dr. Chandan Mitra
15. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
129

130
Representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Shri Wajahat Habibullah, Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudha Pillai, Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
Representatives of Ministry of Labour & Employment
1. Shri K.K. Mittal, Director General (Employment & Training)
2. Dr. Ashok Sahu, Labour & Employment Adviser
3. Shri P .K. Ray, Deputy Director General (Employment)
Representatives of Ministry of Tribal Affairs
1. Smt. P . Jyoti Rao, Secretary
2. Shri S. Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation)
1. Shri Champak Chatterji, Additional Secretary
2. Shri M.M. Nampoothiry, Economic & Statistical Adviser
3. Shri Naved Masood, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened for briefing by the representatives of
Ministries of (i) Panchayati Raj (ii) Tribal Affairs (iii) Labour &
Employment and (iv) Agriculture (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation) on ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’
referred to the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on
23 December, 2004.
3. The Chairman, thereafter pointed out that while examining the
various provisions of the Bill, it was felt that besides the nodal Ministry,
certain clarifications were required from various other Ministries viz.
Ministries of (i) Panchayati Raj (ii) Tribal Affairs (iii) Labour &
Employment and (iv) Agriculture (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation). He informed the members that the representative of the
aforesaid Ministries would brief the Committee on issues related
to the Bill, with specific reference to the matters under their
jurisdiction.
[The representatives of the Ministries of (i) Panchayati Raj (ii) Tribal
Affairs (iii) Labour & Employment and (iv) Agriculture (Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation) were then called in.]

131
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the aforesaid
Ministries to the sitting of the Committee and invited their comments
on pertinent issues related to their respective Ministries.
5. The Committee was then briefed by the representatives of the
respective Ministries on various provisions of the aforesaid Bill, one
by one. The representatives of the Ministries also responded to various
queries raised by members. The main issues that surfaced during the
course of discussion related to ambiguity regarding role and
responsibilities of Panchayats, devolution of funds, functions and
functionaries to Panchayats, threat of violation of spirit of Part IX of
the Constitution by giving more power to the Programme Officer,
updating of data related to primitive tribal groups for targeting
beneficiaries, universal application etc. for implementation of provisions
of the Bill.
6. The representatives thereafter withdrew.
7. The Committee then, decided to hold the next sitting on
14 February, 2005.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX VIII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 31 MAY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri Dawa Narbula
6. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
7. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
8. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
9. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
14. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
15. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
16. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
17. Shri Penumalli Madhu
18. Dr. Chandan Mitra
19. Dr. Faguni Ram
20. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
132

133
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achari — Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
Name of the experts who tendered evidence
1.All India Democratic Women’s Association
(i) Shrimati Brinda Karat, Vice-President
(ii) Shrimati Subhashini Ali
2.National Federation of Indian Women
(i) Ms. Sehba Farooqui, General Secretary
(ii) Ms. Primla Loomba
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the sitting
of the Committee. He then informed the members of the status of
examination of ‘The National Rural Employment Bill, 2004.’ The
aforesaid Bill was referred to the Committee on 23 December, 2004.
The Committee at their sittings held on 19 January, 2005 and 2 February,
2005 were briefed about the provisions of the Bill by the nodal Ministry
as well as by the concerned Ministries. Thereafter, the views of experts/
organizations and public at large were invited through print and
electronic media. In response to the Press Communique issued, the
Secretariat had received 610 memoranda out of which 285 memoranda
were not related to the Bill. Besides, 220 memoranda were received in
regional languages; whereas the views were called only in English
and Hindi version. Thus, 105 memoranda were related to the subject.
Besides, the views of State Governments and Union territory
Administrations were also invited with the permission of Hon’ble
Speaker. The Secretariat had received communication from 15 State
Governments and 3 Union territory Administrations.
3. The Chairman further informed the Committee that he had
received a letter from Hon’ble Minister of Rural Department requesting
him to expedite the report on the aforesaid Bill. Hon’ble Minister had
also written to Hon’ble Speaker in this regard. Hon’ble Speaker had
also communicated the intention of the Government to pass the Bill
during the Budget Session as it had far reaching impact on large

134
sections of the rural areas. Besides, he had also received a letter from
Shri Hannan Mollah, MP and member of the Committee signed by
ten other members of the Committee suggesting expeditious finalisation
of the report. The Chairman appreciated the intention of the
Government as well as members of the Committee to expedite the
finalisation of the report and apprised the Committee that much
progress on the examination of the Bill could not take place as the
Committee were busy with the examination of Demands for Grants
2005-2006 and Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2004-2005.
Eight reports in this regard were presented to Parliament.
4. As soon as the work relating to Demands for Grants was over,
the Secretariat was busy with the examination of the Bill. The sittings
for the purpose were fixed on 5 and 6 May, 2005. However, the sittings
had to be cancelled due to NDA boycott of Parliament and
Parliamentary Committee. All these developments had been
communicated to Hon’ble Speaker. Hon’ble Speaker vide his note dated
11 May, 2005 directed that the report on the aforesaid Bill be finalized
by 24 June, 2005. The Chairman then sought the cooperation of the
members of the Committee so that the report could be prepared by
the deadline given by Hon’ble Speaker.
5. The Committee then took evidence of the following experts/
representatives of organizations/individuals on the provisions contained
in ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ at the time
specified against each.
Name From to
1. All India Democratic Women’s Association 1130 1215
(i) Shrimati Brinda Karat, Vice-President
(ii) Shrimati Subhashini Ali
2. National Federation of Indian Women 1230 1315
(i) Me. Sehba Farooqui, Genreal Secretary
(ii) Ms. Primla Loomba
Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the Committee,
the Chairman welcomed them and drew the attention of each of the
witnesses to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the
Speaker.’

135
6. The witnesses who deposed before the Committee expressed
reservations on certain issues like restricting the employment guarantee
to BPL families, definition of family, lack of commitment of the
Government to expand the guarantee to the country in a time bound
manner, provision empowering the Government to withdraw the
guarantee, limited role of Panchayati Raj Institutions etc. The experts
suggested suitable alternatives and amendments on the concerns raised
by them on the aforesaid Bill. The experts also responded to the
clarifications sought by members of the Committee. On some of the
queries raised by members to which they could not respond at the
moment, they were asked to send the replies to the Secretariat at the
earliest.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1430 hrs.

APPENDIX IX
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 31 MAY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
6. Shri Dawa Narbula
7. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
8. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
9. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
10. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
17. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
18. Shri Penumalli Madhu
19. Dr. Chandan Mitra
20. Dr. Faguni Ram
21. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
136

137
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
Name of the experts who tendered evidence
1. (i) Dr. Jean Dre’ze, Honorary Professor, Delhi School of
Economics
(ii) Shri Nikhil Dey
2. (i) Prof. Prabhat Patnaik, Professor, Centre for economic Studies
and Planning, School of Social Science, JNU
(ii) Prof. Jayati Ghosh, Professor, Centre for Economic Studies
and Planning, School of Social Sciences, JNU.
3. National Commission on Farmers, Ministry of Agriculture
(i) Shri Atul Sinha, Member Secretary
(ii) Shri S.S. Prasad
4. Centre of Indian Trade Unions
Shri W.R. Varada Rajan
2. The Committee resumed evidence and the following experts/
individuals/organizations deposed before the Committee one by one
on the provisions of ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill,
2004’ at the time specified against each.
Name From To
12 3 4
1. (i) Dr. Jean Dre’ze, Honorary Professor, 1430 1500
Delhi School of Economics
(ii) Shri Nikhil Dey,
Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan
2. (i) Prof. Prabhat Patnaik, Professor, 1500 1545
Centre for Economic Studies and
Planning, School of Social Sciences, JNU.
(ii) Prof. Jayati Ghosh, Professor,
Centre for Economic Studies and Planning,
School of Social Sciences, JNU

138
12 3 4
3. National Commission on Farmers, 1545 1630
Ministry of Agriculture
(i) Shri Atul Sinha, Member Secretary
(ii) Shri S.S. Prasad
4. Centre of Indian Trade Unions 1645 1715
Shri W.R. Varada Rajan
Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the Committee,
the Chairman welcomed them and drew the attention of each of the
witnesses to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the
Speaker.’
3. The experts who deposed before the Committee expressed serious
reservations on the various provisions of the Bill. There was a
unanimous view among the experts that there should be universal
application of the employment guarantee. The guarantee should be
self targetting. Besides, concerns were also expressed on lack of
commitment of the Government for time bound extension of the
legislation all over the country, wages to be provided for the purposes
of the Bill, provision of switch off of guarantee, limited role of
Panchayati Raj Institutions, lack of sensitivity towards women and
physically handicapped persons etc.
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided to postpone the sittings of
the Committee scheduled to be held on 10 and 11 June, 2005 to
13 and 14 June, 2005.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet on 1 June, 2005 at 1100 hrs.

APPENDIX X
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 1 JUNE, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
6. Shri Dawa Narbula
7. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
8. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
9. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
15. Shri Penumalli Madhu
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Dr. Faguni Ram
18. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
139

140
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
Name of the experts who tendered evidence
1. Centre for Women’s Development Studies
(i) Shri Narayan Banerjee, Director
(ii) Smt. Indrani Majumdar
2. Shri V .P . Singh, Former Prime Minister
3. All India Agricultural Workers Union
Shri Suneet Chopra, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened to take oral evidence of the experts on
‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004.’
3. The Committee then took evidence of the following experts/
representatives of organizations/individuals at the time indicated
against each.
Name From To
1. Centre for Women’s Development Studies 1130 1200
(i) Shri Narayan Banerjee, Director
(ii) Smt. Indrani Majumdar
2. Shri V .P . Singh, Former Prime Minister 1200 1230
3. All India Agricultural Workers Union 1230 1315
Shri Suneet Chopra, Joint Secretary
Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the Committee,
the Chairman welcomed them and drew the attention of each of the
witnesses to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Direction by the
Speaker’.
4. The experts deposing before the Committee made crucial
observations/suggestions regarding the various provisions of the Bill
for the consideration of the Committee. On some of the issues such as
making the guarantee self targetting under the legislation, extending
the Bill to the entire country in a time bound manner, broadening the

141
scope of works listed under Schedule I etc. there was near unanimity
among the experts.
5. The experts responded to the various queries raised by members
of the Committee pertaining to the Bill. On some of the queries raised
by members to which they could not respond at the moment, they
were asked to send the written replies to the Secretariat.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1430 hrs.

APPENDIX XI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 1 JUNE, 2005
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. R.B.S. Verma— in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
6. Shri Dawa Narbula
7. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
8. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
9. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
15. Shri Penumalli Madhu
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Dr. Faguni Ram
S
ECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
142

143
Name of the Experts who tendered evidence
1. Hind Mazdoor Sabha
Shri R.A. Mittal, Secretary
2. Peoples Action for Employment Guarantee
(i) Shri Subhash Bhatnagar
(ii) Smt. Annie Raja
(iii) Prof. Kamal Mitra Chinoy
(iv) Shri R.A. Mittal, Hind Mazdoor Sabha
3. Shri Bimal Jalan, M.P . (Rajya Sabha)
4. Institute of Social Sciences
Shri George Mathew
5. National Federation of Blind
(i) Shri S.K. Rungta, General Secretary
(ii) Prof. (Miss) Amita Dhanda
6. Shri V .K. Saxena, Former Chief Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Prof. R.B.S. Verma to act as Chairman for the sitting under Rule 258(3)
of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee resumed evidence of the following experts/
representatives of organisations at the time indicated against each.
Name From To
12 3 4
1. Hind Mazdoor Sabha 1430 1500
Shri R.A. Mittal, Secretary
2. Peoples Action for Employment Guarantee 1500 1530
(i) Shri Subhash Bhatnagar
(ii) Smt. Annie Raja
(iii) Prof. Kamal Mitra Chinoy
(iv) Shri R.A. Mittal, Hind Mazdoor Sabha
3. Shri Bimal Jalan, M.P . (Rajya Sabha) 1545 1615
4. Institute of Social Sciences 1615 1640
Shri George Mathew

144
5. National Federation of Blind 1640 1700
(i) Shri S.K. Rungta, General Secretary
(ii) Prof. (Miss) Amita Dhanda
6. Shri V .K. Saxena, Former Chief Secretary, 1700 1730
  Government of Uttar Pradesh
Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the Committee,
the Chairman welcomed them and drew the attention of each of the
witnesses to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the
Speaker.’
4. The experts/representatives of the organizations and individuals
who deposed before the Committee made some crucial observations
on the various provisions of the Bill. The suggestions tendered before
the Committee were almost on the same lines as suggested by experts
in the earlier sittings of the Committee.
5. The Committee sought various clarifications on the certain
provisions of the Bill from the experts. The experts were asked to
send the replies to the queries raised by members, the information in
respect of which was not readily available.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
12 3 4

APPENDIX XII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 13 JUNE, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
6. Shri Subhash Maharia
7. Shri Hannan Mollah
8. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
9. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
10. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
11. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
17. Shri Penumalli Madhu
18. Shri Kalraj Mishra
19. Dr. Chandan Mitra
20. Dr. Faguni Ram
21. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
145

146
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development)
1. Shri M. Shankar, Secretary
2. Shri V . Subramanian, Additional Secretary & FA
3. Shrimati Amita Sharma, Joint Secretary
Representative of Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure)
Shri Anurag Goel, Additional Secretary
Representatives of Planning Commission
1. Dr. Pronab Sen, Principal Advisor (PP)
2. Dr. (Shrimati) Rohini Nayyar, Senior Consultant (RD)
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Dr. D.P . Sharma, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. Santokh Singh, Additional Legal Advisor
Representative of Ministry of Tribal Affairs
Shri S. Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Shrimati Sudha Pillai, Additional Secretary
2. Shri T.R. Raghunandhan, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and the
representatives of the aforesaid Ministries to the sitting of the
Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)
on ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’. He also
welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure), Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal
Affairs), Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Panchayati Raj and
Planning Commission present at the sitting to assist the Committee.
The Chairman then drew their attention to direction 55(1) of ‘Directions
by the Speaker.’

147
3. The Chairman, thereafter, indicated in brief some of  the major
issues pertaining to the aforesaid Bill on which experts/representatives
of organizations, individuals etc., who deposed before the Committee
had expressed serious reservations. Such issues included universal
application and self targeting of the employment guarantee emphasized
in the Bill, lack of commitment on the part of the Government to a
time bound extension of the guarantee to the whole of the country,
provisions in the Bill enabling the Government to switch off the
guarantee at any time, restricted role of Panchayats, minimum wages
to be provided for the purposes of the legislation, financial implication
etc.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the nodal Ministry on the aforesaid Bill. The Secretary first of all
responded to the issues raised by Hon’ble Chairman. He agreed that
universal application of the employment guarantee was the desired
and the best way of providing the guarantee under the legislation.
Not only that, he assured the Committee that the Department was
ready to consider the universal application concept. The representative
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) too agreed to
shoulder the financial liabilities under the Bill. Besides, the Secretary,
Rural Development acknowledged the need for making a provision
for time bound extension of the legislation to the country as a whole.
5. The Secretary (Department of Rural Development), thereafter,
replied to the various queries raised by the members of the Committee
on the provisions of the Bill.
6. The representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs present at
the meeting made various crucial suggestions with regard to tribal
areas where the constitution of local bodies is quite different. He
suggested that in each of the Monitoring Committees at the Central,
State and district/block levels, at least one member should be from
Scheduled Tribes, instead of clubbing them with Scheduled Castes and
others. He also suggested that at the district/block level, the Ministry
has Integrated Tribal Development Project (ITDPs)/Integrated Tribal
Development Agencies (ITDAs) who should also be associated in the
tribal areas.
7. The representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj observed
that as per the provisions made in the Bill, the position of Panchayat
is not Central. He also stated that the provisions made in the Bill are
not in tune with the spirit of part IX of the Constitution. He suggested
that the Panchayats should be accorded Central position in the
legislation.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1500 hrs.

APPENDIX XIII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDA Y, THE 13TH JUNE, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
6. Shri Subhash Maharia
7. Shri Hannan Mollah
8. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
9. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
10. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
11. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
17. Shri Penumalli Madhu
18. Shri Kalraj Mishra
19. Dr. Chandan Mitra
20. Dr. Faguni Ram
21. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
148

149
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. He then outlined in brief some of the major issues
that have emerged during the course of the examination of the aforesaid
Bill. Further, the Chairman invited the members’ suggestions with
regard to modifications, amendments, additions or deletions pertaining
to any of the clauses of the Bill.
3. The Committee, thereafter took up clause by-clause consideration*
of the aforesaid Bill. The Committee decided to consider those clauses
first on which reservations had been expressed from various quarters.
The Committee considered clause 3(1) of the Bill read with clause 2(f),
2(k) and 2(p) of the Bill. After detailed deliberations, the Committee
noted that certain concerns had been expressed from various quarters
with regard to BPL concept, primitive tribals and restricted definition
of family etc.
The Committee noted that all these concerns would be addressed
if employment guarantee being provided under the Bill is made
universal and self targeting which means whoever offers himself/herself
for work will be provided employment at the specified wages. After
detailed deliberations, the Committee decided that a recommendation
be made for suitable amendment to the aforesaid clause of the Bill so
as to provide universal application of the guarantee.
4. The Committee thereafter deliberated clause 1(3) of the Bill
regarding date of application of ‘The National Rural Employment
Guarantee Bill, 2004’. The Committee noted that as per the existing
provisions made in the Bill, there appeared to be lack of commitment
on the part of the Government to implement the provisions of the Bill
in a time bound manner. After deliberations, the Committee felt that
there was an urgent need to indicate specified time limit in the
legislation itself so as to indicate clearly the Government’s intention to
extend the legislation in each rural area in the country. The Committee
therefore, recommended that the said clause should be amended.
5. The Committee then considered clause 6 of the Bill relating to
wage rate to be provided for the purposes of the legislation. After
detailed deliberations, the Committee decided that the wages fixed for
the purposes of the Bill should be fixed by the State Government so
*The agenda scheduled to be considered by the Committee was to take further evidence
of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development). Since the
evidence was concluded in the forenoon meeting the Committee decided to undertake
clause-by-clause consideration in the afternoon meeting.

150
that wages may either be 75 per cent of National floor level wage or
the minimum wage level which may be higher.
6. The Committee thereafter considered clauses 7 and 12 of the
Bill and para 27 of Schedule II of the Bill read with ‘Financial
Memoranda’ of the Bill. The Committee noted that as per the existing
provisions, State Government have to bear over 10 per cent of financial
implication. Keeping in view the poor financial position of most of the
State Governments, the Committee decided to recommend that 100
per cent financial burden should be shouldered by the Union
Government. However, the expenditure on account of unemployment
allowance amount should be borne by the State Governments to put
a pressure on State Governments to provide employment.
7. The Committee thereafter considered clause 7 and clause 9 of
the Bill and suggested some amendments to the aforesaid clauses of
the Bill.
8. The Committee thereafter considered clause 10(3) of the Bill
relating to composition of Central Employment Council and State
Employment Council. The issue of making provision for inclusion of
backward classes in the composition of the said Councils was debated
at length by the Committee. The Committee could not decide on the
said issue and decided to defer the issue to the next sitting of the
Committee.
The Committee decided to resume further clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill at the next sitting of the Committee scheduled
to be held on 14 June, 2005.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on
Tuesday, the 14 June, 2005.

APPENDIX XIV
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-05)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 14TH JUNE, 2005
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
6. Shri Hannan Mollah
7. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
8. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
9. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
10. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
11. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
12. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
13. Shri Mohan Singh
14. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
15. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
16. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
17. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
18. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
151

152
19. Shri Penumalli Madhu
20. Shri Kalraj Mishra
21. Dr. Chandan Mitra
22. Dr. Faguni Ram
23. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
2. The Committee resumed consideration of the remaining clauses
of ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004.’ These related
to provisions under Schedule I and Schedule II of the Bill, power to
amend these Schedules, penalty for non-compliance, transparency and
accountability, commencement of a new work under the scheme and
provisions for women and disabled persons under the guaranteed
legislation. The Committee, considered each clause in detail and after
exhaustive deliberation, suggested suitable modifications to the
respective clauses contained in the Bill.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the deferred issues
relating to representation to backward classes in the Central
Employment Council and State Employment Council. After detailed
deliberation the Committee decided that such number of representatives
of backward classes as the Central Government/State Government
decide should be represented on such councils.
The Committee then adjourned to meet on 20 May, 2005 for
consideration and adoption of the Draft Report on the aforesaid Bill.

APPENDIX XV
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-05)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 20th June, 2005 from 1100 hrs.
to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
6. Shri Subhash Maharia
7. Shri Hannan Mollah
8. Shri Dawa Narbula
9. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
10. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
11. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
12. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
13. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
17. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
18. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
19. Shri Penumalli Madhu
153

154
20. Dr. Chandan Mitra
21. Dr. Faguni Ram
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee.
2. The Committee then took up for consideration of the Draft
Report on ‘The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ and
deliberated on the recommendations contained in the Draft Report at
length. The Draft Report was then adopted with some modifications.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid Draft Report and present the same to the Hon’ble Speaker.
The Committee then adjourned.