23
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.3.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 16.3.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 29
Price : Rs. 98.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2006-2007) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government .......................................................... 35
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ............................................................................ 47
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ...................................................... 48
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ....... 74
APPENDICES
I. Physical and Financial Status of Swajaldhara
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 as on
21 August, 2006 .......................................................... 75
II. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 27 February, 2007 ....................................... 89
III. Analysis of Action taken by the Government
on the recommendation contained in the
Twentieth Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha) ........................................................ 91

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shrimati Susmita Bauri
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri George Fernandes
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
9. Shri Hannan Mollah
10. Shri D. Narbula
11. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
12. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
13. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
16. Shri Sita Ram Singh
17. Shri D.C. Srikantappa *
18. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri D.C. Srikantappa, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Urban Development to Committee on Rural Development vice
the vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Shrichand Kriplani MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Rural Development to Standing Committee on Chemicals
and Fertilizers vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, para No. 2847 dated August 31, 2006.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary-I

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty-Third Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of
Drinking Water supply (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 May,
2006. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 23 August, 2006.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
27 February, 2007.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee
is given in Appendix III .
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 March, 2007 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2006-2007)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) of the Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of
Rural Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 May,
2006.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 34 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
 (i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.4, 3.20, 3.45, 4.11, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10, 6.10, 6.11, 8.11,
8.12 and 8.25.
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s reply:
NIL
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 3.21, 3.22, 3.28, 3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 3.42, 3.43, 3.44,
3.51, 3.52, 4.10, 4.17, 4.18, 4.19, 6.9, 7.8, 8.13, 8.14, 8.22, 8.23
and 8.24
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
NIL
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Issue of unspent balances under ARWSP
Recommendation Serial No. 2 and 3
(Para Nos. 3.21 and 3.22)
4. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that providing drinking water in rural areas
is one of the six components of the ambitious programme of the

2
Government `Bharat Nirman’. The total fund requirement for the
years 2005-2009 as projected to meet the different components
viz coverage of schools, coverage of left-over habitations, coverage
of slipped back/newly emerged habitations, tackling water quality,
outstanding liability for Swajaldhara, calamity, DDP , O&M and
sustainability is Rs. 41,636.971 crore. The yearly allocation may
come to around Rs. 9,000 crore. At present level of annual
allocation i.e. Rs. 5,200 crore during the year 2006-07, it is difficult
to achieve the targets set under Bharat Nirman. Even the
Department has agreed to the inadequacy of allocation. In view
of the aforesaid position, the Committee strongly recommend to
enhance the allocation for drinking water sector. The Committee
would also like the Department to apprise them as to how the
projections made under Bharat Nirman would be met keeping in
view the fact that the level of allocation during the first two
years of Bharat Nirman i.e. 2005 and 2006 is very low as
compared to the projections”.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)
“The Committee note that even the allocation provided during
each of the year is not being meaningfully utilised. The Committee
are concerned to note that as on 31 December, 2005 Rs. 2,113.30
crore was lying unspent with State Governments. Another area
of concern is the low level of achievement by the different State
Governments. The percentage expenditure was 76.58 per cent in
2004-05 and 47.45 per cent in 2005-06. The Department has cited
non-receipt of monthly progress reports by the States reflecting
up-to-date expenditure as the reason for unspent balances. Even
the updated expenditure figures received from the Department
for the Central sector indicate that the expenditure reported was
83.83 per cent during 2004-05 and 47.45 per cent during the year
2005-06. The Committee are not inclined to accept the casual
reply of the Department stating non-receipt of monthly progress
reports as the reason for unspent balances in this era of
technological advancement. The Committee have repeatedly been
expressing their concern over the under-spending with various
State Governments. Inspite of that, there seems to be little
improvement in this regard. In view of this scenario, the
Committee strongly recommend to the Department to take all
the desired action to ensure that every paisa earmarked for the
drinking water sector is meaningfully utilised. As regards the
issue of getting monthly progress reports from the State
Governments, the Committee would like the Department to evolve

3
some mechanism so that online reporting can be ensured from
the State Governments”.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.2 2)
5. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as under:
“It is a fact that the allocation made during 2005-06 and 2006-07
was not as per projections made for the requirement of funds
under Bharat Nirman. The Department would strongly take up
this issue with Planning Commission for providing enhanced
allocation in the coming two years of Bharat Nirman. The State
Governments have also framed their Action Plan. However, for
the funding gaps, the States have been asked to seek external
funding, loan from NABARD, etc”.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)
“The Department has put in place an online monitoring
mechanism for monthly progress reports. A training programme
is being organized to familiarize the States for data entry in the
software. Once the States start using this system, the timely receipt
of expenditure figures will be ensured.
From 2006-07, only 10 per cent carried over funds will be allowed
as against 15 per cent till last year. In case the opening balance
is more than 10 per cent (till last year it was 15 per cent), a cut
equivalent to opening balance in excess of 10 per cent will be
imposed at the time of release of second instalment. This would
be a deterrent factor and the States would ensure utilization of
funds released under ARWSP . Letters have been sent to the States
having large opening balance for ensuring full utilization”.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.2 2)
6. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had raised their
concern over inadequate allocation to meet the set targets under the
ambitious programme ‘Bharat Nirman’ with reference to its drinking
water component. In response to the Committee’s recommendation,
the Department has now assured to take up the matter strongly
with Planning Commission. Besides, it has also been stated that the
States have been asked to seek external funding loan from NABARD
etc. The Committee find that although more than two years of Bharat
Nirman have already passed, the Department has yet to get the
adequate allocation for achieving the set targets. Besides, the

4
Committee disapprove the way the responsibility of arranging outlay
has been passed on to the State Governments whereas the Bharat
Nirman is the project of the Union Government and the targets are
being fixed by them. In view of the aforesaid scenario, the Committee
strongly recommend to the Ministry to take up the issue of
inadequate allocation at the highest level. The matter should be taken
up at the Cabinet Secretary level and the observations of the
Committee in this regard should be conveyed.
Another area of concern expressed by the Committee in their
earlier recommendation was huge opening balances with the various
State Governments. The Department instead of explaining the reasons
for under utilization of resources has simply stated that an online
monitoring mechanism has been put in place which will ensure the
timely receipt of data. Another deterrent measure taken by the
Department is to decrease the permissible percentage of carried over
funds by the State Governments from 15 per cent to 10 per cent. In
case the opening balance by a State Government is more than
10 per cent, a cut equivalent to opening balance in excess of 10 per cent
will be imposed at the time of release of second instalment. The
Committee feel that the progressive States would be benefited by
the aforesaid measure of imposing cut in the funds to be allocated
to underperforming States. The under performing States which are
in need of more allocation would actually be deprived of their due
share. While expressing concern over the under utilization of
resources by these States, the Committee note that much more needs
to be done to motivate the State Governments to implement ARWSP
seriously. Besides there is an urgent need to know the State specific
reasons responsible for under utilization of resources under this
priority programme so that suitable measures can be taken in this
regard. The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to
find out the States/district-wise problems and take action accordingly.
The Committee should also be kept informed about the same.
B. Inter component allocation under ARWSP
Recommendation Serial No. 5, 7 and 8
(Para Nos. 3.28, 3.30 and 3.31)
7. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note with concern that the inter-State and inter-
component funding pattern under ARWSP is extremely
complicated and as such monitoring such a complex criteria
becomes an onerous task. Thus, reiterating their earlier

5
recommendation, the Committee suggest to the Department to
simplify the pattern”.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
“On the question of how the prescribed inter-component funding
pattern under ARWSP is ensured, the Department has failed to
submit a categorical reply. The Committee feel that monitoring
of implementation of inter-component allocation merely through
periodical meetings and conferences is not practical or feasible.
There is no mechanism to supervise States that do not adhere to
the norm of inter-component allocation under ARWSP . The
Committee desire that a system should be put in place whereby
it could be ensured that States adhere to the norm of inter-
component allocation”.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.30)
“The Committee have been informed by the Secretary during
oral evidence that remaining Not Covered habitations are in
remote and difficult areas and achieving the target for NC
habitations is difficult. Apart from coverage of NC habitations,
quality of drinking water and sustainability have emerged as
extremely relevant issues and as such rigid allocation for the
said aspects is not justified in the changed scenario. The
Committee would further like to add that the States have their
unique and peculiar problems with regard to quality and
sustainability in drinking water sector and hence providing for
rigid allocation under various components is not desirable.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to provide
flexibility to States to utilise the amount earmarked for quality
and sustainability depending upon their local conditions and
requirements. The Committee would like the Department to take
urgent corrective action in this regard and suitably modify the
guidelines of ARWSP allowing the States flexibility to spend more
than a minimum threshold. The Committee may be accordingly
apprised of the Department’s assessment on the issue. Till the
issue is finalised the Committee urge the Department to formulate
an appropriate monitoring mechanism for the same”.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.31)
8. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as under:
“The Department has considered the earlier recommendation of
the Standing Committee for simplifying the funding pattern. The

6
funding pattern for different components has been kept taking
into account the importance of that component, fund requirement
and capacity of the State to contribute funds for that component.
At present, it would not be desirable to change the existing
funding pattern. However, this would be reviewed at an
appropriate time”.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
“The system being followed by the Department is as follows:
A. There is a separate allocation for Swajaldhara and Water
Quality. Adherence of the norms of funding pattern of these
components are monitored at the time of releasing the
second and the subsequent instalment.
B. In DDP and Calamity components, there is no State share
and thus there is no need for such a mechanism.
C. Funds released under ARWSP (Normal) are utilized for the
following components:
(i) operation and maintenance upto 15 per cent. The
funding pattern for this is 50:50 between Centre and
States;
(ii) sustainability upto 5 per cent. The funding pattern for
this is 75:25 between Centre and States; and
(iii) rest of the funds ar e utilised for Coverage. The funding
pattern for this is 50:50 between Centre and States.
50 per cent of the allocated funds are released to the States
towards first instalment in the beginning of the financial year.
On attaining the 60 per cent expenditure of the available funds
(first instalment + carry over funds of the last year), State
Government is required to send a proposal for release of second
instalment in the prescribed format. In this prescribed format, all
the details relating to expenditure incurred on O&M, sustainability
and coverage are mentioned. In case, there is excess expenditure
on O&M, the said expenditure is treated as inadmissible and
corresponding cut equivalent to the excess expenditure is made
in the second instalment. Further, while calculating the State share,
the funding pattern of various components is taken into account.
As an example, if the expenditure incurred on sustainability is
(0.05 x), the share to be provided by the State Government would
be (0.95 x) + (0.05 x)/3. Thus a mechanism exists to monitor the
expenditure incurred on different components under ARWSP
(Normal)”.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.30)

7
“The Committee’s suggestion to provide flexibility to States to
utilize the amount earmarked for quality and sustainability
depending upon their local conditions and requirements has been
examined by the Department. On the basis of the request received
from the State Governments with the approval of the Cabinet in
February 2006, it has been decided to retain 20 per cent of the
ARWSP funds at the Centre for releasing to quality affected States
only to provide focused funding for tackling water quality
problems. Revised guidelines on sub-mission on water quality
have already been issued in the month of March, 2006 (available
on the Department website www.ddws.gov .in). Activities for
sustainability will be taken up by the State Governments out of
5 per cent of ARWSP funds allocated to them for the purpose,
under the delegated power. As reporting of sub-mission projects
on source sustainability is still not proportionate to even 5 per
cent of ARWSP funds released to the State Governments, they
were directed to ensure that 5 per cent is spent exclusively on
sub-mission projects related to water sources. It is being impressed
upon the State Governments that sustainability of sources should
be an integral part of the water supply systems. The State
Departments dealing with rural water supply will have to
coordinate with other sectoral programmes to address the issue
of sustainability” .
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.31)
9. The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the
Department to simplify the inter-State and inter-component funding
pattern under ARWSP . As per the existing criteria funds are provided
under different components to the States for covering rural
habitations with drinking water facilities which are as follows:
(i) ARWSP (Normal): Under this, component funds are
allocated to the States for covering rural habitations and
schools with drinking water facility. 15 per cent of funds
can be utilised for O&M of rural water schemes. The
funding pattern for this is 50:50 between Centre and State.
States can utilise upto 15 per cent of their annual allocation
for taking up projects for sub-mission projects on quality,
5 per cent for sub-mission projects on sustainability. The
funding pattern for sub-mission projects is 75:25 between
Centre and State.
(ii) ARWSP (DDP): About 5 per cent of annual plan allocation
is earmarked to States covered by Desert Development
Programme. The funding pattern for this is 100 per cent
from the Centre.

8
(iii) ARWSP (Sector Reforms/Swajaldhara): Upto 20 per cent
of ARWSP allocation can be utilised for sector reforms
later scaled up as Swajaldhara. The funding pattern under
this is 90 per cent from Centre and 10 per cent through
community contribution.
(iv) AR WSP (calamity relief): 5 per cent of the ARWSP
allocation is kept aside for giving financial assistance to
States for restoration of water supply suffered on account
of natural calamity. The funding pattern under this is
100 per cent from Centre.
Even though the Committee had been pursuing this matter year
after year, the Department has not bothered to consider and
implement the recommendation of the Committee. In the replies
now furnished to the Committee, it has been stated that it would
not be desirable to change the existing funding pattern and the
same would be reviewed at an appropriate time. The Committee
express serious concern over the vague and unsatisfactory reply of
the Department. On the issue of monitoring, the expenditure under
the different heads as stated above, the Department has stated that
they have devised a formula in this regard. The formula stated by
the Department in this regard is as under:
“if the expenditure incurred on sustainability is (0.05 x), the share
to be provided by the State Government would be (0.95 x) +
(0.05 x) / 3. Thus, a mechanism exists to monitor the expenditure
incurred on different components under ARWSP (Normal)”.
The Committee are unable to comprehend this complicated
formula and fail to understand how the component wise expenditure
would have been monitored by the Department with this complicated
formula. The Committee may like to reiterate here that due to distinct
and peculiar problems of each State and region, it is not appropriate
to provide for such a rigid allocation of different components. For
instance, a particular State may face major impediment with regard
to tackling a particular component such as quality etc., hence they
may require to spend more on the aforesaid component. State
Governments should, be provided flexibility to use the earmarked
allocation keeping in view the State specific problems viz non-
availability, quality, sustainability etc.
In view of this scenario, the Committee would like to reiterate
their earlier recommendation to simplify the inter- State and inter-
component funding pattern under ARWSP .

9
C. Inter-State allocation under ARWSP
Recommendation Serial No. 6  (Para No. 3.29)
10. The Committee had recommended as under:
“During the Conferences of States’ Ministers incharge of drinking
water supply, it was highlighted by a number of States to provide
more funds under ARWSP and change the funding pattern to
75:25 for Centre and States. While noting that steps have been
initiated to change funding pattern for North-Eastern States, the
Committee would stress that there is a need to explore similar
options with respect to other States that are facing resource
constraint and have large number of habitations in difficult areas.
The Committee urge the Department to take the immediate action
in this regard”.
11. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Department has seriously considered the recommendations
of the Committee for changing the funding pattern to 75:25
between Centre and the State. It may be mentioned that by
changing the funding pattern the Centre would not be able to
provide more funds to the States than what is being provided at
present. The funds of the Central Government are limited and
whatever is the Budget allocation of the Department, the same is
distributed to the States. At present States are providing an
amount equivalent to the amount that has been allocated by the
Centre. Changing the funding pattern will amount to less
contribution by the States (1/3rd of the allocation made by the
Centre) and thus there would be less availability of funds for
rural drinking water supply. The Department has decided that at
the time of formulation of Annual Plan, the Planning Commission
would be apprised of the tentative allocation of different States
so that Planning Commission could make provision of adequate
funds in the State Plan for the matching share”.
12. As per the existing formula of allocation of funds under
ARWSP , State Governments have to allocate equal amount of funds
as earmarked by the Union Government. The Committee in the
earlier recommendation while noting that steps are being initiated
to change funding pattern for North Eastern States had recommended
to explore similar options with respect to other States that are facing
resource constraint and have large number of habitations in difficult
areas. Pursuant to the recommendation, the Department has expressed

10
their limitations to implement the aforesaid recommendation. It has
been stated that the enhancing of the Central allocation would result
in decreased effective allocation under ARWSP to different States.
The Committee feel that the Department has generalized the
recommendation of the Committee for all the States. The spirit of
the recommendation was to assist those States which have large
number of habitations in difficult areas and are facing resource
constraint. The Department should first of all identify these States.
Besides, no response with regard to the status of the revision of
funding pattern with regard to North Eastern States which was under
active consideration of the Government has been given. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and
would like the Department to consider their recommendation in the
right perspective. Besides, enhanced allocation to these States should
be provided so that the issue of getting lesser effective contribution
by the States with the revised funding pattern from 50:50 to 75:25
can be addressed.
D. Authenticity of data with regard to status of coverage and the
issue of slippages
Recommendation Serial Nos. 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14
(Para Nos. 3.42, 3.43, 3.44, 3.51 and 3.52)
13. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find from the information furnished to them
that with an investment of around Rs. 50,000 crore in the drinking
water sector, the Government claims that 96 per cent of the rural
habitations have actually been covered. The Committee have
repeatedly been expressing concern over the authenticity of the
proclamations made by the Government with regard to coverage
of habitations. The status of slipped back habitations has been
reviewed in the coming part of the report. As per the
Government’s data, at present 3,164 are the not covered
habitations and 41,457 are the partially covered habitations. As
regards the achievement with regard to NC/PC habitations, the
Committee find from the data indicated by the Department that
during 8th Plan 3,39,705 habitations could be covered. Further
during 9th Plan total coverage was 4,17,951. During 10th Plan
the coverage during the first four years is 2,10,516. It could be
seen from the data that the number of coverage of habitations
has drastically reduced during 10th Plan as compared to
9th Plan”.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)

11
“Further, while reviewing the performance during the year
2005-06 the Committee note that there is gross mismatch between
the targets and achievements. Against the target of 3,522 NC
habitations the achievement during the first three quarters is
653 and similarly for PC habitations against the targets of
8,375 achievement is 5,958. The Committee further note from the
replies that one of the main reasons for lower rate of coverage
of habitations has been given to be the location of most of the
habitations being in difficult areas. In the plain areas like Punjab
and Rajasthan, deterioration of water quality of ground water
resources, high cost of surface water schemes, decision of State
Government to implement piped water supply scheme etc. have
been cited as the problems encountered regarding coverage of
habitations. While appreciating the difficulties for coverage in
hill areas, the Committee are not convinced with the reason put
forth for coverage in plain areas. The Committee feel that with
the advancement in technology, even difficult areas can be
covered. The Committee would like the Department to explore
technology options and it should be ensured that all the
uncovered habitations are covered within a stipulated time frame.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.43)
“The Committee further find that as on 1 April, 2005 there were
4,588 not covered habitations. Further as on 1 April, 2006 the
status of not covered habitations was 3,935. Thus only 653 NC
habitations could be covered during the year 2005-06. Further
the Committee also find that as per the weightage for allocation
of funds given in guidelines, upto 15 per cent of the funds can
be allocated for NC/PC habitations on 2 : 1 ratio. The Committee
find that while huge allocation might have been made to States
having more NC/PC habitations as per the Government’s data,
the status of coverage reflects that only few habitations are being
covered due to certain reasons as explained above. In view of
this scenario, the Committee would like that realistic targets for
coverage of NC/PC habitations should be set keeping in view
the ground position.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.44)
“The Committee have persistently been expressing their serious
concern over the dichotomy in the data with regard to accessibility
and availability of drinking water in rural areas in the country.
The Committee in the action taken replies on 11th Report on

12
Demands for Grants 2005-06 (refer para 7 of 14th Report –
Fourteenth Lok Sabha) had been informed that revalidation data
of habitations survey being done by Indian Institute of Public
Administration (IIPA) would be completed by February, 2006.
While examining the Demands for Grants of current year, the
Committee note that IIPA has submitted data in respect of only
14 States. Even in these States there are certain discrepancies and
now the Department proposes to conduct a random survey by
involving other agencies. The Committee deplore the way the
different surveys are being undertaken to know the position of
slippage of habitations. The Committee further find that as per
the various Budget documents since the year 2005-06 a lot of
allocation is being made and results are being indicated with
regard to coverage of slippage of habitations. The Committee fail
to understand how the status of coverage of slippage of
habitations is being reflected without having the basic facts about
ground situation in this regard. The Committee are of the view
that it is of utmost necessity to have the exact position of the
availability of drinking water in each of the habitations for future
planning. In view of this scenario, the Committee strongly
recommend that the Government should look into the matter
critically in order to finalise the parameters for conducting the
survey. The survey itself should be completed expeditiously and
the Committee be informed accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.51)
“The Committee further note from the replies that the Department
is evolving mechanism to monitor and assess slippages on regular
basis. On the basis of Monthly Progress Report and Yearly Status
Report received from the States, a software is being developed in
consultation with NIC. Besides the Committee had been apprised
that with regard to regular updation of survey, some of the State
Governments had certain reservations with regard to infrastructure
for periodic updation of slipped back habitations (refer para 7 of
14th Report). The Committee fail to understand how the updation
of the data of slipped back habitations would be possible without
having the basic data with regard to slipped back habitations.
Once the core data of slipped back habitations is available, regular
monitoring of the data may be possible. Therefore, the Department
should first of all ensure that the core data with regard to slipped
back habitations is procured at the earliest. Thereafter the
mechanism for slippage of habitations may be finalised.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.52)

13
14. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The data regarding coverage of habitations with drinking water
facilities in rural areas relates to data of habitation survey
conducted in 1991 and updated in 1999 (Comprehensive Action
Plan 1999, CAP 99) by State Governments. Based on CAP 99 and
subsequent coverage reported by States Governments, there were
4,588 Not Covered (NC), and 50,479 Partially Covered (PC), (Total
55067) out of 14,22,664 habitations as on 1.4.2005 in the country.
It may be mentioned that the habitation survey 1991 and the
subsequent updation in 1999 were done by State Governments
and the habitation wise information was maintained at the State
PHEDs. In 2005-06, 11660 CAP 1999 NC/PC habitations, 76,457
slipped back NC/PC and 4,498 water quality affected habitations
were covered. The coverage status is dynamic and there are
always possibilities of slippage from FC to PC/NC and from PC
to NC due to reasons such as sources going dry or lowering of
ground water table; sources becoming quality affected; systems
outliving their lives; systems working below rated capacity due
to poor operation and maintenance; increase in population
resulting in lower per capita availability and emergence of new
habitations. State Governments were requested in February, 2003
to conduct a fresh habitation survey to assess the status of
coverage of habitations. The survey data of 2003 reveals that a
large number of habitations have slipped back from FC to
PC/NC and from PC to NC.
As on date, the coverage reported for first four years of the
Tenth Plan is 2,41,240 habitations, thus showing a shortfall of
1,76,711 habitations from Ninth Plan. States may have taken up
easily accessible habitations for coverage in the earlier years and
thereby covered more number of habitations.
Some States are, at present, taking up large projects which take
2-3 years for completion while States such as Uttaranchal are
taking up multi stage pumping schemes, which also take
2-3 years to complete. While the projects are ongoing, coverage
is not reported, but will be done so on completion. Besides, there
is still one year left in the Tenth Plan and the coverage position
is likely to increase with focus on coverage under Bharat Nirman
programme”.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)

14
“The Committee’s observations are noted. Time and again at
various foras the Department has emphasized the need to cover
all habitations within a stipulated time frame by adopting and
exploring low cost technological advancements. Under the
drinking water component of Bharat Nirman, it is contemplated
to cover all uncovered habitations by 2008-09. Of the uncovered
55,067 NC /PC habitations, 11,660 habitations were covered in
the first year of Bharat Nirman. From 2006-07, 20 per cent of
ARWSP funds have been allocated to only those States having
water quality problems to tackle the problem in a focused manner.
Regarding technology options being used in various States, the
position is as follows:-
(i) Rajasthan is providing drinking water mainly through Piped
Water Supply (PWS), Hand Pumps and Tankas;
(ii) Himachal Pradesh, Haryana and Punjab are mainly taking
up PWS;
(iii) Uttaranchal, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland
are taking multi stage pumping schemes;
(iv) Sikkim is pr oviding water supply through lift pumping
schemes; and
(v) J&K is providing water through deep tubewells and PWS
in the valleys and tapping perennial streams with Gravity
PWS in the hilly areas.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.43)
“During 2005-06 target for slipped back and quality affected
habitations were given separately for monitoring the performance
of the State Governments. The target and achievement during
2005-06 is as under:
Target Achievement
Balance NC habitations of CAP 99 3522 1456
Remaining PC habitations of CAP 99 8375 10204
Slipped back habitations 34373 76457
Quality affected habitation 10000 4498
Total 56270 92615

15
It can be seen from the above table that State Governments have
achieved less than the target fixed for them in the Remaining
NC habitations of CAP 99 and quality affected habitations where
as they have exceeded their target in the other categories. The
State Governments are facing difficulties in coverage of remaining
uncovered habitations as these habitations are located in difficult
areas and coverage of these habitations require location of safe
water source and building infrastructure to bring water from the
located source, which normally is at a distant place. Funds are
being separately allocated from 2006-07 to tackle water quality
affected habitations.
In view of this, realistic targets have been fixed for coverage
during 2006-07. While fixing targets for 2006-07, the coverage of
habitations in the previous year by the State Governments, fund
availability during current year, cost of coverage per habitations
as indicated by the State Governments in their Action Plan for
Bharat Nirman were taken into consideration. The Department
feels that the State Governments will be able to achieve the
realistic targets fixed for them this year. The target for coverage
of habitations during 2006-07 are as under:
Coverage of remaining NC Habitations 1120
Coverage of remaining PC Habitations 17000
Coverage of Slipped Back Habitations 40000
Coverage of Quality Affected Habitations 15000
Total coverage target 73120
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.44)
“State Governments were requested in February, 2003 to conduct
fresh habitation survey to assess the status of coverage of main
and other habitations and rural schools with respect to availability
of safe drinking water. The Indian Institute of Public
Administration (IIPA) was entrusted with the task of correcting
the habitation survey conducted by States/UTs which was to be
completed by February 2006. IIPA has so far completed the task
in respect of 22 States/UTs. For 10 States/UTs, data submitted
by them have been cleansed by the Department itself. Validation
is not required to be done for Delhi as all habitations are fully
covered. This data for all States/UTs has now been hosted on
the website and will be used as a benchmark. The Department

16
now proposes to conduct field validation of the 2003 survey data
through a random sample survey.
The Department has developed software to capture the status of
availability of drinking water and other information in a
habitation. This software has been linked to the corrected data of
habitation survey 2003. The States/UTs are required to furnish
information on status of availability of water habitationwise on
yearly basis and with this it will be possible to assess the exact
position of availability of drinking water in each habitation in
the country. This software has been hosted in the Department’s
website and States/UTs have been requested to make data entry
and then periodically update the status on-line. The Department
is also organising a training through NIC to familiarize the State
government officials with the software.”
Replies to Recommendations (Para Nos. 3.51 and 3.52)
15. The Committee in their earlier recommendations had raised
various issues concerning authenticity of data with regard to status
of coverage of habitations in rural areas in the country, decreasing
number of coverage of NC/PC habitations during Tenth Plan as
compared to Ninth Plan, the status of coverage of slipped back
habitations and the Government’s strategy to deal with the aforesaid
issues. From the information provided by the Department in the
action taken replies with regard to various recommendations, the
Committee note that there is too much confusion about the data
with regard to coverage of habitations. Many categories have been
evolved viz.  not covered habitations(NC), partially covered
habitations(PC), quality affected habitations, slipped back habitations
etc. which makes utter confusion with regard to actual coverage of
habitations in the country. As regards the status of not covered
habitations as per the Government’s own data, the Committee have
persistently been impressing upon the Department to cover these
habitations within a stipulated time frame by providing adequate
outlay and with technological interventions. Inspite of that the latest
data with regard to achievement of NC habitations reflect that out
of the target of 3,522 habitations, the achievement is just 1,456 i.e.
even less than half of the projected habitations. Similar is the
position with regard to quality affected habitations. Out of the target
of 10,000 habitations, the achievement is 4,498 habitations. Even with
this less than 50 per cent of coverage of these habitations, the action
taken replies reflect a sense of complacency in the Department. The
Department seems to be contended with the achievement of the

17
targets. The Committee are not satisfied with the aforesaid
achievement of targets of NC and quality affected habitations as per
the Government’s own data. Further the Committee also has
apprehensions that the ground situation in this regard may be much
worse.
Besides the aforesaid issues raised above, the major concern is
having some authentic data about the coverage of habitations as
stated above. In this regard, pursuant to pursuing the matter
consistently in various reports, the Department has initiated a survey
in this regard. Since there were some discrepancies in the results of
the survey, the data was to be revalidated by Indian Institute of
Public Administration (IIPA). The habitation wise survey was
initiated in 2003 and the process of revalidation was proposed to be
completed by February, 2006. Even after completion of so many years,
the Department is still to have the final results of the aforesaid
survey. The Committee further find that IIPA has so far completed
the task in respect of 22 States/UTs and for 10 States/UTs, the data
submitted by them have been cleansed by the Department. The
Committee find from the information provided that the Department
now proposes to conduct field validation of the 2003 survey data
through a random sample survey. The Committee feel that again the
cleansing of data by the Department after the validation by IIPA
and the field validation may further take a couple of years making
the exercise of survey meaningless since the scenario between the
years 2003 and the year the final results would be available (that
may be perhaps after 2007-08 or taking more years) may completely
change. The Committee feel that unless the core data with regard to
actual NC/PC habitations is available, the purpose of developing the
software to enable the State Governments to periodically update the
data in this regard cannot be achieved. Further, the Committee do
not understand the logic behind putting the information about NC/
PC habitations on the website when the results of the habitation
survey are still to be finalized through the random sample survey
by the Department. While disapproving the way the Survey Report
is being delayed, the Committee strongly recommend to the
Government to find out ways and means to conduct the survey to
know the ground situation and then periodically update the
information within the stipulated time frame.
The Committee further note that the major thrust needs to be
given to sustainability of sources to arrest the tendency of covered
habitations falling into the category of partially covered (PC) and
not covered (NC) habitations. In this regard, the Committee note

18
from the replies furnished with regard to the recommendation at
para No. 3.31, that even the 5 per cent of ARWSP funds allocated
under sub-missions for source sustainability are not being used by
the State Governments. The Committee feel that unless the stress is
given to sustainability of sources, the issue of coverage of habitations
cannot be tackled in a meaningful way. The Committee therefore
strongly recommend to the Department to take all the measures
through taking various initiatives to motivate the State Governments
to give more stress to the sustainability of sources which may finally
ensure that the covered habitations are not converted into not
covered/partially covered habitations. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the steps taken in this regard by the Department.
E. Issue of physical performance and community contribution under
Swajaldhara
Recommendation Serial Nos. 15, 17, 18 and 19
(Para Nos. 4.10, 4.17, 4.18 and 4.19)
16. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find from the status of financial and physical
achievements under Swajaldhara as indicated above that
performance of Swajaldhara is not satisfactory since the year
2002-03. Not only that, the financial achievements indicate that
there is deterioration in the percentage of achievement year after
year. The percentage expenditure, which was 67 per cent during
2002-03, came down to 40 per cent during 2003-04 and
subsequently reduced to 19.09 per cent and a meager 1.73 per
cent during the years 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively. As regards
physical achievements, while appreciating the fact that some
schemes may have more gestation period the Committee wish to
point out that from the replies furnished by the Department itself
it is apparent that most of the schemes are short duration schemes
the gestation period of which is 12 to 18 months. As such 50 per
cent of the projects initiated during the year 2002-2003 being
incomplete is not understandable. The situation is further alarming
during 2003-04 when the percentage declared to around 40 per
cent and then around 20 per cent during 2004-05. The Committee
are further concerned to note the reasons advanced by the
Department like late reporting of schemes, longer gestation period,
the system of releasing of funds etc. for huge under-spending
and shortfall in achieving the physical targets. The Committee
deplore the way the unsatisfactory achievement under Swajaldhara
has been tried to be justified. The Committee would like the
Department to make all out efforts to ensure that the allocation
made under the Swajaldhara is meaningfully utilised. Besides
the State/district-wise reasons for under-spending as well as non-

19
completion of projects should be obtained from the concerned
State Governments and the Committee may be apprised
accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
“The Committee have gathered the impression that the
Department is very optimistic about the Swajaldhara scheme. It
seems that some of the States have responded positively to the
Swajaldhara principles and desired more funds for these projects.
It has further been stated by the Department that one of the
recommendations of the meeting of State Ministers was to extend
the principles of Swajaldhara to ARWSP from Eleventh Plan. The
Committee had analysed the proposal of replacing ARWSP by
Swajaldhara in their earlier reports (refer para 2.63 of 11th Report)
and expressed concerns that since Swajaldhara is a demand-driven
scheme, the better performing States would only be able to take
the benefit of the scheme. Thus the less performing States would
be deprived of the Central allocation. The Committee had strongly
recommended (para 2.65 of 11th Report) to review the position
in this regard. The Committee note that the apprehensions of the
Committee have not been adequately addressed by the
Department. The Committee while reiterating their earlier
recommendation in this regard would like to have a categorical
response of the Department.”
Recommendation (Para No. 4.17)
“The Committee take note of the fact that Swajaldhara is a small
component of ARWSP wherein 20 per cent funds under ARWSP
are earmarked for projects under Swajaldhara. As per Swajaldhara
principles, 90 per cent contribution is made by the Centre and
10 per cent by community to encourage people to have
participation and inculcate a sense of ownership. The Committee
are constrained to note the ambiguous reply of the Department
on the issue of desirability of obtaining 10 per cent community
contribution for projects under Swajaldhara. On the one hand
the Department has stated that increase in number of projects
taken up under Swajaldhara reflects the willingness of the
communities to come forward with 10 per cent contribution
whereas on the other hand, it has been stated that some States
have expressed inability to implement schemes as the dialogue
with community failed in some cases.”
Recommendation (Para No. 4.18)
“Besides, as indicated in the Performance Budget for a large
number of States in the year 2003-04 and 2004-05, community
contribution has been indicated as zero. During 2003-04, as many

20
as 21 States/Union territories and 14 States/Union territories
during 2004-05 have reported community contribution as nil. Even
though the Secretary during the course of oral evidence has stated
that projects were not sanctioned where community contribution
was zero during 2002, 2003 and 2004, the data reflects otherwise.
Allocation has been indicated for Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Tripura, Uttaranchal and West Bengal
during 2003-04 and to Nagaland during 2004-05, even though
the community contribution indicated is nil. The Committee feel
that there is some confusion with regard to the release of outlay
under Swajaldhara. Even when 10 per cent community
contribution is mandatory under the scheme, the allocation is
being made without having any community contribution, thereby
defeating the very purpose of Swajaldhara i.e. inculcating the
feeling of ownership by way of community contribution. In view
of this scenario, the Committee understand that the whole
principle of Swajaldhara need review particularly when the overall
policy of Government aims to replace ARWSP with Swajaldhara,
the detailed analysis of which has been given in the preceding
part of the report. The Committee while reiterating their earlier
stand in this regard would like the categorical reply of the
Department in the light of the observations given above. The
Committee would like to know the details of the States which
have expressed their inability to implement the said schemes.”
Recommendation (Para No. 4.19)
17. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Department has already accepted that schemes sanctioned
in 2002-03 and 2003-04 at least should have been completed by
now. Letters have been written to all States for the same. Also,
a special meeting was called State-wise in July 2006 and the
matter reviewed individually. Efforts are ongoing to ask the States
to complete and report completion of these schemes within
December 2006. Districts that have not completed schemes of
these two years are not being released any funds for new schemes
in 2006-07. All States and districts have been asked to use the
web-based reporting system and update their entries.
State-wise review of ongoing Swajaldhara schemes with special
focus on schemes sanctioned in the year 2002-03 and 2003-04
was taken in July 2006. The State Governments have furnished
the following reasons for delay in completion of projects:
(i) community contribution is difficult to obtain as other
schemes like ARWSP do not have this element. (All States);

21
(ii) convincing the community to share capital costs is a long
process and takes time. (Himachal Pradesh, Uttranchal,
Assam, Meghalaya, Karnataka);
(iii) at some places, the community withdraws its contribution
due to internal differences. There are cases of the community
withdrawing its contribution after the funds have been
released for works to start. In such cases, either re-
convincing the community or relocating the scheme to
another habitation takes time. Uttar Pradesh had to relocate
all schemes of 2003-04 from 63 districts to only 22 districts,
which lost them one full year. (Uttar Pradesh, Kerala,
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra);
(iv) release of 2nd installment is delayed as the reporting from
DWSC to district takes time and they do not properly
complete the progress reports etc. The chairpersons of the
DWSC do not give priority to the paperwork. (Nagaland,
Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar); and
(v) there is shortage of staff at the GP and District levels to
undertake extensive and continued dialogue with the
communities to explain Swajaldhara principles and they find
it easier to implement schemes like ARWSP . (All States)
As stated to the Committee earlier, the number of schemes being
reported as complete is increasing. The latest position of
completion of schemes is as under:
Projects sanctioned Status as on               No. of schemes
during the year Taken up Completed
2002-03 Feb. 2006 4552 2307
July 2006 4473 2627
2003-04 Feb. 2006 5225 1908
July 2006 5863 2288
2004-05 Feb. 2006 5330 1021
July 2006 5429 1897
2005-06 Feb. 2006 14906 45
July 2006 15315 73
(Note: Number of projects of 2002-03 are less in July 2006, as number of projects
were revised at the request of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh.
These States could not ground the projects due to some of the reasons given above)”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)

22
“ARWSP is not being replaced with Swajaldhara. It is proposed
that from the Eleventh Plan, there will be only one scheme funded
from the Centre, namely ARWSP. This scheme will have an
element of community participation, but may not insist on
community contribution in cash for capital costs. This would be
decided by the respective State Governments. The concern of the
Committee that some States may be deprived of funds due to
under performance shall be suitably addressed. The Department
feels that while allocations will be made in an equitable manner
to all States, release of installments would depend upon the State’s
absorption capacity and performance to provide drinking water.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.17)
“Swajaldhara promotes the principles of the 73rd Constitutional
amendment. Its performance differs from State to State based on
the States’ present status of devolution of the subject of rural
drinking water to the panchayats. In States like Tamil Nadu,
Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Uttaranchal,
Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Orissa, there is increasing demand
for the scheme. In States like Punjab, Haryana, Bihar, North
Eastern States, the demand is not much. In Manipur, only one
district of Ukhrul has taken projects. Sikkim has categorically
stated that they do not want Swajaldhara funds as community
contribution is not forthcoming. Inspite of there being no demand
from some States, the number of projects undertaken under
Swajaldhara has been increasing over the years. The ambiguity
is because of differences in community participation in different
parts of this large country. The Department has not been able to
meet the increased demands of States like Gujarat, Andhra
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu as we try to maintain
equity amongst all States and not allot funds only to better
performing States. The Department shares the apprehension of
the Committee that if funds are allocated as per demand, only
the better performing States would get all the funds.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.18)
“Allocations are made to all States at the beginning of the year.
However, releases are made only to those States that report having
received projects from the districts. The projects are approved by
the district or State level body, in accordance with the guidelines
of the Scheme. No Swajaldhara project can be implemented if
the community contribution is not given, as it is part of the

23
project cost. Since the community contribution need not be paid
upfront, release of first installment is made on request of the
State and community contribution can come during the course
of implementation. The Department scrutinizes the deposit of
community contribution at the time of release of second
installment, which is not released if the data is given by the
State. This aspect is also checked by the District Level Monitors
(DLM) deputed for the purpose. The reports annexed in the
Performance Budget are data as reported by the States at the
time. In case of some of the States noticed by the Committee,
the relevant data was not reported at that time. Since then, the
Department has also initiated on-line data entry from the district
and State levels. Also States have been updating the information
and also reporting the community contribution. Only in the case
of Nagaland for 2004-05, the funds were released for completion
of Sector Reforms Projects (SRP) of Dimapur, hence community
contribution is shown as zero. SRP had the concept of taking
community contribution upfront, without which the project would
not have been sanctioned. Under Swajaldhara community
contribution may be given as the project is implemented, and
even in installments. The latest status, year-wise and State-wise
for Swajaldhara is annexed at Appendix I for the perusal of the
Committee.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.19)
18. The Committee in their earlier report had reviewed the
performance and policy of community contribution under
Swajaldhara. After detailed analysis the following observations were
made by the Committee :—
(i) there was dismal performance of Swajaldhara with specific
reference to the financial achievement since 2002-03;
(ii) a large number of projects initiated during the different
years remained incomplete;
(iii) as many as 21 States/UTs in 2003-04 and 14 States/UTs
during 2004-05 reported community contribution as nil.
Not only that, the allocation was being made to some of
the States even when the community contribution was nil
during the years 2003-04 and 2004-05.
The Department in the action taken replies with regard to the
various observations made by the Committee on the aforesaid issues

24
has furnished updated data. Even the updated data indicate the
performance as very poor. The updated figures indicate the percentage
expenditure as 70.1 per cent during 2002-03, 48.68 per cent during
2003-04, 31.37 per cent during 2004-05 and 2.99 per cent during
2005-06. As regards the number of completed projects, the latest data
indicate that around 50 per cent of the projects started even during
the year 2002-03 remained incomplete. Further with regard to the
projects started during 2003-04 and subsequent years, the number of
completed projects is further reduced, even when the gestation period
as indicated by the Department itself for different projects is 12-18
months. The number of projects completed is about 40 per cent
during 2003-04 and is about 20 per cent during 2004-05. Further during
2005-06 the number of completed projects is very marginal. The
Department on the one hand has indicated various reasons for the
poor performance of the scheme particularly the difficulty in
obtaining the community contribution under the scheme, on the other
hand, the Department has tried to justify Swajaldhara by stating
that in some of the States where the status of devolution with regard
to Panchayati Raj Institutions in tune with the principles of 73rd
Constitutional Amendment, the scheme is performing well. In States
like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Karnataka,
Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Orissa there is increasing
demand for the scheme. With regard to the issue of indicating
allocation in case of States viz. Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Maharashtra,
Jharkhand, Tripura, Uttaranchal and West Bengal during 2003-04 and
to Nagaland during 2004-05 where the community contribution has
been indicated as nil, the Department has furnished no reasons.
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid analysis that there
are serious problems in implementation of Swajaldhara which need
to be reviewed urgently. Foremost issue to be addressed is community
contribution. Since community contribution amounting to 10/20 per
cent based on the amount of the project to be taken up under
Swajaldhara is the pre condition for taking a project, the failure to
get the community contribution makes the Swajaldhara impracticable.
The Committee have persistently been raising their concern on the
aforesaid issue which has not been addressed adequately in the action
taken replies furnished by the Department. Another issue which the
Committee have been pursuing year after year is the proposed policy
of the Government to replace ARWSP by community contribution
scheme Swajaldhara. The Committee have been given to understand
that ARWSP is not being replaced with Swajaldhara. Even in the
recent report when the Committee had raised this issue, the
Department has stated that it is proposed that from the Eleventh

25
Plan there will be only one scheme funded from the Centre namely
ARWSP which will have an element of community contribution
which may not insist on community contribution in cash for capital
cost. There is much ambiguity in the statement furnished by the
Department. On the one hand it is being stated that ARWSP is not
being replaced with Swajaldhara, on the other hand community
contribution is proposed to be made an integral part of ARWSP
even when the Department has agreed that there is problem in
getting the community contribution under Swajaldhara in various
States. This one or the other way indicates changing the basic features
of ARWSP and putting Swajaldhara community contribution
component into it irrespective of the fact whether it is called ARWSP
or Swajaldhara. The Committee strongly disapprove the way ARWSP
is being proposed to be restructured and recommend to the
Government to consider the serious apprehensions expressed by the
Committee with regard to replacing ARWSP by Swajaldhara in their
various reports and ensure that community contribution is not made
part of ARWSP . Further the principles of Swajaldhara should also
be reviewed keeping in view the poor performance of the scheme as
indicated above.
F. Quality of drinking water in rural areas
Recommendation Serial No. 23  (Para Nos. 6.9)
19. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee would like to highlight that the richest possession
a country can be proud of in the 21st century is its water
resources. The Committee opine that it is not sufficient to simply
provide for drinking water in rural areas, but the Government
should simultaneously focus on quality of the water as it has
major linkages with health and well-being of the people. While
the Department is giving targets category-wise to State
Governments wherein coverage of quality affected habitations is
one of the components, the Committee are distressed to note the
pathetic achievements vis-a-vis targets with regard to quality
affected habitations. Against a target of 10,000 habitations in 2005-
06, the achievement was merely 3,249 indicating their failure to
address such a critical dimension of the problem. That too when
the targets themselves were too small as compared to the total
work to be taken i.e,. addressing 1,95,000 habitations. The
Committee would therefore like to recommend to the Department
to address the issue of quality more vigorously and enhance the
annual targets. Efforts should be made to meet the targets in this
regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 6.9)

26
20. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“Against the target of covering 10,000 water quality affected
habitations in 2005-06, the achievement reported by States is 4,439
as on 31 July, 2006. Some of the projects are comprehensive water
supply projects, which could take two years or more to complete.
During the current year 2006-07, following the budgetary
allocation of Rs 1,040 crore to tackle water quality problems, it
is targeted to sanction projects in 27,000 habitations and also to
provide safe drinking water in at least 15,000 habitations.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 6.9)
21. The Committee are constrained to note the casual way in
which the Department has responded to such a critical issue of
quality of drinking water in rural areas. The Department has tried
to justify the under achievement to the extent of 50 per cent even
when the updated data is taken into consideration with regard to
achievement of targets set under water quality affected habitations
in 2005-06 by stating that some of the projects are comprehensive
water supply projects which could take two years or more to
complete. The Committee deplore the under achievement of the
targets particularly when the yearly targets fixed to address the
problems of quality affected habitations are too small as compared
to the total work to be undertaken i.e. addressing 1,95,000 quality
affected habitations. While reiterating the earlier recommendation,
the Committee would like to emphasize for a strategy to tackle the
issue of coverage of quality affected habitations within a stipulated
time frame.
G. Drinking Water Scenario in Rural Schools
Recommendation Serial No. 26  (Para No. 7.8)
22. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee have consistently been drawing the attention of
the Department towards the critical need to provide drinking
water in schools. In spite of that the situation does not seem to
have been improved. The worst part is that the Government
does not have the exact basic data with regard to number of
schools not having drinking water facility. There is vast difference
between the data furnished by the Department of Elementary
Education according to which 78,358 rural schools are yet to be
provided with drinking water supply, and the data furnished by

27
the Department of Drinking Water Supply which indicate that
the said number is 2,07,691. The number of rural schools has
increased from 6.37 lakh (as per 6th Educational Survey) to
8,53,457 (as per 7th All India Educational Survey). As such the
number of schools not having drinking water facilities may be
more. Further this is the situation as reported in Government
data which itself seems to be not firm. The Committee apprehend
that the reality in this regard may be worse. In spite of according
priority to rural schools as per the policy of the Government the
physical achievements corresponding to the targets do not reflect
the seriousness on the part of the Department. There is huge
shortfall in achievement of targets during the year 2003-04,
2004-05 and 2005-06. Not only that the achievement has reduced
considerably during 2004-05 as compared to the previous year.
Further the achievement during 2005-06 i.e, 35,538 against the
huge targets of 1,40,000 is far from satisfactory . In this scenario,
the Committee deplore the way one of the important areas is
being addressed by the Department. It is really painful that after
56 years of planned development, the schools could not be
provided even the basic facility of drinking water. The Committee
cannot accept any excuse for delaying it further since there is an
urgent need to provide drinking water to all the schools in the
country. The Government should take up this aspect with all the
seriousness it deserves and formulate a strategy which should be
implemented in a time bound manner to achieve the task of
providing drinking water to all the schools in the country .”
Recommendation (Para No.7.8)
23. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“Department of Drinking Water Supply and Department of
Elementary Education and Literacy (DEEL) are working in
coordination with each other to provide drinking water facility
to all schools. It has been ascertained from the DEEL that the
data furnished by them about the number of schools not having
drinking water facilities relate to elementary schools only. On the
other hand, the Department has compiled the information based
on the reports furnished by States/UTs in different review
meetings which indicates that there were approximately 2.07 lakh
schools not having drinking water facility as on 1st April 2005
and during 2005-06, 65788 rural schools have been covered. The
Department has developed a software to obtain the names
alongwith the status of water supply and sanitation facilities and

28
States/UTs have been requested to do the data entry in this
regard.
During 2005-06, the achievement in coverage of schools has
improved as compared to preceding years. Though the
achievement is far less than the target set for 2005-06, the
Department is constantly pursuing the matter with the States
Governments.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No.7.8)
24. The Committee maintain that providing drinking water to
rural children in schools should be the primary objective of the
welfare State and are unhappy to note that the Government has
failed miserably in their responsibility to the children of India
especially from rural areas.
The Committee urge that all ambiguity with regard to exact data
for number of schools without drinking water facilities should be
resolved at the earliest. The Department should furnish exact data
for school coverage with respect to primary, upper primary and
secondary and higher secondary schools. This data should be
compiled in coordination with Department of Elementary Education
so that there are no discrepancies between the data furnished by the
Department of Drinking Water Supply and Department of Elementary
Education. The finalised actual figures with regard to number of
schools yet to be covered should be intimated to the Committee.
With regard to the issue of targets and achievement for coverage
of schools, during 2005-06, the target was 1,40,000 schools out of
which achievement reported was 35,538 while examining Demands
for Grants, 2006-07. In the action taken reply, the Department has
informed that 65,788 schools were covered during 2005-06. The
Committee take strong exception to the way overstated figures are
being cited to reflect higher achievements. The Department has also
avoided to respond on the issue of low achievements vis-à-vis targets
during 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06. The Committee fail to understand
how, in such a bleak scenario, all States would be able to cover
remaining rural schools with drinking water facility by March, 2007
as committed to by them. The Department should provide appropriate
clarification for the issues raised above.
The Committee note that the Department has developed software
for online data entry by States/ Union territories for school coverage.
The Department should ensure that the aforesaid mechanism is made

29
operational at the earliest and the feedback from the States is hosted
on the Department website and updated at regular intervals. The
Committee recommend to the Department to devise a time bound
strategy to cover all rural schools in consonance with the objectives
of Bharat Nirman. For the same, the Department should fix realistic
targets and make all out efforts to meet them given the significance
and immediate necessity of providing this basic service to rural
children. The Committee may be duly informed of all the concrete
measures taken in this regard.
H. Financial Performance under CRSP/TSC
Recommendation Serial Nos. 29 and 30
(Para Nos. 8.13 and 8.14)
25. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are dismayed over the dismal performance of
the Department over the last five years as far as utilisation of
sanctioned amount is concerned. The Committee fail to
understand that how, given the bleak scenario of rural sanitation,
the Department can afford to spend as low as 30 to 40 per cent
of the amount allocated in 2001-2002 and 2002-2003. Even for
2004-2005 the amount spent was approximately 50 per cent of
the amount allocated. The Committee take strong exception to
the lackadaisical approach of the Department in this regard and
desire to be furnished with proper justification along with the
remedial action taken in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 8.13)
“Besides, for the year 2005-06, the Department has informed that
out of the amount allocated i.e., Rs. 700 crore, amount released
was only Rs. 660.71 crore out of which amount spent till
31 March was only Rs. 227 crore thus making a huge short fall
in the amount utilised i.e., Rs. 433 crore. The Committee take
strong objection to the way huge funds to the tune of crores of
rupees are lying unspent in such a critical sector. The Committee
would like the Department to justify on the aforesaid matter.
They also recommend that efforts should be made to ensure
timely utilisation of the amount allocated in subsequent years.”
Recommendation (Para No. 8.14)

30
26. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Total Sanitation Programme is demand driven with
community participation. During initial years, demand was low
and hence utilisation of the fund was also low. In later years, it
has gained momentum and utilisation is also improving. Further,
as per the scheme, once a project is sanctioned, 30 per cernt of
the Central share is released to the district. The State also releases
its share. As activities picks up slowly in the initial phase, some
balance remains in the project account of the district. Year-wise
break up of districts in which projects were sanctioned is given
below:
Financial year (FY) No. of projects sanctioned
1999-2000 39
2000-2001 46
2001-2002 65
2002-2003 116
2003-2004 132
2004-2005 80
2005-2006 81
Total 559
In order to ensure that districts have adequate funds in hand
when the need arises, it has been provided in the guidelines that
when 60 per cent of the Central and State share has been spent,
districts can claim the next installment. Thus, availability of the
fund with the district does not imply under utilisation.
The Department is making efforts to increase the pace of
utilization of the money in the field. Review missions are being
sent to the district to monitor and encourage performance.
Communication and Capacity Development Units (CCDU) have
been set up in the States to give thrust to the programme by
increasing IEC activities and increasing the capacity of the
stakeholders. One teacher from each school is being given training
in sanitation aspects to promote it among students.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 8.13)

31
As mentioned in reply to Paragraph 8.13, when a project is
sanctioned for a district, 30 per cent of the Central share is
released to the district so that it can start the work. In the initial
phase the activity picks up slowly and then it gains momentum.
As it is a demand driven scheme, expenditure can be incurred
only when adequate demand is generated among the users. This
IEC activity takes time. As can be seen in the table in reply to
Paragraph 8.13, a large number of districts have been sanctioned
projects in 2004-05 and 2005-06 only. It is expected that the
utilisation will improve in the coming years and for this purpose
all out efforts are being made.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 8.14)
27. The Committee strongly object to the Department’s response
with regard to low allocation and utilisation of amount for sanitation
sector on the pretext that the project is demand driven with
community participation. The Committee differ with the argument
furnished by the Department and hold that once the projects are
sanctioned for a particular district, the assumption is that there is
already sufficient demand generation and hence there should be no
excuse for huge unspent balances. Further the Department has tried
to justify the huge under utilization by stating that guidelines permit
next instalment when 60 per cent of the Central and State share has
been spent by a district. The Committee fail to understand how the
Department can take the excuse of the aforesaid guidelines when
the under-spending under sanitation programme ranges between
50 to 70 per cent during the years 2001-02 to 2004-05. Not only that
during the year 2005-06 out of the allocated outlay of Rs. 700 crore
the expenditure was only Rs. 227 crore. The Department cannot afford
such a huge under-spending particularly when the sanitation scenario
in rural areas in the country is too bleak where only 38 per cent
rural population could be provided the sanitation facilities as per
the Government’s record. While reiterating the earlier
recommendation, the Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to take all the efforts in consultation with the State
Governments and apprise the Committee accordingly.
I. Physical Performance under TSC in 2005-06
Recommendation Serial Nos. 31, 32 and 33
(Para Nos. 8.22, 8.23 and 8.24)
28. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are concerned to note that as per Government’s
estimate, only 38 per cent rural habitations could be provided

32
with sanitation facilities till date. The Committee are further
disturbed to note the rather slow pace of coverage of habitations
with sanitations facilities. India is committed to the Millennium
Development Goal of reducing by half the number of people
without access to sanitation by the year 2010 and achieving cent
per cent coverage in the country by the year 2012. The Committee
feel that to achieve the Millennium Development Goal, the
Department with the current level of achievement, will have to
work with a hands on approach to deal with the issue. The
Committee would like to know the Action Plan and strategies
devised for the attainment of Millennium Development Goal.”
Recommendation (Para No. 8.22)
“Further, as per the Performance Budget of the Department there
is gross under achievement with regard to sanctioned Individual
household latrines, sanitation complexes for women, school toilets,
toilets for Balwadis/Anganwadis. Out of 866.70 lakh sanctioned
IHHL, the achievement was only 198.68 lakh till 31 January, 2006.
Similarly, for sanitation complexes for women, out of 34,081 lakh
sanctioned complexes, achievement was only 6,394 lakh. The
position of school coverage is rather more disappointing. Out of
the target of 5,78,610 toilets, 1,98,670 toilets could be constructed
by 31 January, 2006. Similarly, in the case of Balwadis/
Anganwadis out of 1,73,560 sanctioned toilets, achievement was
merely 41,862.”
Recommendation (Para No. 8.23)
“Further disturbing is the State-wise performance as indicated in
the Budget documents. The expenditure position in Dadra &
Nagar Haveli, Manipur, Meghalaya, Punjab, Goa and Nagaland
is alarming. In Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana,
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Orissa, Sikkim and Uttaranchal
the under-spending is more than 50 per cent. The State specific
performance is further dismal during 2005-06 as indicated in the
preceding para of the report. As indicated in the Budget
documents, Rs. 480 crore is lying unspent with various State
Governments. The Committee deplore such a poor performance
of sanitation programme in the country. In this scenario, the
Committee feel that the objective of outlay augmentation is
defeated if the projects are not completed in time. The Committee
would urge the Department to be more actively engaged in the
entire process of TSC starting from providing allocation till the

33
completion of projects. The Committee desire the Department to
furnish to them the reasons for such unsatisfactory achievement
of physical targets and take effective measures to rectify the
anomaly in future. Besides, the Committee feel that one of the
reasons for under-utilisation of funds may be inadequate outlay
provided under the scheme for construction of a toilet to each
beneficiary. The Committee would like the comment of the
Department in the regard so as to analyse the position critically
and comment further.”
Recommendation (Para No. 8.24)
29. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Department is making all out efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals by 2010 and the decision of
Government of India of 100 per cent coverage of all households
by 2012. For this purpose, sanitation projects have been sanctioned
in 559 districts and for rest of the districts, it is likely to be
sanctioned within this financial year. The project aims to achieve
universal sanitation in the district within a time span of 4-5 years.
All districts have been asked to prepare Project Implementation
Plan (PIP) for the district and progress of the project is being
monitored against this PIP . Further, to generate demand from the
target group and to create capacity among the persons responsible
for implementation of the project, efforts on communication and
capacity building are going on. One Communication and Capacity
Development Unit (CCDU) has been started in each State to
develop State specific Information, Education and Communication
(IEC) strategies and to improve the ability of the field level
functionaries who are involved in this campaign. Till date about
2.42 crore households have constructed toilets, 2.61 lakh school
toilets, 71,725 Anganwadi toilets, 7610 community complexes have
been constructed and 4265 production centers/Rural Sanitary
Marts (RSMs) have been set up. It is expected that with all these
efforts, more than 1 crore IHHL would be constructed in
2006-07, out of which about 23 lakh have already been constructed.
The progress has been slow in some States, while in some other
States it has progressed well. Efforts are being made to sensitize
the slow States to the different nature of this scheme and for this
purpose workshops, seminars, training programmes are being held
regularly in the State. Some Key Resource Centers have been

34
identified, which are conducting regular training for persons
working in this field. Greater emphasis is being put on the IEC
activities. PRIs have been actively involved and help of NGOs
are being taken wherever found feasible.
Districts, which have been slow in implementing TSC, have been
identified and special effort is being made to speed up the pace
in these districts. Sates have been requested to send review
missions to review the progress and give suggestions to remove
bottlenecks in the implementation. The rates allowed for
construction of toilets by the beneficiary have also been revised.”
Replies to Recommendations (Para Nos. 8.22, 8.23 and 8.24)
30. The Committee in their earlier recommendation has reviewed
the performance of Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) in rural areas
in the country. The Committee had observed that there was under
achievement of targets under the different categories viz construction
of household toilets, school/Anganwadi toilets and community
complexes. Besides while evaluating the State-wise performance the
Committee had found that Rs. 480 crore was lying unspent with
various State Governments. The Committee had desired reasons for
under utilization of funds from the Department. Instead of probing
the reasons for poor performance of TSC, the Department has
furnished an evasive reply whereby simply the targets fixed under
the programme have been reproduced. Not only that the Department
is optimistic to achieve the Millennium Development Goal of
reducing by half the number of people without access to sanitation
by the year 2010 and achieving cent percent coverage in the country
by the year 2012. The Committee express serious concern over the
way such serious issues are being handled by the Department. They
would like the Department to take all the desired efforts in
consultation with State Governments to attain the Millennium
Development Goal. The Committee may also be kept apprised about
the initiatives taken in this regard.

35
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation Serial No. 1 (Para No. 2.4)
The Committee note that the primary objective of inserting direction
73A in the Directions by the Speaker was to make the Government
more accountable for implementation of the various recommendations
of the Committee. The Committee are concerned to note that even
after a lapse of around six months when the statement on Eleventh
Report has fallen due and about three months when the Minister was
requested for making the revised statement in respect of First Report,
the statements are yet to be made by the Hon’ble Minister. The
Committee would like to recommend to the Ministry to ensure that
the statements are made at the earliest during the Second part of the
Seventh Session. The Committee further strongly recommend to the
Ministry to ensure that the statements on each of the reports are made
within the specified period  i.e., six months after the presentation of
the Report to Parliament as per direction 73A of the Directions by the
Speaker, in future.
Reply of the Government
The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has made the
statements regarding the status of implementation of recommendations
contained in the both Reports in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha
on 23 May, 2006.
In future, the Department would make all efforts to ensure that
the Statement in the House regarding the status of implementation of
recommendations contained in the Reports of Departmentally Related
Standing Committee are made within the specified period.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation Serial No. 2 (Para No. 3.20)
The Committee note with concern the critical data with regard to
availability of water in the near future as given in the Mid Term

36
Appraisal of the Tenth Plan according to which average availability of
water is likely to fall below the water stress level in the near future.
The per capita storage of water i.e. 207 cubic meter is way below the
storage achieved in many of the countries such as Russia (6103 cubic
meter), Australia (4733 cubic meter), Brazil (3145 cubic meter), US (1964
cubic meter) etc. The Committee observe from the aforesaid data that
the availability of drinking water in the coming years may be at an
alarming position. In view of this, there is an urgent need to pay
greater attention to this sector. The detailed analysis of the allocation
and utilisation position has been done in the succeeding part of the
report. Here the Committee may like to emphasise the need for efficient
planning and delivery mechanism of the different schemes of the
Department to make safe drinking water available and accessible in
rural areas.
Reply of the Government
The National Water Policy of Ministry of Water Resources,
Government of India (April, 2002) gives highest priority to drinking
water under Water Allocation Priorities and it is indicated that irrigation
and multipurpose projects should invariably include a drinking water
component, wherever there is no alternative source of drinking water.
Drinking water needs of human beings and animals should be the
first charge on any available water.
 The Ministry of Water Resources, GoI has launched in 2005 the
“National project for repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies
directly linked to Agriculture”. Although the main thrust of the project
is for augmentation of storage capacity of the tanks /water bodies for
enhancing the irrigation potential, indirectly it will also help to improve
the availability of water for drinking water.
Under the Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Land
Resources, the programme Hariyali has been launched with a view to
increase water availability to the rural community. The main objective
of this programme is “Harvesting every drop of rainwater for purposes
of irrigation, plantations including horticulture and floriculture, pasture
development, fisheries etc. to create sustainable sources of income for
the village community as well as for drinking water supplies.” Also,
the NREGA gives the highest priority to water conservation works to
be taken up for employment generation.
The Department of Drinking Water Supply has published handbook
on Rainwater Harvesting and has sent to all the State Governments
dealing with rural water supply for adopting rooftop harvesting,

37
construction of Check Dams, Percolation Tanks and other techniques
for increasing water availability at the village level for drinking water
supply. To support this, the Department of Drinking Water Supply is
providing 5 per cent of the ARWSP fund every year to all the States.
Since rural water is a State subject and State governments are
empowered to plan, sanction, implement and execute rural water
supply projects, the observations made by the Committee for the need
for efficient planning and delivery mechanism have been brought to
the notice of all the State governments. The State departments dealing
with rural water supply have also been requested to promote
conjunctive use of surface water and ground water and to co-ordinate
with other Sectoral programmes.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation Serial No. 12 (Para No. 3.45)
Besides, the Committee note that the issue of sustainability of
resources is the basic area of concern. The detailed analysis in this has
been made in the coming Chapter of the report. Here the Committee
would like to recommend that more emphasis now should be given to
sustainability and quality issues.
Reply of the Government
The Department agrees that more emphasis need to be given for
quality and sustainability. For quality, the allocation has already been
increased. Previously , States could utilize upto 15 per cent of their
allocation of ARWSP (Normal) for tackling water quality problems.
From this year, focused funding for water quality has been introduced.
Now about 20 per cent of total allocation of ARWSP is set aside for
tackling water quality problems and inter State allocation of the said
fund is made based on the water quality status of different States.
Activities for sustainability will be taken up by the State
Governments out of 5 per cent of ARWSP funds allocated to them for
the purpose, under the delegated power. As reporting of sub-mission
projects on source sustainability is still not proportionate to even 5 per
cent of ARWSP funds released to the State Governments, they were
directed to ensure that 5 per cent is spent on exclusively on sub-
mission projects related to water sources. It is being impressed upon
the State Governments that sustainability of sources should be an
integral part of the water supply systems.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

38
Recommendation Serial No. 16 (Para No. 4. 11)
The Committee further recommend that concrete steps for
strengthening the monitoring and reporting system should be taken.
They feel that in this age where India is making giant strides in the
field of Information Technology, the Department cannot confine itself
to obsolete monitoring and reporting system practiced currently. The
Committee therefore, emphasise that the web based monitoring system
at the district level proposed by the Department should be put in
place and made functional at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Online monitoring is being insisted upon for reporting progress
under Swajaldhara. NIC has conducted training workshops in States
to train and familiarize the State and district-level officials with the
web-site of the Department of Drinking Water Supply. In the discussions
held with the State Secretaries/ Chief Engineers in July, 2006 it emerged
that the States are making all efforts for online data entry at the district-
level. However, some practical problems have been brought to the
notice of this Department and NIC regarding uploading of the data
and programming of the website. Necessary remedial actions are being
undertaken. Most of the States have indicated that they are hopeful of
100 per cent online entry at district-level by September, 2006 except a
few States like Nagaland, Meghalaya, Assam and Bihar, which would
take longer.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 Recommendation Serial No. 20 (Para No.5.8)
The Committee while reiterating their concern with regard to the
issue of sustainability would like to emphasise that sustainability of
the drinking water source and the systems have emerged as extremely
pertinent issues and greatest challenge confronting the drinking water
supply sub-sector. For sustainability to be achieved a multipronged
approach is required which inter- alia  includes:
(i) Ascertaining exact data with regard to slippages and
subsequently exploring reasons for the same and addressing
the problem in a proactive manner;
(ii) Earmarking more funds under the scheme to be utilised for
sustainability;

39
(iii) Active involvement of communities in implementation of
schemes and O & M of water supply schemes;
(iv) Contributing to regulation and control of ground water
extraction and development of ground water;
(v) Integration of all programmes pertaining to water
conservation, management water harvesting etc. and taking
a holistic approach on the issue; and
(vi) Awareness creation and IEC activities to inculcate in people
the value of water as a socio-economic good etc.
The Committee would like to have a categorical response of the
Department to each of the suggestions given above and the action
taken/proposed to be taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
(i) Survey of all habitations has been completed and status as
in 2003 has been hosted on the Department’s website. This
data will serve as a baseline for the status of habitations.
The Department has initiated the process of obtaining a
Yearly Status Report in 2006, which would give the slippage
position annually, with respect to the 2003 status. The
reasons for slippage are part of this report.
(ii) Activities for sustainability will be taken up by the State
Governments out of 5 per cent of ARWSP funds allocated
to them for the purpose, under the delegated power. As
reporting of sub-mission projects on source sustainability is
still not proportionate to even 5 per cent of ARWSP funds
released to the State Governments, they were directed to
ensure that 5 per cent is spent on exclusively on sub-mission
projects related to water sources. It is being impressed upon
the State Governments that sustainability of sources should
be an integral part of the water supply systems. With the
mandate of the Department and limited funds, the first
priority is coverage with safe drinking water. The issue of
sustainability has to be addressed in co-ordination with other
sectoral programmes.
(iii) Swajaldhara scheme promotes the concept of community
participation in planning, implementation and O&M of the
water supply schemes. It is proposed to give incentives to
States for transfer of drinking water assets to Panchayats.

40
(iv) Those State Governments who have not enacted a law so
far have been requested to adopt the draft bill on Regulation
and Control of Ground Water Extraction and Development
of Groundwater, prepared by Ministry of Water Resources.
(v) Various schemes of Department of Land Resources (Ministry
of Rural Development), Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Ministry of Water Resources, contribute to overall
conservation of water resources. NREGA programme accords
top priority to water conservation.
(vi) Each State has been sanctioned a Communication and
Capacity Development Unit (CCDU), with funding for its
programmes. These units are to take up state specific
programmes for awareness and IEC. Also, Swajaldhara
schemes have a component of IEC at the district level.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation Serial No. 21 (Para No.5.9)
The Committee find from the information made available by the
Department that more emphasis is being given under the schemes of
the Department to handpumps on the ground of its being cost effective.
The Committee find that the depletion of ground water is a crucial
matter which needs to be taken into consideration while deciding the
strategy of the Department to provide drinking water. Further the
Committee have their apprehensions on the data with regard to the
working systems provided under the schemes of the Department. As
per the Government’s own data around 3 lakh habitations would have
been converted to slipped back habitations by now. The total number
of habitations in the country is 14,22,664 habitations and as such as
per the Government estimate around 20 per cent of the habitations
would have fallen from covered to not covered status as of now. The
real position in this regard may be even grimmer. This is the serious
area of concern which need to be addressed urgently. Unless the sources
of water are healthy the functioning of the systems cannot be ensured.
Since most of the availability of water is through ground water, in the
absence of sustainability of resources the position of working systems
as indicated in the reply cannot be properly understood. The Committee
would like the Department to verify the said data and inform the
Committee accordingly. Besides they would like to recommend that
more stress needs to be given to use of surface water resources. In

41
cases where ground water is drawn, it should be ensured that there
is some system of water recharge whereby the drawl of water should
be matched by equal quantity of water seeped through water recharge
systems.
Reply of the Government
The data given to the Committee has been supplied by the States.
Since verifying the whole data is not possible, the Department has
initiated the process of sample checking and also checking through
Registrar General of Census Operations for around 4000 habitations.
The Department has also suggested to the States to take up conjunctive
use of surface water to meet requirements for drinking purposes.
Since the use of ground water for drinking purposes is only 3 per
cent, restrictions on other uses would have to be put in place by the
States. The issue of ensuring system of water recharge whereby,
withdrawal of water should be matched by equal quantity of water
recharge will be addressed if the draft bill on Regulation and Control
of Ground Water Extraction and Development of Groundwater,
prepared by Ministry of Water Resources, is adopted by the State
Governments. Those State Governments who have not enacted a law
so far have been requested to adopt this draft bill prepared by Ministry
of Water Resources.
It is being impressed upon the State Governments that sustainability
of sources should be an integral part of the water supply systems.
5 per cent of ARWSP is earmarked for sustainability. Various schemes
of Department of Land Resources Ministry of Water Resources, etc.
contribute to overall conservation of water resources. NREGA
programme accords top priority to water conservation.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation Serial No. 22 (Para No. 5.10)
The Committee further find that only 10 States as of now have
enacted and implemented legislation on control and development of
ground water. The Committee feel that involving States in the huge
endeavor of controlling use of ground water is necessary and immediate
enactment of such a legislation is imperative. The Committee would
like the Department to impress upon the States in collaboration with
Ministry of Water Resources to put such a legislation in place at the

42
earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As this is a State subject, action in this regard has to be taken by
the States. However, as desired by the Committee, the State
Governments have been requested to take necessary action in the matter.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation Serial No. 24 (Para No.6.10)
As per the information received from the Department on the setting
up of District level Water Quality Laboratory, out of 459 sanctioned
laboratories, 368 have been established. The Committee would like the
Department to ensure that the remaining sanctioned labs are established
expeditiously. Further the Department should ensure that labs are
sanctioned in rest of the districts, on an urgent basis.
Reply of the Government
The issue of setting up of already sanctioned district water quality
testing laboratories has been pursued with the States. As per the latest
reports submitted by the States 416 labs have been established out of
445 labs sanctioned by the Govt. of India leaving a balance of 29 labs
in Uttaranchal, J&K, Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim. States have been
requested to send proposals for 73 districts not having district water
testing laboratories. Reminders have also been issued.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Para No.6.11)
The Committee are pleased to note the efforts of the Department
with regard to water monitoring and surveillance programme which
entails coordination and convergence with the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare. While agreeing with the Department that the issue of
health, drinking water and sanitation are intimately linked and should
be addressed through a coordinated approach, the Committee agree
with the proposal of the Department for having common institutional

43
structures by way of common Committees for health, water supply
and sanitation programme. They would like the Department to continue
efforts in this direction and update the Committee about the concrete
action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) has been
identified as the National Referral Institute for the National Rural
Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance Programme.
Establishment of linkages between health and water supply Department
is one of the activities as per the MoU signed between DDWS and
NICD. NICD is imparting orientation training to State Government
officers of PHE Departments. Similarly representatives from the Health
Departments will be one of the members in State Water and Sanitation
Mission (SWSM) and District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM).
Monitoring and Surveillance activities at all levels including Gram
Panchayat have to be done with the cooperation of the health
Department. ASHA a worker of National Rural Health Mission at the
village level can be one of the grass root workers for this programme.
She will also be imparted training for our programme for monitoring
and Surveillance activities. Manuals and guidelines have been sent to
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for development of their training
programme for ASHA.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation Serial No. 27 (Para No. 8.11)
The Committee take note of the fact that allocation for sanitation
sector has been enhanced for the 10th Plan Period vis-à-vis 9th Plan.
Besides, an analysis of the amount allocated and released for the
previous four years during the 10th Plan reveals that funds allocated
to this sector have substantially been enhanced. However, given the
fact that as of now, as per Government’s estimate only 38 per cent
rural households are provided with sanitation facilities, the Committee
feel that there is a long way to go before 100 per cent sanitation can
be achieved and further augmentation of funds would be a positive
step in that direction.

44
Reply of the Government
The department has projected a requirement of Rs. 5300 crores in
its Approach Paper for XI Plan to the Planning Commission to make
adequate fund provision in the 11th Five Year Plan.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation Serial No. 28 (Para No. 8.12)
The Committee have been informed that to cover the whole country
under Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) by 2012, there would be a
requirement of Rs. 860 crore per year. The Committee feel that apart
from coverage of whole country under TSC, the main emphasis of
Government should be to enhance the percentage of rural households
provided with sanitation which stands at a dismal 38 per cent, at
present. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to seek more
funds from Planning Commission not only for the coverage of all
districts under TSC but to implement other activities related to
cleanliness to ensure each and every rural household is provided with
sanitation facilities and the rural areas get clean environment. The
Committee accordingly urge the Department to make efforts for
stepping up the outlay considerably.
Reply of the Government
The department has projected a requirement of Rs. 5300 crores in
its Approach Paper for XI Plan to the Planning Commission to make
adequate fund provision in the 11th Five Year Plan.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation Serial No. 34 (Para No. 8.25)
The Committee are constrained to find from the reply of the
Department that open defecation is an age-old habit because of which
only 80 per cent of toilets constructed under Government schemes are
being used. The Committee feel that non use may also be due to
toilets becoming dysfunctional after some time and not because of
lack of awareness by people. If there are hygienic and functional toilets
in rural areas, the people will be certainly inclined to use them. Even

45
if it is to be believed that non use is due to improper sanitation and
hygiene habits of the people, it implies that IEC activities undertaken
by the Department under TSC have not been up to the required
standards and have failed to deliver results on field. The Committee,
therefore, urge that the Department should take all the desired efforts
to ensure that the toilets constructed under the Government schemes
are actually used. Otherwise, the whole objective of spending crores of
rupees is defeated. The Committee would like to emphasise that proper
sanitation involves provision of water, drainage, disposal of garbage
and is intimately linked with the issue of health care. Thus the
Department should have appropriate intervention in consultation with
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to address the problem.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the response of the
Department on the proposal put forth in the Approach paper to the
Tenth Plan regarding National Mission on Sanitation and Public Health
and efforts made by them in this direction.
Reply of the Government
Multiple design options for construction of toilets have been made
available to the users, out of which an user can choose depending
upon his preference, local condition and financial capability. Rural
Sanitary Marts (RSM)/Production Centre (PC) have been established
in various parts of the districts for supply of and to give necessary
guidance to the users. Masons are being trained and people are being
made aware about maintenance requirement of the toilets through
person-to-person contact and also through various IEC activities at the
village level.
Apart from construction and use of toilets, other activities in day-
to-day life which require observance of sanitation and hygiene practices
like safe keeping of drinking water, washing hands after defecation,
washing hands before and after meals, taking water for drinking
through water ladle, etc. are also being publicized through IEC
activities.
For disposal of household garbage, kitchen waste and waste water,
solid and liquid waste management has been included in the project
as a component of the project. For this, up to 10 per cent of the
project fund can be utilized to improve safe and hygienic conditions
of the villagers. Village opinion makers like PRI members, teachers,
ICDS workers and ASHA workers under NRHM are also being trained
in propagating sanitary behaviour among villagers. For this purpose,
the Department is in close touch with NRHM authorities, SSA

46
authorities and ICDS authorities both at Centre, State and district level.
Training modules have been developed and training on sanitation and
hygiene practices are being imparted to these village opinion makers
when they come for regular Departmental training. Further, synergies
with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Elementary
Education, and Ministry of Women & Child Development are also
being explored.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

47
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
—Nil—

48
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation Serial No. 3 (Para No. 3.21)
The Committee find that providing drinking water in rural areas
is one of the six components of the ambitious programme of the
Government ‘Bharat Nirman’. The total fund requirement for the years
2005-2009 as projected to meet the different components viz. coverage
of schools, coverage of left-over habitations, coverage of slipped back/
newly emerged habitations, tackling water quality, outstanding liability
for Swajaldhara, calamity, DDP , O&M and sustainability is Rs. 41,636.971
crore. The yearly allocation may come to around Rs. 9,000 crore. At
present level of annual allocation i.e. Rs. 5200 crore during the year
2006-07, it is difficult to achieve the targets set under Bharat Nirman.
Even the Department has agreed to the inadequacy of allocation. In
view of the aforesaid position, the Committee strongly recommend to
enhance the allocation for drinking water sector. The Committee would
also like the Department to apprise them as to how the projects made
under Bharat Nirman would be met keeping in view the fact that the
level of allocation during the first two years of Bharat Nirman i.e.
2005 and 2006 is very low as compared to the projections.
Reply of the Government
It is a fact that the allocation made during 2005-06 and 2006-07
were not as per projections made for the requirement of funds under
Bharat Nirman. The Department would strongly take up this issue
with Planning Commission for providing enhanced allocation in the
coming 2 years of Bharat Nirman. The State Governments have also
framed their Action Plan. However, for the funding gaps, the States
have been asked to seek external funding, loan from NABARD, etc.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report)

49
Recommendation Serial No. 4 (Para No. 3.22)
The Committee note that even the allocation provided during each
of the year is not being meaningfully utilised. The Committee are
concerned to note that as on 31 December, 2005 Rs. 2,113.30 crore was
lying unspent with State Governments. Another area of concern is the
low level of achievement by the different State Governments. The
percentage expenditure was 76.58 per cent in 2004-05 and 47.45 per cent
in 2005-06. The Department has cited non-receipt of monthly progress
reports by the States reflecting up-to-date expenditure as the reason
for unspent balances. Even the updated expenditure figures received
from the Department for the Central sector indicate that the expenditure
reported was 83.83 per cent during 2004-05 and 47.45 per cent during
the year 2005-06. The Committee are not inclined to accept the casual
reply of the Department stating non-receipt of monthly progress reports
as the reason for unspent balances in this era of technological
advancement. The Committee have repeatedly been expressing their
concern over the under-spending with various State Governments.
Inspite of that, there seems to be little improvement in this regard. In
view of this scenario, the Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to take all the desired action to ensure that every paisa
earmarked for the drinking water sector is meaningfully utilised. As
regards the issue of getting monthly progress reports from the State
Governments, the Committee would like the Department to evolve
some mechanism so that online reporting can be ensured from the
State Governments.
Reply of the Government
The Department has put in place an online monitoring mechanism
for monthly progress reports. A training programme is being organized
to familiarize the States for data entry in the software. Once the States
start using this system, the timely receipt of expenditure figures will
be ensured.
From 2006-07, only 10 per cent carried over funds will be allowed
as against 15 per cent till last year. In case the opening balance is
more than 10 per cent (till last year it was 15 per cent), a cut equivalent
to opening balance in excess of 10 per cent will be imposed at the
time of release of 2nd instalment. This would be a deterrent factor
and the States would ensure utilization of funds released under ARWSP .
Letters have been sent to the States having large Opening balance for
ensuring full utilization.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report)

50
Recommendation Serial No. 5 (Para No. 3.28)
The Committee note with concern that the inter-Sate and inter-
component funding pattern under ARWSP is extremely complicated
and as such monitoring such a complex criteria becomes an onerous
task. Thus, reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee
suggest to the Department to simplify the pattern.
Reply of the Government
The Department has considered the earlier recommendation of the
Standing Committee for simplifying the funding pattern. The funding
pattern for different components has been kept taking into account the
importance of that component, fund requirement and capacity of the
State to contribute funds for that component. At present, it would not
be desirable to change the existing funding pattern. However, this
would be reviewed at an appropriate time.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 6 (Para No. 3.29)
During the Conferences of States’ Ministers in charge of drinking
water supply, it was highlighted by a number of States to provide
more funds under ARWSP and change the funding pattern to 75:25
for Centre and States. While noting that steps have been initiated to
change funding pattern for North-Eastern States, the Committee would
stress that there is a need to explore similar options with respect to
other States that are facing resource constraint and have large number
of habitations in difficult areas. The Committee urge the Department
to take the immediate action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department has seriously considered the recommendations of
the Committee for changing the funding pattern to 75:25 between
Centre and the State. It may be mentioned that by changing the funding
pattern, the Centre would not be able to provide more funds to the

51
States than what is being provided at present. The funds of the Central
Government is limited and whatever is the Budget allocation of the
Department, the same is distributed to the States. At present States are
providing an amount equivalent to the amount that has been allocated
by the Centre. Changing the funding pattern will amount to less
contribution by the States (1/3rd of the allocation made by the Centre)
and thus there would be less availability of funds for Rural Drinking
Water Supply. The Department has decided that at the time of
formulation of Annual Plan, the Planning Commission would be
apprised of the tentative allocation of different States so that Planning
Commission could make provision of adequate funds in the State Plan
for the matching share.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 7 (Para No. 3.30)
On the question of how the prescribed inter-component funding
pattern under ARWSP is ensured, the Department has failed to submit
a categorical reply. The Committee feel that monitoring of
implementation of inter-component allocation merely through periodical
meetings and conferences is not practical or feasible. There is no
mechanism to supervise States that do not adhere to the norm of
inter-component allocation under ARWSP . The Committee desire that
a system should be put in place whereby it could be ensured that
States adhere to the norm of inter-component allocation.
Reply of the Government
The system being followed by the Department is as follows:
A. There is a separate allocation for Swajaldhara and Water
Quality. Adherence of the norms of funding pattern of these
components are monitored at the time of releasing the
second and the subsequent installment.
B. In DDP & Calamity components, there is no state share
and thus there is no need for such a mechanism.

52
C. Funds released under ARWSP (Normal) are utilized for the
following components:
1. Operation and Maintenance upto 15%. The funding pattern
for this is 50:50 between Centre and States.
2. Sustainability upto 5%. The funding pattern for this is 75:25
between Centre and States.
3. Rest of the funds are utilized for Coverage. The funding
pattern for this is 50:50 between Centre and States.
50% of the allocated funds are released to the States towards
first installment in the beginning of the financial year. On attaining
the 60% expenditure of the available funds (first installment +
carry over funds of the last year), State Government is required
to send a proposal for release of second installment in the
prescribed format. In this prescribed format, all the details relating
to expenditure incurred on O&M, sustainability and coverage are
mentioned. In case, there is excess expenditure on O&M, the
said expenditure is treated as inadmissible and corresponding
cut equivalent to the excess expenditure is made in the second
installment. Further, while calculating the state share, the funding
pattern of various components is taken into account. As an
example, if the expenditure incurred on sustainability is (0.05 x),
the share to be provided by the State Government would be
(0.95 x) + (0.05 x) / 3. Thus, a mechanism exists to monitor the
expenditure incurred on different components under ARWSP
(Normal).
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No. 3.31)
The Committee have been informed by the Secretary during oral
evidence that remaining Not Covered habitations are in remote and
difficult areas and achieving the target for NC habitations is difficult.
Apart from coverage of NC habitations, quality of drinking water and
sustainability have emerged as extremely relevant issues and as such
rigid allocation for the said aspects is not justified in the changed
scenario. The Committee would further like to add that the States
have their unique and peculiar problems with regard to quality and

53
sustainability in drinking water sector and hence providing for rigid
allocation under various components is not desirable.The Committee,
therefore, urge the Department to provide flexibility to States to utilise
the amount earmarked for quality and sustainability depending upon
their local conditions and requirements. The Committee would like
the Department to take urgent corrective action in this regard and
suitably modify the guidelines of ARWSP allowing the States flexibility
to spend more than a minimum threshold. The Committee may be
accordingly apprised of the Department’s assessment on the issue. Till
the issue is finalised the Committee urge the Department to formulate
an appropriate monitoring mechanism for the same.
Reply of the Government
The Committee’s suggestion to provide flexibility to States to utilize
the amount earmarked for quality and sustainability depending upon
their local conditions and requirements has been examined by the
Department. On the basis of the request received from the State
Governments with the approval of the Cabinet in February , 2006 it
has been decided to retain 20 per cent of the ARWSP funds at the
Centre for releasing to quality affected States only to provide focused
funding for tackling water quality problems. Revised guideline on sub-
mission on water quality have already been issued in the month of
March, 2006 (available on the Department website www.ddws.gov.in).
Activities for sustainability will be taken up by the State
Governments out of 5 per cent of ARWSP funds allocated to them for
the purpose, under the delegated power. As reporting of sub-mission
projects on source sustainability is still not proportionate to even 5 per
cent of ARWSP funds released to the State Governments, they were
directed to ensure that 5 per cent is spent exclusively on sub-mission
projects related to water sources. It is being impressed upon the State
Governments that sustainability of sources should be an integral part
of the water supply systems. The State departments dealing with rural
water supply will have to co-ordinate with other sectoral programmes
to address the issue of sustainability.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report)

54
Recommendation Serial No. 9 (Para No. 3.42)
The Committee find from the information furnished to them that
with an investment of around Rs. 50,000 crore in the drinking water
sector, the Government claims that 96 per cent of the rural habitations
have actually been covered. The Committee have repeatedly been
expressing concern over the authenticity of the proclamations made
by the Government with regard to coverage of habitations. The status
of slipped back habitations has been reviewed in the coming part of
the report. As per the Government’s data, at present 3,164 are the not
covered habitations and 41,457 are the partially covered habitations.
As regards the achievement with regard to NC/PC habitations, the
Committee find from the data indicated by the Department that during
8th Plan 3,39,705 habitations could be covered. Further during 9th
Plan total coverage was 4,17,951. During 10th Plan the coverage during
the first four years is 2,10,516. It could be seen from the data that the
number of coverage of habitations has drastically reduced during 10th
Plan as compared to 9th Plan.
Reply of the Government
The data regarding coverage of habitations with drinking water
facilities in rural areas relates to data of habitation survey conducted
in 1991 and updated in 1999 (Comprehensive Action Plan 1999, CAP
99) by State Governments. Based on CAP 99 and subsequent coverage
reported by State Governments, there were 4588 Not Covered (NC),
and 50479 Partially Covered (PC), (Total 55067) out of 14,22,664
habitations as on 1.4.2005 in the country. It may be mentioned that the
habitation survey 1991 and the subsequent updation in 1999 were done
by State Governments and the habitation-wise information was
maintained at the State PHEDs. In 2005-06, 11660 CAP 1999 NC/PC
habitations, 76457 slipped back NC/PC and 4498 water quality affected
habitations were covered. The coverage status is dynamic and there
are always possibilities of slippage from FC to PC/NC and from PC
to NC due to reasons such as sources going dry or lowering of ground
water table; sources becoming quality affected; systems outliving their
lives; systems working below rated capacity due to poor operation
and maintenance; increase in population resulting in lower per capita
availability, and; emergence of new habitations. State Governments were
requested in February 2003 to conduct a fresh habitation survey to
assess the status of coverage of habitations. The Survey Data of 2003
reveals that a large number of habitations have slipped back from FC
to PC/NC and from PC to NC.

55
As on date, the coverage reported for first four years of the
X Plan is 241240 habitations, thus showing a shortfall of 176711 habitations
from IX Plan. States may have taken up easily accessible habitations
for coverage in the earlier years and thereby covered more number of
habitations.
Some States are, at present, taking up large projects which take
2-3 years for completion while States such as Uttranchal are taking up
multi stage pumping schemes, which also take 2-3 years to complete.
While the projects are ongoing, coverage is not reported, but will be
done so on completion. Besides, there is still one year left in the
X th Plan and the coverage position is likely to increase, with focus
on coverage under Bharat Nirman programme.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 10 (Para No. 3.43)
Further while reviewing the performance during the year 2005-06
the Committee note that there is gross mismatch between the targets
and achievements. Against the target of 3,522 NC habitations the
achievement during the first three quarters is 653 and similarly for PC
habitations against the targets of 8,375 achievement is 5,958. The
Committee further note from the replies that one of the main reasons
for lower rate of coverage of habitations has been given to be the
location of most of the habitations being in difficult areas. In the plain
areas like Punjab and Rajasthan, deterioration of water quality of
ground water resources, high cost of surface water schemes, decision
of State Government to implement piped water supply scheme etc.
have been cited as the problems encountered regarding coverage of
habitations. While appreciating the difficulties for coverage in hill areas,
the Committee are not convinced with the reason put forth for coverage
in plain areas. The Committee feel that with the advancement in
technology, even difficult area can be covered. The Committee would
like the Department to explore technology options and it should be
ensured that all the uncovered habitations are covered within a
stipulated time frame.

56
Reply of the Government
The Committee’s observations are noted. Time and again at various
foras the Department has emphasized the need to cover all habitations
within a stipulated time frame by adopting and exploring low cost
technological advancements. Under the drinking water component of
Bharat Nirman, it is contemplated to cover all uncovered habitations
by 2008-09. Of the uncovered 55067 NC/PC habitations, 11660
habitations were covered in the first year of Bharat Nirman. From
2006-07, 20% of ARWSP funds have been allocated to only those States
having water quality problems to tackle the problem in a focused
manner.
Regarding technology options being used in various States, the
position is as follows:
1. Rajasthan is providing drinking water mainly through Piped
Water Supply (PWS), Hand Pumps and Tankas.
2. Himachal Pradesh, Haryana and Punjab are mainly taking
up PWS.
3. Uttaranchal, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland
are taking multi stage pumping schemes.
4. Sikkim is providing water supply through lift pumping
schemes.
5. J&K is providing water through deep tubewells and PWS
in the valleys and tapping perennial streams with Gravity
PWS in the hilly areas.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 3.44)
The Committee further find that as on 1 April, 2005 there were
4588 not covered habitations. Further as on 1 April, 2006 the status of
not covered habitations was 3935. Thus only 653 NC habitations could
be covered during the year 2005-06. Further the Committee also find
that as per the weightage for allocation of funds given in guidelines

57
upto 15 per cent of the funds can be allocated for NC/PC habitations
on 2:1 ratio. The Committee find that while huge allocation might
have been made to States having more NC/PC habitations as per the
Government’s data, the status of coverage reflects that only few
habitations are being covered due to certain reasons as explained above.
In view of this scenario, the Committee would like that realistic targets
for coverage of NC/PC habitations should be set keeping in view the
ground position.
Reply of the Government
During 2005-06, target for slipped back and quality affected
habitations were given separately for monitoring the performance of
the State Governments. The target and achievement during 2005-06 is
as under:
Target Achievement
Balance NC habitations of CAP 99 3522 1456
Remaining PC habitations of CAP 99 8375 10204
Slipped back habitations 34373 76457
Quality affected habitation 10000 4498
Total 56270 92615
It can be seen from the above table that State Governments have
achieved less than the target fixed for them in the Remaining NC
habitations of CAP 99 and Quality affected habitations where as they
have exceeded their target in the other categories. The State
Governments are facing difficulties in coverage of remaining uncovered
habitations as these habitations are located in difficult areas and
coverage of these habitations require location of safe water source and
building infrastructure to bring water from the located source, which
normally is at a distant place. Funds are being separately allocated
from 2006-07 to tackle water quality affected habitations.
In view of this, realistic targets have been fixed for coverage during
2006-07. While fixing targets for 2006-07, the coverage of habitations
in the previous year by the State Governments, fund availability during
current year, cost of coverage per habitations as indicated by the State
Governments in their Action Plan for Bharat Nirman were taken into
consideration. The department feels that the State Governments will

58
be able to achieve the realistic targets fixed for them this year. The
target for coverage of habitations during 2006-07 is as under:
Coverage of remaining NC Habitations 1120
Coverage of remaining PC Habitations 17000
Coverage of Slipped Back Habitations 40000
Coverage of Quality affected habitations 15000
Total coverage target 73120
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 13 (Para No. 3.51)
The Committee have persistently been expressing their serious
concern over the dichotomy in the data with regard to accessibility
and availability of drinking water in rural areas in the country. The
Committee in the action taken replies on 11th Report on Demands for
Grants 2005-06 (refer para 7 of 14th Report – Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
had been informed that revalidation data of habitations survey being
done by Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) would be
completed by February, 2006. While examining the Demands for Grants
of current year, the Committee note that IIPA has submitted data in
respect of only 14 States. Even in these States there are certain
discrepancies and now the Department proposes to conduct a random
survey by involving other agencies. The Committee deplore the way
the different surveys are being undertaken to know the position of
slippage of habitations. The Committee further find that as per the
various Budget documents since the year 2005-06 a lot of allocation is
being made and results are being indicated with regard to coverage of
slippage of habitations. The Committee fail to understand how the
status of coverage of slippage of habitations is being reflected without
having the basic facts about ground situation in this regard. The
Committee are of the view that it is of utmost necessity to have the
exact position of the availability of drinking water in each of the
habitations for future planning. In view of this scenario, the Committee
strongly recommend that the Government should look into the matter

59
critically in order to finalise the parameters for conducting the survey.
The survey itself should be completed expeditiously and the Committee
be informed accordingly.
Reply of the Government
State Governments were requested in February 2003 to conduct
fresh habitation survey to assess the status of coverage of main and
other habitations and rural schools with respect to availability of safe
drinking water. The Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA)
was entrusted with the task of correcting the habitation survey
conducted by States/UTs which was to be completed by February
2006. IIPA has so far completed the task in respect of 22 States/UTs.
For 10 States/UTs, data submitted by them have been cleansed by the
Department itself. Validation is not required to be done for Delhi as
all habitations are fully covered. This data for all States /UTs has now
been hosted on the website and will be used as a benchmark. The
Department now proposes to conduct field validation of the 2003
Survey data through a random sample survey.
The Department has developed software to capture the status of
availability of drinking water and other information in a habitation.
This software has been linked to the corrected data of Habitation survey
2003. The States/UTs are required to furnish information on status of
availability of water habitation wise on yearly basis and with this, it
will be possible to assess the exact position of availability of drinking
water in each habitation in the country. This software has been hosted
in the Department’s website and States/UTs have been requested to
make data entry and then periodically update the status on-line. The
Department is also organizing a training through NIC to familiarize
the State government officials with the software.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 14 (Para No. 3.52)
The Committee further note from the replies that the Department
is evolving mechanism to monitor and assess slippages on regular
basis. On the basis of Monthly Progress Report and Yearly Status Report

60
received from the States, a software is being developed in consultation
with NIC. Besides the Committee had been apprised that with regard
to regular updation of survey some of the State Governments had
certain reservations with regard to infrastructure for periodic updation
of slipped back habitations (refer para 7 of 14th Report). The Committee
fail to understand how the updation of the data of slipped back
habitations would be possible without having the basic data with regard
to slipped back habitations. Once the core data of slipped back
habitations is available, regular monitoring of the data may be possible.
Therefore, the Department should first of all ensure that the core data
with regard to slipped back habitations is procured at the earliest.
Thereafter the mechanism for slippage of habitations may be finalised.
Reply of the Government
The Department has developed software to capture the status of
availability of drinking water and other information in a habitation.
This software has been linked to the corrected data of Habitation survey
2003. The States/UTs are required to furnish information on status of
availability of water habitationwise on yearly basis and with this, it
will be possible to assess the exact position of availability of drinking
water in each habitation in the country. This software has been hosted
in the Department’s website and States/UTs have been requested to
make data entry and then periodically update the status on-line. The
Department is also organizing a training through NIC to familiarize
the State government officials with the software.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 15 (Para No. 4.10)
The Committee find from the status of financial and physical
achievements under Swajaldhara as indicated above that performance
of Swajaldhara is not satisfactory since the year 2002-03. Not only
that, the financial achievements indicate that there is deterioration in
the percentage of achievement year after year. The percentage
expenditure, which was 67 per cent during 2002-03, came down to
40 per cent during 2003-04 and subsequently reduced to 19.09 per
cent and a meager 1.73 per cent during the years 2004-05 and

61
2005-06 respectively. As regards physical achievements, while
appreciating the fact that some schemes may have more gestation
period the Committee wish to point out that from the replies furnished
by the Department itself it is apparent that most of the schemes are
short duration schemes the gestation period of which is 12 to
18 months. As such 50 per cent of the projects initiated during the
year 2002-2003 being incomplete is not understandable. The situation
is further alarming during 2003-04 when the percentage declared to
around 40 per cent and then around 20 per cent during 2004-05. The
Committee are further concerned to note the reasons advanced by the
Department like late reporting of schemes, longer gestation period, the
system of releasing of funds etc. for huge under-spending and shortfall
in achieving the physical targets. The Committee deplore the way the
unsatisfactory achievement under Swajaldhara has been tried to be
justified. The Committee would like the Department to make all out
efforts to ensure that the allocation made under the Swajaldhara is
meaningfully utilised. Besides the State/district-wise reasons for under-
spending as well as non-completion of projects should be obtained
from the concerned State Governments and the Committee may be
apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Department has already accepted that schemes sanctioned in
2002-03 and 2003-04 atleast should have been completed by now. Letters
have been written to all States for the same. Also, a special meeting
was called Statewise in July 2006 and the matter reviewed individually.
Efforts are ongoing to ask the States to complete and report completion
of these schemes within December 2006. Districts that have not
completed schemes of these 2 years are not being released any funds
for new schemes in 2006-07. All States and districts have been asked
to use the web-based reporting system and update their entries.
State-wise review of ongoing Swajaldhara schemes with special
focus on schemes sanctioned in the year 2002-03 and 2003-04 was
taken in July 2006. The State Governments have furnished the following
reasons for delay in completion of projects:
1. Community contribution is difficult to obtain as other
schemes like ARWSP do not have this element. (All States)
2. Convincing the community to share capital costs is a long
process and takes time. (Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal,
Assam, Meghalaya, Karnataka)
3. At some places, the community withdraws its contribution
due to internal differences. There are cases of the community

62
withdrawing its contribution after the funds have been
released for works to start. In such cases, either re-
convincing the community or relocating the scheme to
another habitation takes time. Uttar Pradesh had to relocate
all schemes of 2003-04 from 63 districts to only 22 districts,
which lost them one full year. (Uttar Pradesh, Kerala,
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra)
4. Release of 2nd installment is delayed as the reporting from
DWSC to district takes time and they do not properly
complete the progress reports etc. The chairpersons of the
DWSC do not give priority to the paperwork. (Nagaland,
Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar)
5. There is shortage of staff at the GP and District levels to
undertake extensive and continued dialogue with the
communities to explain Swajaldhara principles and they find
it easier to implement schemes like ARWSP . (All States)
As stated to the Committee earlier, the number of schemes being
reported as complete is increasing. The latest position of
completion of schemes is as under:
Projects sanctioned Status as on           No. of schemes
during the year Taken up Completed
2002-03 Feb. 2006 4552 2307
July 2006 4473 2627
2003-04 Feb. 2006 5225 1908
July 2006 5863 2288
2004-05 Feb. 2006 5330 1021
July 2006 5429 1897
2005-06 Feb. 2006 14906 45
July 2006 15315 73
(Note: Number of projects of 2002-03 are less in July 2006, as number of projects
were revised at the request of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh.
These States could not ground the projects due to some of the reasons given
above)
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report)

63
Recommendation Serial No. 17 (Para No. 4.17)
The Committee have gathered the impression that the Department
is very optimistic about the Swajaldhara scheme. It seems that some
of the States have responded positively to the Swajaldhara principles
and desired more funds for these projects. It has further been stated
by the Department that one of the recommendations of the meeting of
State Ministers was to extend the principles of Swajaldhara to ARWSP
from Eleventh Plan. The Committee had analysed the proposal of
replacing ARWSP by Swajaldhara in their earlier reports (refer para
2.63 of 11th Report) and expressed concerns that since Swajaldhara is
a demand-driven scheme, the better performing States would only be
able to take the benefit of the scheme. Thus the less performing States
would be deprived of the Central allocation. The Committee had
strongly recommended (para 2.65 of 11th Report) to review the position
in this regard. The Committee note that the apprehensions of the
Committee have not been adequately addressed by the Department.
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation in this
regard would like to have a categorical response of the Department.
Reply of the Government
ARWSP is not being replaced with Swajaldhara. It is proposed
that from the XI Plan, there will be only one scheme funded from the
Centre, namely ARWSP . This scheme will have an element of
community participation, but may not insist on community contribution
in cash for capital costs. This would be decided by the respective
State Governments. The concern of the Committee that some states
may be deprived of funds due to under performance shall be suitably
addressed. The Department feels that while allocations will be made
in an equitable manner to all States, release of installments would
depend upon the State’s absorption capacity and performance to
provide drinking water.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 18 (Para No. 4.18)
The Committee take note of the fact that Swajaldhara is a small
component of ARWSP wherein 20 per cent funds under ARWSP are

64
earmarked for projects under Swajaldhara. As per Swajaldhara
principles, 90 per cent contribution is made by the Centre and 10 per
cent by community to encourage people to have participation and
inculcate a sense of ownership. The Committee are constrained to note
the ambiguous reply of the Department on the issue of desirability of
obtaining 10 per cent community contribution for projects under
Swajaldhara. On the one hand the Department has stated that increase
in number of projects taken up under Swajaldhara reflects the
willingness of the communities to come forward with 10 per cent
contribution whereas on the other hand, it has been stated that some
States have expressed inability to implement schemes as the dialogue
with community failed in some cases.
Reply of the Government
Swajaldhara promotes the principles of the 73rd Constitutional
amendment. Its performance differs from State to State, based on the
States’ present status of devolution of the subject of rural drinking
water to the panchayats. In States like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat
and Orissa, there is increasing demand for the scheme. In States like
Punjab, Haryana, Bihar, NE States, the demand is not much. In
Manipur, only one district of Ukhrul has taken projects. Sikkim has
categorically stated that they do not want Swajaldhara funds as
community contribution is not forthcoming. Inspite of there being no
demand from some States, the number of projects undertaken under
Swajaldhara has been increasing over the years. The ambiguity is
because of differences in community participation in different parts of
this large country. The Department has not been able to meet the
increased demands of States like Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra
and Tamil Nadu as we try to maintain equity amongst all States and
not allot funds only to better performing States. The Department shares
the apprehension of the Committee that if funds are allocated as per
demand, only the better performing States would get all the funds.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report)

65
Recommendation Serial No. 19 (Para No. 4.19)
Besides, as indicated in the Performance Budget for a large number
of States in the year 2003-04 and 2004-05, community contribution has
been indicated as zero. During 2003-04, as many as 21 States/Union
territories and 14 States/ Union territories during 2004-05 have reported
Community Contribution as nil. Even though the Secretary during the
course of oral evidence has stated that projects were not sanctioned
where Community Contribution was zero during 2002, 2003 and 2004,
the data reflects otherwise. Allocation has been indicated for
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Tripura, Uttaranchal
and West Bengal during 2003-04 and to Nagaland during 2004-05,
even though the Community Contribution indicated is nil. The
Committee feel that there is some confusion with regard to the release
of outlay under Swajaldhara. Even when 10 per cent Community
Contribution is mandatory under the scheme, the allocation is being
made without having any Community Contribution, thereby defeating
the very purpose of Swajaldhara i.e. inculcating the feeling of
ownership by way of Community Contribution. In view of this scenario,
the Committee understand that the whole principle of Swajaldhara
need review particularly when the overall policy of Government aims
to replace ARWSP with Swajaldhara, the detailed analysis of which
has been given in the preceding part of the report. The Committee while
reiterating their earlier stand in this regard would like the categorical
reply of the Department in the light of the observations given above.
The Committee would like to know the details of the States which
have expressed their inability to implement the said schemes.
Reply of the Government
Allocations are made to all States at the beginning of the year.
However, releases are made only to those States that report having
received projects from the districts. The projects are approved by the
district or State level body, in accordance with the guidelines of the
Scheme. No Swajaldhara project can be implemented if the community
contribution is not given, as it is part of the project cost. Since the
community contribution need not be paid upfront, release of first
installment is made on request of the State and community contribution
can come during the course of implementation. The Department
scrutinizes the deposit of community contribution at the time of release
of 2nd installment, which is not released if the data is given by the
State. This aspect is also checked by the District Level Monitors (DLM)
deputed for the purpose. The reports annexed in the Performance
Budget are data as reported by the States at the time. In case of some

66
of the States noticed by the Committee, the relevant data was not
reported at that time. Since then, the Department has also initiated
on-line data entry from the district and State levels. Also, States have
been updating the information and also reporting the community
contribution. Only in the case of Nagaland for 2004-05, the funds were
released for completion of Sector Reforms Projects (SRP) of Dimapur,
hence community contribution is shown as zero. SRP had the concept
of taking community contribution upfront, without which the project
would not have been sanctioned. Under Swajaldhara, community
contribution may be given as the project is implemented, and even in
installments. The latest status, year-wise and State-wise for Swajaldhara
is annexed for the perusal of the Committee.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 23 (Para No.6.9)
The Committee would like to highlight that the richest possession
a country can be proud of in the 21st century is its water resources.
The Committee opine that it is not sufficient to simply provide for
drinking water in rural areas, but the Government should
simultaneously focus on quality of the water as it has major linkages
with health and well-being of the people. While the Department is
giving targets category-wise to State Governments wherein coverage
of quality affected habitations is one of the components, the Committee
are distressed to note the pathetic achievements vis-a-vis targets with
regard to quality affected habitations. Against a target of 10,000
habitations in 2005-06, the achievement was merely 3,249 indicating
their failure to address such a critical dimension of the problem. That
too when the targets themselves were too small as compared to the
total work to be taken i.e,. addressing 1,95,000 habitations. The
Committee would therefore like to recommend to the Department to
address the issue of quality more vigorously and enhance the annual
targets. Efforts should be made to meet the targets in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Against the target of covering 10,000 water quality affected
habitations in 2005-06, the achievement reported by States is 4439 as

67
on 31/7/2006. Some of the projects are Comprehensive water supply
projects, which could take 2 years or more to complete. During the
current year 2006-07, following the budgetary allocation of Rs 1040
crore to tackle water quality problems, it is targeted to sanction projects
in 27,000 habitations and also to provide safe drinking water in atleast
15,000 habitations.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 21 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 26 (Para No. 7.8)
The Committee have consistently been drawing the attention of
the Department towards the critical need to provide drinking water in
schools. In spite of that the situation does not seem to have been
improved. The worst part is that the Government does not have the
exact basic data with regard to number of schools not having drinking
water facility. There is vast difference between the data furnished by
the Department of Elementary Education according to which
78,358 rural schools are yet to be provided with drinking water supply,
and the data furnished by the Department of Drinking Water Supply
which indicate that the said number is 2,07,691. The number of rural
schools has increased from 6.37 lakh (as per 6th Educational Survey)
to 8,53,457 (as per 7th All India Educational Survey). As such the
number of schools not having drinking water facilities may be more.
Further this is the situation as reported in Government data which
itself seems to be not firm. The Committee apprehend that the reality
in this regard may be worse. In spite of according priority to rural
schools as per the policy of the Government the physical achievements
corresponding to the targets do not reflect the seriousness on the part
of the Department. There is huge shortfall in achievement of targets
during the year 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06. Not only that the
achievement has reduced considerably during 2004-05 as compared to
the previous year. Further the achievement during 2005-06 i.e, 35,538
against the huge targets of 1,40,000 is far from satisfactory. In this
scenario, the Committee deplore the way one of the important areas
is being addressed by the Department. It is really painful that after 56
years of planned development, the schools could not be provided even
the basic facility of drinking water. The Committee cannot accept any
excuse for delaying it further since there is an urgent need to provide

68
drinking water to all the schools in the country. The Government
should take up this aspect with all the seriousness it deserves and
formulate a strategy which should be implemented in a time bound
manner to achieve the task of providing drinking water to all the
schools in the country.
Reply of the Government
Department of Drinking Water Supply and Department of
Elementary Education and Literacy (DEEL) are working in coordination
with each other to provide drinking water facility to all schools. It has
been ascertained from the DEEL that the data furnished by them about
the number of schools not having drinking water facilities relate to
elementary schools only. On the other hand, the Department has
compiled the information based on the reports furnished by States/
UTs in different review meetings which indicates that there were
approximately 2.07 lakh schools not having drinking water facility as
on 1st April 2005 and during 2005-06, 65788 rural schools have been
covered. The Department has developed a software to obtain the names
alongwith the status of water supply and sanitation facilities and
States/UTs have been requested to do the data entry in this regard.
During 2005-06, the achievement in coverage of schools has
improved as compared to preceding years. Though the achievement is
far less than the target set for 2005-06, the Department is constantly
pursuing the matter with the State Governments.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 24 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 29 (Para No. 8.13)
The Committee are dismayed over the dismal performance of the
Department over the last five years as far as utilisation of sanctioned
amount is concerned. The Committee fail to understand that how,
given the bleak scenario of rural sanitation, the Department can afford
to spend as low as 30 to 40 per cent of the amount allocated in
2001-2002 and 2002-2003. Even for 2004-2005 the amount spent was
approximately 50 per cent of the amount allocated. The Committee
take strong exception to the lackadaisical approach of the Department
in this regard and desire to be furnished with proper justification
along with the remedial action taken in this regard.

69
Reply of the Government
The Total Sanitation Programme is demand driven with community
participation. During initial years, demand was low and hence
utilization of the fund was also low. In later years, it has gained
momentum and utilization is also improving. Further, as per the
scheme, once a project is sanctioned, 30 per cent of the central share
is released to the district. The State also releases its share. As activities
picks up slowly in the initial phase, some balance remains in the
project account of the district. Year wise break up of districts in which
projects were sanctioned is given below:
Financial year (FY) No. sanctioned
1999-2000 39
2000-2001 46
2001-2002 65
2002-2003 116
2003-2004 132
2004-2005 80
2005-2006 81
Total 559
 In order to ensure that districts have adequate funds in hand
when the need arises, it has been provided in the guideline that when
60 per cent of the central and state share has been spent, districts can
claim the next installment. Thus, availability of the fund with the
district does not imply under utilization.
The department is making efforts to increase the pace of utilization
of the money in the field. Review missions are being sent to the district
to monitor and encourage performance. Communication and Capacity
Development Units (CCDU) have been set up in the states to give
thrust to the programme by increasing IEC activities and increasing
the capacity of the stakeholders. One teacher from each school is being
given training in sanitation aspects to promote it among students.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 27 of Chapter I of the Report)

70
Recommendation Serial No. 30 (Para No. 8.14)
Besides, for the year 2005-06, the Department has informed that
out of the amount allocated i.e., Rs.700 crore amount released was
only Rs.660.71 crore out of which amount spent till 31 March was
only Rs.227 crore thus making a huge short fall in the amount utilised
i.e., Rs.433 crore. The Committee take strong objection to the way
huge funds to the tune of crores of rupees are lying unspent in such
a critical sector. The Committee would like the department to justify
on the aforesaid matter. They also recommend that efforts should be
made to ensure timely utilisation of the amount allocated in subsequent
years.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned in reply to Paragraph 8.13, when a project is
sanctioned for a district, 30 per cent of the central share is released to
the district so that it can start the work. In the initial phase the activity
picks up slowly and then it gains momentum. As it is a demand
driven scheme, expenditure can be incurred only when adequate
demand is generated among the users. This IEC activity takes time.
As can be seen in the table in reply to Paragraph 8.13, a large number
of districts have been sanctioned projects in 2004-05 and 2005-06 only.
It is expected that the utilization will improve in the coming years
and for this purpose all out efforts are being made.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 27 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 31 (Para No. 8.22)
The Committee are concerned to note that as per Government’s
estimate, only 38 per cent rural habitations could be provided with
sanitation facilities till date. The Committee are further disturbed to
note the rather slow pace of coverage of habitations with sanitations
facilities. India is committed to the Millennium Development Goal of
reducing by half the number of people without access to sanitation by
the year 2010 and achieving cent per cent coverage in the country by
the year 2012. The Committee feel that to achieve the Millennium
Development Goal, the Department with the current level of

71
achievement, will have to work with a hands on approach to deal
with the issue. The Committee would like to know the Action Plan
and strategies devised for the attainment of Millennium Development
Goal.
Reply of the Government
The department is making all out effort to achieve the MDG by
2010 and the decision of Government of India of 100% coverage of all
households by 2012. For this purpose, sanitation projects have been
sanctioned in 559 districts and for rest of the districts, it is likely to
be sanctioned within this financial year. The project aims to achieve
universal sanitation in the district within a time span of 4-5 years. All
districts have been asked to prepare Project Implementation Plan (PIP)
for the district and progress of the project is being monitored against
this PIP . Further, to generate demand from the target group and to
create capacity among the persons responsible for implementation of
the project, efforts on communication and capacity building is going
on. One Communication and Capacity Development Unit (CCDU) has
been started in each state to develop state specific Information,
Education and Communication (IEC) strategies and to improve the
ability of the field level functionaries who are involved in this
campaign. Till date about 2.42 crore households have constructed toilets,
2.61 lakh school toilets, 71,725 Anganwadi toilets, 7610 community
complexes have been constructed and 4265 production centers/rural
sanitary marts (RSMs) have been set up. It is expected that with all
these efforts, more than 1 crore IHHL would be constructed in
2006-07, out of which about 23 lakh have already been constructed.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 30 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 32 (Para No. 8.23)
Further, as per the Performance Budget of the Department there is
gross under achievement with regard to sanctioned Individual
household latrines, sanitation complex for women, school toilets, toilets
for Balwadis/Anganwadis. Out of 866.70 lakh sanctioned IHHL, the
achievement was only 198.68 lakh till 31 January, 2006. Similarly , for
sanitation complex for women, out of 34,081 lakh sanctioned complexes,

72
achievement was only 6,394 lakh. The position of school coverage is
rather more disappointing. Out of the target of 5,78,610 toilets, 1,98,670
toilets could be constructed by 31 January, 2006. Similarly , in the case
of Balwadis/Anganwadis out of 1,73,560 sanctioned toilets, achievement
was merely 41,862.
Reply of the Government
The department is making all out effort to achieve the MDG by
2010 and the decision of Government of India of 100% coverage of all
households by 2012. For this purpose, sanitation projects have been
sanctioned in 559 districts and for rest of the districts, it is likely to
be sanctioned within this financial year. The project aims to achieve
universal sanitation in the district within a time span of 4-5 years. All
districts have been asked to prepare Project Implementation Plan (PIP)
for the district and progress of the project is being monitored against
this PIP . Further, to generate demand from the target group and to
create capacity among the persons responsible for implementation of
the project, efforts on communication and capacity building is going
on. One Communication and Capacity Development Unit (CCDU) has
been started in each State to develop state specific Information,
Education and Communication (IEC) strategies and to improve the
ability of the field level functionaries who are involved in this
campaign. Till date about 2.42 crore households have constructed toilets,
2.61 lakh school toilets, 71,725 Anganwadi toilets, 7610 community
complexes have been constructed and 4265 production centers/rural
sanitary marts (RSMs) have been set up. It is expected that with all
these efforts, more than 1 crore IHHL would be constructed in
2006-07, out of which about 23 lakh have already been constructed.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 30 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation Serial No. 33 (Para No. 8.24)
Further disturbing is the State-wise performance as indicated in
the Budget documents. The expenditure position in Dadra & Nagar
Haveli, Manipur, Meghalaya, Punjab, Goa and Nagaland is alarming.
In Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu &
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Orissa, Sikkim and Uttaranchal the under-spending

73
is more than 50 per cent. The State specific performance is further
dismal during 2005-06 as indicated in the preceding para of the report.
As indicated in the Budget documents, Rs. 480 crore is lying unspent
with various State Governments. The Committee deplore such a poor
performance of sanitation programme in the country . In this scenario,
the Committee feel that the objective of outlay augmentation is defeated
if the projects are not completed in time. The Committee would urge
the Department to be more actively engaged in the entire process of
TSC starting from providing allocation till the completion of projects.
The Committee desire the Department to furnish to them the reasons
for such unsatisfactory achievement of physical targets and take
effective measures to rectify the anomaly in future. Besides, the
Committee feel that one of the reasons for under-utilisation of funds
may be inadequate outlay provided under the scheme for construction
of a toilet to each beneficiary. The Committee would like the comment
of the Department in the regard so as to analyse the position critically
and comment further.
Reply of the Government
The progress has been slow in some States, while in some other
States it has progressed well. Efforts are being made to sensitize the
slow States to the different nature of this scheme and for this purpose
workshops, seminars, training programmes are being held regularly in
the State. Some Key Resource Centers have been identified, which are
conducting regular training for persons working in this field. Greater
emphasis is being put on the IEC activities. PRIs have been actively
involved and help of NGOs are being taken wherever found feasible.
Districts, which have been slow in implementing TSC, have been
identified and special effort is being made to speed up the pace in
these districts. States have been requested to send review missions to
review the progress and give suggestions to remove bottlenecks in the
implementation. The rates allowed for construction of toilets by the
beneficiary have also been revised.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2006-DWS-III dated: 23 August, 2006
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 30 of Chapter I of the Report)

74
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
NIL
   N EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 March, 2007 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

75
APPENDIX I
PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL STATUS OF SWAJALDHARA (2002-03) AS ON 21.8.2006
(Rupees in lakh)
Financial Parameters Physical Paramters
Sl. State Project GOI Ist IInd Total Community Interest Total Reported %expenditure No. of Schemes
No. Outlay Share Installment Installment Amount Contribution Accrued Available Expenditure schemes completed
Released Fund taken
(3+4) (5+6) up
12 3 4 56 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 9,082.78 7,951.45 4,002.43 3,912.16 7,914.59 1,102.65 50.36 9,067.60 7,101.07 78.31 1620 1361
2. Assam 831.78 757.59 370.12 222.89 593.01 74.21 18.74 685.96 357.92 52.18 53 23
3. Chhattisgarh 283.10 263 131.5 110.51 242.01 20.79 0 262.8 115.84 44.08 102 53
4. D & N Haveli 9.98 9.48 4.74 0 4.74 0.5 0 5.24 0 0 1 0
5. Gujarat 184.42 167.97 83.99 78.54 162.53 17.47 0 180 169.21 94.01 30 28
6. Haryana 24.55 21.95 10.98 0 10.98 2.6 0 13.58 7.85 57.81 2 0
7. Himachal Pradesh 664.42 607.04 335.78 269.75 605.53 61.49 1.5 668.52 131.94 19.74 439 36
8. Karnataka 246.09 218.15 109.07 109.07 218.14 28.63 6.59 253.36 158.67 62.63 55 26

76
12 3 4 56 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
9. Kerala 589.03 511.29 272.84 251.88 524.72 80.06 0.11 604.89 193.28 31.95 84 40
10. Madhya Pradesh 563.85 529.01 264.49 254.2 518.69 57.81 0.28 576.78 417.72 72.42 87 71
11. Maharashtra 8,261.52 7,427.68 3,721.14 2,847.49 6,568.63 832.73 49 7,450.36 5,982.22 80.29 761 103
12. Orissa 725.39 671.69 335.87 319.33 655.2 53.57 4.09 712.86 196.08 27.51 287 56
13. Rajasthan 412.52 374.52 187.26 187.26 374.52 38.81 0 413.33 205.68 49.76 35 10
14. Tamil Nadu 1,521.07 1,395.00 702.04 694.5 1,396.54 121.8 3.07 1,521.41 856.38 56.29 389 387
15. Uttar Pradesh 1,123.73 1,030.61 565.98 490.68 1,056.66 103.43 29.6 1,189.69 668.8 56.22 490 483
16. West Bengal 52.19 47.76 23.88 9.85 33.73 4.43 0.06 38.22 13.27 34.72 8 0
Total 24,576.42 21,984.19 11,122.11 9,758.11 20,880.22 2,600.98 163.4 23,644.60 16,575.93 70.1 4443 2677

77
PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL STATUS OF SWAJALDHARA (2003-04) AS ON 21.8.2006
Normal Release Status (Rs. in lakh)
Financial Parameters Physical Parameters
Sl. State Amount Ist IInd Total Amount Total Community Interest Total Reported % No. of Schemes
No. Allocated Installment Installment Amount Released Amount Contribution Accrued Available Expenditure expenditure Schemes completed
to States Released for Released Fund taken
against Startup, (4+5+6) (6+7+8+9) up
the IEC
allocation etc.
(2+3)
12 3 4 5 6 789 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15
1. A&N Islands 12 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
2. Andhra Pradesh 1,616.07 808 751.5 1,559.50 80.80 1,640.30 183.2 12.32 1,835.82 1,328.43 72.36 423 334
3. Arunachal Pradesh 447.41 223.71 0 223.71 0.00 228.08 46.48 0 274.56 14.61 5.32 90 22
4. Assam 754.59 377.3 302.05 679.35 37.73 717.08 187.59 5.97 910.64 392.65 43.12 432 166
5. Bihar 873.73 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
6. Chandigarh 0000 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
7. Chhattisgarh 262.8 0 0 0 13.15 13.15 0 0 13.15 0000
8. D&N Haveli 8404 0.40 4.4 0.4 0 4.8 0010

78
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 11 21 31 41 5
 9. Daman & Diu 0000 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
10. Delhi 6000 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
11. Goa 14.55 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
12. Gujarat 765.56 382.78 382.78 765.56 38.28 803.84 27.23 0 831.07 810.56 97.53 201 163
13. Haryana 234.23 117.12 0 117.12 11.71 128.83 0 0 128.83 0 0 155 0
14. Himachal Pradesh 680.19 340.11 112.16 452.27 34.01 486.28 67.35 11.17 564.8 171.9 30.44 118 83
15. Jammu & Kashmir 1,497.90 748.95 0 748.95 74.90 823.85 48.85 0 872.7 154.94 17.75 121 64
16. Jharkhand 356.02 178.01 0 178.01 17.80 195.81 35.87 0.05 234.43 3.79 1.62 3 3
17. Karnataka 1,397.03 698.52 678.51 1,377.03 69.85 1,446.88 46.13 4.5 1,497.51 921.11 61.51 244 162
18. Kerala 504.03 252.02 230.99 483.01 25.00 508.01 24.71 3.68 536.4 247.57 46.15 42 39
19. Lakshadweep 0000 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
20. Madhya Pradesh 840.54 420.27 255.76 676.03 42.03 718.06 100.96 2.49 821.51 366.64 44.63 707 140
21. Maharashtra 2,172.15 1,086.07 1,008.55 2,094.62 108.61 2,203.23 224.41 8.73 2,436.37 1,245.05 51.1 310 15
22. Manipur 153.59 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
23. Meghalaya 176.96 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000

79
24. Mizoram 126.88 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
25. Nagaland 130.22 65.11 65.11 130.22 6.51 136.73 10 0.09 146.82 95.56 65.08 9 0
26. Orissa 733.28 366.64 309.38 676.02 36.66 712.68 34.47 18.72 765.87 223.14 29.14 157 62
27. Pondicherry 6000 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
28. Punjab 313.79 156.89 71.4 228.29 0.00 228.29 31.99 6.07 266.35 135.59 50.91 14 0
29. Rajasthan 2,191.77 1,070.50 676.17 1,746.67 109.55 1,856.22 236.13 0.23 2,092.58 644.6 30.8 100.4 233
30. Sikkim 53.42 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0000
31. Tamil Nadu 673.22 336.6 336.6 673.2 33.66 706.86 66.62 0.09 773.57 536.19 69.31 445 442
32. Tripura 156.93 78.47 55.7 134.17 7.85 142.02 17.39 0.6 160.01 35.74 22.33 814 249
33. Uttar Pradesh 1,532.91 766.45 0 766.45 76.65 843.1 419.04 19.28 1,281.42 1,027.70 80.2 537 0
34. Uttaranchal 364.33 182 82.5 264.5 18.20 282.7 13.01 1.47 297.18 42.06 14.15 24 17
35. West Bengal 943.9 471.5 100 571.5 47.15 618.65 91.65 0 710.3 100.16 14.1 42 5
Total 20,000.00 9,131.02 5,419.15 14,550.17 890.50 15,440.67 1,916.18 95.46 17,456.69 8,497.98 48.68 5893 2199
12 34 5 6789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5

80
FINANCIAL AND PHYSIAL PERFORMANCE UNDER SWAJALDHARA SCHEME
FOR YEAR ‘2004-05’ AS ON 21.8.2006
Normal Release Status (Rs. in lakh)
Financial Parameters Physical Parameters
Sl. State Amount Ist IInd Total Amount Amount Total Community Interest Total Reported %expenditure No. of Schemes
No. Allocated Installment Installment Amount Released Released Amount Contribution Accrued Available Expenditure Schemes completed
to States Released for for Released Fund taken
against Completetion Startup, (6+7+8) (8+9+10+11) up
the of SRP IEC
allocation schemes etc.
(4+5)
12 3 4 5 6 789 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16
1. A&N Islands 12.69 0 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
2. Andhra Pradesh 1,632.65 1,224.49 31.58 1,256.07 2,953.84 244.90 4,454.81 183.71 0.98 4,639.50 715.04 15.41 728 305
3. Arunachal Pradesh 473.76 0 0 0 0. 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
4. Assam 797.36 132.74 0 132.74 0 26.55 159.29 9.42 0.84 169.55 54.45 32.12 229 197
5. Bihar 923.98 587.24 0 587.24 0 138.60 725.84 6.67 0 723.51 0 0 21 0
6. Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0. 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
7. Chattisgarh 332.2 247.12 0 247.12 0 49.83 296.95 7.57 0 304.52 0 0 61 0
8. D&N Haveli 8.46 0 0 0 0. 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

81
12 3 4 5 6 789 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16
9. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
10. Delhi 6.35 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
11. Goa 15.04 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
12. Gujarat 826.42 619.81 206.61 826.42 0 123.96 950.38 7.31 0 957.69 826.42 86.29 183 103
13. Haryana 246.48 184.86 0 184.86 0 36.97 221.83 118.45 0 340.28 0 0 155 0
14. Himachal Pradesh 677.16 507.87 81.75 589.62 0 101.57 691.19 32.96 2.55 726.7 209.68 28.85 427 51
15. Jammu & Kashmir 1,560.02 1,170.02 0 1,170.02 0 234.00 1,404.02 141.31 0 1,545.33 193.71 12.53 223 12
16. Jharkhand 368.12 0 0 0 0. 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
17. Karnataka 1,253.54 940.15 242.14 1,182.29 1,152.33 188.03 2,522.65 420.65 4.06 2,947.36 918.89 31.18 182 70
18. Kerala 492.54 366.93 20 386.93 0 73.88 460.81 54.14 15.09 530.04 993.79 187.49 40 25
19. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
20. Madhya Pradesh 966.49 724.54 129 853.54 0 144.97 998.51 110.49 1.11 1,110.11 513 46.21 454 114
21. Maharashtra 1,992.80 1,494.60 454.4 1,949.00 0 298.92 2,247.92 433.57 10.17 2,691.66 849.11 31.55 504 8
22. Manipur 162.86 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
23. Meghalaya 186.12 139.59 0 139.59 0 27.92 167.51 64.44 0 231.95 0 0 43 0

82
12 34 5 6789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6
24. Mizoram 133.25 96.84 0 96.84 0 19.19 116.03 12.06 0 128.09 17.75 13.86 5 0
25. Nagaland 137.48 216.76 0 216.76 0 0.00 216.76 38.61 8.83 264.2 457.11 173.02 4 0
26. Orissa 865.23 648.92 83.48 732.4 0 129.78 862.18 97.92 3.51 963.61 269.19 27.94 295 67
27. Pondicherry 6.35 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
28. Punjab 351.11 263.33 5.44 268.77 0 52.67 321.44 39 0.48 360.92 85.62 23.72 20 2
29. Rajasthan 2,544.51 1,902.91 126 2,028.91 0 381.68 2,410.59 207.87 0.71 2,619.17 789.93 30.16 641 359
30. Sikkim 57.11 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
31. Tamil Nadu 889.1 666.83 222.27 889.1 0 133.37 1,022.47 87.85 3.13 1,113.45 559.4 50.24 366 154
32. Tripura 164.97 123.73 0 123.73 0 24.75 148.48 18.48 0.48 167.44 63.78 38.09 181 14
33. Uttar Pradesh 1,621.06 1,234.11 0 1,234.11 0 243.16 1,477.27 387.56 21.81 1,886.64 559.14 29.64 1056 3
34. Uttaranchal 378.67 401.01 0 401.01 0 0.00 401.01 162.3 0 563.31 0 0 26 0
35. West Bengal 1,064.06 582.2 0 582.2 0 116.44 698.64 51.88 0 750.52 0 0 85 0
Total 21,147.94 14,476.60 1,602.67 16,079.27 4,106.17 2,791.14 22,976.58 2,694.22 73.75 25,744.55 8,076.00 31.37 5927 1484

83
Additional Release Status 2004-05 (Rs. in lakh)
Financial Parameters Physical Parameters
Sl. State Amount Ist IInd Total Amount Amount Total Community Interest Total Reported %expenditure No. of Schemes
No. Allocated Installment Installment Amount Released Released Amount Contribution Accrued Available Expenditure Schemes completed
to States Released for for Released Fund taken
against Completetion Startup, (6+7+8) (8+9+10+11) up
the of SRP IEC
allocation schemes etc.
(4+5)
1. Gujarat 1,173.67 880.25 0 880.25 0 0.00 880.25 0 0 880.25 0 0 0 0
2. Karnataka 261.5 196.12 0 196.12 0 0.00 196.12 0 0 196.12 0 0 0 0
3. Maharashtra 942.66 706.99 0 706.99 0 0.00 706.99 0 0 706.99 0 0 0 0
4. Rajasthan 322.3 241.73 0 241.73 0 0.00 241.73 0 0 241.73 0 0 0 0
5. Tamil Nadu 229.7 172.27 57.44 229.71 0 0.00 229.71 25.42 1.14 256.27 288.02 112.39 45 39
Total 2,929.83 2,197.36 57.44 2,254.80 0 0.00 2,254.80 25.42 1.14 2,281.36 288.02 12.63 45 39
Grand Total 24,077.77 16,673.96 1,660.11 18,334.07 4,106.17 2,791.14 25,231.38 2,719.64 74.89 28,025.91 8,364.03 29.84 5972 1523
(Normal+Additional)

84
FINANCIAL AND PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE UNDER SWAJALDHARA SCHEME
FOR YEAR 2005-2006 AS ON 21.8.2006
Normal Release  Status (Rs. in lakh)
Financial Parameters Physical Parameters
Sl. State Amount Ist IInd Total Amount Amount Total Community Interest Total Reported %expenditure No. of Schemes
No. Allocated Installment Installment Amount Released Released Amount Contribution Accrued Available Expenditure Schemes completed
to States Released for for Released Fund taken
against Completetion Startup, (6+7+8) (8+9+10+11) up
the of SRP IEC
allocation schemes etc.
(4+5)
12 3 4 5 6 789 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16
1. A&N Islands 25.01 0 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
2. Andhra Pradesh 3,045.35 2,280.18 0 2,280.18 0 456.80 2,736.98 0 0 2,736.98 0 0 600 0
3. Arunachal Pradesh 933.61 0 0 0 0. 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
4. Assam 1,571.29 962.87 0 962.87 0 235.69 1,198.56 0 0 1,198.56 0 0 245 0
5. Bihar 2,232.74 1,674.56 0 1,674.56 0 334.91 2,009.47 0 0 2,009.47 0 0 7284 0
6. Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
7. Chattisgarh 750.97 0 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
8. D&N Haveli 16.67 0 0 0 0. 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

85
12 3 4   5  6  7 8 9 1 01 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 5 1 6
 9. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 000000 0 0 0 0 0
10. Delhi 12.5 0 0 000000 0 0 0 0 0
11. Goa 28.05 0 0 000000 0 0 0 0 0
12. Gujarat 1,629.73 1,222.31 0 1,222.31 0 244.46 1,466.77 0 0 1,466.77 0 0 240 0
13. Haryana 511.69 383.72 0 383.72 0 76.75 460.47 0 0 460.47 0 0 52 0
14. Himachal Pradesh 1,250.82 938.14 0 938.14 0 187.62 1,125.76 0 0 1,125.76 0 0 393 0
15. Jammu & Kashmir 2,900.60 2,175.46 0 2,175.46 0 435.09 2,610.55 27.78 0 2,638.33 133.07 5.04 2096 0
16. Jharkhand 805.61 604.21 0 604.21 0 120.84 725.05 0 0 725.05 0 0 161 0
17. Karnataka 2,253.99 1,690.49 0 1,690.49 0 338.10 2,028.59 41.22 0.04 2,069.85 133.25 6.44 329 0
18. Kerala 784.65 588.49 0 588.49 0 117.70 706.19 0 0 706.19 0 0 39 0
19. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 000000 0 0 0 0 0
20. Madhya Pradesh 2,200.27 1,650.27 0 1,650.27 0 330.04 1,980.31 36.86 0 2,017.17 101.02 5.01 1002 0
21. Maharashtra 4,019.88 3,014.93 0 3,014.93 0 602.98 3,617.91 0 0 3,617.91 0 0 359 0
22. Manipur 320.93 238.96 0 238.96 0 48.14 287.1 0 0 287.1 0 0 33 0
23. Meghalaya 366.77 275.08 0 275.08 0 55.01 330.09 0 0 330.09 0 0 18 0
24. Mizoram 262.58 196.94 0 196.94 0 39.38 236.32 15.49 0 251.81 128.05 50.85 23 0

86
12 34 5 6789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6
25. Nagaland 270.91 203.18 0 203.18 0 40.64 243.82 39.21 0 283.03 9.07 3.2 15 0
26. Orissa 1,807.40 1,355.45 0 1,355.45 0 271.11 1,626.56 61.32 0 1,687.88 61.1 3.62 409 0
27. Pondicherry 12.5 0 0 0 0 0.00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
28. Punjab 530.53 397.91 0 397.91 0 79.58 477.49 0 0 477.49 0 0 29 0
29. Rajasthan 4,580.72 3,381.85 0 3,381.85 0 687.11 4,068.96 41.28 0.71 4,110.95 72.04 1.75 692 0
30. Sikkim 112.53 0 0 000000 0 0 0 0 0
31. Tamil Nadu 1,730.13 1,297.60 69.75 1,367.35 0 259.52 1,626.87 63.7 145.97 1,836.54 442.07 24.07 421 130
32. Tripura 325.1 241.44 0 241.44 0 48.77 290.21 0 0 290.21 0 0 136 0
33. Uttar Pradesh 3,608.10 2,706.08 0 2,706.08 0 541.22 3,247.30 0 0 3,247.30 0 0 659 0
34. Uttaranchal 834.12 625.59 0 625.59 0 125.12 750.71 0 0 750.71 0 0 78 0
35. West Bengal 1,938.90 1,454.18 0 1,454.18 0 290.84 1,745.02 0 0 1,745.02 0 0 0 0
Total 41,674.65 29,559.89 69.75 29,629.64 0 5,967.42 35,597.06 326.86 146.72 36,070.64 1,079.67 2.99 15313 130

87
Additional Release Status 2005-06
Financial Parameters Physical Parameters
Sl. State Additional Ist IInd Total Amount Amount Total Community Interest Total Reported %expenditure No. of Schemes
No. Amount Instalment Instalment Amount Released Released Amount Contribution Accrued Available Expenditure Schemes completed
Allocated Released for Released Released Fund taken
to States against Completion Startup, (6+7+8) (10+11+12+13) up
the of SRP IEC
allocation schemes etc.
(4+5)
12 3 4 5 6 789 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16
1. Andhra Pradesh 1,020.20 765.15 0 765.15 0 0.00 765.15 0 0 765.15 0 0 0 0
2. Gujarat 543.21 407.41 0 407.41 0 0.00 407.41 0 0 407.41 0 0 0 0
3. Haryana 170.63 127.97 0 127.97 0 0.00 127.97 0 0 127.97 0 0 0 0
4. Himachal Pradesh 416.91 312.68 0 312.68 0 0.00 312.68 0 0 312.68 0 0 0 0
5. Jharkhand 268.53 201.4 0 201.4 0 0.00 201.4 0 0 201.4 0 0 0 0
6. Karnataka 751.32 563.49 0 563.49 0 0.00 563.49 0 0 563.49 0 0 0 0
7. Kerala 261.53 196.15 0 196.15 0 0.00 196.15 0 0 196.15 0 0 0 0
8. Madhya Pradesh 495.97 371.98 0 371.98 0 0.00 371.98 0 0 371.98 0 0 0 0
9. Maharashtra 1,339.91 1,004.93 0 1,004.93 0 0.00 1,004.93 0 0 1,004.93 0 0 0 0
10. Nagaland 90.33 67.75 0 67.75 0 0.00 67.75 0 0 67.75 0 0 0 0

88
12 34 5 6789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6
11. Orissa 602.59 451.94 0 451.94 0 0.00 451.94 0 0 451.94 0 0 0 0
12. Punjab 49.92 37.44 0 37.44 0 0.00 37.44 0 0 37.44 0 0 0 0
13. Rajasthan 1,598.48 11,98.86 0 11,98.86 0 0.00 11,98.86 0 0 1,198.86 0 0 0 0
14. Tamil Nadu 576.69 432.52 0 432.52 0 0.00 432.52 0 0 432.52 0 0 0 0
15. Uttaranchal 278.03 208.52 0 208.52 0 0.00 208.52 0 0 208.52 0 0 0 0
16. West Bengal 646.28 484.71 0 484.71 0 0 484.71 0 0 484.71 0 0 0 0
Total 9,110.53 6,832.90 0 6,832.90 0 0.00 6,832.90 0 0 6,832.90 0 0 0 0
Grand Total 50,785.18 36,392.79 69.75 36,462.54 0 5,967.42 42,429.96 326.86 146.72 42,903.54 1,079.67 2.52 15313 130
(Normal+Additional)

89
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDA Y THE 27 FEBRUARY, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. ‘139’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Zora Singh Mann
4. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
7. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
8. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
9. Shri Sita Ram Singh
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari
13. Shri Jayantilal Barot
14. Dr. Chandan Mitra
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary-I
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II

90
2. In the absence of Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Hannan
Mollah, M.P . to act as Chairman for the sitting under Rule 258(3) of
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and solicited their cooperation in examination and
finalisation of draft action taken reports on Demands for Grants (2006-
2007) and reports on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of various
Departments/Ministries under the jurisdiction of the Committee.
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 2 regarding draft action taken report on Twentieth Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of
Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development). The
Committee after deliberations adopted the draft report without any
modification.
4. *** *** ***
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft action taken Reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
6. The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1500 hrs.
onwards on 1 March, 2007 for consideration and adoption of two
draft action taken reports on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in respect
of Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
and Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
***Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

91
APPENDIX III
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE  RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 34
II. Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government 12
Para Nos. 2.4, 3.20, 3.45, 4.11, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10,
6.10, 6.11, 8.11, 8.12 and 8.25
Percentage to the Total recommendations  35.29%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies Nil
Percentage to Total recommendation Nil
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee 22
Para Nos. 3.21, 3.22, 3.28, 3.29, 3.30, 3.31,
3.42, 3.43, 3.44, 3.51, 3.52, 4.10, 4.17, 4.18,
4.19, 6.9, 7.8, 8.13, 8.14, 8.22, 8.23 and 8.24
Percentage to Total recommendations 64.71%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited Nil
Percentage to Total recommendation Nil