43
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development on Demands for Grants (2008-09)]
FORTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FORTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 19.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 049
Price : Rs. 56.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2008-09) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 14
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 32
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 33
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 39
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 15.12.2008 .............................................................. 46
II. Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-seventh Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 48
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Vacant*
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
11. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
12. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
17. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
18. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
19. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
20. Vacant $
21. Vacant
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
24. Shri Prabhat Jha
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Shrimati Kanimozhi
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri V .K. Gupta — Under Secretary
*Vacancy caused due to the resignation given by Shri George Fernandes, MP from the
membership of Lok Sabha and accepted by the Hon’ble Speaker w.e.f. 11 November,
2008 vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 6205 dated 11 November, 2008.
$Vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Dharmendra Yadav, MP ,
Lok Sabha by Hon’ble Speaker from Standing Committee on Rural Development to
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice w.e.f. 5 December, 2008 vide
Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 6267 dated 5 December, 2008.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2008-2009) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Forty-third Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2007-2008) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Department of
Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Thirty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
17 April, 2008. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 1 September, 2008.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
15 December, 2008.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh Report of the
Committee is given in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 December, 2008 Chairman,
24 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2008-2009)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Thirty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2008-
2009) of the Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural
Development).
2. The Thirty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
17 April, 2008 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 21 April,
2008. It contained 35 recommendations/observations.
3. Action taken notes in respect of all the 35 recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government and categorised as follows:-
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:-
Para Nos. 3.13, 3.14, 4.7, 4.8, 5.8, 5.11, 5.12, 5.23, 5.28, 5.29,
6.11, 6.12, 6.14, 6.15, 7.10, 7.12, 7.13, 7.14, 7.15 and 7.16
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s reply:-
-NIL-
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:-
Para Nos. 3.22, 3.23, 4.9, 4.10 and 5.26
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:-
Para Nos. 3.15, 3.24, 5.9, 5.10, 5.24, 5.25, 5.27, 6.13, 6.16 and
7.11
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non implementation. The Committee further desire

2
that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations
contained in Chapter–I and final action taken replies to the
recommendations contained in Chapter–V of this report should be
furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Over-all review of allocation and utilisation of outlay
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 4, 5 & 6
Para Nos. 3.22, 3.23 & 3.24)
6. The Committee had recommended as under:-
 “The Committee note that not only the Department are getting
lesser allocation than the outlay proposed to Planning
Commission, whatever amount is allocated at BE stage is further
reduced at RE stage. During the year 2006-07, the outlay of
Rs. 5,200 crore provided at BE stage was reduced to Rs. 4,560 crore
at RE stage. Then during the year 2007-08, the BE of Rs. 6,500 crore
was reduced to Rs. 6,400 crore. The releases upto 29 February
2008 were to the tune of Rs. 5,386 crore. The Committee express
serious concern over the reduction of outlay at RE stage
particularly when the scheme is for providing drinking water to
rural masses. The Committee strongly recommend to take up the
matter with the Planning Commission so that whatever allocation
is made at BE stage is not reduced at the RE stage. The
Department on their part should make all efforts to ensure cent
percent utilization of the resources.”
(Recommendation No. 3.22)
“The Committee find from the data provided by the Department
in the Outcome Budget that during the year 2006-07, Rs. 1,088.36
crore were lying as opening balances with various State
Governments. As regards the State-wise position, the under-
spending was more in Jharkhand where the expenditure was
only 44.48 per cent followed by Punjab where 52.70 per cent of
funds were lying unspent. Worst is the position in A&N Islands,
Dadar and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep,
Puducherry, Delhi and Chandigarh, where the expenditure
reported is nil against the indicated releases. Further
the expenditure reported under Union Government share is

3
76.19 per cent whereas the expenditure reported under State share
is 81.40 per cent during 2006-07. During the year 2007-08,
Rs. 1,803 crore have been stated to be the unspent balances in
various States. The maximum unspent balances are with
West Bengal i.e. Rs. 2,49,85.42 lakh, Maharashtra Rs. 2,39,10.85 lakh,
Bihar Rs. 1,80,54.77 lakh, Uttar Pradesh Rs. 1,66,82.99 lakh and
Madhya Pradesh Rs. 1,19,30.73 lakh. The Committee have
repeatedly been expressing concern over the huge opening
balances lying with the State Governments. In spite of that, the
trend of opening balances persists during each year. The
Committee strongly recommend to analyze the reasons in the
States where the under-spending is a recurrent feature. The
Department should obtain reports from all the States regarding
non utilisation of funds and inform the Committee accordingly.
The Committee would like the Department to indicate the specific
reasons for nil utilization of outlay in some of the States/UTs.”
(Recommendation No. 3.23)
“The Committee had earlier recommended (refer para 4.12 of
28th Report) for revising the format of MPRs so as to include a
component wherein States furnish specific reasons for non-
utilisation of resources. Such a mechanism will not only make
the States responsible but would also help the Union as well as
the State Governments to take timely remedial measures. The
Committee while reiterating the earlier recommendation would
like that the desired action on the suggested lines should be
taken and the Committee apprised accordingly.”
(Recommendation No. 3.24)
7. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as under:-
 “The Central fund flow in this sector has increased considerably
since the launch of Bharat Nirman whereas the proportionate
State resources in the form of State matching share were not
forthcoming from some of the States due to their financial
resource crunch. The States have also been experiencing difficulties
in absorbing the enhanced allocation, which has affected timely
release of Central fund to the States. Accordingly, a cut of Rs.
640 crore was imposed by Ministry of Finance from the allocation
of fund in the water sector keeping in view the trend of
expenditure by the State during 2006-07. Besides, it is pertinent
to mention here that the 2nd instalment of funds under ARWSP
is released to the States after utilizing 60% of total available

4
funds with the States and providing matching State share. In
addition, proportionate reduction is effected from the second
instalment on account of less State share provided as well as
unspent balance beyond permissible limit in the previous year.
The Department has emphasized all States/UTs to expedite the
implementation, raise the pace of expenditure and provide
adequate State share so that allocated fund could be released
well in time.
During 2007-08, Rs. 6,500 crore was allocated for the rural
drinking water sector, which was reduced to Rs. 6,400 crore at
the RE stage by Ministry of Finance keeping in view the trend
of expenditure by the States against which Rs. 6,442 crore has
been utilized. In fact the Department has been able to utilize the
full allocation provided at the RE stages in the previous years.
During 2008-09, efforts will be made to enhance the allocation at
the RE stage and the same will be utilized.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.22)
“The most important reason for the States to have unspent balance
is on account of slow pace of expenditure by the States. There
are other reasons such as court intervention, delay in sanction of
the project in time, delay in transfer of funds by the State finance
Department to the PHED/implementing agencies etc. which also
add to the accumulation of unspent balance. The Department
has urged the States for proper planning/execution as well as
timely release of funds to the implementing agency so as to
keep the unspent balance within the permissible limit. As regards
reporting, the monitoring mechanism has been strengthened and
it has been decided to consider online reports for all purposes
from 2008-09 onwards.
The UTs are not availing Central funds for coverage of habitations
and mostly utilizing their own resources. However, funds have
been released to them under National Rural Drinking Water
Quality Monitoring & Surveillance programme for IEC, HRD
activities and purchase of field test kits from 2006-07 onwards. “
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.23)
“The recommendation is noted and the MPR is being suitably
revised.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.24)

5
8. The Committee find from the reply furnished by the
Department that the cut of Rs. 100 Crore was imposed at RE stage
during the year 2007-08 by the Ministry of Finance keeping in view
the trends of expenditure by the States. The reply further indicates
that there is proportionate reduction in the allocation of outlay for
States due to unspent balance beyond the permissible limit as well
as lesser State share. First there is reduction in the allocation to
States during a year and then the States are unable to utilise the
allocated resources. The aforesaid scenario indicates that the
Department itself is responsible for the cut imposed by the Ministry
of Finance. The Committee have repeatedly been emphasising to
review the position of under-spending State-wise and take corrective
action. In the present recommendation also, the Committee have
emphasised over this fact. But the Department has not bothered to
analyse the State specific reasons for underspending.
In this regard, the Committee in their 28th report, presented to
Parliament on 14.5.2007 had recommended to review the format of
MPRs so as to include a component wherein States furnish specific
reasons for the non-utilisation of resources. Although the specific
suggestion to review the format of MPR was made way back in the
year 2007, the Department is yet to revise the format. This indicates
the non-serious attitude of the Department towards one of the most
important programmes relating to drinking water in rural areas. More
so, the recommendations of the Committee are also not being taken
seriously by the Department. While deploring the way their
recommendations are being addressed, the Committee seek a
categorical reply from the Department on the issues raised in the
recommendation. The reasons for not agreeing to the recommendation
of the Committee should specifically be indicated.
The Committee further note that Union Territories are not
availing of the funds allocated under ARWSP for coverage of
habitations and are mostly utilizing their own resources. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of coverage in
each of the UTs in this regard so as to understand the reasons for
not using ARWSP funds by UTs in a better way.
B. Depiction of data in respect of ARWSP
 Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 4.9)
9. The Committee had recommended as under:-
 “The Committee note that before 2003 survey the information
was being maintained with regard to not covered habitations

6
and partially covered habitations. Not covered habitations were
such habitations, which were mainly in the difficult geographical
areas. After compilation of the data based on 2003 survey, it
seems that slipped back habitations have been included in the
not covered and partially covered habitations. 1,45,518 not covered
and 1,94,067 partially covered habitations have been indicated as
per the latest survey. There is no slipped back category as per
the habitation survey results. However, during the Bharat Nirman
period, there is a category of slipped back habitations. This
disparity in categorization creates utter confusion with regard to
the status of coverage of partially covered and not covered
habitations. The Committee would like the Department to clarify
the position in this regard. Besides, the Committee strongly
recommend that the data for the targets and achievements with
regard to slipped back category should be depicted separately
and not clubbed with the data relating to not covered and
partially covered habitations, so as to have a fair idea about the
not covered and partially covered habitations. Besides, the
Committee feel that in the latest updated data, it is difficult to
find out as to how many not covered habitations are in difficult
terrains where the State Governments find it difficult to cover
those habitations. The Department should clarify the position in
this regard. The Committee desire that the position should be
made clear in the data in order to facilitate effective monitoring
and implementation.”
10. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as under:-
“It is clarified that the uncovered habitations included in the
Bharat Nirman are the NC/PC habitations of the earlier survey
i.e. the habitation survey conducted in 1992-93 subsequently
updated in 1999. The remaining NC/PC habitations mentioned
in the Habitation Survey 2003 are the ones which were earlier
fully covered and slipped–back to NC/PC status due to increase
in population, depletion of ground water table, water sources
becoming quality–affected, water supply systems working below
rated capacity and water supply systems outliving their design
period resulting into lower per capita availability of water and
therefore categorized as slipped–back habitations. Accordingly,
target for slipped–back habitations has been set under Bharat
Nirman and the achievement monitored separately.
 A report indicating uncovered, slipped–back and quality–affected
habitations separately has been devised and hosted in the
Department’s website.”

7
11. The action taken reply does not address the specific query
of the Committee as to how many not covered habitations as per
the latest data available with the Department are in the difficult
terrain. The Committee desire the response of the Department in
this regard.
C. Physical progress under AWRSP
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No 4.10)
12. The Committee had recommended as under:-
“The Committee note with dismay that physical performance
under ARWSP of uncovered habitations is not up to the mark.
The underachievement of targets for 2006-07 has been about
30 per cent and for 2007-08, it is about 70 per cent. Though the
Department is optimistic about achieving the targets, the ground
reality in this regard suggests otherwise. The Committee would
like the Department to shun their complacent approach and
undertake concrete and strict measures to ensure achievement of
the targets by the States. The Committee may be apprised of the
concrete action taken in this regard.”
13. The Department in the action taken replies has stated as under:-
 “These habitations are mostly located in remote and difficult
areas where the States are finding difficulty in covering these
habitations. Out of 55,067 habitations, 36,933 habitations have
already been covered by the States. In addition, about 946
habitations have reportedly become depopulated leaving a balance
of about 17,188 habitations. The State Governments have been
asked to cover these habitations on priority by March, 2009.”
14. Dismayed at the complacent approach of the Department
despite under achievement of targets during the last two years, the
Committee had recommended the Department to undertake concrete
and strict measures to ensure achievement of targets by the States.
The explanation given by the Government, that the uncovered
habitations are mostly located in remote and difficult areas and they
are finding it difficult to cover them, is not plausible.
The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation in the
matter and would like to be apprised of the concrete action taken in
this regard.
D. National Rural Drinking Water Quality Management and
Surveillance Programme
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 5.12)

8
15. The Committee had recommended as under:-
“While examining DFG of the year 2007-08, the Committee had
recommended that the Union Government should urge upon the
States to set up rural local marts with the aid of district authorities
where simple and low cost techniques for treating contaminated
water may be marketed. The Committee reiterate their suggestion
and urge them to take concrete action on the suggested lines.
The Committee feel that the dangers of potentially harmful
sources of water are immense and imminent and the Department
need to undertake broad interventions through targeted action
for better and dignified living conditions for rural populace and
for promoting environment sustainability.”
16. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Under TSC programme, villages have provision of setting up
local sanitary marts for the sale of sanitary items for construction
of household and community toilets. The same sanitary marts
can be used for stocking simple to use water purification
technology items eg., terracotta filters, washers, etc.”
17. It is evident from the reply that under TSC programme there
is a provision for setting up local sanitary marts for the sale of
sanitary items for construction of household and community toilets.
These sanitary marts can also be used for starting sale of drinking
water purification technology items. In this regard, the Committee
in the earlier recommendation had urged the Department to take
concrete action to set up rural local marts. The Committee would
like to be apprised as to how many marts could be set up so far
State/UT wise. The Committee desire that it should be ensured that
at least each district should have one such mart.
E. Sustainability of the drinking water sources and systems
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 5.23)
18. The Committee had recommended as under :—
“xxxx since UN has prioritized access to drinking water as one
of its Millennium Development Goals, the issue of sustainability
of sources and the Systems has assumed prime significance. Over
the years the Committee have been stressing upon the
Government to evolve a comprehensive strategy in this regard.
The Committee are happy to note that the Department is
undertaking measures to promote sustainability through holding
of seminars, workshops, conference and raising awareness through
the same. The Committee, however, maintain, that while the
Department should continue with such efforts, more action needs

9
to be taken on the ground to improve water resources
management to bring about sustainability of sources and systems.”
19. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
(i) Sustainability of sources and systems is the central focus of
the Department in the 11th Plan period for ensuring potable
water to the rural population on a continuous basis. For
this purpose, the provisions of the core RWS programme of
the Department have been revised to bring in higher
component of funding to the States under Sustainability
component from the existing 5% of the allocation of the
States on 75:25 basis (Centre to State) to 20% of the allocation
of the States on 100:0 (Centre to State) basis.
(ii) Detailed checklists have been issued to the States and the
technical officers attending the meetings of the State level
Scheme Sanctioning Committees for consideration of
individual RWS project at the State level have to ensure
that every project sanctioned has a definite component which
ensures that the scheme is sustainable on a long term basis.
(iii) CDs on rainwater harvesting for bringing in sustainability
of sources have been sent to the State Governments for
their guidance.
(iv) For improved recharge of ground water sources, hydro-geo-
morphological maps have been prepared by NRSA and
distributed in 10 States. Work in another 9 States is in
progress.
20. The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Department
viz. enhanced allocation for core RWS programme, use of hydro-
geo-morphological maps prepared by NRSA for improved recharge
of ground water. However, it appears from the reply that only
19 States have been covered/are being covered. The Committee while
noting that the efforts being made are in the right direction,
recommend that they should be made more vigorously to ensure the
improvement of water resource management all over the Country in
order to bring about sustainability of sources and systems.
F. Need for a comprehensive legislation on extraction of ground water
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 5.24)
21. The Committee had recommended as under:-
“xxxx The model legislation for control on over extraction of
ground water, if and when implemented in letter and spirit by
all the States can go a long way in bringing about sustainability

10
of sources as depletion of ground water table due to excessive
and uncontrolled extraction of the water is the main cause for
the sources going dry. In this regard, the Committee would draw
attention to their earlier recommendation (refer para 5.11 of the
28th Report) and urge upon the Department to ensure that the
said legislation is put in place by the States at the earliest since
the depleting ground water table has already started threatening
the availability of drinking water in both rural and urban areas.
The Department in the action taken replies on Report on Demand
for grants (2007-08) had expressed helplessness by stating that it
has a limited role since the respective State legislatures have to
decide about the legislation.
The Committee would again like the Department to interact
assertively with the Ministry of Water Resources and along with
them with the State Governments to emphasize upon them the
need to put such a legislation in place at the earliest. The
Department should also hold review meetings with the States in
this regard. The Committee desire that the Department should
make all efforts in coordination with the Ministry of Water
Resources to motivate the State Governments to implement the
said legislation in a time bound manner and keep the Committee
informed about the concrete action taken in this regard.”
22. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“A system of holding of co-ordination meetings between the
Secretaries of the Department of Drinking Water Supply and the
Ministry of Water Resources was started in September 2007 for
bringing a mechanism for convergence of activities of both the
Department of DWS and Ministry of Water Resources. In these
coordination meetings, the issue of model legislation on ground
water is discussed. In the States review meetings on drinking
water, the issue of enactment of model legislation on ground
water is also discussed.”
23. The Committee appreciate the system of holding coordination
meetings between the Secretaries of the Department of Drinking
Water Supply and the Ministry of Water Resources for convergence
of the activities undertaken by the two Ministries. Further the
Committee also take note of the fact that the issue of enactment of
model legislation on ground water is also discussed at the review
meetings held with the States as well as in the aforesaid coordination
meetings. The Committee would like to be apprised of the number
of meetings held by the Coordination Committee as well as the
review meetings held with the States during the year 2007-08 and
2008-09. Besides, the Committee would also like to be apprised of

11
the outcome of these meetings and reaction of the States over the
issue of enactment of the ground water legislation.
G. Installation of Rain Water Harvesting Structures
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 5.26)
24. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Further, another issue interlinked to the issue of depleting
ground water table is rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge
of ground water. The Committee in the previous Demands for
Grant Reports had made a series of recommendations with respect
to the said issue. The Committee feel that depletion of ground
water table is reaching a critical level and unless urgent action
is taken to promote conjunctive use of water through ground,
surface and rainwater, a situation of extreme water stress and
scarcity may emerge. The Committee feel that the Department
should work in a proactive mode to promote rainwater harvesting
on a massive scale. For this, mass awareness campaign may be
launched where information about simple methods for rainwater
harvesting may be disseminated widely. Besides, as suggested by
the Committee in their previous Report, the Department should
work with the Ministry of Water Resources and other Departments
to ensure that rainwater harvesting structures are installed in all
new rural constructions and encourage the State Governments to
modify their building by-laws accordingly. The Committee would
also like to reiterate that the issue of identifying an exclusive
Private/Government Agency to give technical inputs for
promoting rain water harvesting at the earliest should be taken
up with each State. The names of agencies so identified should
be hosted on the Department’s website. The Department may
liberally involve NGOs/VOs active in the field in different regions
and provide assistance to them through financial grants for the
said purpose. The Committee would like the Government to
seriously consider the suggestions of the Committee and take
concrete actions on the suggested lines.”
25. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The entire focus of the Department in the Eleventh plan period
is to ensure sustainability in the drinking water schemes.
Conjunctive use of ground water, surface water and roof-water
has therefore been the focus area for bringing in sustainability to
rural drinking water supply schemes and the States are being
repeatedly urged on every available forum/occasion to adopt such
models. It is now one of the conditions for sanctioning of projects
in the States. As mentioned earlier, a system of greater

12
coordination between the Department of Drinking Water Supply
and the Ministry of Water Resources through meetings between
the Secretaries of two organizations was started in September
2007 for bringing in more effective mechanism for greater
convergence in the field of water security. For assisting the States
with more technical expertise, list of technical experts has been
prepared based on their technical expertise and knowledge in
the sector of water and sanitation. National Seminar of Technical
Experts and the State Government officials was held on 25 July,
2008 where efforts were made to concretize their role in this
area.”
26. The Committee in their earlier recommendations had made a
series of suggestions as given below, while emphasizing the need
for rain water harvesting to address the problem of depletion of
ground water table:
(i) Need for mass awareness campaign to disseminate simple
methods of rain water harvesting;
(ii) Making installation of rain water harvesting structure in
new constructions compulsory and modifying the by-laws
by the State Government in this regard;
(iii) To identify an exclusive private/Government Agency to
give technical inputs for providing rain water harvesting
and hosting the names of the agencies on the website;
(iv) Involvement of NGOs/VOs.
29. The Department has not responded to the aforesaid
suggestions in the action taken replies. In a vague manner the
coordination mechanism between the Department of Drinking Water
Supply and Ministry of Water Resources, as stated in another action
taken reply, has been repeated. While disapproving the way such a
serious suggestion has been sidetracked by the Department, the
Committee desire a categorical reply indicating the concrete action
taken/proposed to be taken by the Department on each of the
suggestions of the Committee.
H. Sanitation Scenario
Recommendation (Serial No. 34, Para No. 7.15)
27. The Committee had recommended as under :—
“xxx the Government do not have any data with regard to
drinking water and sanitation facilities in private schools. The
Committee feel that the objective of total school coverage with

13
regard to drinking water and sanitation cannot be achieved unless
the private schools also provide these facilities. In this regard,
the Committee recommend that the Department should work in
coordination with the Department of Elementary Education and
Ministry of HRD to see that drinking water and sanitation
facilities are ensured in private schools also in rural areas. In this
regard, an effective mechanism can be to provide recognition to
private schools only when the building structure has adequate
facility for drinking water and separate toilets for boys and girls.
Not only that, there should be a regular monitoring mechanism
with regard to reviewing the certification for such recognized
schools so that the drinking water and sanitation facilities are
ensured on a continuous basis.”
28. The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee to work in coordination
with the Department of School Education and Literacy to ensure
that drinking water and sanitation facilities are available in private
schools in rural areas is accepted. The norms for mandatory
provision of water and sanitation facilities for recognition and
certification of private schools comes under the purview of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development. In order to ensure
availability provision of water and sanitation facilities in all
schools including Private and Government, Government Aided,
new schools constructed under SSA, States have been asked to
build effective coordination mechanisms with the respective State
Education Departments.”
The Committee in the earlier recommendation had suggested an
important mechanism to ensure water and sanitation facilities in
private schools in rural areas. It was suggested that recognition to
private schools should be given only when the building structure
has adequate facilities for drinking water and separate toilets for
boys and girls. Instead of taking the issue with the nodal Ministry
i.e. Ministry of Human Resource Development, the Department has
tried to avoid the recommendation by stating that the issue falls
under the jurisdiction of HRD Ministry. The Committee would like
the Department to take up the issue urgently with the Ministry of
Human Resource Development particularly when drinking water in
Schools in rural areas is one of the components of Accelerated Rural
Water Supply Programme (ARWSP). The Committee further desire
to be apprised of the reaction of the Ministry of HRD in this regard.

14
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 3.13)
The Committee find from the analysis of the data furnished by
the Department that there has been a shortfall between the amount
proposed to the Planning Commission and the actual amount provided
to the Department during each year of the Tenth Plan, Eleventh Plan
as a whole and the first two years of Eleventh Plan i.e. the years
2007-08 and 2008-09. For the Eleventh Plan, there is a huge shortfall
of about Rs. 15,500 crore between the proposed allocation and the
amount agreed to by the Planning Commission. The Committee are
surprised with the statement of the Department that the amount has
been considerably increasing over the years in absolute terms. It seems
that the Department are content with the outlay provided under
ARWSP even when there is considerable shortfall in the agreed to
outlay during each of the year as compared to the outlay proposed by
the Department there under. The Committee have repeatedly been
emphasizing for providing adequate outlay for drinking water schemes
in their earlier Reports. While reiterating their stand in this regard, the
Committee emphasize that the Department should take up the matter
with the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission for getting adequate
allocation.
Reply of the Government
It is a fact that in spite of the best efforts and continuous
persuasion, the full allocation proposed by the Department has not
been allocated by the Planning Commission. However, it may be stated
that against the initial outlay of Rs. 13,245 crore for the 10th Plan, the
actual allocation had gone to Rs. 16,845 crore, out of which Rs. 16,254
crore had actually been utilized.
During 2007-08, Rs. 6,500 crore was allocated for ARWSP which
has been increased to Rs. 7,300 crore in 2008-09 by the Planning
Commission. The allocation in the water sector in the 11th Plan period
has been increased considerably. Nevertheless, Department will keep
on pursuing with the Planning Commission.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September, 2008 of
Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural
Development)]

15
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 3.14)
The Committee find that a few projects have been taken up with
the external assistance in the States of Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Uttarakhand and Punjab. The Committee would like that similar
initiative should be taken in the other States. Besides, as stated in the
para above, the Government should provide adequate Government
funding for the drinking water schemes through enhanced budgetary
support from their own resources and make sincere efforts to fulfil
their mandate of providing safe and adequate drinking water which is
central to the livelihood system of rural people.
Reply of the Government
The State Governments have been urged to mobilize adequate funds
to provide safe drinking water to the rural population from their own
resources as well as external agencies, if required. Regarding taking
up of externally aided projects (EAPs) by the States, the Department
of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance is the Nodal Ministry/
Department. However, the Specific EAP proposals received from States
are examined and appropriately forwarded to DEA for necessary action.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 4.7)
The Committee appreciate that after the continuous pursuance of
the issue with regard to finding out the ground reality in respect of
coverage of habitations, the results of habitations survey 2003 could
be made available and all the States have started entering the data
online. The data made available by the survey was updated as on
1 April, 2007 and now the efforts are being made to update it further
upto 1 April, 2008. The Secretary has further assured that during the
year 2008-09, the data will be updated on a continuous basis. While
complimenting the Department on the serious efforts made in this
regard, the Committee would like that the efforts should be continued
so that there is transparency with regard to the actual situation in
respect of availability of drinking water in rural areas. The availability
of updated baseline data would certainly help the country in future
planning and making projections.

16
Reply of the Government
The State/UT Governments has been asked to update the Status
of habitations as on 1.4.2008 and the States have already started the
same. This updation exercise is done on yearly basis.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8 Para No. 4.8)
The Committee further find that certain targets were fixed for
uncovered and slipped back habitations during the Bharat Nirman
period. The analysis of the achievements made in this regard indicates
that during the first three years of Bharat Nirman period only 57 per
cent of the targets could be achieved under the category of uncovered
habitations while 64 per cent of the targets could be achieved under
slipped back habitations. The Committee have doubts about achieving
the remaining targets with the slow pace of implementation of Bharat
Nirman particularly when the year 2008-09 is the last year of the
programme. The Committee would like the Department to work out
a strategy urgently to achieve the said targets within the stipulated
time frame. The Committee may also be apprised of the same.
Reply of the Government
As per reports received from States, in the first three years starting
from April 2005 under Bharat Nirman, 36,933 un–covered and 2.44
lakh slipped–back habitations have been covered and 1.04 lakh quality–
affected habitations have been addressed against the target of 55,067
un-covered and 3.31 lakh slipped-back habitations to be covered and
2.17 lakh quality-affected habitations to be addressed by March, 2009.
Thus, 3.85 lakh habitations have been covered/addressed. To accomplish
the target under drinking water component of Bharat Nirman within
the stipulated time period, appropriate strategy has been worked out
which is as under :
(a) Uncovered habitation :  The uncovered habitations mostly
located in most difficult and water stressed areas are planned
to be covered by rainwater harvesting, recharge of ground
water and in hilly areas by spring water harvesting and if
necessary, pipeline supply from distant sources are taken
up.

17
(b)) Slipped–back habitations :  The focus of the Department is
towards ensuring sustainability in all drinking water schemes
so that slippage in the covered habitations does not happen.
(c) Quality–affected habitations :
(i) To tackle water quality problem, Arsenic and Fluoride
contaminants affected habitations have been accorded the
highest priority followed by Iron, Salinity, Nitrate and other
contaminants.
(ii) Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology (IMMT),
Bhubaneswar (a CSIR institution) has been identified as
nodal institute/ referal centre to address Iron contamination
through use of Terracota filters (Terafil water filter systems)
throughout the country. To transfer the technology and
adoption of the same by the State a three-day national
workshop was organized by IMMT at Bhubaneswar 13–15
on February, 2008.
(iii) To tackle the salinity problem, various technological solutions
viz. technologies developed by Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre (BARC), Defence Research and Development
Organization (DRDO), Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR), Department of Science & Technology, etc.
are being used and to coordinate all these efforts to tackle
salinity problem in the drinking water, Central Salt & Marine
Chemicals Research Institute (CSMCRI), Bhavnagar–a CSIR
laboratory has been identified as the nodal agency for the
dissemination of simple/cost-effective technologies for
tackling the salinity problem. The CSMCRI had organised a
national workshop of concerned States on 21–22 February,
2006 at Bhavnagar to discuss various technological options
for addressing salinity problem in the drinking water.
(iv) The Nitrate affected habitations are planned to be tackled
by improving sanitation and in some places by change in
the pattern of usage of fertilizers, etc.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 5.8)
It needless to point out that contaminated harmful sources of water
in rural areas in the country may cause a severe crisis and trap the

18
people in vicious cycle of poverty and disease. The Committee would
emphasize that all the efforts made with regard to improving the
coverage status and bringing about sustainability of sources and the
systems become meaningless in the absence of clean and safe drinking
water. The Government should launch a nationwide awareness
programme about the perils of contaminated water on the model of
AIDS, Polio campaigns etc. The Department may provide inputs for
the said campaign for disseminating information and sensitizing the
people on the said aspect. The programme should aim at promoting
linkages between water, sanitation, hygiene, health and environment
policies through involvement of all stakeholders viz. policy makers,
civil society, local authorities, NGOs and individuals in the field.
Reply of the Government
Public awareness programme with flexibility of using audio-visual,
inter-personal communication, print & mass media and advertising on
the issue of prevention of water pollution is being conducted through
the State Governments so that the State Government could apply area-
specific interventions to sensitize people on the need for clean water,
safe sanitation, personal hygiene and health. In order to decentralize
this policy the State Governments have been advised to amend the
Village Water and Sanitation Committee’s to Village Water, Sanitation,
Health, Hygiene and Nutrition Committee’s so that health issues would
be appropriately addressed by providing safe drinking water and access
to good sanitation practices.
The IEC funds provided under ARWSP , CCDU, WQM & S and
TSC are flexible and state can involve NGO’s, Civil Society or any
other stakeholder for raising level of awareness among the rural
population on water and sanitation related issues.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 14 Para No. 5.11)
As discussed during the oral evidence of the Department, a large
number of grass root level workers still need to be trained under the
NRDWQM and SP programme for testing water quality in village
Panchayats. The Committee feel that towards this end, the Department
should work in a mission mode and take all the necessary steps to
complete the training within a stipulated time frame. Further, the
programme may be expanded to include students from schools,

19
colleges, NSS, NCC Cadets and other youth organizations where the
same training for testing water quality at local level and improving its
quality by using simple low cost techniques for treating contaminated
water may be imparted. This may help to find a practical and a lasting
solution to the problem of contaminated water according to the
Committee. Besides, the services of NGOs/VOs having expertise in
the field may also be taken by the Department. The Committee would
like the Department to take the necessary action in this direction and
revise the guidelines accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and
Surveillance Programme envisages training of five persons from Gram
Panchayat for testing of all drinking water sources in the villages. The
choice of these five persons is left to the State Government. However,
because of the experience gained in the implementation of the
programme, over the years this Department has suggested to the States
to include ASHA worker, girl student studying in high school from
the village, ex-servicemen if available, GP member, Anganwadi worker,
science teacher, etc. so that natural leadership in the village gets scope
of management of the programme at the grass root level. However,
the process of selection is flexible and these categories of persons as
stated in the recommendation can be considered by the State while
selecting the group of five persons from each GP for operationalising
the programme at the grass root level.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15 Para No. 5.12)
While examining DFG of the year 2007-08, the Committee had
recommended that the Union Government should urge upon the States
to set up rural local marts with the aid of district authorities where
simple and low cost techniques for treating contaminated water may
be marketed. The Committee reiterate their suggestion and urge them
to take concrete action on the suggested lines. The Committee feel
that the dangers of potentially harmful sources of water are immense
and imminent and the Department need to undertake broad
interventions through targeted action for better and dignified living
conditions for rural populace and for promoting environment
sustainability.

20
Reply of the Government
Under TSC programme, villages have provision of setting up local
sanitary marts for the sale of sanitary items for construction of
household and community toilets. The same sanitary marts can be
used for stocking simple to use water purification technology items
eg., terracotta filters, washers, etc.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 5.23)
The Committee would like to stress that since UN has prioritized
access to drinking water as one of its Millennium Development Goals,
the issue of sustainability of sources and the Systems has assumed
prime significance. Over the years the Committee have been stressing
upon the Government to evolve a comprehensive strategy in this
regard. The Committee are happy to note that the Department are
undertaking measures to promote sustainability through holding of
seminars, workshops, conference and raising awareness through the
same. The Committee, however, maintain, that while the Department
should continue with such efforts, more action needs to be taken on
the ground to improve water resources management to bring about
sustainability of sources and systems.
Reply of the Government
(1) Sustainability of sources and systems is the central focus of
the Department in the 11th Plan period for ensuring potable
water to the rural population on a continuous basis. For
this purpose, the provisions of the core RWS programme of
the Department have been revised to bring in higher
component of funding to the States under Sustainability
component from the existing 5% of the allocation of the
States on 75:25 basis (Centre to State) to 20% of the allocation
of the States on 100:0 (Centre to State) basis.
(2) Detailed checklists have been issued to the States and the
technical officers attending the meetings of the State level
Scheme Sanctioning Committees for consideration of

21
individual RWS project at the State level has to ensure that
every project sanctioned has a definite component which
ensures that the scheme is sustainable on a long term basis.
(3) CDs on rainwater harvesting for bringing in sustainability
of sources have been sent to the State Governments for
their guidance.
(4) For improved recharge of ground water sources, hydro-geo-
morphological maps have been prepared by NRSA and
distributed in 10 States. Work in another 9 States is in
progress.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 5.28)
Panchayats have a Central role in ensuring sustainability of systems
and sources, particularly when as per the mandate of the Constitution,
73rd Amendment Act all the drinking water projects are to be handed
over to Panchayats. However, as informed by the Department, many
State Governments have handed over the drinking water schemes on
paper but in reality, the Panchayats have not taken over them. The
Committee find that additional funds have been given in Twelfth
Finance Commission to each and every Panchayat. In this regard, Rs.
40 crore has been distributed for operation and maintenance of water
supply and sanitation projects to Panchayats. As regards the issue of
equipping Panchayats with technical staff to enable these institutions
to handle the huge responsibility with regard to maintenance of sources
and systems, the Secretary has informed that the Department had
requested the PHED staff to be deployed at least for a group of
Panchayats. But there is resistance from the PHED staff and the
Department are advising Panchayats to recruit their own staff. In the
aforesaid scenario, the Committee conclude that much needs to be
done to build the financial and functional capacity of Panchayats in
this regard. There is an urgent need to take up this issue with various
State Governments so that ultimately the responsibility of maintenance
of systems and sources of drinking water is transferred to the
Panchayats in the real sense. While appreciating the fact that the
Finance Commission has allocated exclusive outlay for the maintenance

22
of water supply and sanitation projects, the Committee desire that the
issue with regard to providing technical staff should be taken up with
the State Governments. Besides, the Department should also take up
the issue of equipping Panchayats in this regard with the sister Ministry
i.e. Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The concrete action taken in this regard
should be communicated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The issue of building financial and functional capacity of
Panchayats for creating drinking water security and maintenance of
the assets created properly are the core areas of the Sustainability
programme. It is proposed to train State and PRI officials in all States
by utilizing the services of CGWB. States have also been advised to
designate Junior Engineer for a group of Panchayats so that necessary
technical assistance can be rendered by him. The suggestion of the
Committee for greater convergence/support with Ministry of Panchayati
Raj is noted for compliance.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 5.29)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the main activity to be undertaken
under one of the flagship programmes of the Government  i.e.
NREGA is water conservation and water bodies. There are many
watershed schemes of different Ministries/Departments under
which the issues related to water conservation are being
addressed. In addition, the State Governments may have their
own schemes for water conservation. The Committee are of the
opinion that there is an urgent need to pool together different
initiatives taken by various quarters by proper coordination
between the various Ministries of Union Government and the
various Departments of State Governments and all other
concerned so that the issue of water conservation is addressed in
a mission mode. The Committee strongly recommend that
Government should take all necessary measures in this regard
and inform the Committee accordingly.”
The Government in the action taken replies have stated as under:—
“While National and State level Convergence of various schemes
relating to water conservation and water security is being

23
pursued, the effective convergence at the district/block/village
level is more challenging. The Department is taking up the issue
with State secretaries during the State review meetings. These
points are also highlighted by officers of the Department when
they go to various States for reviewing the rural water supply
programme in the States.”
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 6.11)
The Committee express concern on the inadequate access of large
number of rural households in the country to basic sanitation. The
Committee are perturbed to note that despite the pace of
implementation of Total Sanitation Campaign picking up over the years,
the percentage coverage of rural population reflects a dismal picture
where only about 49.6 per cent population is covered with sanitation
facilities. The Committee feel that mere approval of projects in large
number of districts should not be the only criteria to determine the
sanitation scenario in the country. They would recommend that in the
‘International Year of Sanitation’, the Department should take concerted
action with a multipronged strategy to achieve the Millennium
Development Goal.
Reply of the Government
The Department agrees with the concern of the Committee that
mere approval of projects under TSC should not be the only criterion
of progress. The Committee was informed of the number of projects
approved only to give an indication that work has started in all rural
districts of the country. With the pace of implementation, coverage is
now estimated at around 55%. The Department accepts that about
45% of the rural population even then does not have access to toilets.
With the accelerated efforts it is expected to cover the total rural
population by year 2012. The approval of projects in all districts would
ensure that the entire population is covered and monitored under the
programme regularly for its effective implementation. The
recommendations of the Committee for undertaking special programmes
in the International Year of Sanitation are being taken into account. To
improve on the pace of work, the following measures have been
initiated:
1. Letters to all Chief Ministers from Minister for Rural
Development, requesting them to take personal review of
progress in their State.

24
2. Breaking down approved project component into
monitorable annual action plan for each district and asking
the States to do the same for each Block and Gram
Panchayat.
3. Monthly review meeting with laggard States to sort out the
problems of implementation.
4. Half yearly Review meeting with all States.
5. Support provided to laggard districts through NGOs
identified by CAPART.
6. Training programmes through the 5 identified Key Resource
Centers.
7. Exchange visits from laggard Districts to better performing
Districts.
8. Special programmes for increased involvement of all
stakeholders such as SACOSAN III conference in November
2008.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 6.12)
Department have informed that TSC projects are approved for 584
rural districts of the country which implies that almost all the districts
in the country are covered under TSC. However, the increase in the
percentage of the people with access to basic sanitation has not been
commensurate with the improvement of TSC implementation and
approval of projects for large number of districts. The Committee feel
that more awareness and IEC activities need to be undertaken so that
more project proposals are forthcoming from the States and are
implemented in letter and spirit in each district. The Committee hold
that on the lines of the baseline data of habitations with drinking
water facilities, the Department should evolve online system to include
names of TSC projects in each district along with relevant details such
as the percentage of people having access to sanitation, number of
toilets, IHHL, mobile toilets constructed, status of IEC activities etc.
This would help in bringing about more transparency and better
monitoring to ensure that the approved projects function properly.

25
Reply of the Government
Coverage of all the districts of the country only implies that works
in all the districts have started under TSC. Generally, TSC district
projects, once sanctioned, are implemented over a period of 4-5 years.
The implementation of programme is monitored for its effectiveness
and progress in every district. Thus identification of poor performing
districts will enable targeted intervention to increase the sanitation
coverage at a higher pace in coming days. The recommendation
regarding more awareness and IEC activities is accepted. IEC and
awareness creation activities are essential and integral parts of the
district campaigns. The States have been advised to take up IEC
activities which have greater impact at field level. At the Central level
also IEC programmes are being implemented through print, TV and
video media. The recommendation regarding inclusion of base-line data
of habitation with sanitation details is accepted and necessary action
in this direction has been initiated. The progress of projects at the
district level is being obtained on-line on the website of the Department.
All States have also been instructed to give disaggregated data for the
panchayat level and the same is being entered online.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 6.14)
The Committee while examining the subject learnt that the main
indicator for defining coverage is ‘access to toilets to a household’.
The Committee feel that there may be instances where toilets
constructed may not have adequate water availability , may become
dysfunctional over a period of time, the people do not have the mindset
to use the toilets or they may be of a lower standard due to
infrastructural constraints. The Committee urge upon the Department
to broaden the scope of sanitation and ensure that all the aspects
related to IEC and usage of toilets are taken into account before
sanctioning amount for the projects.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee to ensure that the aspect
of usage of toilets be taken into account while monitoring projects is
accepted. As regards IEC, the strategy of the programme is to make
it ‘community led’ and ‘people centered’. A “demand driven approach”
is to be adopted with increased emphasis on awareness creation and

26
demand generation for sanitary facilities in houses, schools and for
cleaner environment. To achieve this strategy, each project is provided
funds for IEC activities to the extent of 15% of the project cost. A
national communication strategy and plan has been developed by
Government of India giving emphasis on inter personal communication
at the grassroots level. The details of the communication strategy and
the tools are hosted on the website www.ddws.gov.in. As part of this
strategy motivators can be engaged at the village level for demand
creation and taking up behaviour change communication. At district
level, focus is provided for inter-personal communication, use of folk
media and also outdoor media like wall painting, hoarding etc. The
Communication and Capacity Development Units (CCDUs) has been
set up at the State level to support the districts in developing a good
IEC plan and also in implementing it.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 6.15)
The Committee feel that with respect to sanitation, strict vigilance
and monitoring play a key role. The Committee note that few States
such as Manipur, Meghalaya, Punjab, Assam, J & K and Bihar are not
reporting satisfactory expenditure of funds in this regard. For such
States, NGOs have been identified by CAPART to help district
authorities in this regard. The Committee strongly urge the Department
to maintain a system of regular monitoring through review meetings
as well as field visits. The services of DLMs and NLMs to ensure
better utilizations of funds as well as verifying the same through
physical parameters should also be used in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee is accepted. Besides
bi-annual reviews with all States, the poor performing States are being
reviewed every month through video conferencing. Also, a monthly
meeting is held with the North-Eastern States and special category
States to sort out problems of implementation.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

27
Recommendation (Serial No. 29, Para No. 7.10)
The Committee have repeatedly been drawing the attention of the
Department in their respective Reports to the need for coverage of all
the schools in rural areas in the country under drinking water and
sanitation programmes. As per the Seventh All India Education Survey,
there are 8.5 lakh Government schools in rural areas in the country.
As regards the status of drinking water, 84,000 rural schools are still
to be provided with drinking water facility, as on 1 April, 2007. While
reviewing the year-wise performance under school component of
ARWSP , the Committee find that during the years 2003-04 and
2005-06, the achievement is 50 per cent. During the year 2004-05, the
achievement is far below i.e. 30 per cent. Since 2006-07, the targets are
not being fixed for coverage of schools in this regard. During the year
2007-08, out of 84,000 schools 18,000 schools could be covered. Thus
66,000 schools remained uncovered. As stated by the Department, the
Government had projected to achieve full coverage by March, 2008.
Even if the Government data is believed, it will take another four
years to cover all the rural schools with the existing pace of coverage.
The Committee further note that the ground situation in this regard
may not be as projected by the Department. The Committee have
repeatedly been stressing to achieve the target of full coverage of the
schools within the shortest possible time. The Committee again reiterate
that the country cannot wait any more in this regard. The Department
have to ensure full coverage when it is a question of providing drinking
water in schools. As such all the measures should be taken not only
to complete the left-over targets as per the Government’s data but
also complete the task after reviewing the ground situation in this
regard. In this regard the Committee suggest that coverage of schools
should be made a component of ARWSP . The ARWSP guidelines may
be suitably modified for the same.
Reply of the Government
It was agreed in the State Ministers’ Conference held in January–
February, 2006 that all schools in rural areas would be covered by
March, 2007. Also, it was decided to cover new schools with drinking
water facilities under SSA and the old schools under ARWSP/ State
share. Accordingly, funds amounting to Rs. 228 crore were released to
States. However, as some States had expressed their reservation
regarding coverage of all rural schools by March, 2007, the timeline
was extended to March, 2008. There were about 84 thousand rural
schools without drinking water facilities as on 1.4.2007 out of which
about 52 thousand rural schools are reported to have been covered

28
during 2007-08 leaving a balance of about 32 thousand schools yet to
be covered. The Department has been impressing upon each State
Government to cover all rural schools with drinking water and toilet
facilities at the earliest. This was discussed in detail in the Conference
of State Secretaries in-charge of Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation
held on May 13–14, 2008 wherein Minister, Rural Development had
reviewed the position and all the States have assured to cover the
remaining rural schools with drinking water supply latest by December,
2008.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 31,  Para No. 7.12)
The Committee note that there may be problem of slippages in
the case of drinking water systems in schools also. Even when the
Department have procured an elaborate online system to have current
status of coverage of slippages of habitations, efforts have not been
made to include the position of slippages in case of the schools. The
Committee would like the Department to maintain up-to-date
information about the status of coverage of schools in rural areas and
also indicate it online, so as to bring transparency in this regard.
Besides, the basic reason for slippages is drying of sources. In this
regard, there is an urgent need to ensure rainwater harvesting structures
in the schools. The Department should take up the issue with the
State Governments so as to make rainwater harvesting structures in
schools mandatory. Besides, there is an urgent need to pay greater
attention to have roof top rainwater harvesting structures, particularly
in hilly areas. The concrete actions on the suggested lines should be
taken and the Committee be informed accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The State/ UT Governments have been asked to update the Status
of habitations as on 1.4.2008 which inter-alia includes updation of status
of rural schools also. The States have been impressed upon to construct
rain water harvesting as well as roof top rain water harvesting
structures in the schools so that once covered these schools may not
slip back in future.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

29
Recommendation (Serial No. 32, Para No. 7.13)
With regard to the sanitation scenario in rural schools, the
Committee note that a large number of States are lagging behind in
this regard. As regards the roadmap for coverage of all the schools,
the Committee have been informed that all the States would be able
to achieve 100 per cent coverage by March, 2009 except Jammu and
Kashmir, Bihar, Uttarakhand, Goa, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Assam,
Manipur and Punjab. Thus, according to the Government’s own
projections, the total coverage would not be possible even by March
2009. Every year the Government are setting the targets for full
coverage and the targets are being spilled over to the next year. The
Committee have repeatedly been recommending to cover all the schools
within the shortest possible time. Even if being repetitive, the
Committee observe that it is a matter of shame for the country that
after more than five decades of planned development, our children in
the schools do not have the basic facility of toilet. The Committee
again strongly recommend to take all out initiatives to ensure that all
the schools in the country in rural areas have the toilet facility within
the shortest possible time.
Reply of the Government
The Department is committed to cover all rural schools in all the
States with toilet facilities by March, 2009. Most of the States have
made significant improvement in the school sanitation coverage as the
figures on annual rate of increase in the last financial year shows.
Four States viz. Haryana, Sikkim, Mizoram, and Pondicherry have
already achieved full coverage with consistent and sustained efforts in
the direction. At a micro level, 124 districts of the country have
achieved 100% coverage for school sanitation. The annual rate of
increase in school sanitation over the last financial year for the other
states including the poor performing States, indicate that they are likely
to achieve the targets set for full coverage by the target date.
[O.M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 7.14)
The Department did not furnish any clarification on the issue of
providing separate toilet blocks for girls in co-educational schools. The
Committee strongly recommend that an element of gender sensitivity
should also be included in all projects of TSC by providing separate

30
toilet blocks so as to provide privacy and dignity to girl students in
rural areas. The Department should take concrete action in this regard
and inform the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
All Projects have been approved with targets for separate toilets
for girls and boys as the minimum basic need.
[O.M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 34, Para No. 7.15)
The Committee, further, note that the Government do not have
any data with regard to drinking water and sanitation facilities in
private schools. The Committee feel that the objective of total school
coverage with regard to drinking water and sanitation cannot be
achieved unless the private schools also provide these facilities. In this
regard, the Committee recommend that the Department should work
in coordination with the Department of Elementary Education and
Ministry of HRD to oversee that drinking water and sanitation facilities
are ensured in private schools also in rural areas. In this regard, an
effective mechanism can be to provide recognition to private schools
only when the building structure has adequate facility for drinking
water and separate toilets for boys and girls. Not only that, there
should be a regular monitoring mechanism with regard to reviewing
the certification for such recognized schools so that the drinking water
and sanitation facilities are ensured on a continuous basis.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee to work in coordination
with the Department of School Education and Literacy to ensure that
drinking water and sanitation facilities are available in private schools
in rural areas is accepted. The norms for mandatory provision of water
and sanitation facilities for recognition and certification of private
schools comes under the purview of the Ministry of Human Resource
Development. In order to ensure availability provision of water and
sanitation facilities in all schools including Private and Government,
Government Aided, new schools constructed under SSA, States have
been asked to build effective coordination mechanisms with the
respective State Education Departments.
[O.M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

31
Recommendation (Serial No. 35, Para No. 7.16)
The Committee further feel that there is an urgent need to include
the various issues related to contamination of water, sanitation, water
conservation and menstrual hygiene for girls in the schools ensured.
Besides, various issues related to contamination of water along with
the cost effective techniques to treat the water contamination,
particularly due to iron and saline contaminants should not only be
ensured in the books as part of the curriculum but can also form part
of the practicals of Science & Technology syllabus of the students,
particularly when the kits for treating water in this regard are not so
expensive. In this regard, the Department should take up the matter
with the Ministry of HRD. The Committee strongly feel that children
are the best medium to give message to community as a whole. As
such all the aforesaid experiments would go a long way in finding a
long lasting solution to the problem of contamination of water and
sanitation. The Department should work in consultation with Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan and Department of Elementary Education to
disseminate information in this regard.
Reply of the Government
A comprehensive Health and Hygiene Education programme is
being undertaken in schools in coordination with other Departments
viz.—Department of Education (Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan), Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, and the UINICEF. These include the areas
of health, hygiene (personal, environmental), use, cleaning and
operation and maintenance of school toilets, water conservation, water
testing, environment conservation activities in school and community.
Health and Hygiene Education awareness level in schools is also an
essential criteria for awarding of the Nirmal Gram Puruskar (NGP) to
the GPs.
The Department has undertaken intersectoral convergence initiatives
with programmes of other Ministries at Central and State level— viz.
Kishori Shakti Yojana of Women and Child Development, Curriculum
Development, teacher training, food and personal hygiene education
with Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) and Mid-day meal programme of
Department of School Education & Literacy, School Health programme
under National Rural Health Mission for effective implementation of
SSHE programme.
[O.M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

32
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

33
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 3.22)
The Committee note that not only the Department are getting lesser
allocation than the outlay proposed to Planning Commission, whatever
amount is allocated at BE stage is further reduced at RE stage. During
the year 2006-07, the outlay of Rs. 5,200 crore provided at BE stage
was reduced to Rs. 4,560 crore at RE stage. Then during the year
2007-08, the BE of Rs. 6,500 crore was reduced to Rs. 6,400 crore. The
releases upto 29 February 2008 were to the tune of Rs. 5,386 crore.
The Committee express serious concern over the reduction of outlay
at RE stage particularly when the scheme is for providing drinking
water to rural masses. The Committee strongly recommend to take up
the matter with the Planning Commission so that whatever allocation
is made at BE stage is not reduced at the RE stage. The Department
on their part should make all efforts to ensure cent percent utilization
of the resources.
Reply of the Government
The central fund flow in this sector has increased considerably
since the launch of Bharat Nirman whereas the proportionate State
resources in the form of State matching share was not forthcoming
from some of the States due to their financial resource crunch. The
States have also been experiencing difficulties in absorbing the enhanced
allocation, which has affected timely release of central fund to the
States. Accordingly, a cut of Rs. 640 crore was imposed by Ministry of
Finance from the allocation of fund in the water sector keeping in
view the trend of expenditure by the State during 2006-07. Besides, it
is pertinent to mention here that the 2nd installment of funds under
ARWSP is released to the States after utilizing 60% of total available
funds with the States and providing matching State share. In addition,
proportionate reduction is effected from the second installment on
account of less State share provided as well as unspent balance beyond
permissible limit in the previous year. The Department has emphasized
all States/UTs to expedite the implementation, raise the pace of
expenditure and provide adequate State share so that allocated fund
could be released well in time.

34
During 2007-08, Rs. 6,500 crore was allocated for the rural drinking
water sector, which was reduced to Rs. 6,400 crore at the RE stage by
Ministry of Finance keeping in view the trend of expenditure by the
State against which Rs. 6,442 crore has been utilized. In fact, the
department has been able to utilize the full allocation provided at the
RE stages in the previous years. During 2008-09, efforts will be made
to enhance the allocation at the RE stage and the same will be utilized.
[O.M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 3.23)
The Committee find from the data provided by the Department in
the Outcome Budget that during the year 2006-07, Rs. 1,088.36 crore
were lying as opening balances with various State Governments. As
regards the State-wise position, the under spending was more in
Jharkhand where the expenditure was only 44.48 per cent followed by
Punjab where 47.30 per cent of funds were lying unspent. Worst is the
position in A&N Islands, Dadar and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu,
Lakshadweep, Puducherry, Delhi and Chandigarh, where the
expenditure reported is nil against the indicated releases. Further the
expenditure reported under Union Government share is 76.19 per cent
whereas the expenditure reported under State share is 81.40 per cent
during 2006-07. During the year 2007-08, Rs. 1,803 crore have been
stated to be the unspent balances in various States. The maximum
unspent balances are with West Bengal i.e. Rs. 2,49,85.42 lakh,
Maharashtra Rs. 2,39,10.85 lakh, Bihar Rs. 1,80,54.77 lakh, Uttar Pradesh
Rs. 1,66,82.99 lakh and Madhya Pradesh Rs. 1,19,30.73 lakh. The
Committee have repeatedly been expressing concern over the huge
opening balances lying with the State Governments. In spite of that,
the trend of opening balances persists during each year. The Committee
strongly recommend to analyze the reasons in the States where the
under-spending is a recurrent feature. The Department should obtain
Reports from all the States regarding non-utilisation of funds and
inform the Committee accordingly. The Committee would like the
Department to indicate the specific reasons for nil utilization of outlay
in some of the States/UTs.

35
Reply of the Government
The most important reason for the States to have unspent balance
is on account of slow pace of expenditure by the States. There are
other reasons such as court intervention, delay in sanction of the project
in time, delay in transfer of funds by the State Finance Department to
the PHED/implementing agencies etc. which also add to the
accumulation of unspent balance. The department has urged the States
for proper planning/execution as well as timely release of funds to
the implementing agency so as to keep the unspent balance within the
permissible limit. As regards reporting, the monitoring mechanism has
been strengthened and it has been decided to consider online reports
for all purposes from 2008-09 onwards.
The UTs are not availing central funds for coverage of habitations
and mostly utilizing their own resources. However, funds have released
to them under National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring &
Surveillance programme for IEC, HRD activities and purchase of field
test kits from 2006-07 onwards.
[O.M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 4.9)
The Committee note that before 2003 survey the information was
being maintained with regard to not covered habitations and partially
covered habitations. Not covered habitations were such habitations,
which were mainly in the difficult geographical areas. After compilation
of the data based on 2003 survey, it seems that slipped back habitations
have been included in the not covered and partially covered habitations.
1,45,518 not covered and 1,94,067 partially covered habitations have
been indicated as per the latest survey. There is no slipped back
category as per the habitation survey results. However, during the
Bharat Nirman period, there is a category of slipped back habitations.
This disparity in categorization creates utter confusion with regard to
the status of coverage of partially covered and not covered habitations.
The Committee would like the Department to clarify the position in
this regard. Besides, the Committee strongly recommend that the data
for the targets and achievements with regard to slipped back category

36
should be depicted separately and not clubbed with the data relating
to not covered and partially covered habitations, so as to have a fair
idea about the not covered and partially covered habitations. Besides,
the Committee feel that in the latest updated data, it is difficult to
find out as to how many not covered habitations are in difficult terrains
where the State Governments find it difficult to cover those habitations.
The Department should clarify the position in this regard. The
Committee desire that the position should be made clear in the data
in order to facilitate effective monitoring and implementation.
Reply of the Government
It is clarified that the un–covered habitations included in the Bharat
Nirman are the NC/PC habitations of the earlier survey i.e. the
habitation survey conducted in 1992-93 subsequently updated in 1999.
The remaining NC/PC habitations mentioned in the Habitation Survey
2003 are the ones which were earlier fully covered and slipped–back
to NC/PC status due to increase in population, depletion of ground
water table, water sources becoming quality–affected, water supply
systems working below rated capacity and water supply systems
outliving their design period resulting in to lower per capita availability
of water and therefore categorized as slipped–back habitations.
Accordingly, target for slipped–back habitations has been set under
Bharat Nirman and the achievement monitored separately.
A report indicating un–covered, slipped–back and quality–affected
habitations separately has been devised and hosted in the department’s
website.
[O.M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 4.10)
Further, the Committee note with dismay that physical performance
under ARWSP of uncovered habitations is not up to the mark. The
underachievement of targets for 2006-07 has been about 30 per cent
and for 2007-08, it is about 70 per cent. Though the Department are
optimistic about achieving the targets, the ground reality in this regard
suggests otherwise. The Committee would like the Department to shun

37
their complacent approach and undertake concrete and strict measures
to ensure achievement of the targets by the States. The Committee
may be apprised of the concrete action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
These habitations are mostly located in remote and difficult areas
and the States are finding difficulty in covering these habitations. Out
of 55,067 habitations, 36,933 habitations have already been covered by
the States. In addition, about 946 habitations have reportedly become
depopulated leaving a balance of about 17,188 habitations. The State
Governments have been asked to cover these habitations on priority
by March, 2009.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 5.26)
Further, another issue interlinked to the issue of depleting ground
water table is rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge of ground
water. The Committee in the previous Demands for Grant Reports
had made a series of recommendations with respect to the said issue.
The Committee feel that depletion of ground water table is reaching
a critical level and unless urgent action is taken to promote conjunctive
use of water through ground, surface and rainwater, a situation of
extreme water stress and scarcity may emerge. The Committee feel
that the Department should work in a proactive mode to promote
rainwater harvesting on a massive scale. For this, mass awareness
campaign may be launched where information about simple methods
for rainwater harvesting may be disseminated widely. Besides, as
suggested by the Committee in their previous Report, the Department
should work with the Ministry of Water Resources and other
Departments to ensure that rainwater harvesting structures are installed
in all new rural constructions and encourage the State Governments
to modify their building by-laws accordingly. The Committee would
also like to reiterate that the issue of identifying an exclusive Private/
Government Agency to give technical inputs for promoting rainwater
harvesting at the earliest should be taken up with each State. The
names of agencies so identified should be hosted on the Department’s

38
website. The Department may liberally involve NGOs/VOs active in
the field in different regions and provide assistance to them through
financial grants for the said purpose. The Committee would like the
Government to seriously consider the suggestions of the Committee
and take concrete actions on the suggested lines.
Reply of the Government
The entire focus of the Department in the XI plan period is to
ensure sustainability in the drinking water schemes. Conjunctive use
of ground water, surface water and roof-water has therefore been the
focus area for bringing in Sustainability to rural drinking water supply
schemes and the States are being repeatedly urged on every available
forum/occasion to adopt such models. It is now one of the conditions
for sanctioning of projects in the States. As mentioned earlier, a system
of greater co-ordination between the Department of Drinking Water
Supply and the Ministry of Water Resources through meetings between
the Secretaries of two organizations was started in September 2007 for
bringing in more effective mechanism for greater convergence in the
field of water security. For assisting the States with more technical
expertise, list of technical experts has been prepared based on their
technical expertise and knowledge in the sector of water and sanitation.
National Seminar of Technical Experts and the State Government
officials was held on 25/7/2008 where efforts were made to concretize
their role in this area.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter-I of the Report)

39
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 3.15)
Further, during the oral evidence, the Secretary pointed out that
some of the States face difficulties in providing 50 percent matching
share due to the fund constraints. The Committee would like the
Department to undertake a detailed and comprehensive exercise to
identify such States, which are facing resource crunch in consultation
and collaboration with Ministry of Finance as well as the Planning
Commission particularly, when the important question of providing
drinking water to rural masses is involved. After having the detailed
report, the Department should find out the mechanism to assist some
of the specific concerns of special category of States, which do not
have the capacity to pay 50 per cent matching share under the
programme. The Union Government should take the desired action in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
Some of the North Eastern States and Jammu & Kashmir find it
difficult to provide the matching State share. Moreover, these States
have requested to change the funding pattern from the existing 50:50
to 90:10 between Central and State Governments. Accordingly, a
proposal for changing the funding pattern from the existing 50:50 to
90:10 between Central and State Governments for the above mentioned
States has been initiated by the Department. Recently the Government
has approved the proposal for changing of funding pattern for the
North Eastern States & J & K from the existing 50:50 between the
Centre & the States to 90:10 between the Centre & the States.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.24)
The Committee had earlier recommended (refer para 4.12 of 28th
Report) revising the format of MPRs so as to include a component

40
wherein States furnish specific reasons for non-utilisation of resources.
Such a mechanism will not only make the States responsible but would
also help the Union as well as the State Governments to take timely
remedial measures. The Committee while reiterating the earlier
recommendation would like that the desired action on the suggested
lines should be taken and the Committee apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation is noted and the MPR is being suitably
revised.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chpater I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 5.9)
Besides creating awareness, the problem of contaminated water
which has emerged as a serious threat to the livelihood systems of
rural poor, itself needs to be tackled on a priority basis. While
continuing the initiatives being taken with regard to the treatment of
contaminated water, there is an urgent need to focus on preventive
measures to check water contamination. In this regard, the Committee
would like to emphasize the urgent need for legislative measures to
check the tendency of industries to dump the effluents back into the
ground without treating, which is contaminating the ground water
and is a serious threat to the agriculture and environment. The
Secretary, during the course of oral evidence, has informed that the
Department is working on a draft Model Legislation, in order to
address the aforesaid issue. The Committee strongly recommend that
the Model Legislation should be drafted in consultation with the
experts, policy makers, all the related Ministries, State Governments
and all the stakeholders expeditiously. The proposed legislation should
provide for punitive measures against the offence of polluting drinking
water sources.
Reply of the Government
The Department agrees with the recommendation of the Committee
that protection of drinking water sources from pollution is one of the

41
key issues for bringing in sustainability through maintenance of quality
of drinking water. Experts, Policy makers, related Ministries,
Organizations such as Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB),Bureau
of Indian Standards (BIS), Ministry of Water Resources , Department
of S&T, CSIR, Central Ground Water Board, Ministry of Urban
Development, Ministry of Law, reputed NGOs and representatives of
State Pollution control Board have participated in a National Workshop
for Protection of drinking water sources held in New Delhi on
10th May, 2008 to discuss a Model Legislation on protection of drinking
water process. Further follow up action on the recommendations of
the National Workshop is underway.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 5.10)
Further, the Committee are perturbed to note the dismal
performance of quality-affected habitations under the Bharat Nirman
programme, wherein all quality-affected habitations were to be covered
by 2008-09. However, the performance of quality-affected habitations
indicate only about 50 per cent achievement so far with only one year
of the Bharat Nirman programme remaining. The Committee take
strong exception on the under achievement of targets in such a critical
area. The Committee desire that the Department should take all
measures to ensure that all the remaining quality affected habitations
are addressed on a priority basis by chalking out an immediate Action
Plan in this regard.
Reply of the Government
All arsenic and most of the fluoride affected habitations have
already been addressed. The issues of addressing salinity and nitrate
by dilution and iron by environment friendly technologies like terracotta
based filtration system have been suggested to the State Governments.
The State Government officials have also been offered training as to
how to apply the low cost and environment friendly technologies the
performance of poor performing States under Bharat Nirman
programme including those which have performed poorly in respect
of addressing water quality affected habitations was reviewed in a
national level review meeting in July 2008. Further follow up action
on the basis of the deliberations of the meeting is in progress.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

42
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 5.24)
The model legislation for control on over extraction of ground
water, if and when implemented in letter and spirit by all the States
can go a long way in bringing about sustainability of sources as
depletion of ground water table due to excessive and uncontrolled
extraction of the water is the main cause for the sources going dry. In
this regard, the Committee would draw attention to their earlier
recommendation (refer para 5.11 of the 28th Report) and urge upon
the Department to ensure that the said legislation is put in place by
the States at the earliest since the depleting ground water table has
already started threatening the availability of drinking water in both
rural and urban areas. The Department in the action taken replies on
Report on Demand for Grants (2007-08) had expressed helplessness by
stating that it has a limited role since the respective State legislatures
have to decide about the legislation.
The Committee would again like the Department to interact
assertively with the Ministry of Water Resources and along with them
with the State Governments to emphasize upon them the need to put
such a legislation in place at the earliest. The Department should also
hold review meetings with the States in this regard. The Committee
desire that the Department should make all efforts in coordination
with the Ministry of Water Resources to motivate the State Governments
to implement the said legislation in a time bound manner and keep
the Committee informed about the concrete action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
A system of holding of co-ordination meetings between the
Secretaries of the Department of Drinking Water Supply and the
Ministry of Water Resources was started in September 2007 for bringing
a mechanism for convergence of activities of both the Department of
DWS and Ministry of Water Resources. In these co-ordination meetings,
the issue of model legislation on ground water is discussed. In the
States review meetings on drinking water, the issue of enactment of
model legislation on ground water is also discussed.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I of the Report)

43
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 5.25)
The Committee further note that over extraction of ground water
in urban areas by big builders, industrial houses etc. adversely affect
the availability of water in rural areas. The Committee desire that the
issue should be addressed in the model legislation being worked out
by the Ministry as stated by the Secretary and referred to in the earlier
para of the report, so as to have relevant provisions in the building
by-laws of the various State Governments in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The issue of Common property rights on water will be given
consideration in the draft model legislation on protection of drinking
water sources. Further action on this is under process.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 5.27)
With regard to ensuring that States utilize 5 per cent amount under
ARWSP earmarked for sustainability, the Committee have been
recommending to the Department to ensure accountability from the
States by evolving appropriate mechanisms in this regard. The
Committee have learnt that there is a proposal to increase the said
amount from 5 to 20 per cent. The Committee urge that the Department
should carry out the necessary groundwork before such a proposal is
implemented as presently even 5 per cent of the amount is not being
utilised. The Committee desire that the Department should consider
providing incentives/grants separately to the States to promote
sustainability measures and conjunctive use of water.
Reply of the Government
The Government has decided to revise the ARWSP scheme by
increasing the component under sustainability from the existing 5% of
the State’s allocation on 75:25 basis (Centre to State) to 20% of the
allocation on 100:0 basis (Centre to State). The RWSP guidelines
mentioning this important modification and other modifications are
currently under preparation.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

44
Recommendation (Serial No. 25 , Para No. 6.13)
Further with respect to spreading awareness about hygienic and
sanitation practices to ensure that toilets constructed are actually used
for the purpose, the Committee recommend that the curriculum in
schools and colleges may be suitably modified to include good practices
in water and sanitation habits. This would create more awareness about
the programme and generate more demand, which is crucial to the
success of the programme.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions are accepted. The recommendation to include good
water and sanitation habits in an effective way in the curriculum noted
will be taken up with the Department of School Education and Literacy
and the State Governments. In co-ordination with Department of School
Education and UNICEF, a programme has been worked out for
advocacy of safe hygiene practices during mid-day meal in schools in
October 2008. Also, UNICEF is preparing a booklet on safe water and
sanitation practices for schools children for circulation.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 6.16)
The Committee appreciate the initiative taken by the Department
to encourage PRIs in sanitation promotion by awarding Nirmal Gram
Puraskar to a PRI which completely eliminates the practice of open
defecation, provide water supply and toilet facility to schools and
anganwadis and maintains general cleanliness. The number of PRIs
who have won the Nirmal Gram Puraskar has risen from 38 in 2005
to 5000 last year. The Committee are happy to note that over 32000
applications from villages all over the country have been received by
the Department for the current year. Besides rewarding the villages in
this regard, the State of Sikkim has surpassed all records by being the
only State declared totally sanitized in spite of the difficult geographical
conditions. The Committee hope and trust that the remaining States
will emulate the best practices being adopted by the Nirmal Gram
Puraskar winner PRIs. Besides, other States will follow Sikkim, which
has shown the way to the country by being the best State in respect
of sanitation. The Department have informed that monitoring of such
villages by UNICEF is being done. The Committee would like that the
Department should also have some sort of mechanism for regular
monitoring of the awarded villages and the State of Sikkim.

45
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee is accepted. Mechanism is
being devised to induce sustainability of sanitation status of NGP
villages. All States have been asked to check the status of the NGP
villages. They have been asked to designate all such villages as Training
Centers, so that others can visit and learn from the good practices of
NGP villages.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 7.11)
The Committee note with satisfaction that during the year 2008-09,
the Hon’ble Finance Minister has made an announcement of special
scheme of Rs. 200 crore to improve the potability of water for school
children at school level by providing for stand alone purification
system. The Committee would like the Department to make sincere
efforts for meaningful utilisation of the outlay.
Reply of the Government
A high level Technical Committee under the Chairmanship of
Secretary Department of Science and Technology has been form to
suggest list of Technologies with price range which can be adopted by
the State Government while providing these stand along water
purification system in the Rural School. The Committee will be
finalizing their recommendation shortly . Meanwhile the expenditure
sanction for the Scheme is being considered in the EFC meeting chaired
by the Secretary, Department of Expenditure in a meeting on
20th August, 2008. The expenditure sanction for the scheme has since
been obtained. Further follow up action for operationalising the scheme
is underway.
[O. M. No. H. 11011/4/2008-DWS-III, dated: 1 September,
2008 of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
 N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 December, 2008 Chairman,
24 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

46
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 15 DECEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Balihari Babu
8. Smt. T. Ratna Bai
9. Shri Prabhat Jha
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11. Shri P .R. Rajan
12. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Vinod Gupta — Under Secretary

47
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption
of three draft action taken reports on Demands for Grants (2008-2009)
of the Department of Land Resources, Drinking Water Supply and
Rural Development of the Ministry of Rural Development.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the
Memorandum Nos. 2, 3 and 4 regarding draft reports on action taken
by the Government on recommendations/observations contained in
Thirty-sixth, Thirty-seventh and Thirty-fifth Reports of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) in respect of Departments of Land
Resources, Drinking Water Supply and Rural Development under the
Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee after deliberations
adopted the aforesaid draft action taken Reports with a slight
modification in the draft action taken Report of the Department of
Rural Development.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft action taken Reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

48
APPENDIX II
(vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-
SEVENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 35
II. Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:— 20
Para Nos. 3.13, 3.14, 4.7, 4.8, 5.8, 5.11, 5.12,
5.23, 5.28, 5.29, 6.11, 6.12, 6.14, 6.15, 7.10,
7.12, 7.13, 7.14, 7.15 and 7.16
Percentage to the total recommendations (57.14%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do NIL
not desire to pursue in view of
Government’s reply:—
Percentage to the total recommendations (NIL)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:— 5
Para Nos. 3.22, 3.23, 4.9, 4.10 and 5.26
Percentage to the total recommendations (14.28%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:— 10
Para Nos. 3.15, 3.24, 5.9, 5.10, 5.24, 5.25,
5.27, 6.13, 6.16 and 7.11
Percentage to the total recommendations (28.57%)