18
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

EIGHTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.5.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.5.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2006/Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 024
Price : Rs. 141.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE N O.(S)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (ix)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory.................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Overall Evaluation of the Demands for Grants
2006-2007 of the Department of Rural
Development ................................................................ 3
Status of Implementation of Direction 73 A ...... 3
Comparative position of allocation under
different Plans ............................................................. 4
Speedy finalisation of Below Poverty Line (BPL)
list ................................................................................... 10
Huge underspending under different schemes .. 14
Monitoring Mechanism ............................................. 15
Gender Budgeting ...................................................... 18
Preparation of Eleventh Five year Plan ............... 20
CHAPTER III Scheme-wise assessment of Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) of the Department of Rural
Development ................................................................ 21
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) ...... 21
National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) .. 26
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(NREGA) ....................................................................... 31
Swarnajyanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) ... 42
Rural Housing (RH), Indira Awaas Yojana(IAY) 48
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY).. 53
Provision for Urban Amenities in Rural Areas
(PURA) .......................................................................... 60
DRDA Administration Scheme ............................... 62
(i)

PAGE N O.(S)
Assistance to Council for Advancement of
People’s Action and Rural Technology
(CAPART) ..................................................................... 65
Training Schemes: National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD) ................................................. 69
Strengthening and establishment of State
Institute of Rural Development (SIRD) and
Extension Training Centres (ETCs) ........................ 71
APPENDICES
I. Statement showing Budget Estimates, Revised
Estimates and Actual Expenditure during
9th Plan by the Department of Rural
Development ................................................................ 75
II. Statement showing Budget Estimates, Revised
Estimates and Actual Expenditure, during
10th Plan by the Department of Rural
Development ................................................................ 77
III. Statement showing the Monthly Expenditure
Plan for 2006-07 by the Department of
Rural Development .................................................... 79
IV . State-wise Physical Financial Achievement made
by  NE States and Sikkim since 2002-03 under
SGSY Scheme ............................................................... 80
V. Detailed Financial Performance under NFFWP
during 2005-06 ............................................................. 82
VI. Statement indicating name of 150 most
backward districts under the National Food for
Work Programme........................................................ 84
VII. Statement indicating name of additional
50 districts  covered under the NREGA ............. 90
VIII. Physical and Financial progress under PMGSY
Phase V (2005-06) ....................................................... 92
IX. Extracts of Recommendation Para 7 made in
Seventh Report 2004-05 of Estimates Committee..... 94
X. Extracts of the Minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 21 March, 2006 ...................... 95
XI. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
12 April, 2006 .............................................................. 98
XII. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
8 May , 2006.................................................................. 101
XIII Statement of observations/recommendations ...... 103
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
*12. Shri Prabodh Panda
@13. Vacant
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri Prabodh Panda, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural Development
vide para No. 1580, Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II dated 23 August, 2005.
@Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil, MP (LS) and member of the Committee ceased to be
member of the Lok Sabha vide Notification No. 21/5/2005/T w.e.f. 23.12.2005 (AN).

Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
$#23. Vacant
#24. Vacant
25. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
26. Shri Penumalli Madhu
#27. Vacant
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
#30. Vacant
#31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri G.C. Prasad — Committee Officer
(iv)
$Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has changed the nomination of Shrimati Vanga Geetha,
MP (RS) from Standing Committee on Industry to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 23 August, 2005 vide Committee Branch-I note dated 25.8.2005.
#Shrimati Vanga Geetha, MP (RS), Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar, MP(RS),
Shri Kalraj Mishra, MP(RS), Dr. Faguni Ram MP(RS) and Prof. R.B.S. Varma, MP (RS)
and members of the Committee on Rural Development ceased to be members of the
Rajya Sabha due to completion of the tenure of the members of Rajya Sabha w.e.f.
2.4.2006 vide Coordination Cell note dated 23.3.2006.

ABBREVIATIONS
ADB — Asian Development Bank
APL — Above Poverty Line
APO — Assistant Project Officer
ARTS — Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme
BE — Budget Estimates
BLCC — Block Level Coordination Committee for SGSY
BPL — Below Poverty Line
CAPART — Council for Advancement of People’s Action and
Rural Technology
CCSS — Credit-cum-subsidy Scheme
CIRDAP — Centre on Integrated Rural Development in Asia and
Pacific
CLCC — Centre Level Coordination Committee for SGSY
DG — Director General
DLCC — District Level Coordination Committee
DLM — District Level Monitoring
DRDA — District Rural Development Agency
DWCRA — Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas
EAS — Employment Assurance Scheme
ETC — Extension Training Centre
FAQ— Fair Average Quality
FCI — Food Corporation of India
GDP — Gross Domestic Product
GKY — Ganga Kalyan Yojana
IAY — Indira Awaas Yojana
IEC — Information, Education and Communication
IBRD — International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
IEC — Information, Education and Communication
IRDP — Integrated Rural Development Programme
IT — Information Technology
(v)

JGSY — Jawahar Gram Samridhi Yojana
JRY — Jawahar Rozgar Yojana
MIS — Management Information System
MLA — Member of Legislative Assembly
MNP — Minimum Needs Programme
MP — Member of Parliament
MPR — Monthly Progress Report
MWS — Million Wells Scheme
NABARD — National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development
NC — Not Covered
NCT — National Capital Territory
NFFWP — National Food For Work Programme
NGO — Non-Government Organization
NICD — National Institute of Community Development
NIRD — National Institute of Rural Development
NLM — National Level Monitors
NREGA — National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
NREGS — National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
NRRDA — National Rural Roads Development Agency
NSC — National Standing Committee
NSSO — National Sample Survey Organisation
NYK — Nehru Yuvak Kendra
OB — Organization of Beneficiaries
OM — Office Memorandum
OTC —O rganisation of Training Courses/Seminars/
Workshops
PADI — People’s Action for Development Initiatives
PC — Public Cooperation regarding promotion of Voluntary
Action in Rural Development
PDS — Public Distribution System
PMGY — Prime Minister’s Gramodaya Yojana
PMGSY — Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
PUCL — People’s Union for Civil Liberties
PURA — Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas
(vi)

PRIs — Panchayati Raj Institutions
RBI — Reserve Bank of India
RBC — Rural Building Centres
RC — Regional Committees of CAPART
RD — Rural Development
RE — Revised Estimates
RH — Rural Housing Schemes
RIDF — Roads Infrastructure Development Fund
RSVY — Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana
SAY — Samagra Awaas Yojana
SC — Scheduled Caste
SDM — Sub-Divisional Magistrate
SHG — Self Help Group
SGRY — Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
SGSY — Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
SIRD — State Institute of Rural Development
SITRA — Supply of Improved Tool Kits to Rural Artisans
SLCC — State Level Coordination Committee
SLSC — State Level Sanctioning Committee
ST — Scheduled Tribe
SVO — Support Voluntary Organisations
TRC — Technology Resource Centre
TRYSEM — Training of Rural Youth for Self-Employment
UB/OB — Unspent Balance/Opening Balance
UC — Utilisation Certificate
UNDP — United Nations Development Programme
UT — Union territory
ZP — Zilla Parishad
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry
of Rural Development).
2. The Committee examined the Demands for Grants pertaining
to the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) for the year 2006-2007 which were laid on the Table of
the House on 11 March, 2006.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
on 12 April, 2006.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 8 May, 2006.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
for placing before them the requisite material and their considered
views in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. They would also like to place on record their deep sense of
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
17 May, 2006 Chairman,
27 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(ix)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The basic function of the Ministry of Rural Development is to
realise the objectives of alleviating rural poverty, ensuring improved
quality of life for the rural population, especially of those living below
the poverty line through formulating and implementing different
Yojanas/Programmes relating to various spheres of rural life and
activities. The Ministry consists of the following three Departments:
(i) Department of Rural Development;
(ii) Department of Land Resources; and
(iii) Department of Drinking Water Supply.
Department of Rural Development
1.2 The Department of Rural Development formulates and
implements Schemes for generation of self-employment and wage
employment, provision of housing to rural poor, rural roads and
provides support services and other quality inputs such as assistance
for strengthening of District Rural Development Agency Administration,
training and research, human resource development, development of
voluntary action etc. for proper implementation of the Programme.
1.3 The Ministry implements various Central Sector and Centrally
Sponsored Schemes. The main Schemes being implemented by the
Department are:
(a) Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY);
(b) Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY);
(c) National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA);
(d) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY);
(e) Rural Housing (RH): Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY);
(f) District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) Administration
Scheme.

2
1.4 The Department of Rural Development has three autonomous
bodies under its administrative control viz. (i) Council for Advancement
of People’s Action and Rural Technology (CAPART); (ii) National
Institute of Rural Development (NIRD); and (iii) National Rural Roads
Development Agency (NRRDA).
1.5 The overall net Demands for Grants of the Department for BE
2006-07 are for Rs. 39,073.18 crore. However, after deducting the
recoveries (Rs. 15,025.62 crore) expected during the year, the net Budget
of the Department during 2006-07 BE is Rs. 24,047.56 crore both for
Plan and non-Plan.
1.6 The Demands for Grants of the Department have been
presented to Parliament under Demand No.78. The detailed Demands
for Grants of the Department was laid in Lok Sabha on 11 March,
2006.
1.7 In the present Report, the Committee have restricted their
examination only to the major issues concerning the Department and
the Programmes/Schemes that are being implemented in the context
of Demands for Grants 2006-2007.

3
CHAPTER II
OVERALL EVALUATION OF THE DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2006-2007 OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Status of Implementation of the recommendations made by the
Committee in their Third and Ninth Reports under Direction 73 A
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
As per direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha,
the Minister concerned shall make once in six months a statement in
the House regarding the status of implementation of recommendations
contained in the Reports of Departmentally Related Standing
Committees of Lok Sabha with regard to the Ministry.
2.2 Third Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
on Demands for Grants (2004-05) was presented to Parliament on
19 August, 2004. Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development made a
statement in the House in pursuance of direction 73A on 29 April,
2005. On examination of the statement, it was found that the status of
action taken on each of the 58 recommendations made in the Report
was not indicated in the statement. As such the statement was found
to be deficient of the set procedure. The general remarks on the action
taken by the Government on few recommendations was made. Further
the Committee presented Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-
06) of the Department of Rural Development to Lok Sabha on
20 April, 2005. The statement with regard to this Report has fallen
due on 19 October, 2005.
2.3 The Department of Rural Development was requested to take
the necessary action for tabling the revised statement with regard to
Third Report and making a statement by Hon’ble Minister in respect
of Ninth Report vide Lok Sabha Secretariat OM dated 20 January, 2006
and subsequent reminders dated 24 February, 2006 and 14 March, 2006.
Besides the format in which the statement has to be made was also
sent to the Department for their use. Inspite of this, revised statement
in respect of Third Report and the statement in respect of Ninth Report
is yet to be made by the Hon’ble Minister.
2.4 When asked about the reasons for delay in making the
statements on the status of implementation of recommendations of the

4
Committee made in Third and Ninth Reports, it has been submitted
that the Department is in the process of finalisation of the revised
statement to be laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the status of
implementation of recommendations contained in Third Report on
Demands for Grants (2004-05), as per the proforma sent on 20 January,
2006. Similarly, the statement on Ninth Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) is also being finalised. It has further been stated by the
Department that the collection of information from different agencies,
including State Governments, took some time. The Department proposes
to lay the revised statement on the Third Report (2004-05) and the
statement on the Ninth Report (2005-06) on the Table of the Lok Sabha
during the ensuing Session of Parliament.
2.5 Besides, during the course of oral evidence, the Secretary of
the Department assured the Committee that the statements in respect
of aforesaid reports would be made during the Second part of the
Seventh Session of Lok Sabha commencing from 10 May, 2006.
2.6 The Committee note that the primary objective of inserting
direction 73A in the Directions by the Speaker was to make the
Government more accountable for implementation of the various
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee are concerned
to note that even after a lapse of around six months when the
statement on Ninth Report had fallen due and about three months
when the Ministry was requested for making the revised statement
in respect of Third Report, the statements are yet to be tabled by
the Hon’ble Minister. The Committee also find that the Department
is taking the desired action to make the statements in the Second
part of the Seventh Session as stated by the Secretary during the
course of oral evidence. The Committee would like the Government
to ensure that the statements are made at the earliest during the
Second part of the Seventh Session. They further strongly recommend
that in future, the Department should ensure that the statements on
each of the reports are mandatorily made within the specified period
i.e. six months after the presentation of the Report to Parliament as
per direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker.
Comparative position of allocation made for rural development under
different Plans
2.7 The Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates, Actual Expenditure
during each year of Ninth and Tenth Plan are given at Appendix I and
Appendix II .

5
The comparative position of data is as under with regard to
allocations made during Ninth and Tenth Plan is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Ninth Plan agreed to allocation 32869.87
Ninth Plan proposed allocation 40435.22
Proposed allocation during Tenth Plan 129464.27
Tenth Plan allocation as agreed to 56748.00
Total allocation released during Tenth Plan 65314.29
(upto 31 March, 2006)
2.8 Percentage distribution of allocation of the Government of India
during different Plans as reported in Economic Survey 2005-06:
6th Plan 6.4 per cent
7th Plan 7 per cent
8th Plan 7.9 per cent
9th Plan 8.7 per cent
10th Plan 8 per cent
2.9 As per speech of Hon’ble Finance Minister on Budget (2006-
07), GDP growth target for the Tenth Plan was set at 8 per cent with
the three years of 7.5 per cent plus growth. He has stated that it is
possible that the overall growth rate will be 7 per cent. During the
year 2006-07, GDP growth is likely to be 8.1 per cent.
2.10 As indicated in the Budget documents, various programmes
of the Department of Rural Development for generation of employment
like National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) and
creation of infrastructure like Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) and Pradhan
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) have been accorded priority.
2.11 As per the Human Development Reports of UNDP , Nepal,
Sri Lanka and Pakistan which are our neighbouring countries have
been able to improve their ranking in human development index over
the last three years. However, the ranking of India remain invariant at
127 consecutively for three years in a row. State-wise position as
reported in Economic Survey reflect that while Kerala stood apart from
the rest and achieved high levels of human development comparable

6
to rich developed countries the so-called ‘BIMARU States’ (Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh) fared particularly badly.
2.12 While responding to the concerns of the Committee over the
static ranking in Human Development Index of India over the last
three years, the Secretary, Department of Rural Development stated as
under :—
“Per capita income is one of the three indices. Basic educational
services which are taken for the Human Development Index is not
the focus of the Ministry of Rural Development. Basic education
part does not pertain to us. The basic health services are not part
of my Ministry’s area of activity. On the per capita income part,
well, we are doing something – not to improve the per capita
income of the people directly, but we are trying to actually increase
the number of persons who cross the poverty line and who come
above the poverty line. That is the focus of this Ministry. In the
Human Development Index as a whole, there are three areas. It is
being monitored by the Planning Commission, and at least two
areas, certainly, specifically, are not really the mandate of our
Ministry.”
2.13 As regards the level of allocation of the Department of Rural
Development, the Secretary stated as under:—
“……that the allocation for rural development by the Planning
Commission and by the Government of India has certainly gone
up substantially. We had done an analysis using the deflator for
the Tenth Plan allocation for the Ministry of Rural Development.
……. We have actually discovered that the Planning Commission
has given us 50 per cent more allocation in the course of the
Tenth Plan than it had originally planned to give at the Tenth
Plan period. We have actually been given a substantially higher
allocation in the course of each of the five years. xx xx xx.
Seventy-nine thousand crores is the deflated value of the actual
Tenth Plan allocation which we have received. I am talking only
about the actual expenditure and current year’s allocation. While
the Tenth Plan outlay was only Rs. 56,748 crore, there has been
a substantial increase, 50 per cent additional amount, which was
actually made available to the Ministry of Rural Development.”
2.14 The Committee note with concern that although our
neighbouring countries could improve the human development index,
India has remained static at 127th position for the last three years.

7
Since out of three parameters for determining human development
index, one parameter i.e. employment is the mandate of the
Department of Rural Development, the Department has therefore, a
key role in improving the human development index. The Committee
would like to point out that employment being the basic parameter
to improve the economic and social status of a person, once an
individual gets employment, the other issues like education and basic
health services are taken care of. There is a co-relation between the
status of employment of an individual and his social and economic
status.
2.15 From the status of allocation of outlay as indicated above,
the Committee note that although there may be some enhancement
of outlay in each plan as compared to the previous plans, the
percentage increase in outlay when compared to the overall outlay
of the Government of India do not indicate any substantial
enhancement in rural development sector. There was marginal
increase in allocation of resources for rural development for each of
the plan as compared to the previous plan upto 9th Plan. However,
during 10th Plan, when the targets for GDP growth are being set at
8.1 per cent and the Indian economy has been acknowledged as
booming economy worldwide, the percentage distribution of
allocation has decreased from 8.7 per cent to 8 per cent.
2.16 The Committee further note that some of the States such as
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh are not doing
well. The scheme-wise position has been reviewed in the subsequent
chapters of the report. In view of this scenario, the Committee
recommend the Government to enhance the allocation for rural
development adequately so that the benefit of the booming economy
reach the poorest of the poor in the country. Further, there is an
urgent need to ensure even development of different States in the
country. The Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Department to review the position of implementation of schemes
State-wise and after addressing the shortcomings, suggest some
remedial measures and inform the Committee accordingly.
2.17 Comparative position of outlay made available during
2006-2007
    (Rs. in crore)
B.E. 2004-2005 11437.40
R.E. 2004-2005 13866.40

8
Actual expenditure 2004-2005 13857.86
B.E. 2005-2006 18334.00
R.E. 2005-2006 21334.00
Expenditure upto January, 2006 13398.08
B.E. 2006-2007 24025.62
Difference between B.E. and R.E. of 2004-2005 2429
Underspending during 2004-2005 as compared to R.E. 8.54
Difference between B.E. and R.E. of 2005-2006 3000.00
Underspending during 2005-2006 as compared to
expenditure position upto January, 2006 7935.92
Increase in BE 2005-06 over RE of 2004-2005 4467.60
Increase in BE 2006-2007 over RE of 2005-2006 2691.62
2.18 As per the information provided by the Ministry, the Revised
Estimates for the year 2005-06 is Rs. 21,334 crore out of which
Rs. 13, 398.08 crore was utilised during the first ten months of the
financial year. The remaining amount of Rs. 7,935.92 crore was utilized
in the last two months of the financial year. When asked about the
reasons for the uneven expenditure, the Secretary during the course of
oral evidence stated as under:—
“Rs. 21,334 crore which was provided at the end of the year
include Rs. 3,000 crore which we got only at the end of the year
for payment to Food Corporation of India for foodgrains
component. So, the budget actually was Rs. 18,334 crore which
was available to us till the very end of March. So Rs. 13,400
crore of expenditure in January may kindly be seen with reference
to Rs. 18,334 crore that we had. I would like to submit that with
reference to that amount of expenditure that we did in the last
two months will come down from Rs. 7,900 crore to Rs. 4,900
crore. It is slightly much smaller amount. Rs. 3,000 crore was
basically the payment made by the Ministry directly to the FCI
for the budget which was not provided at the beginning of the
year”.
2.19 When asked whether the Government will take the route of
Supplementary Grants for meeting the expenditure under foodgrains
component and special component in 2006-07, the Department has
stated that the allocation of funds for the schemes is done by the

9
Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission. In the Annual Plan
proposal for SGRY for 2006-07, the requirement for the provision against
foodgrains component including outstanding Bills of FCI has been
proposed. However, no allocation against foodgrains component has
been made in BE 2006-07. Further it has been stated that additional
funds will be obtained through Supplementary Grants during the year
2006-07 for payment of outstanding balance for foodgrains lifted under
the programme.
2.20 The Department has furnished a statement showing the
monthly expenditure plan for 2006-2007 which is given at Appendix-III.
2.21 The Committee observe that while requirement of funds
for foodgrains component and special component is an important
feature, the funds are being made available only at the
Supplementary Grants or RE stage. The Committee have repeatedly
been recommending in this regard in their respective reports. Inspite
of that, the practice of allocating funds for foodgrains component at
Supplementary Grants stage still continue. The Committee are of
the opinion that demanding huge allocation at Supplementary Grants
stage is not a healthy practice of Budgeting. It does not give an idea
about the allocation made under a scheme in different districts. The
implementing agencies should be well aware of the provisions made
under a scheme well in time i.e. in the beginning of the financial
year. In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend that the
practice of allocating funds at RE stage for a component which is
certain and for which estimates are available at BE stage should be
dispensed with and funds should be made available at the BE stage
itself. The Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance should be
apprised of the concerns of the Committee in this regard.
2.22 The Committee find from the data indicated above that there
is enhancement of only Rs. 2691.62 crore in B.E. 2006-07 as compared
to R.E. 2005-06, although Rs. 11,300 crore have been allocated for the
ambitious programme ‘National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme’. Not only that, ambitious targets have also been fixed for
Rural Housing. The comparative position of outlay scheme-wise has
been analysed in the subsequent Chapters of the Report. Here the
Committee feel that the enhancement of outlay in one programme
may be due to the decrease in outlay in some other scheme. The
Committee disapprove of this tendency of the Government. The
Committee strongly recommend that adequate outlay under different
schemes should be provided to achieve the laudable objectives.
Besides, the enhancement of outlay for the ambitious programme

10
i.e. NREGA should not be at the cost of the established programmes
of the Department.
Speedy finalisation of Below Poverty Line (BPL) list by States
2.23 At the beginning of each Five Year Plan, the Ministry of Rural
Development conducts a Below Poverty Line (BPL) Census through
the State Governments with a view to identify households living below
the poverty line who could be assisted under various anti-poverty
programmes implemented by the Ministry .
2.24 The results of BPL census, 2002 could not be finalized because
of direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court. Supreme Court in its order
dated 5 May, 2003 had directed not to insist on State Governments
deleting any name from the existing BPL list while hearing Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 196 of 2001 in the matter of PUCL vs. Union of India.
While examining Demands for Grants (2005-2006), the Committee had
been informed that the exercise of BPL census 2002 is yet to be
completed in term of tabulation and analysis, as per the tabulation
plan of the Ministry. Further the Committee in their Ninth Report had
recommended that pending the decision of the Supreme Court, the
exercise by States/UTs should be completed expeditiously and the
provisional results should be made available by the Government so
that the results could be finalized immediately when the decision in
this regard is taken by the Supreme Court. Hon’ble Minister of Rural
Development in a statement made in Lok Sabha on 10 March, 2006
has informed the House that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has vacated
the stay after hearing all parties and examining material placed upon.
Hon’ble Minister has further stated that to ensure transparency in the
process of finalizing BPL list instructions have been issued for obtaining
the approval of the Gram Sabha to display the draft BPL list at the
Panchayat head quarter or in prominent place in the village alongwith
scores. States have also been requested to provide a two stage appeal
mechanism so that people can file objections, if any, to the Tehsildar,
SDM or District Collector as the case may be, regarding their ranking
in the BPL list.
2.25 When asked about the status of finalisation of BPL list in
respective States, the Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated
as under:—
“As mentioned by the Minister of Rural Development in his
suo moto statement in Lok Sabha on 10 March, 2006, the State
Governments have been instructed to finalise the BPL list based
on the BPL Census 2002 after getting it approved by the Gram

11
Sabhas. The States have been requested to provide a two stage
appeal mechanism to address the objections of the people. For
this purpose also, a time limit has been prescribed. As per the
information received from various States, the process of
finalisation of BPL list is in the final stage and reports from
States regarding finalisation of the BPL list are awaited. It is
expected that most States will be able to finalise the BPL list
within two to three months as the entire process is in an advanced
stage.”
2.26 As per Economic Survey (2005-06), the next official estimates
of poverty incidence will be based on the NSSO (61st) round of large
scale Sample Survey conducted in 2004-05 results of which are expected
to be published in 2006. When asked about the utility of finalization
of data of survey (2002), when the results of the latest survey are
expected by 2006, the Department has stated that the BPL Census to
identify the rural poor households is conducted in the beginning of
the Five Year Plan. For the 10th Five Year Plan, the BPL Census 2002
was conducted, however, results could not be finalized because the
matter was subjudice. The BPL list based on the results of BPL Census
2002 can be utilized till the exercise of next BPL Census is completed.
2.27 As regards the methodology adopted while calculating BPL
persons during the latest survey, the Department has informed that
Census 2002 was conduced applying the improved score based
methodology as recommended by Expert Group set up by the Ministry.
Keeping in view the experience, 13 score based social-economic
parameter covering matters like land holdings, type of house,
availability of clothes, food security, sanitation, literacy, means of
livelihood and indebtedness was applied to identify poor households.
2.28 Further as reported in the Economic Survey the extent of the
actual decline in the proportion of BPL between 1993-94 and
1999-2000 has been a subject of an intense debate by academicians
because of change in methodology for collection of basic data in
1999-2000 and possible non-comparability with earlier rounds of
consumer expenditure surveys.
2.29 The Planning Commission has defined poverty in terms of
the per capita monthly expenditure corresponding to per capita daily
calorie requirement of 2,400 in rural areas and 2,100 in urban areas.
The poverty line defined in this way covers the expenditure on food
and non-food items (such as fuel, clothing, housing, health, education
and social services) and ensures adequacy of calorie consumption.

12
2.30 In 1989, the Planning Commission constituted an Expert Group
on estimation of the proportion and number of poor chaired by
Prof. D.T. Lakdawala to review the methodology for estimation of
poverty at the National and State level and also to go into the question
of redefining the poverty line, if necessary. The Expert Group submitted
its report in 1993 which accepted the definition of poverty employed
by the Task Force. The report set out a methodology for estimation of
poverty and provided estimates of poverty at National and State level
from the Quinquennial Expenditure Survey of the National Sample
Survey using State specific poverty lines.
2.31 When asked whether the methodology adopted while
calculating BPL persons is same as adopted in 2002 survey, the
Department has stated that the BPL Census conducted by the Ministry
of Rural Development through the State Governments and Union
Territory Administrations aims at identifying the rural poor households
who could be assisted under the programmes of the Ministry . To
identify the rural households, the methodology as recommended by
the Expert Group set up the Ministry was used which had
recommended giving a score to the household based on 13 socio-
economic parameters. The number of households Below Poverty Line
to be identified had to match with the estimated number of BPL
households of Planning Commission. Hence the methodology used for
estimating number of BPL households and the methodology used for
identifying the BPL households are interlinked.
2.32 The Committee have repeatedly been deploring the arbitrary
cut off limit of BPL persons as imposed by Planning Commission
according to which the number of BPL families identified through the
BPL Census, 2002 may not exceed the number of BPL persons estimated
by the Planning Commission during 1999-2000 for the rural sector. An
additional 10 per cent may be permitted to account for the transient
poor. The Committee in the Ninth and Seventeenth Report had desired
that the matter should be brought before the Planning Commission
and reviewed afresh. When asked whether the concerns expressed by
the Committee have actually been brought to the knowledge of
Planning Commission and what has been the reaction of Planning
Commission, the Department has stated that the concerns of the
Committee regarding the number of BPL families to be identified
through BPL Census were conveyed to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission has responded that since the cap on the total
number of BPL families to be identified was recommended by the
Expert Committee, therefore, this issue may be looked into in detail
by the Expert Committee to be constituted for the next BPL Census to
be conducted for Eleventh Five year Plan.

13
2.33 The Committee find that the results of the BPL Census 2002
have inordinately been delayed. BPL Census is conducted at the
beginning of each Five Year Plan so as to identify the households
living Below Poverty Line (BPL) who could be benefited by the
different schemes of the Ministry. Although the Tenth Five Year
Plan is coming to an end, the results of the BPL Census conducted
for the said Five Year Plan are yet to be finalised. While noting the
fact that the results were delayed due to the stay imposed by the
Supreme Court in this matter, the Committee have repeatedly been
recommending to the Department in the respective reports to direct
the State Governments to complete the exercise and be ready with
the provisional results pending decision of the Supreme Court. Even
when the announcement regarding the vacation of the stay by the
Supreme Court has been made by Hon’ble Minister in Lok Sabha
on 10 March, 2006, the results are yet to be finalised. As stated by
the Secretary, Department of Rural Development, it will take two or
three months to finalise the results. While expressing the concern
over the inordinate delay in finalisation of the BPL List, the
Committee would like to recommend for finalisation of the BPL list
without any further delay.
2.34 The Committee further note that the next official estimates
of poverty incidence based on NSSO (61st) round of Sample Survey
conducted in 2004-05 are expected by 2006. The Committee hope
that the results would be made available during the year 2006 so
that the genuine beneficiaries i.e. Below Poverty Line persons could
be provided assistance under the different schemes of the
Government. Till the results of the latest survey are made available,
the Census report 2002, the results of which are still to be finalised,
could be used for the purpose of different schemes of the
Government.
2.35 The Committee in their earlier reports have repeatedly been
expressing their unhappiness over the decision of the Government
according to which the number of BPL persons estimated should
not exceed those identified as per 1999-2000 survey. The Committee
find that the concerns of the Committee have been conveyed to
Planning Commission and it has responded that since the cap on
the total number of BPL families to be identified was recommended
by the Expert Committee, the issue may be looked into in detail by
the Expert Committee to be constituted for the BPL Census to be
conducted for Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee feel that such
an arbitrary limit on BPL persons to be identified will do a great
injustice to the genuine BPL persons who could be debarred from

14
certain benefits. Not only that, such limitations can provide
unreasonable authority to the agencies involved thereby inviting
corruption and malpractice. Therefore, the Committee would like
the Department to pursue the matter with the Planning Commission
so that such limitations are not imposed while finalizing the number
of BPL persons during latest survey.
2.36 The Committee further note that as reported in the Economic
Survey, the extent of the actual decline in the proportion of BPL
between 1993-99 and 1999-2000 has been a subject of an intense
debate by academicians because of change in the methodology for
collection of basic data in 1999-2000 and possible non-comparability
with earlier rounds of consumer expenditure surveys. The Committee
would like to be informed about the details of the methodology
adopted during the latest survey being conducted for Eleventh Plan.
They would also like to be informed whether the results of the BPL
Census 2002 and 2006 would be comparable keeping in view the
specific methodologies adopted during these two surveys.
Huge under-spending under different schemes of the Department
2.37 As per Performance Budget (2005-06) as on 31 December, 2005,
Rs.9,162 crore is lying as unspent under different schemes of the
Department. Major underspending is under the important schemes of
the Department like SGRY, NFFWP and PMGSY. When asked for the
reasons for huge underspending, the Department has stated that the
funds under different programmes are generally released in two
instalments. First instalment is generally released to all the DRDAs/
States automatically if the second instalment during the previous
financial year is not released with any condition. The second instalment
is released only on utilization of 60 per cent of available funds and on
receipt of audited statement of expenditure of previous year. Each
proposal for release of second instalment undergoes detailed scrutiny
and if DRDAs/States have more unspent balance than the prescribed
limit (now 10 per cent of the annual allocation) they face proportionate
cut in the release of Central share of allocation.
2.38 Further as per Performance Budget, 335 Utilisation Certificates
amounting to Rs.1,171.17 crore are pending from different States/Union
territories under difference schemes. When asked for the reasons, the
Department has stated that the pendency of Utilisation Certificates
indicated in the Performance Budget 2006-2007 relate to grants-in-aid
released up at the end of the financial year 2003-2004. The total budget
allocation of the Department of Rural Development at R.E. stage during

15
2003-2004 was Rs.15,500 crore. The amount of Rs.1,171.14 crore for
which Utilisation Certificates are pending, therefore, constitutes only
7.55 per cent of the total allocation of 2003-2004.
2.39 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence has informed
the Committee as under:
“I do agree it is a fact that there has been a fair amount of
money which is available or was available as on 31 December in
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and particularly in the case of Bihar
where there were elections and there were a series of
developments over a period of 6-7 months which did put some
kind of restriction on expenditure for the State.”
2.40 The Secretary further informed:
“******We are in touch with the State Governments. We keep
writing to them, reminding them, monitoring them and also in
our own system, we have a series of disincentives for people
who do not spend up to 60 per cent of the expenditure. We do
not release the second instalment. We ask for further expenditure
certificate before we release again. We have certain measures,
which are part of the guidelines to ensure that not much of
pending balance is carried forward from year to year. These
guidelines are followed strictly. We hope that it will make a
difference.”
Monitoring Mechanism
2.41 As per information given in the Performance Budget, the
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees are constituted with a view to
fulfill the objective of ensuring quality expenditure, particularly, in the
context of large public funds being spent under all the programmes of
the Ministry of Rural Development. The major objective of the
reconstitution of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees include
providing a crucial role for the Members of Parliament and elected
representatives of the people in State Legislatures and Panchayati Raj
Institutions in the implementation of the Rural Development
programmes and to put in place a mechanism to monitor the execution
of the Schemes, in the most effective manner and within the given
time frame, as a result of which, the public funds are put to optimal
use and the programme benefit may flow to the rural poor in full
measure. These Committees also keep a close watch over the
implementation of the programmes as per the prescribed guidelines.
As on 19th December, 2005 reports have been received from 288 districts

16
about holding of the meetings of these Committees at least once in
these districts. The Committees are also to effectively liaise and
coordinate with the Ministry of Rural Development and State
Governments to ensure that all schemes are implemented as per the
programme guidelines. Meetings of the Vigilance & Monitoring
Committee at each level are to be held at least once every quarter,
after giving sufficient notice to all the Members, including Hon’ble
MPs/MLAs.
2.42 The Department has further informed that a new initiative of
District-level Monitoring of the programmes of the Ministry in
130 districts through locally based independent Research Institutions
has been taken up on a pilot basis. The initiative has been launched
in 27 States. This mechanism enables the Ministry to obtain not only
the monthly physical and financial progress from different
implementing agencies but also generates periodic qualitative reports
on the policy and implementation environment for the programmes in
the districts and verification of physical achievements under different
programmes. Such close monitoring helps in improving quality of
implementation of programmes.
2.43 The information with regard to the number of meetings of
State and district level Vigilance Committee held since 2004 as provided
by the Department indicate that in most of the districts only one
meeting was held during the year 2005. Further in most of the districts
no meeting of District Level Vigilance Committee has been held during
the year 2006. Only in 21 districts, viz. East Kameng (Arunachal
Pradesh), Madhubani and Katihar (Bihar) Anand and Surat (Gujarat)
Kaithal and Hisar (Haryana), Bhopal, Ratlam and Rewa (Madhya
Pradesh), Chandrapur, Gadchiroli and Thane (Maharashtra), Barmer,
Bundi, Udaipur and Tonk (Rajasthan), Faizabad and Meerut and
Bulandshahar (Uttar Pradesh), Haridwar and Rudraprayag
(Uttaranchal), the meetings of district level Vigilance Committee have
been held during 2006. As regards the meetings of State Level Vigilance
Committees, in Eighteen States (Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa,
Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Mizoram, Punjab,
Sikkim, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Nagaland, Orissa, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Pondicherry) or and two meetings
were held during the year 2005. During 2006, only in Rajasthan, one
meeting has been held.
2.44 In addition, though the Ministry has adopted various strategies
like District Level Monitoring, Area Officers Inspection visits, Impact
Evaluation Studies, National Quality Monitoring, etc. to have a check

17
on the quality of programme implementation, even then there has
been often criticism about the deficiencies in the delivery mechanism.
To overcome such shortcomings, the Ministry at later stage thought to
have a third party monitoring system and therefore the concept of
NLM came into existence during May, 2003 with empanelment of
179 National Level Monitoring. Accordingly, the Ministry has prepared
a panel of 272 National Level Monitors by involving ex-servicemen
and retired servants. The NLMs have been thoroughly imparted
trainings in different phases to make them fully aware about the rural
development Schemes and their functions.
2.45 The Department has informed that with the implementation
of the ‘Right to Information Act’, 2005, there has been an increase in
the monitoring and vigilance of the rural development programmes at
all levels particularly at the grass-root level. Further the Ministry has
made arrangements to provide maximum information on its website
www.rural.nic.in. States have been asked to prepare a permanent Indira
Awaas Yojana wait list and to display the same permanently in the
villages and put up the same in the District Rural Development
Agencies (DRDA’s) website. Similarly all relevant details in the
implementation of National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA)
are also made available on the website.
2.46 The Committee find that even though the Department has
a detailed monitoring mechanism to oversee the implementation of
various schemes/programmes meant for the upliftment of rural
masses, much needs to be done to improve the delivery mechanism
of the schemes/programmes. Huge unspent balances amounting to
Rs. 9,162 crore lying with the State Governments is certainly an area
of concern. The Committee further feel that more than putting in
place different monitoring mechanisms, there is an urgent need to
see that the system works effectively. The working of the district
and State level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees speaks volume
about the ineffective state of monitoring mechanism put in place by
the Ministry of Rural Development. Although there is a provision
to hold at least one meeting in each quarter, most of the District
and Vigilance Committees could succeed in holding barely one
meeting during the year 2005. If this is the state of affairs of the
Committees which are to be appointed by the Department of Rural
Development, the status of other monitoring mechanisms can be
well imagined. Further, although the Department has claimed that
there has been an increase in monitoring and vigilance of rural
development programmes at all levels particularly at the grass-root
level, no information has been furnished by the Department to

18
substantiate the aforesaid claim. In view of the aforesaid scenario,
the Committee hold the opinion that there is an urgent need to
implement the best of the systems evolved for monitoring of schemes.
The Committee hope that with the implementation of the Right to
Information Act, there will be a check on the proper implementation
of various programmes and schemes. Further dissemination of
information as required under the provisions of the Act would make
the public aware about the various schemes and programmes which
automatically would put a pressure on the implementing agencies to
perform better and deliver results.
2.47 The Committee further find that a laudable initiative has
been taken by the Department to prepare a permanent Indira Awaas
Yojana wait list. The Committee would like that similar initiatives
may be taken for other schemes of the Department. Besides, it would
be desirable to put the BPL list of each district on the website so
as to ensure fair and transparent selection of beneficiaries under
different schemes. The Committee would also like the Government
to pursue further with the State Governments so that the directions
issued by the Department are really complied with. The Committee
may also be kept informed in this regard.
Gender Budgeting
2.48 Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech has informed
that Gender budgeting statement which was for 10 Demands for Grants
during 2004-05, now covers 24 Demands for Grants in 18 Ministries/
Departments and five Union territories and schemes with an outlay of
Rs. 28,737 crore.
2.49 When asked which schemes of the Department of Rural
Development could be covered by the statement on gender budgeting
and what has been the major findings of such statements, the
Department has replied that, so far Department of Rural Development
is concerned, the Rural Housing Scheme of Indira Awaas Yojana(IAY)
have been identified where 100 per cent allocation could be the target
for the women beneficiaries. The other two schemes which have been
identified are Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) and
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) .
2.50 When asked what steps have been undertaken to address the
rather more over rate of increase of unemployment in females in rural
areas, the Department has stated that in order to increase the wage
employment opportunities for the females in the rural areas, specific
provisions for women have been made in the guidelines of

19
self-employment programme and the wage employment programmes.
Under SGSY, it has been provided that 50 per cent of self help groups
at the block level should be formed exclusively for the women. Further,
under SGSY, 40 per cent of the beneficiaries are to be women, under
SGRY efforts have to be made for providing 30 per cent of employment
opportunities for women. Under NREGA, while providing employment,
priority would be given to women in such a way that at least one-
third of the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and
requested for work.
2.51 As reported in Economic Survey, results of 60th round of
NSSO Survey conducted in January to June, 2004 have found that in
rural India on an average per day a male casual labourer earns
Rs. 56.53 i.e. Rs. 20.38 more than a female casual labourer who earns
Rs. 36.15. When asked for the comments of the Department, it has
stated that whenever an incidence of wage disparity between male
and female worker is noticed, the same is informed to the concerned
State authorities for necessary action.
2.52 Further as per the Concurrent Evaluation of SGRY (2003-04)
as reported in Mid-Term Appraisal of Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07),
only 12 per cent of beneficiaries under SGRY are women though the
scheme envisages that at least 30 per cent of wage employment
opportunities should be reserved for women.
2.53 The Committee appreciate the concept of Gender Budgeting
covering as many as 24 Demands for Grants in 18 Ministries/
Departments and five Union territories and schemes with an outlay
of Rs. 28,737 crore. The noble objective of Gender Budgeting is to
remove the disparity between the two genders by giving more and
more benefits to women in all the schemes of the Government. The
Committee would like to emphasise that by mere constitution of
Gender Budget Cell, the objectives behind Gender Budgeting would
not be achieved. The Committee are concerned to find that although
under the different schemes of the Department of Rural
Development, particularly under IAY, SGSY and SGRY, specific
provisions for women have been made in the guidelines, the
implementation of the said provisions is far from satisfactorily. As
reported in various Budget documents like Economic Survey and
Mid-Term Appraisal document the targeted benefits are not reaching
the female beneficiaries.
2.54 The Committee therefore desire that the Government should
seriously try to achieve the targets specified for women beneficiaries

20
in the guidelines of each scheme so that the gap in terms of
employment, housing, wages etc. between men and women is bridged
to a great extent. Further, survey at regular intervals be undertaken
by independent research agencies to evaluate the effects of Gender
Budgeting.
Preparation for Eleventh Five Year Plan
2.55 Eleventh Five Year Plan would commence from the year
2007-2008. When asked about the preparation for the Eleventh Plan,
the Department has informed that the Approach Paper to the Eleventh
Five Year Plan is under preparation in Planning Commission. The
priorities proposed will be finalized in discussion with Planning
Commission and the various stakeholders.
2.56 The Committee note that preparations for Eleventh Five Year
Plan (2007-2012) are being made and priorities are being finalized.
The Committee urge that the plan proposals should be finalized
expeditiously well before the start of the Plan. Besides, the
Committee would also like that the State Governments should be
consulted before finalising the plan proposals. The various
recommendations made by the Committee in their respective reports
should also be considered in this regard.

21
CHAPTER III
SCHEME-WISE ASSESSEMENT OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
The Committee in this Chapter have analysed the Demands for
Grants and performance of different Central Sector and Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Department of Rural Development as
indicated under:—
(i) Wage Employment programmes: (a) Sampoorna Grameen
Rozgar Yojana (SGRY); (b) National Food for Work
Programme (NFFWP); and (c) National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS);
(ii) Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY);
(iii) Rural Housing (RH): Indira Awaas Yajana (IAY);
(iv) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY);
(v) Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas(PURA);
(vi) DRDA Administration Scheme;
(vii) Assistance to Council for Advancement of People’s Action
and Rural Technology (CAPART);
(viii) Training Schemes.
(i) (a) Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)
3.2 The Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) was launched
by merging the erstwhile Employment Assurance Scheme (EAS) and
Jawahar Gram Samridhi Yojana (JGSY) w.e.f. 25 September, 2001.
Objective
3.3 The objective of the scheme is to provide additional wage
employment in all rural areas and thereby provide food security and
improve nutritional levels with the creation of durable community,
social and economic assets and infrastructural development of rural
areas.

22
Funding pattern
3.4 The scheme is implemented in  two streams :
The First Stream : It is implemented at the District (Zilla Parishad)
and Intermediate Panchayat levels. 50 percent
of the funds and foodgrains under SGRY are
distributed between the Zilla Parishad and the
Intermediate Panchayats in 40:60 ratio.
The Second Stream : It is implemented at the Village Panchayat level.
50 percent of the funds and foodgrains under
SGRY are earmarked for Village Panchayats and
distributed among them through DRDAs and
Zilla Parishad.
3.5 From 2004-2005, it has been decided to merge both the streams
of SGRY together for administrative convenience. The cash component
of the programme is shared between Centre and States in the ratio of
75:25. For Union territories, the Centre provides 100 per cent funds
under the Scheme. Foodgrains are provided free of cost to States and
Union territories but the cost of transportation of foodgrains from Food
Corporation of India (FCI) godown to worksite/PDS and its distribution
is the responsibility of the State/Union territory Governments. Under
the scheme foodgrains are distributed @5 kg per manday to the
workers.
Implementing Authority
3.6 For the Financial Year 2006-2007, a Budget provision of
Rs. 3,000 crore has been made for the SGRY. As per the information
furnished by the Department, this amount has been proposed for
386 districts excluding 200 districts covered under NREGA.
3.7 As per information provided in the Outcome Budget, the
quarterly physical targets fixed and achieved during 2005-2006 in terms
of mandays are as under:—
Target (mandays in lakh) Quarterly targets Achievement (mandays
(mandays in lakh) generated in lakh)
Employment generation of First - 1722 First - 892.06
8611 lakh Mandays Second - 1722 Second - 2224.14
Third - 3014 Third - 1854.52
Fourth - 2153 Fourth - —

23
3.8 The reason for shortfall in achievement of targets during first
and third quarter as given by the Department is that there is a time
lag in reporting by the States. The demand for wage employment is
generally higher in last quarter. Further, a part of the budget allocation
was made available only in the 1st batch of Supplementary Demands
for Grants 2005-2006.
3.9 The physical and financial performance under SGRY during
2004-05 as furnished by the Department indicates that whereas the
overall percentage of expenditure against the available funds is 83.42
per cent in eleven States and three Union territories viz, Andhra
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram,
Nagaland, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshdeep and
Pondicherry, the expenditure is less than 75 per cent. Besides Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu have not reported the
expenditure position. Worst performing States and Union territories
are Arunachal Pradesh, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep
and Pondicherry. Out of 20,60,344 works undertaken 16,39,619 works
could be completed. An amount of Rs. 2,764.36 crore is lying unspent
as on 31 December, 2005.
3.10 The physical and financial performance under SGRY during
2005-06 shows very dismal performance of SGRY. As on 31 January,
2006, out of Rs. 6,88,575.94 lakh available with the State Governments,
spending is to the tune of Rs. 3,75,773.16 lakh which is only 54.57 per
cent of the available funds. Except in Goa and Tamil Nadu, the financial
performance under the scheme is below 70 per cent.
3.11 In Daman and Diu, during 2005-06, it is zero per cent and in
some other States and Union territories like Arunachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Mizoram and Lakshadweep, it is well below 25 per cent.
3.12 W hen asked about the specific reasons for the under utilization
by the States, the Department has replied that while the release of
funds by the Centre and States are immediately shown in the progress
report, utilization status always runs behind schedule as it takes time
to collect and compile requisite information from each Village Panchayat
and Intermediate Panchayat in a district. Progress Reports upto month
of January, 2006 have been received in the Ministry and hence the
figures mentioned above do not give the clear picture of
implementation status by the States. The States/Union territories in
which performance is below the average of national performance, have
been advised to intimate the reasons for poor performance with facts
and figures. Their replies are awaited.

24
3.13 On the physical performance side, the statement indicates that
as on 31 January, 2006, out of the 14,25,785 works undertaken, only
7,94,286 works could be completed which is only 55.70 per cent of the
work undertaken during the year.
3.14 As per Performance Budget, as on 31 December 2005,
utilisation certificates of Rs. 5 crore under SGRY are yet to be received.
During the course of oral evidence, the representative of the Ministry
has stated as under:—
“Actually, the very point that you (the Committee) have made is
accepted by us that there is certainly under-performance in both
the programmes (SGRY and NFFWP), and we admit it. It is a
fact that as you have seen in the Outcome Budget, 86.11 crore
mandays were supposed to be created under SGRY, but we have
actually achieved 66.21 crore mandays as per the information
that we have got so far from the States. This is against
86.11 crore mandays, which is what we have given in Outcome
Budget. Therefore, it is definitely at a lower level”.
3.15 When asked about the criteria for allotment of funds to North
Eastern States and Sikkim under SGRY and whether the scheme has
been a success in the North Eastern region and Sikkim, the Department
has informed that atleast 10 per cent of total allocation of funds under
SGRY is earmarked for these States. Funds so earmarked for North
Eastern States are allocated among these States on the basis of
proportion of a rural BPL population in the State to the total BPL
population in the country.
3.16 Implementation status of SGRY Scheme in North Eastern
region varies from State to State. During the year 2004-05, the
performance of Tripura was highest (96.11%) followed by Sikkim
(85.38%), Meghalaya (85.81%) and Manipur(81.21%). During that year,
the performance of Arunachal Pradesh was lowest (34.77%) which was
trailed by Mizoram(58.06%) Assam(72.57%) and Nagaland (73%).
3.17 State-wise physical and financial achievement in case of North
Eastern States and Sikkim since 2002-03 as reflected in the information
furnished (please see Appendix IV) by the Department states as under:—
(Rs. in lakh)    (Mandays in lakh)
Year Central Total funds Expenditure Mandays
Release available reported generated
2002-03 31427.35 58620.19 38520.77 674.58
2003-04 41249.98 73432.126 55159.463 1464.60
2004-05 41074.44 67796.60 39582.64 823.53
*2005-06 55000.00 88201.44 53392.59 785.91
*as reported by the States upto January, 2006.

25
3.18 Further, the physical and financial performance of SGRY
during 2005-06 in the North Eastern States and Sikkim is as under:-
(Rs. in lakh)   (Mandays in lakh)
S.No. States Central Total funds Expenditure* Mandays
Release available reported *generated
1. Arunachal Pradesh 1377.50 2110.02 562.63 9.06
2. Assam 40916.96 68966.84 43761.89 660.87
3. Manipur 2164.50 3055.56 363.69 4.37
4. Meghalaya 2334.13 3016.87 2301.31 27.68
5. Mizoram 748.55 1022.37 615.18 7.66
6. Nagaland 1415.70 1988.75 777.95 9.34
7. Sikkim 828.75 1172.18 1075.62 7.59
8. Tripura 5213.91 6868.85 3933.32 113.34
TOTAL 55000.00 88201.44 53391.59 839.91
*As reported by the States up to January, 2006.
3.19 It emerges from the above statement that out of
Rs. 88,201.44 lakh available for North Eastern States and Sikkim, only
Rs. 53,391.59 lakh could be utilised and only 839.91 lakh mandays
could be generated.
3.20 The Committee note that the physical and financial
performance under the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)
is very poor. As on 31 January, 2006, the Government could utilise
only 54.57 per cent of the allocated outlay for SGRY. Even in regard
to physical achievements, the Government could complete only
55.70 per cent of the works undertaken. Further, it could only generate
66.21 crore mandays whereas the target was 86.11 crore mandays.
The quarter-wise achievements in terms of mandays generated further
indicate shortfall of around 50 per cent during the first quarter and
around 40 per cent during the third quarter. The Committee are not
inclined to accept the reasons put forth by the Department that
utilisation status always runs behind schedule particularly when there
is shortfall in expenditure during 2004-05 when the financial
achievement was 83.42 per cent. Not only that, 11 States/Union
territories could utilize less than 75 per cent of the outlay. There are
huge unspent balances to the time of  Rs. 2,764.36 crore lying with

26
the respective States/Union territory Governments. Around 20 per
cent of the works undertaken during 2004-05 are still incomplete.
Besides, the Committee feel that the plea of late receipt of Utilisation
Certificates cannot be accepted in this era of technological
advancement. The Committee would like to know the State-wise
reasons for under-performance. Besides, the State/Union territories
and implementing agencies should be impressed upon to furnish
the timely Utilisation Certificates. There should also be physical
inspection by Senior Officers of the Ministry to check whether the
works shown by the States in their records, have actually been done/
completed in that particular year. The shortcomings reflected by the
Area Officers during their visits and the corrective action taken by
the Department should be reflected in the Budget documents.
3.21 The Committee further find that 10 per cent of allocation
under different schemes is exclusively earmarked for North-Eastern
Region. The data with regard to physical and financial achievement
under SGRY since 2002-03 indicate that although the position is
improving year after year, still there is huge gap between the total
available funds and the expenditure reported. Around 40 per cent of
the funds are still lying unspent. The position of mandays generated
improved during 2003-04, but there is huge decline in the mandays
generated during 2004-05 and 2005-06. While 1464.60 lakh mandays
were generated during 2003-04, the achievement declined to
Rs. 823.53 lakh during 2004-05 and further to 785.91 lakh during
2005-06. Further the expenditure position during 2004-05 is also worse
as compared to the previous year. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the reasons for shortfall in physical and financial
achievement during 2004-05 and 2005-06 in North-Eastern Region.
The Committee urge the Department to take necessary corrective
action so as to ensure meaningful utilisation of the exclusive outlay
made for these States.
(i) (b) National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP)
3.22 The National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) was
launched in the month of November 2004 in 150 most backward
districts of the country, identified by the Planning Commission in
consultation with the Ministry of Rural Development and the respective
State Governments.
Objective
3.23 The objective of the programme is to provide additional
resources apart from the resources available under the Sampoorna
Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) to 150 most backward districts of the

27
country so that generation of supplementary wage employment and
providing of food security through creation of need based economic,
social and community assets in these districts is further intensified.
Criteria for selection of 150 most backward districts
3.24 For States [other than special category States and States in
the North Eastern (N.E.) region except Assam] most backward Districts
have been chosen on the basis of an exercise undertaken by the
Planning Commission using three parameters, namely (i) agricultural
productivity as per worker, (ii) agricultural wage rate and (iii) SC/ST
population. Same criteria was followed for Assam.
3.25 For the special category States and States in North Eastern
region (except Assam), districts were identified from out of the list
selected under Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY). At least one district
has been selected in each State other than Goa. While selecting these
districts, suggestions received from the State Governments were also
considered.
Funding
3.26 The pr ogramme is being implemented as a 100 per cent
Centrally Sponsored Scheme. Foodgrains are also provided to the States
free of cost. The transportation cost, handling charges, and taxes on
foodgrains are, however, the responsibility of the States.
Focus of the programme
3.27 The programme will focus on water conservation, drought-
proofing and land development as a first priority. Flood control
measures, rural connectivity in terms of all-weather roads and other
productive works for ensuring economic sustainability may also be
included depending upon local needs.
Physical and financial achievement under NFFWP
3.28 The following are the highlights of Demands for Grants with
regard to NFFWP as indicated in the various Budget documents:—
(Rs. in crore)
Unspent balances as on 31.12.2005 1910.73

28
Performance during 2004-05 & 2005-06
(Rs. in crore)
BE 2004-05 2020
Actual expenditure 2019.95
BE 2005-06 6000.00
RE 2005-06 4500.00
Expenditure upto January, 2006 2276.63
Expenditure as reported during 2005-06
upto April, 2006 4454.08
3.29 When asked about the reasons for cut of Rs. 1,500 crore at
RE stage under such an important programme, the Department has
responded that Rs. 1,500 crore was transferred to SGRY to maintain at
least the previous SGRY allocation and thus the Revised Estimates for
NFFWP was Rs. 4,500 crore. The revised allocation was sufficient to
meet NFFWP requirement.
3.30 The detailed financial and physical achievement during
2004-05 is as given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Allocation 2019.00
Releases 2019.45
Utilisation 569.73
Percentage of utilisation 28.21 per cent
Percentage of SC beneficiaries 27.87 per cent
Percentage of ST beneficiaries 40.35 per cent
Women 34.23 per cent
Total works 73183
Works completed 18130
3.31 During 2005-06, total availability of funds (as on 31 January,
2006) was Rs. 4971.46 crore. Other details are as given below:—
Expenditure 1472.88
Percentage of utilisation 29.63 per cent
Total works 199276
Works completed 118221
Percentage of SC beneficiaries 26.94 per cent
Percentage of ST beneficiaries 37.23 per cent
Percentage of woman beneficiaries 32.04 per cent

29
3.32 When asked for the reasons for not being able to utilize even
Rs. 4,500 crore during 2004-05, the Department has stated that NFFWP
was a new programme launched in November 2004, and States had to
provide for technical and administrative manpower to absorb huge
additional resources which takes time.
3.33 As per the information furnished by the Ministry during the
course of oral evidence on 12 April, 2006, the highlights of NFFWP
during 2005-06 are as follows:—
Allocation : Rs. 4500 crore
Release : Rs. 4450.85 crore
Total available funds : Rs. 5800.63 crore
Expenditure (as on Feb. 06) : Rs. 1944.31 crore
Foodgrains authorized : 11.85 lakh mts
Foodgrains distributed (Feb.06) : 10.53 lakh mts
Mandays generated (Feb. 06) : 25.00 crore
SC/ST mandays (64 per cent) : 16.09 crore
Women days (32 per cent) : 7.93 crore
3.34 Further the gap in booking of expenditure, execution of work
and reporting of expenditure has been cited as the reasons for huge
under-spending under the programme.
3.35 National Food for Work Programme is a preparatory
programme which will pave the way for the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme. Initially, National Food for Work
Programme was started in 150 districts which have now been converted
into National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. When asked about
the fate of the ongoing schemes under NFFWP as the programme has
been subsumed with NREGA, the Department has stated that the State
Governments have been requested to complete all ongoing works under
NFFWP latest by 30 June, 2006. Such works can be completed under
NREGA also because nature of works permissible under NFFWP and
NREGA is similar.
3.36 The Committee are concerned to note the poor performance
of a very important programme of the Department i.e. ‘National Food
for Work Programme’ which has now been converted into ‘National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme’. Not only that, the utilisation
of outlay is dismal i.e. 28.21 per cent during 2004-05 and 32.21 per cent

30
during 2005-06 (as on 31 January, 2006). Even if the latest data is
taken into account, the percentage of expenditure to total available
funds is almost one-third. Out of total available funds of Rs. 5,800 crore,
expenditure reported as on February, 2006 is Rs. 1,944.31 crore. Not
only that a large number of works taken up under the programme
are still to be completed. In this scenario, the Committee express
their apprehension about the success of the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme which is the top most priority
programme of the Government. The Committee strongly recommend
to the Government to plug the loopholes which resulted into poor
implementation of National Food for Work Programme and take
stringent measures to ensure that the objectives of National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act are met.
3.37 The Committee further find that National Food for Work
Programme initially started in 150 districts has now been subsumed
into National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. They also note
that during 2004-05 out of 73,183 number of total works undertaken,
18,130 works could actually be completed. Similarly, during 2005-06
out of total works of 1,80,396, actually 1,03,625 works were completed.
Besides as on 31 December, 2005, an amount of Rs. 1,910.73 crore
was lying as unspent balances under the programme. The Committee
also note that as per the information provided by the Department,
State Governments have been directed to complete all ongoing works
under NFFWP latest by 30 June, 2006. Instructions have also been
issued whereby the works can be completed under NREGA. The
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to monitor the status of
the incomplete works taken under NFFWP . Besides the monitoring
of the position of utilisation of huge unspent balances is urgently
required. The Committee would like the Department to pursue with
the State/UT Governments and a strict monitoring of the programme
should be done. The Committee should also be kept apprised in
this regard.
3.38 The Committee further find that during 2005-06 at the
Budget Estimates stage, Rs. 6,000 crore was provided under National
Food for Work Programme. At Revised Estimates stage, a cut of
Rs. 1,500 crore was imposed thereby reducing the allocation to
Rs. 4,500 crore. They also find from the position indicated by the
Department that Rs. 1,500 crore were transferred from NFFWP to
SGRY to maintain at least the previous SGRY allocation. Further the
Department has also acknowledged that the revised allocation was
sufficient to meet NFFWP requirement. The Committee are surprised
at the statement given by the Department whereby the estimated

31
outlay indicated at the Budget Estimates stage when reduced
substantially has been found to be sufficient to meet the requirement
of a programme. The Committee, therefore, conclude that the
implementation of the programme was very poor whereby the part
of the allocation made under NFFWP was transferred to another
programme. What is worse, even the reduced allocation could not
be utilised and the implementation of the programme was quite
poor during the year 2005-06 as indicated in the preceding paras of
the Report. The Committee deplore the tendency of the Government
whereby the allocation made under a programme at Budget Estimates
stage is transferred to another scheme at Revised Estimates stage.
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that efforts should be
made for meaningful utilisation of the allocated resources in a year.
3.39 The Committee further find that in the districts not covered
by National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, the employment
generation scheme SGRY would be applicable till the Guarantee
Scheme is made applicable in all the districts of the country. In
view of this position, the Committee would like that adequate
allocation under SGRY should be made so that the districts where
NREGA Scheme is not being applicable are not deprived of the
allocation made under an old programme of employment generation
i.e. SGRY.
3.40 Detailed statement showing the State-wise financial
performance as on 31.1.2006 during 2005-2006 is given at Appendix-V.
(i) (c) National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA)
3.41 The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004 was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2004 and was referred to
the Standing Committee on Rural Development by the Hon’ble Speaker,
Lok Sabha under Rule 331 E (1) (b) of the ‘Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’ on 23 December, 2004 for
examination and report. The Committee accordingly examined the
aforesaid Bill after taking into consideration the views expressed by
the experts, representatives of organizations and public at large, various
States and UT Governments and the concerned Ministries of the Union
Government. The report on the aforesaid Bill was presented to
Parliament on 27 July, 2005. The Bill was considered by the Parliament
and many of the recommendations made in the aforesaid report were
considered and agreed to by the Government. Some of the
recommendations were agreed to during consideration of the Bill in
both the Houses of Parliament.

32
3.42 The aforesaid Bill was passed by Lok Sabha on 23 August,
2005 and on 24 August, 2005 by Rajya Sabha and enacted on
5 September, 2005. The notification in this regard was issued on
2 February, 2006. As per clause 4(10) of the Act, every State Government
shall, within six months from date of commencement of the Act, by
notification, make a scheme for providing not less than one hundred
days of guaranteed employment in a financial year. Accordingly, seven
States have already notified these schemes.
3.43 During 2006-07 a provision of Rs. 11,300 crore has been made
under the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act.
3.44 The Act gives legal guarantee of a hundred days of wage
employment in a financial year to adult members of a rural household
who demand employment and are willing to do unskilled manual
work.
Objective
3.45 The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act aims to
enhance the livelihood security of the people in rural areas by
generating wage employment through works that develop the
infrastructure base of that area. The choice of works suggested
addresses causes of chronic poverty like drought, deforestation and
soil erosion.
Coverage
3.46 The Act will be applicable to areas notified by the Central
Government and will cover the whole country within five years. In
the first phase it has been made operational in 200 districts across the
country w.e.f. 2nd February, 2006, out of which 150 are those where
National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) was in existence and
50 new districts have been identified by the Planning Commission for
coverage under NREGA.
3.47 The salient features of NREGA and the implementation format
are as follows:
* Employment to be provided to every rural household whose
adult member volunteers to do unskilled manual work.
* Household means a nuclear family comprising mother,
father, their children and may include any person wholly
or substantially dependent on the head of the family.
Household may also comprise a single member family.

33
* Such household is to be provided work for 100 days in a
financial year.
* This is a demand based programme and demand emanating
from the village through the Gram Sabha.
* Every person who has done the work to be provided
minimum wages as prescribed under the Minimum Wages
Act, 1948 for agricultural labourers in the State. And such
wages shall not be less than sixty Rupees per day.
* Disbursement of wages to be done on weekly basis but not
beyond a fortnight.
* Under Section 4 of the Act every State to formulate the
State’s Employment Guarantee Scheme to give effect to the
provisions of the NREGA.
* Each employment seeker to be registered by Gram Panchayat
after due verification and the household to be provided a
Job Card.
* Employment will be given within 15 days of application
for work by an employment seeker.
* If Employment is not provided within 15 days, daily
unemployment, in cash has to be paid. The legal liability to
provide employment is of the States and liability to provide
commensurate funds is of the Centre.
*A  new work to be commenced if at least 50 labourers
become available for work.
* At least one third beneficiaries have to be women.
* Gram Sabha to recommend works. Panchayat Raj Institutions
(PRIs) have a principal role in planning and implementation.
* Gram Panchayats to execute at least 50 per cent of works.
* Gram Panchayat is responsible for planning, registering,
issuing Job Cards to beneficiaries, allocating employment
and monitoring of works.
Financial requirement
3.48 As per information provided by the Ministry, an amount of
Rs. 405 crore has been released to all the 200 districts for making
preparatory arrangements for smooth launch of NREGA. It includes
Rs. 267.50 crore to the new 50 districts @ Rs. 5 crore to open up
works, Rs. 10 lakh for Perspective Plan and Rs. 25 lakh for printing

34
of necessary documents like job cards, Application forms and various
registers to each of the 50 districts. Rs. 25 lakh each for printing of
necessary document have also been given to 150 NFFWP Districts.
20 districts of Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan have been given
@ Rs. 5 crore each as additional installment based on their request.
3.49 Apart from the above, Rs. 1,084.99 crore has been released as
initial installment under the NREGA out of NFFWP allocation which
will be utilised only for opening up of new works for providing wage
employment guarantee. Any further releases out of the NFFWP
allocation will be part of NREGA this year.
3.50 The funding pattern under NREGA between the Centre and
State is as under:-
(i) Central Government shall meet the following costs :
(a) Amount required for payment of wages for unskilled
manual workers.
(b) 75 per cent of the cost of material and wages for skilled
and semi-skilled workers.
(c) The administrative expenses as may be determined by
the Central Government. These will include, inter alia ,
the salary and allowances of Programme Officers and
their support staff and work site facilities.
(d) Administrative expenses of the Central employment
Guarantee Council.
(ii) The State Government will bear the following costs:
(a) 25 per cent of the cost of material and wages for skilled
and semi-skilled workers.
(b) Unemployment allowance payable in case the State
Government cannot provide wage employment within
15 days of application.
(c) Administrative expenses of the State Employment
Guarantee Council.
3.51 Central Government will be able to monitor the allocation
made by the State Government in a financial year at the time of
release of second installment of funds in the next financial year.
3.52 When asked how the Department would ensure the success
of the of programme particularly looking into not so satisfactory

35
performance of SGRY, the Secretary during the courser of oral evidence
stated as under:—
“……the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act is a statutory
entitlement which has been given to the people in the rural areas.
So, in this case, there is a legal binding. The authority concerned
will have to provide unemployment allowance if job is not
provided. This is one of the main statutory requirements under
the NREG Scheme. As you are aware of the field conditions, I
would submit that this is not a very easy or simple statute to
implement. It has been introduced after a great deal of
consultation and interaction with people, with the Panchayati Raj
Institutions, with the participatory mechanisms, with the NGOs
and other people also. In the NREG Scheme, we have tried to
introduce some mechanisms which will, we hope, ensure that
everybody who demands work is in a position to get it. What
we have made, the way the act is drafted is that we will have
to seek the demand for employment. We have tried to give
maximum possible publicity so that all the people who are likely
to require employment can first register themselves and get the
job cards. That is the first stage. We have made great efforts to
ensure that the registration takes place well in all the States.”
State-wise status of implementation of the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme
3.53 As per the information given by the Ministry, the following
are the major achievements. The data has been furnished with regard
to 182 districts in 18 States.
Application received for registration 22492402
Job cards issued 8282248
Applications received demanding employment 660552
Employment offered 614836
Number of works
Old 21764
New 2592
3.54 The State-wise analysis indicate that out of 18 States in case
of which the implementation status has been indicated, Arunachal
Pradesh and Kerala have not furnished the information with regard to
job cards issued, demand of application and employment offered.

36
Besides, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have not indicated the data with regard
to demand of application and employment offered. A good number of
job cards have been issued in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Rajasthan and West Bengal. There is vast difference between
the job cards issued and employment demand by way of applications
from the intended beneficiaries. As per the information provided by
the Department at present 2.24 crore people have registered. In case
the programme is implemented well there may be demand for
employment from the 200 districts covered under the scheme. On the
question of adequacy of Rs. 11,300 crore as provided during 2006-07,
the Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated as under:—
“Our own projection, which we made, is that with this Rs. 11,300
crore, we can give 100 days of guaranteed wage employment
only to 1.16 crore households. We have made the assessment
also. But this Rs. 11,300 crore budget provision has been made
with the full knowledge that if there is a demand, we will
definitely get further money in the supplementary. It is an Act.
The money will have to be found.”
3.55 The Committee reiterate the importance of the National
Rural Employment Guarantee Legislation as indicated in their
Thirteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) whereby it had been
observed that the National Rural Employment Guarantee legislation
is one of the most important legislations introduced in Parliament
after Independence and it is the first step of the Government towards
ensuring some sort of economic and social security by way of
guaranteed wage employment to the millions of poor in rural areas
in the country. The Committee, while noting that only two months
have passed since the legislation was enacted, feel that it is too
early to draw any conclusions about the success of the Guarantee
Scheme. The initial data of implementation provided by the
Department indicate that whereas in some of the States viz, Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and West Bengal,
a good number of applications have been received, in Haryana and
Karnataka, the number of applications received is quite less. The
Committee also find that the number of applications received is
quite dismal with reference to the number of districts covered in a
particular State. The highest number of districts covered are in Bihar
i.e. 23, followed by Uttar Pradesh i.e. 22. The data with regard to
applications as received in both the States is quite comparable.
Performance-wise, Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh which have

37
13 and 18 districts respectively covered under the scheme have
comparatively received almost three times the applications as received
by Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee would like the
Department to find out the reasons why lesser number of applications
have been received in these States where the poverty index may be
quite high as compared to Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh
and apprise the Committee accordingly. Further, the Committee note
that there is vast difference between applications registered, job cards
issued and employment offered. Out of 2.24 crore applications
received, job cards have been issued to around 83 lakhs applicants.
Further there is a huge gap between job cards issued and
employment demand and employment offered. Out of 83 lakh job
cards issued, employment was offered to only 6,14,838 workers which
is a very sorry state of affairs. The Committee would like to urge
the Department to analyse the aforesaid data critically and take
corrective action, so that the ambitious programme is implemented
with full vigour and the benefits reach to the intended beneficiaries.
For this, the Government has to undertake effective long term
planning, provide the necessary ground training to implementing
agencies, identify the work timely, create the necessary demand for
work and ensure timely employment to the job seekers for the
specified period. Since the legal responsibility of providing
employment rests primarily with the State Governments and the
responsibility of providing commensurate funds rests primarily with
the Central Government, the Government should ensure that the
NREGA does not become a liability if it is unable to generate
adequate employment commensurate to the demand. The Department
should maintain the district-wise data with regard to implementation
of NREGA and it should be put on the website so that public can
have access to the data and be aware of the implementation status.
Payment of Unemployment Allowance under the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act
3.56 As per the provisions made under the aforesaid Act after
registration, the registered person can apply for work which is to be
provided within 15 days of the date of demand or the date from
which the work is requested. The entitlement for unemployment
allowance will start only after the authorities fail to provide work as
requested above.
3.57 As per the data furnished by the Department as given in the
preceding para of the report, there is a huge difference between the
job cards issued, applications received and employment offered. Out

38
of 8,28,2248 job cards issued, employment demand was for 6,60,552
out of which 6,14,836 workers were offered employment. When asked
whether the Department is aware of unemployment allowance provided
since inception of the scheme in any State, the Department has stated
that no report from any of the State of any case of unemployment
allowance has been received so far.
3.58 The Committee find that the provision of unemployment
allowance under the Guarantee Scheme is the legal right of a person
who has been issued a job card. The huge difference between the
employment demand and employment offered is a matter of concern.
Besides the expenditure with regard to unemployment allowance has
to be borne by the State Governments as per the provisions made
under the legislation. In view of this scenario, it will be a huge
burden on the State exchequer if the job opportunities are not created
by way of initiating the admissible projects/schemes in a specific
area. The Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Government to keep a watch on the data and take the necessary
action to bridge the gap between the job cards issued, demand for
employment and employment offered so as to avoid unnecessary
litigation.
Parameters for selection of districts under NREGA
3.59 As per the information provided by the Department, 200
districts have been covered under the NREGA. Statement indicating
the name of 150 districts which were earlier covered under NFFWP
and now converted into NREGA and a list of additional 50 districts
identified by the Planning Commission for coverage under NREGA
have been given at Appendix VI and VII  respectively. As regards the
criteria for selection of districts, the Department has informed that 200
districts identified for coverage under NREGA in the first phase include
150 districts which had been earlier identified for NFFWP and 50 new
districts. These 150 districts were selected on the basis of a exercise
conducted by Planning Commission on the basis of three parameters
SC/ST population, inverse of agricultural productivity per worker and
inverse of agricultural wage rate. At least, one district was chosen in
each State except Goa. For North Eastern States except Assam for
which data on the parameters was not available, districts were selected
out of RSVY districts. Out of 50 new districts, 45 districts are those
districts which were covered under Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY)
but not included in NFFWP . Thus all districts under RSVY have now
been included in NREGA. Five more districts have been identified by
the Planning Commission to assess the impact of the programme in
certain specific backgrounds.

39
3.60 The Committee in their Thirteenth Report on the National
Rural Employment Guarantee Bill 2004 had recommended for time-
bound extension of the legislation to the country as a whole. The
Committee had recommended that the legislation should be extended
to the rural areas in whole of the country within four years. While
accepting the amendment proposed by the Committee the provision
for time bound extension has been made as per Section 13 of the
NREGA, 2005 whereby it has been provided that the Act shall be
applicable to the whole of the territory to which it extends within a
period of five years from the date of enactment of the Act. When
asked whether the Department has prepared an action plan covering
the name of the districts which may be covered during a period of
five years, the Department has informed that no such plan has yet
been prepared. It has also been stated that the Ministry would be
watching the performance of the Act for sometime as the Act had
come in force in districts selected for first phase recently.
3.61 The Committee are concerned to note the vague reply of
the Department on such a serious issue of preparation of action
plan to cover all the districts under the provision of NREGA. Instead
of taking immediate action in this regard, it has been stated that the
performance of the Act would be watched. The Committee note that
the guarantee of 100 days of wage employment to each household
in rural areas in the country has been provided under the enactment
and further under the provisions of the Act it has been specifically
mentioned that the guarantee shall be applicable to the whole of
the rural areas in the country within a period of five years from the
date of enactment of the Act and as such there is no scope for
delaying the implementation of the Act. The Committee are of the
firm opinion that an action plan for coverage should be prepared by
the Department and transparency in this regard should be maintained
so that the part of the country where the Guarantee Scheme at
present is not applicable can be reassured about the applicability of
the legislation in the near future.
According priority to coverage of areas covered under Fifth and Sixth
Schedule
3.62 The Committee in their Thirteenth Report on National Rural
Employment Guarantee legislation had recommended that in view of
the fact that the Schedule Fifth and Sixth areas in the country are the
most backward and the people residing there are the poorest, these
areas should be included in the first phase of implementation of
Employment Guarantee legislation. As per the list furnished by the

40
Department only 67 districts falling under the Fifth and Sixth Schedule
areas in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Orissa,
Rajasthan, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Gujarat
and Madhya Pradesh have been covered in the first phase of
implementation of NREGA. When asked about the total number of
districts falling in Fifth and Sixth Schedule areas, the Department has
furnished a list of tribes or tribal communities predominant in Schedule
Fifth and Schedule Sixth areas.
3.63 The Committee find that in the absence of information with
regard to total area (districts/blocks) falling under Schedule Fifth
and Schedule Sixth areas in the country, it is difficult to draw any
conclusion on the issue of according priority to such areas in the
country. In view of the aforesaid position, the Committee would
like to be apprised of the total area (districts/blocks) in each State
in Schedule Fifth and Schedule Sixth areas and the areas covered by
the NREGA so far so as to draw any meaningful conclusion and
recommend further in this regard. The Committee would like that
the information in this regard should be furnished separately for
Schedule Fifth and Schedule Sixth areas.
Capacity Building of Panchayats
3.64 As per Section 16 (5) of the said Act, at least 50 per cent of
the works in terms of its cost under a scheme shall be implemented
through the Gram Panchayats. When asked about the steps taken for
the capacity building of Panchayats, the Department has informed that
training of Panchayat level functionaries is being arranged by States.
NIRD, Hyderabad has conducted two Training of Trainers courses in
February. Rs. 74.00 lakhs have been sanctioned to States for training of
key functionaries to act as resources persons for training at lower
levels. The States have also been asked to provide an NREG assistant
to each Panchayat and charge expenditure to Administrative expense
allowed under the Act. Further when asked how the Department would
monitor the position of implementation through Gram Panchayats, it
has been stated that an MIS is under finalization, it will have a
provision to monitor works done by each implementing agency
including Panchayat.
3.65 The Committee note that handling of such a voluminous
work related to implementation of 50 per cent of the Employment
Guarantee Scheme by Panchayati Raj Institutions is a huge challenge.
The capacity building of the Panchayats by way of empowering
these institutions through funds and functionaries is the prerequisite

41
to ensure the success of the programme. Conducting a few
programmes by NIRD is not sufficient. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to take the desired action in
coordination with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for empowering
the Panchayats so as to enable these institutions to take the
responsibility of implementation of a scheme of this level.
Payment for foodgrains under NREGA
3.66 As per para 13 of Schedule 2 of the Act, the wages under a
scheme may be paid either wholly or in cash and kind provided that
at least 1/4th of the wage would be paid in cash only. When asked
about the parameters for procurement and distribution of foodgrains
as foodgrain is a mandatory component of NREGA, the Department
has informed that only cash resources are being provided under the
Act.
3.67 The Committee find from the reply of the Department that
no attention has been paid to ensure the distribution of foodgrains
under the Guarantee Scheme whereas 75 per cent of the wages under
the scheme can be paid by way of foodgrains. It has simply been
stated that only cash resources would be provided to the State
Governments. The Committee would like the Department to clarify
further whether the procurement and distribution of foodgrains will
be the sole responsibility of the State Governments and what will
be role of the undertakings involved in foodgrains like Food
Corporation of India (FCI) so as to enable the Committee to
recommend further in this regard.
Preparation for implementation of Employment Guarantee Scheme
3.68 As per the provision made under the Act, every State
Government shall within six months from the date of commencement
of the Act, by notification make a scheme under NREGA. Seven States
have already notified these schemes. The time of six months w.e.f.
2 February, 2006 i.e. up to 2 August, 2006 would be available with
States in this regard. Certain implementation and monitoring authorities
like Central Employment Council, State Employment Guarantee Council
have to be constituted for the implementation of the provisions of the
Bill. As regards the Central agencies the Department has informed
that draft rules of the Council have been framed and notified in the
official gazette on 23 March, 2006 for inviting objections. As regards
the constitution of State Employment Guarantee Council, no State
Government has yet reported the constitution of the State Council.
With regard to appointment of Programme Officer States have been
asked by the Department to take the necessary action.

42
3.69 The Committee while noting that only seven States only
have so far notified Guarantee Scheme under NREGA, urge the
Department to pursue with the State Governments for an early
notification of the Scheme.
3.70 Further, the Committee find that a detailed implementing
and monitoring mechanism as proposed under the provisions of the
Guarantee Act has to be created to ensure the successful
implementation of the Guarantee Scheme. The Committee note with
concern that State Governments have not yet initiated action in this
regard. In view of this scenario, the Committee strongly recommend
to the Department to pursue with the State Governments for
appointment of different agencies to ensure the success of the
programme. In the absence of the desired mechanism as provided in
the provisions made under the Act, the Committee have their
apprehensions that the Guarantee Scheme may meet the fate of the
other Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Department.
(ii)  Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY):
3.71 Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), a holistic
programme of self-employment, was launched w.e.f. 1 April, 1999
following restructuring of the erstwhile Integrated Rural Development
Programme (IRDP), Training of Rural Youth for Self Employment
(TRYSEM), Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas
(DWCRA), Supply of Improved Tool Kits to Rural Artisans (SITRA)
and Ganga Kalyan Yojana (GKY).
Funding Pattern
3.72 As provided in the Scheme, the funding pattern is:
Central Allocation — 75 per cent,
State Allocation — 25 per cent, and
Union territory Allocation — 100 per cent by Centre.
Objective
3.73 The objective of the SGSY is to bring the assisted poor families
(Swarozgaris) above the poverty line by organizing them into Self
Help Groups (SHGs) through the process of social mobilisation, training,
capacity building and provision of income-generating assets through a
mix of bank credit and Government subsidy.

43
Subsidy to individuals and Self Help Groups (SHGs)
3.74 Assistance under SGSY, to individual Swarozgaries or Self
Help Groups (SHGs), is given in the form of subsidy by the
Government and credit by the Banks. There is no monetary limit on
subsidy for irrigation projects. The subsidy is back ended. Cooperative
Banks, Regional-Rural Banks and Commercial Banks and some of the
Banks in the private sector disburse the loan and subsidy under the
scheme.
Subsidy for Individuals
3.75 An individual is provided a subsidy @ 30 per cent of the
project cost subject to a maximum of Rs.7,500. In respect of SCs/STs/
disabled persons, the subsidy is 50 per cent of the project cost upto
a maximum of Rs. 10,000.
Subsidy for Self Help Groups (SHGs)
3.76 Under the Scheme, 50 per cent of the project cost can be
given as subsidy to SHGs subject to per capita subsidy of Rs.10,000 or
Rs.1.25 lakh, whichever is less.
Implementation
3.77 The Scheme is implemented through District Rural
Development Agencies (DRDAs) in various States with active
involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions, Banks, line departments
and the Non-Government Organisations.
3.78 As per the detailed Demands for Grants 2006-2007, under
SGSY Rs. 1080 crore Central share have been allocated and Rs. 120
crore have been kept in the North Eastern region pool. Therefore the
BE 2006-2007 of SGSY is Rs. 1,200 crore.
3.79 As per the Performance Budget, under the Scheme, State and
Union territory-wise credit target is fixed under the Scheme. When
asked about what has been done specifically during 2005-2006 to
increase the achievement of credit target, the Department has stated
that a meeting was held on 19 March 2006 in Mumbai under the
Chairmanship of Deputy Governor, RBI with Chairman and Managing
Directors of Commercial Banks in which performance of Banks involved
under SGSY was evaluated. The issue was also discussed during the
meeting of the Central Level Coordination Committee held on

44
22 November, 2005 which was attended by representatives from State
Governments and various Banks. The Governor, Reserve Bank of India
has also been requested to convene a special meeting of all CMDs of
the Commercial Banks in Mumbai to discuss issues like flow of credit
under SGSY and poor lending by various Bank Branches. Further,
when asked about the taken to motivate Banks to improve the lending
for SGSY, the Department have stated that RBI has been requested to
closely monitor the performance of the Banks to ensure that the targeted
level of credited is actually released. The Reserve Bank of India has
been entrusted with the responsibility to coordinate and motivate Banks
on all issues relating to SGSY. Further, with regard to the rate of
rejection of applications by Banks, the Department has stated that the
rate of rejection of application by Banks during the year 2004-05 and
2005-06 was 37.56 per cent and 42.91 per cent, respectively.
3.80 The Committee are perturbed to note the poor lending rate
by Banks. During 2004-05, applications at the rate of four out of
every ten applicant were rejected. The rejection rate has further
increased to about five persons out of every ten applicants. This
inter-alia means that over fifty per cent of the needy are unable to
take benefit under SGSY due to some reason or other. The Committee
observe that this is a disturbing trend and would ultimately lead to
collapse of the scheme. The Department cannot wash away its hands
simply by shifting its responsibility on Reserve Bank of India which
is entrusted with the responsibility to coordinate and motivate Banks
on all issues relating to SGSY. The Department needs to resolve all
the issues pertaining to poor lending rate by taking the matter at
the highest level in the Reserve Bank of India, Finance Ministry
and the Chief of leading Banks. The Committee are of the view that
applicant approach the Banks with great hope and expectations and
they feel let down when their applications are rejected on flimsy
grounds or due to cumbersome procedure. The Committee, therefore,
suggest that the procedure for lending under SGSY be simplified
and paper work should be reduced so that people are not
unnecessarily harassed. Help counters may be opened either at the
Bank or DRDA Office to assist the illiterate applicant in filling up
the forms, explaining them the highlights of the scheme, the liability
of the applicant, the procedure for taking the benefit under the
scheme etc. Further, the role of DRDAs and Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs) should be strengthened for effective coordination
between them and the Banks so that the needy applicants are not
unnecessarily turned away by Banks.

45
The State and Union territory-wise Physical and Financial
Performance of SGSY during 2005-06
3.81 As per Para 3.28 of the SGSY guidelines, the SC/STs will
account for a minimum of 50 per cent, women for 40 per cent and
disabled for 3 per cent of the total Swarozgaris assisted during a year.
3.82 As per information furnished by the Department, as on
31 January, 2006, the physical performance of SGSY (during 2005-2006)
except in few States like Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Punjab, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh,
West Bengal, Orissa, Sikkim and some North-Eastern States like
Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Tripura, Meghalaya and Lakshadweep,
Pondicherry, the percentage SC/ST of Swarozgaris assisted under SGSY
is dismal and well below the marked target of 50 per cent. Even in
the handicap category, except for Manipur and Tamil Nadu. The
percentage of Swarozgaris assisted upto 31 January, 2006 is well below
the targeted 3 per cent.
3.83 When asked as to whether the physical targets fixed for
2005-06 will be achieved the Department has stated that the most
recent data available with the Government of India upto February,
2006 indicates that the total no. of SHGs assisted was 6,26,444 against
a target of 5,28,757. So, the target for the year 2005-2006 has been
achieved. However, the number of individuals Swarojgaris assisted till
February, 2006 was 2,06,783 against a target of 3,30,473, a shortfall of
43.13 per cent. It needs to be stated that accurate position will emerge
only after the figures from all the State Governments become available
and by including the figures for the month of March, 2006 as well.
3.84 As per information furnished by the Department, as on
31 January, 2006, the financial performance of SGSY (during 2005-2006)
shows that credit of Rs.90,606.16 lakh could only be disbursed against
a target of Rs.2,51,565.47 lakh.
3.85 Seven States and four Union territories viz. Arunachal Pradesh,
Bihar, Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya, Punjab, Rajasthan, Andaman &
Nicobar Islands, Daman and Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep
have less than 75 per cent utilization of funds. Financial achievements
of eight States and five Union territories viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, West Bengal,
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Daman and Diu, Dadara & Nagar Haveli,
Lakshadweep, Pondicherry have less than 50 per cent credit
disbursement achievement. During 2005-2006, in almost all the States
excepting Gujarat, Punjab less than 75 per cent is the rate of utilisation

46
whereas overall percentage utilization is 55.36 percent. The overall credit
disbursement is 36.02 percent only.
3.86 When asked the reasons for shortfall in achievement of credit
target, the Department has stated that achievement of credit target
under SGSY has improved over a period of time. However, shortfall
in the achievement of the credit targets is attributable to poor lending
by Banks to the SHGs. When asked the steps taken to motivate Banks
to improve the lending for SGSY, the Department has stated that RBI
has been requested to closely monitor the performance of Banks to
ensure that the target is actually released. The Reserve Bank of India
has been entrusted with the responsibility to coordinate and motivate
Banks on all issues relating to SGSY.
3.87 Further, when asked about the reasons for dismal financial
performance in the aforesaid States/Union territories, the Ministry have
stated that the position relating to the year 2005-2006 is still dynamic.
Information available with the Government of India till February 2006,
indicates that out of the total available funds of Rs. 1,44,525 lakh, the
fund utilisation position is Rs. 99,073 lakh only. This works out to
68.55 percent of the total available funds (there are some States from
which the MPRs for the month of February are yet to be received).
The position is expected to improve further during the last month of
the financial year. Some of the causes as ascertained during the
Concurrent Evaluation for the under utilization of funds under SGSY
are:—
• Delay in sanction of loans/indifferent attitude of banks/
financial institutions,
• Difficulties in the formation of SHGs,
• Inadequate Infrastructure,
• Fewer number of applicants than anticipated, and
•P roblems in identifying projects.
3.88 The Committee are concerned to note that the physical
targets meant for disadvantaged groups like SC/ST and handicap
category have not been met satisfactorily. While some States have
fared well, the figures indicate that the SC/ST Swarozgaris assisted
in more than 13 States and Union territories are less than fifty per
cent. Further, the statement indicates that except in T amil Nadu and
Manipur the percentage of handicap Swarozgaris assisted is less than
the three per cent target. On an average, by the end of February
2006, only 43.13 percent of the targeted Swarozgaris could be assisted

47
which also highlights the poor performance of the scheme. Further,
the Committee note that the utilization of funds by many States is
very poor. While more than 13 States have disbursed less than
50 per cent of the credit marked for them, the Committee note that
the overall percentage of credit disbursed is only 36.02 per cent. The
Committee observe that the poor performance could be attributed to
the slack attention paid by the Government. Something is lacking
due to which the Government has failed to attract the targeted
number of Swarozgaris. The DRDAs/Zilla Parishads are also not
trained enough to meet their objectives. As revealed by the
Concurrent Evaluation, the scheme is facing a lot of problems which
include indifferent attitude of Banks, inadequate infrastructure,
problems in identifying projects etc. There is an urgent need to
address all these issues to ensure the success of the programme. The
Committee would like the Department to look into the matter and
take remedial action in consultation with State Governments, Banks,
DRDAs and all other concerned.
Role of Private Banks under SGSY
3.89 As per SGSY guidelines Banks are involved closely in planning
and preparation of projects, identification of activity clusters,
infrastructure planning as well as capacity building and choice of
activity of SHGs, selection of individual Swarozgaris, pre-credit activity
and post credit monitoring including loan recovery. Among Banks,
Public Sector Commercial Banks, Cooperative Banks, Regional Rural
Banks, Private Banks are involved in the implementation of SGSY . The
Committee were informed that the following Private Sector Banks are
involved in the implementation of SGSY:
Sl. No.     Name of the private sector bank
12
1. ICICI Bank
2. Bank of Rajasthan
3. Bharat Overseas Bank Ltd.
4. Banares State Bank Ltd.
5. Chathelic Syrian Bank Ltd.
6. Dhanlakshmi Bank Ltd.
7. Federal Bank Ltd.

48
 12
 8. J & K Bank Ltd.
 9. Karnataka Bank Ltd.
10. Karur Vysya Bank Ltd.
11. Lakshmi Vilas Bank Ltd.
12. Nedungadi Bank Ltd.
13. Ratnakar Bank Ltd.
14. Sangli Bank Ltd.
15. South Indian Bank Ltd.
16. Tamil Nadu Mer. Bank Ltd.
17. United Western Bank Ltd.
18. Vysya Bank Ltd.
19. Nainital Bank Ltd.
20. City Union Bank Ltd.
21. Lord Krishna Bank Ltd.
3.90 The Committee note that in addition to the Public Sector
Commercial Banks, Cooperative Banks, Regional Rural Banks, some
Private Sector Banks are also being involved in the implementation
of SGSY. The Committee would, therefore, like to know the
performance of various Private Sector Banks vis-a-vis the Public
Sector Banks, Cooperative Banks and Regional Rural Banks in term
of the credit target vis-à-vis achievement in each year since these
Banks were involved to analyse the role of Private Sector Banks
critically and comment further in this regard. The information with
regard to total number of beneficiaries assisted and the total credit
made available in each year, and the average benefit made available
to each beneficiary in each case of Commercial Banks, Cooperative
Banks, Regional Rural Banks and Private Sector Banks may be
provided for the information of the Committee.
(iii)  Rural Housing (Indira Awaas Yojana)
3.91 The Government of India is implementing Indira Awaas Yojana
(IAY) since the year 1985-86 to provide assistance for construction/
upgradation of dwelling units to Below Poverty Line (BPL) rural
households belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and

49
freed bonded labourers categories. From the year 1993-94, the scope of
the IAY was extended to cover below the poverty line Non-Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes families in the rural areas. Simultaneously,
the allocation of funds for implementing the scheme was raised from
6 percent to 10 percent of the total resources available under the JRY
at the national level, subject to the condition that the funds going to
SC/ST poor should not be less than 6 per cent of the total JRY
allocation. The IAY was de-linked from JRY and made an independent
scheme with effect from 1 January , 1996. Now, out of the total
allocation, a minimum of 60 per cent has to be spent on SC/ST BPL
families. Expenditure under the Scheme on other eligible BPL families
cannot exceed 40 per cent. IAY became an independent Scheme w.e.f.
1 January, 1996.
3.92 Rural Housing is one of the six components of the ambitious
programme of the Government ‘Bharat Nirman’. Under ‘Bharat Nirman’
sixty lakh houses are likely to be constructed during the next four
years starting from 2005-06.
3.93 The funding for IAY is shared between the Centre and State
in the ratio of 75:25. From 2005-2006 onwards, the allocation criteria
has been modified to assign 75 per cent weightage to housing shortage
and 25 per cent to poverty ratio for State level allocation. Further, the
allocation amongst districts is carried out giving 75 per cent weightage
to housing shortage and 25 per cent weightage to SC/ST component.
This criteria modification is aimed at addressing the acute problem of
shelterlessness in a given time frame.
3.94 Other small sub-Schemes of IAY such as Innovative Stream
for Rural Housing and Habitat Development, Rural Building Centres
(RBCs) and Samgra Awas Yojana (SAY) etc. have been discontinued
w.e.f. 1 April, 2004 so that maximum funds can be spent on providing
IAY houses to the rural poor.
3.95 With effect from 1 April, 2004 the ceiling of assistance for
construction of a house under IAY is as under:
Plain Areas Hilly/Difficult
Areas
Construction of house including sanitary Rs. 25,000 Rs. 27,500
latrine and smokeless chulah
Upgradation of un-serviceable houses      Rs. 12,500

50
3.96 In the financial year (2005-2006) an outlay of Rs. 2,775 crore
was approved for rural housing at Budget Estimates share. This was
subsequently reduced to Rs. 2,750 crore at RE stage. Rs. 2,732.40 crore
have been allocated to States and Union Territories under IAY as
Central share against which Rs. 908.94 crore will be provided by States
as their matching share. This will enable construction of around
14.41 lakh houses. As on 31 January, 2006, Rs. 2,267.11 crore were
released as Central assistance under the Indira Awaas Yojana to various
States and Union Territories. Utilisation under IAY reported so far by
States is about Rs. 2,139.07 crore. 8,85,082 houses are reported to have
been constructed while 8,02,481 houses are at various stages of
construction.
3.97 As per the information furnished by the Department on the
physical and financial performance of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) during
the year 2005-2006, as on 31 January, 2006, against a target of 14,41,241
houses, only 9,85,082 houses could be completed which is only 61.41
per cent of the target. It also emerges that in some of the States and
Union territories, the physical performance is very poor. In Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Maharashtra,
Meghalaya, Orissa, Tripura, A & N Islands, D & N Haveli, Daman &
Diu, Lakshadweep and Pondicherry it is below 50 per cent. While
1,46,912 houses were allotted in the name of men, 4,95,237 houses
were allotted in the name of women. 2,54,955 houses were allotted
jointly in the name of the husband and wife.
3.98 Further, the financial performance of IAY during 2005-2006 is
also very poor. The statement shows that out of Rs. 3,865 crore, only
Rs. 2,139 crore could be utilized which is about 55.34 per cent of the
total funds available. In some States like Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat and J & K; and in some Union Territories like
A & N islands, Daman & Diu and Pondicherry the expenditure in ten
months is below 50 per cent.
3.99 When asked whether the Department think that there is a
need to increase the area of lending for rural housing to meet the
housing shortage in rural areas as well as to improve the condition of
houses in rural areas, the Department has stated that, there is a clear
need to expand institutional credit to cover the rural housing sector in
a more inclusive manner. However, since the rural BPL households
lack credit worthiness, it is necessary that they are organised into
financially accountable units like Self Help Groups (SHGs) so that the
financial institutions find it viable enough and the beneficiaries
themselves are able to afford the periodic payments.

51
3.100 When asked as to whether the problem of housing for rural
poor has been effectively addressed by ongoing IAY, the Department
has stated that as per 2001 Census, there is a housing shortage of
148.00 lakh in rural areas and about 9 lakh shelterless households are
added annually to this shortage due to various reasons, such as
bifurcation of families and the houses damaged by floods/cyclones,
etc. The estimated shelterlessness as in 2005-06 is 128 lakh in rural
areas. With the present budgetary allocations, this ministry is able to
provide 15 lakh houses to the rural poor every year. During the four
years’ period from 2005-06 to 2008-09, 60 lakh houses are likely to be
constructed under ‘Bharat Nirman’. Hence at the end of 2008-09 there
would still be a shortage of 104 lakh houses.
3.101 Physical target laid down under Indira Awaas Yojana during
10th Five Year Plan are as under:
2002-2003 : 1314431 houses
2003-2004 : 1484554 houses
2004-2005 : 1562356 houses
2005-2006 : 1441241 houses
2006-2007 : 1533498 houses (based on proposed allocation and
subject to revision)
3.102 The allocation during each year of Tenth Five Year Plan is as
under:
YEAR BE (Rs. in crore) RE (Rs. in crore)
2002-2003 1725.00 1692.95
2003-2004 1900.00 1900.00
2004-2005 2500.00 2900.00*
2005-2006 2775.00 2750.00$
2006-2007 2920.00 **
* An amount of Rs. 400.00 crore has been approved by the Prime Minister in order to
reconstruction of IAY houses damaged in the flood in 20 districts of Bihar during
2004-2005.
$ Revised Budget Estimates for 2005-2006.
** This is subject to approval by the Parliament.
3.103 When asked as to whether there is any mechanism to check
that the construction material used under IAY is of good quality, the

52
Department has stated that under IAY houses are constructed by the
beneficiaries themselves and not by any external agency as per the
guidelines. Hence, the construction material is as per beneficiary choice.
On the request of the beneficiaries, the DRDAs do provide assistance
or facilitate construction material access. As per the information made
available by the Department, till date 2.74 lakh IAY houses have been
verified by monitors and their condition found to be satisfactory. Rural
Building Centres have also been set up at some places for providing
necessary training to the masons and for producing and supplying,
cost effective and environment-friendly construction material to the
beneficiaries. When asked whether the assistance under IAY is easily
available to beneficiaries within a limited time and without hassles,
the Department has stated that the IAY guidelines provides that
payment should be made to the beneficiary on a staggered basis
depending on the progress of the work. The entire money should not
be paid to the beneficiary in lump sum. Instalments of payment to be
linked to the progress of work can be decided by the State Government
or at the District level. No major complaint about non-payment of
funds to the beneficiaries has been received.
3.104 During the course of briefing by the Ministry on 21.3.06 it
emerged that the authority for allocation of houses is given to the
Gram Sabha. When asked whether the beneficiaries are actually been
selected during the Gram Sabha meeting, the Secretary stated as under
“The people in the Gram Sabha openly told me during inspection
in Tamil Nadu that they were not aware as to who have been
given houses under the Indira Awaas Yojana and they were not
comfortable with the list being put to us. I was able to
communicate directly with the people and they gave me the
same feedback. For this, we have a methodology, which we have
developed. We are very happy that the Supreme Court stay on
the BPL list has now been lifted and we have already written to
all the State Governments that waitlist for IAY should be prepared
as per the ranking in the list and it should be put outside the
Panchayat office. We hope that if the list is put there, the people
who are educated and who are able to read at least will find out
where they stand in the list and they will be demanding their
houses. It is an uphill task. We are doing our best to see that
Gram Sabha is empowered and it demands its rights.”
3.105 The Committee find that the data with regard to physical
targets fixed during each year of Tenth Plan indicate that although
the targets made during 2006-2007, are 92,237 higher than the targets

53
fixed during 2005-2006 but are lesser by 28,858 houses, if compared
to the year 2004-2005. In view of this position the Committee note
that although ambitious commitments are being made with regard
to providing housing under IAY, there is no such enhancement of
targets and outlay to meet such commitments. Not only that the
resources made available are not being utilised fully. The information
provided above indicates that in most of the States less than 50 per
cent of physical and financial targets could be achieved. The
Committee observe that as per the Government’s own data the
housing shortage in rural areas is 148 lakh. The said shortage will
increase 9 lakh houses annually due to various reasons. The annual
targets fixed under Bharat Nirman are over 15 lakh houses. Around
60 lakh houses would be constructed by the year 2009. The net
shortage of houses by the year 2009 as per the Government’s own
estimate would be 184 lakh (148 lakh + 36 lakh) houses. Even if
60 lakh houses are provided by 2009, there would be shortage of
124 lakh houses by 2009. The Committee have selected the subject
‘Rural Housing’ for examination and report and different issues in
this regard would be examined in detail during the course of
examination of the subject. Here the Committee would like to
recommend that besides augmenting the resources, there is an urgent
need to ensure that the targets fixed are met and every paise
earmarked for the scheme meant for rural masses is meaningfully
utilised. Further, to augment the resources for rural housing, there is
an urgent need to expand institutional credit.
3.106 As already indicated in the preceding para of the report,
the Committee appreciate the initiatives of the Department to instruct
the State Governments to prepare the wait list for IAY as per the
ranking in the BPL list and display it at the prominent places. The
Committee would like the Government to ensure that the instructions
issued by the State Government are complied with. Further, similar
initiatives are required in other Schemes of the Department. The
Committee would like the Department to take action in this regard
and inform the Committee accordingly.
(iv) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
3.107  ‘Rural Roads’ is a State subject and finds mention at Entry
No. 13 of the State List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
However, it is recognized that rural connectivity is an important
instrument in rural poverty reduction. Accordingly, the Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was launched on 25 December, 2000, as
a 100 per cent Centrally funded Scheme, with the target of connecting

54
every habitation with a population of more than 500 by the year 2007
through good all-weather roads.
Objective of the Yojana
3.108 At the time of the launch of PMGSY, the objective of the
programme was to provide connectivity by way of an all-weather roads
to all unconnected habitations having a population of 500 and above
by the end of the Tenth Plan Period (250 and above in case of Hill
Sates, tribal and desert areas). The targets have now been revised, and
as stated earlier it is now proposed to connect all habitations having
a population of 1000 and above, and in hilly, tribal and desert areas
habitations having a population of 500 or more by 2009. The remaining
habitations are proposed to be taken up thereafter. Fund requirement
for implementing the targets under Bharat Nirman is also being firmly
tied up so as to ensure timely completion of the works sanctioned.
3.109 As per the information furnished in Performance Budget,
out of 30,00,000 KMs. Approximately road length, 3,69,386 are eligible
under PMGSY. There are total 1,72,772 habitations eligible under
PMGSY. Under Bharat Nirman the targets have been set for providing
connectivity, with all weather roads by 2009 and the requirement of
funds will be Rs. 48,000 crore. Again fund requirement for PMGSY
has been indicated as Rs. 14,543 crore during phase-I and Rs. 57,762
crore under phase-II.
The requirement of outlay and the existing pace of allocation of
resources:
3.110 As per the information furnished by the Department, PMGSY
is one of the six components of Bharat Nirman, the ambitious
programme of the Government of India. To meet the targets of
providing all-weather road connectivity and upgradation proposed for
the years 2005-06 to 2008-09, the estimated requirement of funds is
Rs. 48,000 crore (at 2003-04 rates). Of this Rs. 16,000 crore is likely
availability from Cess on High Speed Diesel. Rs. 9,000 crore will be
available from the World Bank & the Asian Development Bank leaving
a gap of Rs. 23,000 crore. It is proposed to raise Rs. 16,500 crore
through NABARD to meet the gap. The Finance Minister, in his Budget
Speech on 28 February , 2006, has proposed to open a separate window
under RIDF XII for rural roads with a corpus of Rs. 4,000 crore during
2006-07. The remaining gap is proposed to be funded through
Budgetary support.
3.111 The financial allocation for PMGSY during 2006-07 is
Rs. 5,225.62 crore.

55
3.112 The targets of road works are determined on the basis of
annual allocations and proposals of States for road works to be taken
up. Physical targets have been fixed for the year 2005-06 through the
Outcome Budget. Physical and financial targets for 2005-06 are:
No. of habitations to be connected: 7895
Road length to be constructed: 17454 Kms.
Expenditure: 4220.00 crore
3.113 As on 31 December 2005, Rs. 2764.14 crore is lying unspent
under PMGSY. As per the information provided by the Department
the roads should be ready within 12 months in normal areas and
within 18 months in hilly areas after award of work. The data with
regard to number of incomplete roads as taken up from phase-I to
Phase-V is as under:
Year  No. of incomplete
roads
Phase-I 2000-2001 530
Phase-II 2001-2003 1336
Phase-III 2003-2004 3020
Phase-IV 2004-2005 5628
Phase-V 2005-2006 3234
ADB/WB 2926
Total 17079
3.114 When the attention of the Department was drawn to such
high number of incomplete road, the representative of the Department
during the course of oral evidence stated as under :
“Phase I and Phase II works were taken up when details systems
and procedures for the programmes were still being finalised. In
the first two phases very ad hoc works were selected without
detailed field investigation and verification. Now, in many cases
it was found, subsequently after the works were sanctioned, that
land for the projects were not available. In some cases, forest
clearance was a hindrance. In some cases, some litigation had
come. If you look at the percentage of works which is remaining
incomplete in the first two phases, then it is about 2 to 3 per
cent in Phase-II and it was less than two per cent in Phase I. In

56
Phase III and IV , in different States, the pace of progress is
varying. …… Some States have already sanctioned Phase V and
VI during the last year and in some States Phase III and IV were
sanctioned last year. So, the phase-wise progress of works still
vary from State to State. But if you look at Phase-III progress of
work, then, I think more than 60 per cent of works have been
completed. The two main reasons are the difficulties which have
been experienced in the implementation of the programme
management and provision and the second is whether States have
adequate contracting capacity. These are the two issues. States
which have addressed these two issues very effectively, their pace
would be very satisfactory. For example, if you look at the
progress of works in States like Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and
to some extent even States like Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and
Orissa are also addressing these issues, the pace is getting
accelerated. But in States like Jammu and Kashmir, Uttaranchal
and in the North-Eastern States where we have difficulties on
both counts, I think, what we are doing through our intervention
is trying to help the States to strengthen their implementation
arrangement. For example, the State of Jharkhand is also having
problems.”
3.115 The Physical & Financial progress under PMGSY in Phase V
(2005-06) upto December, 2005 is given at Appendix VIII.  As per
information provided by the Department, the Physical and Financial
achievement upto December, 2005 under PMGSY is as follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
Phase/Year Value of Amount Expenditure No. of road No. of road
proposals released* to amount works works
cleared released up completed
to Dec. 2005 up to
December,
2005
I/2000-01 2516.69 2560.69 2361.37 13202 12672
II/2001-03 5152.39 4950.30 4417.66 10963 9627
III/2003-04 6080.21 5040.69 3569.76  8706 5681
IV/2004-05 4907.15 2195.41 1104.51  6732 1104
V/2005-06 2946.83  273.73  72.99  3267 33
ADB/WB 3855.01  559.53  293.45  3773 447
Total 25458.28 15579.96 11819.74 46643 29564
*release for road works of respective Phase.

57
3.116 The Committee observe that Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana is a very laudable programme initiated by the Government
with the objective to provide connectivity by road to all the
unconnected habitations in rural areas in the country. From the
information provided by the Department, it seems that the progress
is not very encouraging. Initially, at the launch of the programme,
the objective was set to provide connectivity to all unconnected
habitations having a population of 500 and above (250 and above in
hill States, tribal and desert areas) by the end of Tenth Plan i.e.
(2006-07). The targets have now been spilled over. The Government
now target to connect all the habitations having a population of
1000 and above (500 in case of hilly States, tribal and desert areas)
by the year 2009. The Committee apprehend that it would be difficult
to achieve even the spilled over targets with the existing pace of
implementation of the programme, whereby even the roads started
in Phase I and Phase II during the years 2000-2001 and 2002-2003 are
lying incomplete. The Committee find that as per stipulated
parameters set by the Department, the roads should be ready within
12 months in normal and within 18 months in hilly areas after award
of work. Even after the lapse of five or six years, a number of roads
started are incomplete which is a major area of concern. Many reasons
such as availability of land, forest clearance, programme management
& provision, contracting capacity of States, institutional arrangement,
training etc. have been cited as the reasons for such a state of affairs
of the programme.
3.117 The Committee also find that one of the reasons for these
bottlenecks being faced in the implementation of the programme is
very old and out dated enactment ‘Land Acquisition Act, 1894’. The
said enactment is under the administrative control of the Ministry
of Rural Development. The Committee have repeatedly been
recommending to the Ministry to amend the out dated provisions
made under the Act. But the same has not been done so far. Even
though the Government has found the ways and means to provide
the required allocation of Rs. 48,000 crore by the year 2009 to
complete the uphill task of providing connectivity to all the
habitations of population of 1000 and above, the Committee are of
the opinion that the targets cannot be achieved unless the problem
areas are addressed urgently. The Department has to work on a
mission-mode. There is an urgent need to enhance the capacity of
the State Governments/implementing agencies to absorb the enhanced
resources. Besides, various bottlenecks found in the implementation
of the programme as noted above need to be discussed at various
meetings held with the State Governments. Frequent Central

58
interventions are required to motivate the State Governments to take
the challenge of providing connectivity by the target date. Further,
the old and outdated laws like ‘Land Acquisition Act, 1894’ need to
be amended expeditiously which would solve the major problems
like acquisition of land for construction of roads etc. The Committee
should be kept informed about the action taken in this regard.
3.118 During the course of oral evidence on 12 April, 2006, when
the attention of the Department was drawn to the poor quality of
works under PMGSY and the problem of official contractors subletting
to sub-contractors to do the construction work. The representative
during the course of oral evidence stated as under :—
“Let me first refer to the issue of sub contracting. The bidding
document, which has been prescribed for use under this
programme allows, limited sub-contracting up to 25 per cent. No
work can be fully sub-contracted by the principal contractor. Sub-
contracting up to a limit of 25 per cent, as per the bidding
document, is permissible. One has to seek the permission of the
concerned Programme Officer, or else it is unauthorized and in
that case, action as per law, against that person will be taken. In
terms of quality monitoring, it is done at three levels. The first
level is at the programme implementation level. The contractors
are supposed to maintain a field laboratory for each package of
work awarded. They are supposed to perform quality test of
both workmanship and material and keep detailed records and
a certain percentage is to be supervised by field engineers. This
is the first level of quality monitoring. The second level is at the
State level. Independent quality monitors are supposed to be
engaged by the State Governments. They are supposed to inspect
the work at three stages. One at the time of commencement of
the work, second time when the work is in progress and third
time when it is nearing completion. In the three-tier quality
monitoring system, we have a panel of 150 quality monitors who
are deployed at random. We cover a check of about 5 per cent
of the works over all and we find out whether the work is being
executed as per the prescribed standards or there are deviations.
This is one of the programmes where we have a structured quality
monitoring. Reports that we have received suggest that it is not
that all works are found to be satisfactory .”
3.119 When the Committee enquired whether there was shortage
of engineers, the representative stated that :
“on campuses today that Civil Engineers are not available any
more. They have just disappeared. They are all getting jobs even

59
before computer engineers because these programmes are on the
ground. So, it is true that there is tremendous demand for Civil
Engineers because of this programme.
Regarding the problem of maintenance of roads, the Ministry
has submitted that the Central Government is providing hundred
per cent grant only for the capital cost component of the
programme. So, hundred per cent is funded for the construction
part. But, maintenance even now is solely the responsibility of
the State Government. What however we have done as a part of
this programme is to enable that the roads are maintained
regularly and routinely . Otherwise, the road, the pavement will
deteriorate. At the time of inviting tender, the tender is a
composite one for construction and the second part is for 5-year
maintenance. So, bids are invited for both together. While
finalizing the tenders, the contract is also awarded for 5-year
maintainence. But the maintenance component is to be funded
by the State Governments. The second feature of our contracting
system is that there is 5-year defect liability that the contractor
has to bear. Originally, we used to keep 10 per cent of the contract
amount withheld for that 5 year period. Now, it is 7.5 per cent.
Now, 7.5 percent is withheld to rectify any construction defect
that may be noticed over a period of this defect liability period
of five years. Now, what we are doing for enforcing the
maintenance requirement, as you are aware, is that whenever the
States come to us for clearance of projects, they specify that is
the maintenance amount required for each road and each package.
That is, right from the beginning, the maintenance requirement
is estimated and the States are required to budget for that and
provide the funds to the States implementing agency. Now,
secondly, when the States come for project clearance, we also
look at what is the amount that was required not only for
maintenance of the road assets created under the programme but
the entire core network of rural roads, along with how much
was required, how much has been budgeted, and how much has
been spent.”
3.120 The Committee are perturbed to note that most of the works
under PMGSY are being sublet to contractors by the principal
contractors. Further the Committee express their apprehension on
the quality of roads built under PMGSY. Despite deploying monitors
at various levels, the quality of roads at the field level is very poor.
Many roads would have vanished in a single rain. Some would
have vanished after few months of their construction and in other

60
areas, where the roads do exist the same are very poorly maintained.
This is a vital area which needs to be addressed by the Government
on top priority otherwise the work done under PMGSY will bear no
result and the connected habitations would again revert to
unconnected status. The Committee recommend that to address this
situation and to improve the quality of roads, the Government should
make the monitors more accountable. If roads are found to be bad
and of poor quality, further work to the concerned contractors should
not be awarded. Besides, a notice board at the entrance and at
prominent milestones of every road constructed under PMGSY should
be erected indicating that the road is constructed under PMGSY, the
month and year of its construction, the month and year till the road
is expected to be maintained by the contractor as per the agreement
and the name, designation, phone number of the officers whom the
people can contact in case the quality of road is not up to the mark
or is maintained poorly. The status of roads should also be accessible
on the website and people should be able to put their complaints
on the website so that Senior Officers of the State/Union
Governments are able to monitor the status of roads. The
accountability of monitors who inspect the roads should also be
increased so that they are brought to book in the event of non
performance. Another area of concern, which the Committee would
like the Ministry to address is to impress upon a separate fund for
the maintenance of roads. The Committee would like to hear further
in this regard.
(v) ‘Provision for Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA)’
3.121 The ‘Provision for Urban Amenities in Rural Areas’ (PURA)
Scheme has been started w.e.f. 2003-2004.
3.122 This Centrally Sponsored Scheme was prepared by the
Planning Commission based on the thoughts placed before the Nation
by the Hon’ble President of India for bridging the rural urban divide
and achieving balanced socio-economic development. The Planning
Commission prepared a Cabinet Note for the Scheme. As per the
Cabinet Note the Scheme would be implemented in 4,130 rural clusters
across the country in the next five years. The scheme aims to provide
physical and social infrastructure in the identified rural clusters to
further their growth potential, which are:
(i) road transportation and power connectivity;
(ii) electronic connectivity in the form of reliable Telecom,
Internet and IT services;

61
(iii) knowledge connectivity in the form of good educational
and training institutions;
(iv) market connectivity that would enable farmers to get the
best price for their produce; and
(v) a provision of drinking water supply and upgradation of
existing health facilities.
3.123 A list of towns for PURA was also selected by the Planning
Commission as per the criteria suggested in the Cabinet Note. The
Cabinet considered the note in its meeting on 20 January , 2004 approved
in principle the ‘Provision of Urban Services in Rural Areas’ Scheme
with the direction that the outlay for the scheme will be within the
Gross Budgetary Support. The Cabinet also decided that the list of
towns would have to be reworked in consultation with the State
Governments and brought back to the Cabinet. The consultation with
the State Governments was also made.
3.124 These facilities are expected to be created by implementing
agencies by converging resources under on-going Central and State
Government programmes. Gaps which cannot be funded under any of
those scheme or arising out of the inadequacy of funds available under
the existing schemes will be funded through PURA. Thus PURA builds
on existing schemes while providing funds for critical gaps.
Allocation and Expenditure of PURA Scheme
(Rs. in crore)
Allocation Expenditure
2002-2003 (BE) 0 -
2003-2004 (BE) 0 5.78 (up to March
2004)
2004-2005 (RE) 10 10.00
2005-2006 (BE) 10 10.00
3.125 Although no allocation for PURA Scheme was made in
2003-2004 BE, an amount of Rs. 5.78 crore was spent by reappropriation
of savings under different Schemes of the Ministry . As per the
Performance Budget 2006-2007 Ministry of Rural Development is the
nodal agency for implementing the Provision of Urban Amenities in
Rural Areas (PURA) scheme. The Ministry has, with the approval of

62
Planning Commission, launched a pilot phase for implementation of
the scheme. The Steering Committee on PURA chaired by
Secretary(RD), constituted to examine, sanction and monitor the
implementation of projects under PURA, decided in its first meeting
on 11 January, 2005 that each cluster would be financed to the tune of
Rs. 4-5 crore over a period of three years in the initial pilot phase of
the scheme. It further decided to provide physical or road connectivity
in selected clusters in the first phase and for this purpose allowed
release of Rs. 1.5 crore per cluster except in the case of Maharashtra
where the release was Rs. 1 crore. Accordingly, in 2004-05, Rs. 10 crore
were released to different clusters. Since funds were released in March,
2005 expenditure was incurred by States in 2005-2006.
3.126 For 2005-2006, a budget provision of Rs. 10 crore was made.
No amount was released up to 31 January, 2006. A meeting of the
Steering Committee was held on 18 January, 2006 to decide the project
components for further fund release. The budget provision is expected
to be released among the selected clusters for the identified activities
very soon.
3.127 The Committee observe that the Steering Committee on
Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA) in its first
meeting held on 11 January, 2005 had decided that each cluster would
be financed to the tune of Rs. 4-5 crore over a period of three years
in the initial pilot phase. After a gap of two months, the decision
of this meeting was implemented and Rs. 10 crore were released to
provide physical or road connectivity in selected clusters during
March 2005. Thereafter, up to 31 January, 2006, no further funds
have been released. The Committee conclude that during 2005-06 no
progress seems to have been made in the selected PURA clusters as
no funds have been released even after a span of more than one
year. The Committee while noting the slow pace of work, express
their apprehension that it would take a long time to get the results
from the pilot clusters and thereafter launch the scheme nationwide.
The Committee find that a visionary programme to bridge the gap
between urban and rural divide has been proposed by Hon’ble
President. There is an urgent need to translate the visionary idea
into a reality. For this the pilot project should be completed
expeditiously so that the programme can be launched nation-wide.
(vi) DRDA Administration Scheme
3.128 As per the information furnished to the Committee, the DRDA
Administration Scheme was introduced w.e.f. 1 April, 1999. Being a

63
Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the funding is shared between Centre
and States in the ratio of 75:25.
3.129 There are four different types of districts (Category A to
Category D) as per the number of blocks. The State Governments are
advised to ensure staffing pattern of DRDAs and personnel policies
laid down in the guidelines. Although the guidelines have prescribed
a model staffing structure for DRDAs, the actual staffing is decided by
the State Governments according to their local conditions. In view of
this, there is no uniformity in the actual staff position in the DRDAs.
3.130 The ceiling on administrative cost per district has been fixed
as on 1 April, 1999 as follows:—
Category A districts (<6 blocks) Rs. 46 lakh
Category B districts (6-10 blocks) Rs. 57 lakh
Category C districts (11-15 blocks) Rs. 65 lakh
Category D districts (>15 blocks) Rs. 67 lakh
3.131 The ceiling may be raised every year, on a compounding
basis, up to 5 per cent to set off the increases due to inflation etc.
3.132 Up to 30 per cent of the estimated salary cost of sanctioned
strength is allowed for contingencies.
3.133 The following are the broad personnel policies for DRDAs
laid down in the Guidelines:—
(i) The DRDAs should take employees on deputation for
specific period and should not have any permanent staff.
(ii) The posts of Project Director, Project Officers, APOs and all
the technical posts should be manned by officers of proven
capability and motivation and should be selected in an
objective manner by a Selection Committee. Emphasis should
be on selecting officers of young age and in any case not
older than 50 years.
(iii) Project Directors, APOs and other technical staff must have
a minimum tenure of 2-3 years.
(iv) The Of ficials and staff of DRDAs should be trained regularly
for proper orientation.

64
3.134 As per the Preliminary Material replies the governing body
of DRDA also reviews and monitor the implementation of annual plans
of DRDAs. The Annual Plans are prepared by the DRDAs to set their
own priorities. These are for use at district level and are not required
to be forwarded to the Ministry.
3.135 The Central allocation for the Scheme during 10th Plan and
the amounts released are given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year Central Allocation   Amount Release
2002-2003 220 199.19
2003-2004 220 220
2004-2005 230 231.81 *
2005-2006 220 199.64 (as on
21.02.2006)
2006-2007 220 —
*An amount of Rs. 181.40 lakh have been re-appropriated from SGSY in the year 2004-05.
3.136 As per the Performance Budget 2006-2007 (pg. 14), for the
funds released upto 31 March 2004, seven different utilisation certificates
were due by 31.12.2005 amounting to Rs. 125.21 crore.
3.137 The Committee observe that DRDA is an important district
level agency for implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
As per the Guidelines, 25 per cent of the funds are to be allocated
and released by the State Governments. However, the Performance
Budget of the Department does not monitor the progress of State’s
share of funds. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should invariably monitor the State’s share of funds
and reflect the same in the Performance Budget of the Department.
3.138 The Committee further find from the information furnished
by the Department that seven utilisation certificates amounting to
Rs. 125.21 crore were due with regard to the funds released by
31 March, 2004. The Committee observe that DRDA is the main
agency through which funds for different schemes of the Department
are allocated to the States/implementing agencies. The non-furnishing
of utilisation certificate by a Government agency who is responsible
for effective management of rural development programmes at district
Panchayat level is really a matter of concern. The Committee would

65
like the Department to explain the reasons for non-furnishing of
utilisation certificates by DRDA. Besides, the other issues which
need to be addressed are training of the officers and other
administrative initiatives relating to the service matters to improve
the efficiency and accountability of officers involved in manning
DRDAs.
(vii) Assistance to Council for Advancement of People’s Action
and Rural T echnology (CAPART)
3.139 The Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural
Technology (CAPART) came into existence in September, 1986 following
the merger of two erstwhile Societies, namely, People’s Action for
Development India (PADI) and Council for Advancement of Rural
Technology (CAPART). CAPART’s principal aim is to involve the people
in the implementation of development programmes and promote need-
based, innovative projects through non-governmental voluntary
organizations and it works towards creating a peoples movement for
development in the rural areas through higher social mobilization,
lowering of social barriers and empowerment of the rural poor. The
main objectives of CAPART include:—
•P romotion of voluntary action through grassroots planning,
organization of seminars and workshops;
•P roviding a platform for sharing and dissemination of
knowledge and experience;
•P roviding funding support to innovative need based projects;
• Encouraging voluntary organizations to collaborate amongst
themselves by developing networks;
• Selection and encouragement of innovative technologies and
their dissemination;
• Reduction of rural poverty;
• Generation of awareness for conservation of the environment
and natural resources; and
•P roviding the minimum needs in respect of safe drinking
water, sanitation etc.
3.140 From the financial year 2001-2002, the Ministry has made
the budget provision for CAPART under a single Head, namely,
‘Assistance to CAPART’. This assistance is principally utilized in

66
implementing three Schemes, namely, Promotion of Voluntary Action
in Rural Development (PC), Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme
(ARTS) and Organization of Beneficiaries (OB). The administrative costs
are also met from the Head ‘Assistance to CAPART’.
3.141 The aims and objectives of the projects implemented under
these programmes are as under:—
(i) Public Cooperation Scheme: Projects of innovative and
integrated nature only are considered under the scheme
which result in harnessing the collective energies and
creativity of the rural community and lead to capacity
building and enhancement of life.
(ii) Organisation of Beneficiaries: Projects for creating awareness
organising the beneficiaries into groups and strengthening
their bargaining position etc., are considered under this
scheme.
(iii) W atershed Development Scheme:-CAPART Watershed
Programme is operational in drought prone and water
scarcity areas with the active involvement of grassroot
voluntary organizations and village level beneficiaries. The
programme involves experienced voluntary organizations
representing all the agro-ecological Zones in the country.
Capacity building stage in the programme is very useful
for the voluntary organizations as well as for village level
workers so that implementation work is done adhering to
the watershed principles, such as top to bottom and ridge
to valley approach.  The unique model of Support V oluntary
Organisations (SVOs) to train and technically assist various
voluntary organizations approved for watershed and natural
resource management has been developed for better
implementation of the programme.
(iv) Appropriate Rural Technology Scheme: Under Rural
Technology activity, the mandate of CAPART is to co-
ordinate all efforts towards advancement of technology
relevant to rural areas except for sectors being dealt with
ICAR and its sister organizations. The broad objective of
the Council under this is  development and dissemination
of rural Technology. Projects aimed at conducting need based
study, survey and adaptive research and development,
administration and dissemination of appropriate technologies
amongst the poor are funded under this scheme. A
programme of setting up of Technology Resource Centre

67
(TRCs) was initiated by CAPART under this scheme. These
are VOs equipped with lab facilities that received annual
grants from CAPART for development of appropriate
technology and  dissemination of the same through network
of small VOs within their areas of operation .
(v) Disability: Projects relating to the Community Based
Rehabilitation of the disabled to facilitate and help them
for integration with the community as dignified, self-reliant
categories so that they can contribute to the development
process of the Society.
3.142 No project under any of CAPART’s schemes is sanctioned
without pre-funding appraisal and the approval of the National
Standing Committee/Regional Committees which comprises eminent
persons in the field of rural development. The VO has to submit
progress report in the prescribed proformae within six months of the
release of the 1st instalment. Before the second instalment is released,
mid term evaluation is done. After completion of the project, the VO
has to submit the final progress report and audited statement of
accounts alongwith Utilization Certificate and therefore, the entire
project is post evaluated.
3.143 The extent of assistance to CAPART by Ministry of Rural
Development since 1999-2000 is as below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year Release Amount actually spent
1999-2000 31.55 35.44
2000-2001 29.65 43.61
2001-2002 30 44.44
2002-2003 30 58.79
2003-2004 71.46 67.83
2004-2005 69.85 56.94
2005-2006 70 39.50 (upto 31.1.06)
2006-2007 70  -
3.144 Voluntary Organisations (VOs) furnish utilization certificates
to CAPART for the amounts released to them and CAPART furnishes

68
Utilisation Certificate to the Ministry for the entire amount received
from the Ministry. This is a continuous process involving Utilisation
Certificates relating to releases made in earlier years.
3.145 When asked about the monitoring of activities of CAPART
the Department has stated that they monitor the activities of CAPART
through a series of meeting at the Secretary (RD) level, which includes
monthly staff meeting of Secretary (RD). In addition, CAPART’s
activities are reviewed by the Chairman, Executive Committee who is
also the Minister for Rural Development as well as through Executive
Committee and General Body meetings.
3.146 The Committee have been informed that the functioning of
CAPART has been decentralized by setting up Regional Committees
(RCs) and these RCs have been empowered to sanction projects upto
Rs. 20 lakh each w.e.f. 04 September 2000. In addition to the RCs at
Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Chandigarh, Dharwad, Guwahati,
Hyderabad, Jaipur, Lucknow and Patna, National Standing Committees
have been constituted to sanction projects upto Rs. 1 crore by the
Headquarters (at New Delhi).
3.147 As per the Performance Budget 2006-2007 the following
information about CAPART for performance during 2005-2006 against
the BE 2005-2006 of Rs. 70 crore has been given:—
Targets Progress Achievement   Reasons
    f o r
1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1st  2nd 3rd 4th shortfall
No. of Projects—1200 200 300 350 350 516
No. of Beneficiaries 1.00 1.25 1.25 1.50 107991
to be assisted—5 lakh
No. of Mela/Exhibitions 19 14 19 23 18
to be organised—75
No. of Workshops to 25 20 30 25  61
be organised—100
No. of rural unemployed .10 .20 .30 .40    650 (at
youth to be trained—1 lakh various stages
of completion)
1. Only 4 NSC
meetings were
held till date.
2. Viable
proposals are not
forthcoming in
the Regional
Offices for
approval
3. The
Organisation is
gearing up to
address these
challenges.

69
3.148 During the course of oral evidence, the attention of the
Department was drawn to para 7 of the recommendations made in
Seventh Report (2004-05) of Estimates Committee on CAPART,(extracts
at Appendix IX ) whereby the Committee have pointed out about the
ineffective funding of functioning of Regional Committees of CAPART.
It has been pointed out by the Estimates Committee in the said report
that these Committees are not sufficiently equipped with required
manpower etc to discharge their responsibilities effectively. In reply to
this, DG, CAPART informed as under:—
“……We are at a static stage where we have to try and reorient
our objectives in keeping with the present ground realities. We
are doing that exercise.……. At present the entire man power,
the entire energy of CAPART is going basically into rejecting
applications.”
3.149 Further the representative of CAPART has stated as under:
“……We are almost in a broken down state. Our internal systems
have completely collapsed. In the first few months, we have been
trying to build them up, whether administrative systems or
whether they are financial systems…… I can assure that we are
doing everything possible to lay a system where we can overcome
this”.
3.150 The Committee find from the information given above that
the performance of CAPART has deteriorated over the years. CAPART
came into existence in 1986 with the principal objective to involve
the people in the implementation of development programmes and
promote need based, innovative projects through non-governmental
voluntary organization. The great shortfall in achievement of targets
during 2005-2006 are indicated in the Budget documents speaks
volumes about the inefficiency of CAPART. Further, the report of
the Estimates Committee highlights the collapse of the CAPART.
Even the DG, CAPART has admitted this during the course of oral
evidence. In view of this scenario, the Committee strongly
recommend the Department to look into the matter seriously in the
light of the poor performance of CAPART and make all out efforts
to review/restructure the functioning of CAPART. The Committee
would like to be apprised further in this regard
(viii) Training Schemes
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD)
3.151 In April 1962, the Central Institute of Study and Research in
Community Development, Trainers Training Institute were merged to

70
establish National Institute of Community Development (NICD). The
NICD became an autonomous registered Society in November 1965.
The name of NICD was changed to National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD) in September 1977 which has since set up a
regional Centre at Guwahati in July 1983. The NIRDs policy is
determined by a 47 member General Council.
3.152 The NIRD undertakes training programmes for creation and
enhancement of capacity of the delivery mechanism for poverty
alleviation and rural infrastructure programmes, undertakes research
and studies on Panchayati Raj Institutions and Rural Development
programmes for continuous policy, programmes upgradations and
disseminates information through various publications.
3.153 The activities of NIRD relate to training, research, action
research and consultancy in rural development. Action Plan has been
drawn up on each of these activities and is being implemented.
3.154 During 2005-2006, NIRD had planned to conduct 201 Training
Programmes out of which it could conduct 186 training programmes
with 5141 participants up to January 2006. NIRD has also drawn up
a plan for Research Studies, Action Research Projects and consultancy
studies were planned for the year 2006–2007. The NIRD has planned
to conduct 230 training programmes by utilizing Rs. 12 crore (Plan)
and Rs. 8.70 crore (Non-Plan) in BE 2006-2007.
3.155 The extent of assistance by Department of Rural Development
to NIRD since 1999-2006 is as follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Plan Non-Plan
1999-2000 5.00 7.15
2000-2001 5.00 7.60
2001-2002 5.00 7.55
2002-2003 5.45 7.55
2003-2004 6.57 7.50
2004-2005 9.00 7.42
2005-2006 10.00 7.87
2006-2007 BE 12.00 8.70

71
Strengthening and Establishment of State Institute of Rural
Development (SIRDs) and Extension Training Centres (ETCs)
SIRDs
3.156 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Strengthening and
Establishment of State Institute of Rural Development (SIRDs) and
Extension Training Centres (ETCs) is being implemented since 6th Five
Year Plan (1980-85).
3.157 At present, there are 28 SIRDs functioning all over the country ,
one in each State. All SIRDs are operating from their own buildings
or in rented buildings. Since 1994-1995, 100 per cent Central assistance
is provided to SIRDs for non-recurring expenditure for developing
infrastructure while the recurring expenditure is shared on 50:50 basis
between the Centre and the States. In addition to 50 per cent share of
the recurring expenditure from the Centre includes 100 per cent funding
support for five senior core faculty members of SIRDs is also provided.
ETCs
3.158 In order to impart training to village and block level
functionaries, the Scheme of ETCs was taken up since 7th Plan period
(1985-90). In 28 States, 88 different Extension Training Centres (ETCs)
have been established and functioning. A new ETC in Mizoram has
been approved by the Department in 2005-2006. The States which do
not have ETCs are Goa, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttranchal. The ETCs
function under State Governments to impart training to rural
development functionaries and elected representatives of PRIs. Funds
for ETCs are released by the Ministry of Rural Development through
State Governments and SIRDs on the basis of demands received from
State Governments. Central assistance is provided @ 100 per cent for
non-recurring expenditure and up to a maximum of Rs. 5 lakh per
ETC per annum towards recurring expenditure.
3.159 In 2005-2006, 51 ETCs from which data have been made
available to the Committee, have reported 1,843 training programmes
with participation of 70,686 persons.

72
3.160 The following information was furnished regarding allocation,
release and expenditure made by SIRDs and ETCs since 1997-98:
The expenditure made by SIRDs and ETCs since 1997-98 is given
below:—
 (Rs. in crore)
      Year Release Expenditure
1997-98 7.51* 6.75
1998-99 6.66* 6.02
1999-00 10.25 10.01
2000-01 13.39* 11.44
2001-02 11.75 10.83
2002-03 11.72 10.27
2003-04 25.66** NA
2004-05 30.93 NA
2005-06 20.93 NA
@ Reports from some SIRDs/ETCs are awaited
*Additional release was met by reappropriation from other schemes.
**Additional release was met by utilising savings from other Schemes.
3.161 As per the written replies, against a target of 6000
programmes, 2707 programmes were conducted by training 1,02,765
participants with assistance of Rs. 20.45 crore in 2005-06. In 2006-07, it
has been planned to conduct 7000 training programmes.
3.162 The targets and achievement during each of the quarter of
the year 2005-2006 in case of NIRD/SIRD/ETCs is as under :
Sl. Programme Objective/ Outlay Quantifiable/ Progress/ Achievement/ Reasons for
No. Outcome 2005- Deliverables/ Timeliness Outcome shortfall, if any,
06 Targets in achievement/
Outcome
12 3 4 567 8
1. Training To provide 21.00 Total number 1st qtr.-1000 1st qtr.-909 Training
SIRDs/ training to the of training 2nd qtr-1800 2nd qtr.-1323 Programmes are
ETCs rural programmes 3rd qtr.-1800 3rd qtr.-475 in progress in
development during the 4th qtr.-1400 4th qtr- SIRDs/ETCs.
functionaries year—6000 No shortfall is
in States expected in the
number of training
programmes.
Progress reports
from some SIRDs
and ETCs are
awaited.

73
12 3 4 567 8
2. Grant of To provide 10.00 No. of Training Training No shortfall in
NIRD training to training Programmes Programmes achievement till
Centre and programmes 1st qtr.-50 1st qtr.-49 3rd quarter
State under NIRD— 2nd qtr.-62 2nd qtr.-64
Government 201 and 3rd qtr.-51 3rd qtr.-58
Officials number of 4th qtr.-38 4th qtr.-
research
programmes Research Research Remaining 19
under Studies Studies research studies
NIRD-20 1st qtr.-11 Completed-1 are in progress.
2nd qtr.-07
3rd qtr.-02
4th qtr.-00
3. Public Rural Rs. 70.00 No. of 1st  2nd 3rd 4th     1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Cooperation Development crore Projects-1,200 200 300 350 350 516
(CAPART) (Nos.)
No. of 1.00 1.25 1.25 1.50 107991
Beneficiaries to (lakh)
be assisted—
5.00 lakh
No of Mela/ 19 14 19 23 18
Exhibitions to (Nos.)
be organised—75
No. of 25 20 30 25 61
Workshops to (Nos.)
be organised—
100
No. of rural 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 650*
unemployed
youth to be
trained—
1.00 lakh
3.163 The Committee find that capacity building of the
implementing agencies are the major input for the successful
implementation of rural development programmes for which crores
of rupees are annually being allocated. Besides, with the
decentralisation of responsiblities in pursuance of article 243G of
the Constitution of India, there is a great responsibility to equip
Panchayats to take the huge responsibility. With the introduction of
‘National Employment Guarantee Scheme’ the responsibilities of
Panchayats would increase manifold. The Committee further find
that NIRD at the Central level, SIRD at the State level and ETCs at
the district/block level are the premier institutions involved for
imparting training and capacity building of Panchayats and other
functionaries involved with the implementation of various
programme/scheme meant for upliftment of rural masses. The
shortfall in achievement of targets by these institutions is a matter
of great concern. Out of 21 research studies, NIRD could undertake
only one study. There is huge shortfall in achievement with regard
(1) Only 4 NSC
meeting were
held till date.
(2) Viable proposals
are not
forthcoming in
the Regional
Offices for
approval.
(3) The organisation
is gearing up to
address these
challenges.

74
to training programmes of SIRD/ETCs during the first three quarters
during 2005-06. The Committee while expressing their unhappiness
over the shortfall in achievement of targets during 2005-2006, would
like the Department to explain the reasons and to take the corrective
actions. The Committee should be kept informed in this regard.
3.164 The Committee further note that with the added
responsibilities as stated above, the challenge of imparting training
to Panchayats and other implementing agencies cannot be met only
by these Government agencies. There is an urgent need to train
some of the NGOs as the mother trainers who can impart training
to PRIs and others involved in implementation of rural development
schemes. Besides, the possibilities of taking the benefit of other
local institutions can also be explored. The allocation for training
needs to be enhanced substantially. The Committee urge the
Department to take all possible measures so that the objectives set
under the laudable schemes/programmes are met. The Committee
may also be informed of the further action taken by the Department
in this regard.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
17 May, 2006 Chairman,
27 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

75
APPENDIX I
STATEMENT SHOWING BUDGET ESTIMATES, REVISED ESTIMATES, ACTUAL EXPENDITURE DURING 9TH PLAN
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
B.E., R.E., Actuals during 9th Plan (Rs. in crores)
Sl.No.  Name of the Schemes 9th Plan 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-2002 Total Ninth Plan
Outlay B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals B.E. R.E. Actuals
12 345 6 78 9 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
1. Employment 8690.00 1970.00 1905.21 1968.27 1990.00 1990.00 1989.88 1700.00 2040.00 2040.00 1300.00 1600.00 1419.51 1600.00 1875.00 1898.23 856 0.00 9410.21 9315.89
Assurance Scheme
2. Jawahar Gram 7095.90 2077.70 1952.70 1951.61 2095.00 2060.00 2062.26 2095.00 1689.00 1689.00 1650.00 1510.00 1384.88 1650.00 1875.00 1895.58 9 567.70 9086.70 8983.33
Samridhi Yojana
3. Food for Work ————————————— 0.00 800.00 800.00 0.00 800.00 800.00
Programme
4. Swarnajayanti 4690.00 1183.00 1033.00 1034.45 1410.00 1195.94 1196.17 1215.00 950.00 946.76 1000.00 470.00 544.94 500.00 550.00 536.27 5308.00 4198.94 4258.59
Gram Swarozgar
Yojana
5. DRDA Administration 915.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 110.00 110.00 220.00 200.00 165.97 220.00 200.00 198.90 440.00 510.00 474.87
6. N.S.A.P. 3280.00 700.00 490.00 559.41 700.00 640.00 640.11 725.00 710.00 709.94 715.00 715.00 700.55 835.00 635.00 629.85 3675.00 3190.00 3239.8 6
7. Rural Housing 7285.00 1190.00 1143.75 1143.55 1600.00 1532.00 1531.92 1710.00 1659.00 1659.00 1710.00 1710.00 1664.17 1527.00 1991.00 1945.33 7737.00 8035.75 7943.97
(Indira Awaas
Yojana)
8. Annapoorna 596.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 100.00 100.00 99.80 300.00 100.00 71.63 400.00 200.00 171.43
9. Grants to National 30.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 25.00 25.00 25.00
Institute of Rural
Dev.

76
12 345 6 78 9 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
10. Strengthening of Ext. 15.00 3.00 3.00 3.45 3.00 3.00 1.99 3.00 4.00 4.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 15.00 16.00 15.44
Training Centre
11. Communication Cell 45.00 4.00 4.00 4.22 4.00 4.00 4.23 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 28.33 38.00 38.00 56.78
12. Assistance to 60.00 12.00 12.00 6.00 12.00 12.00 12.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 30.00 30.00 30.00 80.00 80.00 74.00
C.A.P .A.R.T.
13. Promtion of Voluntary 115.00 10.00 10.00 1.55 20.00 20.00 19.54 26.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 13.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 69.00 56.00 47.09
Scheme
14. Organisation of 15.97 3.50 3.50 0.50 3.50 3.00 1.75 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 2.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.00 12.50 8.25
Beneficiaries
15. Panchayat Development 10.00 3.00 3.00 3.01 3.00 2.00 1.79 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 5.00 10.50 8.77 17.00 21.50 19.57
and Training
16. Roads in Special 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.02 1.50 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.50 2.55 1.52
Problems Areas
17. Agricultural Marketing 0.00 7.25 7.25 5.78 7.25 7.25 4.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.50 14.50 9.90
18. Monitoring Mechanism 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.50 0.59 2.00 2.00 2.00 5.00 5.00 4.50 10.00 10.00 8.92 17.50 17.50 16.01
19. Information Technology 0.00 ———————————— 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00
20. International Cooperation 0.00 ———————————— 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00
21. Pradhan Mantri Gram —————————— 2 5 0 0 . 0 0 2 5 0 0 . 0 0 2 4 3 5 . 0 0 2 5 0 0 . 0 0 2 5 0 0 . 0 0 2 5 0 0 . 0 0 5 0 00.00 5000.00 4935.00
Sadak Yojana
Total-Rural Dev. 32869.87 7174.20 6578.16 6692.16 7858.50 7478.44 7476.43 7517.00 7220.00 7216.70 9260.00 8869.55 8480.12 9205.00 10606.50 1056 9.81 41014.70 40752.65 40435.22
(including PMGSY)

77
APPENDIX II
STATEMENT SHOWING BUDGET ESTIMATES, REVISED ESTIMATES AND
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE DURING 10TH PLAN
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(Rs. in crores)
Sl.No. Name of the Schemes 10th Plan 2002-2003 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
Proposed Outlay Total release B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E.
outlay agreed to (upto Expenditure Expenditure Expenditure Expenditure
by Plg. 31.3.06) in 31.3.2006
Commn. the 10th Plan
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7
1. Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana 48538.00 30000.00 32732.13 4440.00 9086.00 9086.93 4900.00 10130.00 10129.93 5100.00 5100.00 5014.84 4000.0 0 8500.00 8501.43 3000.00
2. National Food For Work Programme — — 6473.08 — — — — — — 0.00 2020.00 2019.00 6000.00 4500.00 4454.08 0.00
3. Food Work Programme — — 785.18 600.00 860.00 785.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
4. Assistance to Rural Employment — — 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 11300.00
Guarantee
5. Swarnajayanati Gram Swarozgar 9850.00 3955.00 3491.27 710.00 710.00 706.04 800.00 800.00 797.55 100.00 1000.00 958.80 960.00 1000.00 1028.88 1200.00
Yojana
6. DRDA Administration 1586.27 1100.00 883.11 220.00 220.00 199.19 220.00 220.00 220.00 230.00 230.00 228.92 220.00 220.00 235.00 220.00
7. Rural Housing-Indira Awaas Yojana 13040.00 8603.00 9111.76 1725.00 1725.00 1693.14 1900.00 1900.00 1899.50 2500.00 2900.00 2772.55 2750.00 2750.00 2746.57 2920.00
8. N.I.R.D. 350.00 40.00 30.45 5.00 5.00 5.45 6.00 6.00 6.00 9.00 9.00 9.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 12.00
9. Training 315.00 150.00 107.70 20.00 20.00 18.02 39.00 39.00 39.84 24.40 24.40 22.16 24.00 24.00 27.68 30.00

78
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7
10. Assistance to C.A.P.A.R.T. 250.00 200.00 215.00 30.00 30.00 30.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 65.00 65.00 65.00 70.00 70.00 70.00 70.00
11. Information, Education & 500.00 100.00 52.30 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.50 20.00 20.00 16.12 15.00 15.00 15.68 18.00
Communication
12. Monitoring Mechanism 350.00 100.00 52.53 10.00 10.00 10.24 20.00 20.00 15.83 20.00 20.00 11.78 15.00 15.00 14.68 20.00
13. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 55000.00 12500.00 11354.00 2500.00 2500.00 2500.00 2325.00 2325.00 2328.60 2468.00 2468.00 2305.40 4235. 00 4220.00 4200.00 5225.62
14. Provision for Urban Amenities in — — 25.78 — — — 0.00 0.00 5.78 1.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00
Rural Areas
Total-Rural Development 129464.27 56748.00 65314.29 10270.00 15176.00 15043.19 10270.00 15500.00 15503.53 11437.40 13866.40 13433.57 18334.0 0 21334.00 21334.00 24025.62
*Provisional

79
APPENDIX III
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
STATEMENT SHOWING THE MONTHLY EXPENDITURE
PLAN FOR 2006-07
(In crores of Rupees)
Month Plan Non-Plan Total Cumulative Total
April 3280.04 1.82 3281.86 3281.86
May 1155.19 5.35 1160.54 4442.40
June 932.62 0.98 924.60 5367.00
July 762.86 0.98 763.84 6130.84
August 504.02 0.98 505.00 6635.84
September 536.66 0.98 537.64 7173.48
October 730.36 1.25 731.61 7905.09
November 845.63 1.02 846.65 8751.74
December 1220.92 5.4 1226.32 9978.06
January 1123.89 1.02 1124.91 11102.97
February 851.40 1.02 852.42 11955.39
March 791.03 1.14 792.17 12747.56
Total (excluding 12725.62 21.94 12747.56 —
NREGA)
NREGA* 11300.00 0.00 11300.00 24047.56
Total 24025.62 21.94 24047.56
*Monthly targets cannot be specified for National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(NREGA) as the programme is demand driven.

80
APPENDIX IV
STATE-WISE PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENT MADE
BY NE STATES AND SIKKIM SINCE 2002-03 UNDER SGSY SCHEME
(Rs. in lakhs)   (Mandays in lakh)
During the year 2002-03
Sl.No. States Central Total funds Expenditure Mandays
release available reported generated
12 345 6
1. Arunachal Pradesh 824.26 1762.78 1427.27 16.62
2. Assam 22496.96 44613.49 27332.23 483.50
3. Manipur 669.80 1364.27 1257.14 14.91
4. Meghalaya 1905.92 2967.74 1833.13 24.43
5. Mizoram 573.88 991.27 869.41 12.99
6. Nagaland 667.28 943.70 1111.86 16.39
7. Sikkim 439.18 742.50 478.25 6.28
8. Tripura 3850.07 5234.44 4211.48 99.46
Total 31427.35 58620.19 38520.77 674.58
During the year 2003-2004
1. Arunachal Pradesh 1560.75 2209.82 1257.74 18.42
2. Assam 29681.01 55467.36 41422.14 637.20
3. Manipur 1331.4 2042.85 1071.19 14.00
4. Meghalaya 2055.44 3518.53 2716.95 34.37
5. Mizoram 757.86 998.104 801.684 15.38
6. Nagaland 1168.08 1405.87 1170.55 610.06
7. Sikkim 703.55 1189.7 760 8.21
8. Tripura 3991.89 6599.892 5959.21 126.96
Total 41249.98 73432.126 55159.464 1464.60

81
12 345 6
During the year 2004-2005
1. Arunachal Pradesh 1154.33 1756.26 685.09 8.53
2. Assam 30275.11 51314.95 30722.59 626.02
3. Manipur 1503.12 2508.77 889.17 31.93
4. Meghalaya 1927.93 3316.52 1999.43 36.96
5. Mizoram 548.96 684.44 238.66 6.54
6. Nagaland 1118.71 1350.60 296.93 36.71
7. Sikkim 623.52 904.15 771.95 5.34
8. Tripura 3922.76 5960.91 3978.82 108.46
Total 41074.44 67796.60 39582.64 823.53
During the year 2005-2006
1. Arunachal Pradesh 1377.50 2110.02 563.63 9.06
2. Assam 40916.96 68966.84 43761.89 660.87
3. Manipur 2164.50 3055.56 363.69 4.37
4. Meghalaya 2334.13 3016.87 2301.31 27.68
5. Mizoram 748.55 1022.37 615.18 7.66
6. Nagaland 1415.70 1988.75 777.95 9.34
7. Sikkim 828.75 1172.18 1075.62 7.59
8. Tripura 5213.91 6868.85 3933.32 113.34
Total 55000.00 88201.44 53392.59 785.91
*As reported by the States upto January , 2006.

82
APPENDIX V
DETAILED FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE UNDER THE NATIONAL FOOD FOR WORK
PROGRAMME DURING THE YEAR 2005-2006 (As on 31.1.2005)
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name of the Month No. of Allocation Opening Release of                              Release during the year Misc. Total Cumulative E xpenditure %age
No. States Code Distts. Balance last year but receipts Availability
Identified As on received 1st Instalment 2nd Instalment Total (Col. On Works Contigency Total
1.4.2005 during the No. of amount No. of Amount Additional Release (6+7+
current year Distt. Distt. funds for (Col. 9+ 12+13)
preparation 11+12)
on NREGA
12 3 4 5 6 789 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
1. Andhra Pradesh 11 8 27199.63 8159.34 0.00 8 13599.82 — — 2875.00 16474.82 3.07 24637.23 9117.28 213.79 9331.07 37.87
2. Arunachal Pradesh 11 1 425.26 9.89 63.64 1 212.63 — — 25.00 237.63 — 311.16 246.10 — 246.10 79.09
3. Assam 10 5 37100.61 15371.93 786.37 — — — — 1195.00 1195.00 — 17353.30 7541.15 20.88 7562.03 43.58
4. Bihar 11 15 58812.89 19679.62 — 11 19918.80 — — 4655.00 24573.80 198.17 44451.59 11694.72 66.72 11761.44 26.46
5. Chhattisgarh 12 10 23181.35 4025.62 — 10 11590.71 4 3018.06 785.00 15393.77 22.28 19441.67 11019.76 52.54 11072.30 56.95
6. Gujarat 12 6 8895.33 3765.47 0.00 5 4009.55 — — 150.00 4159.55 10.89 7935.91 3018.47 28.43 3046.90 38.39
7. Haryana 12 1 627.62 282.43 0.00 1 313.81 — — 560.00 873.81 0.00 1156.24 194.71 3.05 197.76 17.10
8. Himachal Pradesh 11 1 676.75 103.33 0.00 1 338.38 — — 560.00 898.38 3.02 1004.73 298.51 1.41 299.92 29.85
9. Jammu & Kashmir 42 1100.60 146.96 0.00 2 550.31 — — 585.00 1135.31 — 1282.27 185.13 1.35 186.48 14.54

83
12 3 4 5 6 789 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
10. Jharkhand 81 4 50315.90 19481.20 — 13 23120.83 4 5469.31 3560.00 32150.14 0.00 51631.34 9504.93 4.61 9509.54 18.42
11. Karnataka 11 3 6514.20 2749.23 0.00 3 3257.11 — — 1145.00 4402.11 0.00 7151.34 2523.27 14.87 2538.14 35.49
12. Kerala 12 1 1218.36 421.77 0.00 — — — — 560.00 560.00 0.00 981.77 120.58 0.56 121.14 12.34
13. Madhya Pradesh 11 15 35201.76 9029.97 0.00 15 17600.04 12 15085.84 1980.00 34666.78 103.59 43800.34 15998.30 50.63 16049.93 36.64
14. Maharashtra —1 1 34504.70 — — 3 4632.71 1 981.55 810.00 6424.26 — 6424.26 — — 0.00 0.00
15. Manipur 10 1 889.78 64.57 133.16 1 444.89 1 — 25.00 469.89 — 667.62 423.20 5.00 428.70 64.21
16. Meghalaya 11 1 1212.16 212.31 181.39 1 606.08 — — 560.00 1166.08 5.66 1565.44 295.51 3.06 298.57 19.07
17. Mizoram 12 1 212.89 14.71 — 1 106.45 — — 560.00 666.45 0.15 681.31 107.69 1.06 108.76 15.96
18. Nagaland 81 1015.71 27.33 152.00 — — — — 25.00 25.00 — 204.33 — — 0.00 0.00
19. Orissa 12 18 49621.06 7363.16 0.00 18 24810.56 12 15730.47 985.00 41526.03 1.17 48890.36 19778.80 322.45 20101.25 41.11
20. Punjab 11 1 1595.09 17.87 0.00 1 797.55 — — 25.00 822.55 1.17 841.59 0.00 5.56 5.56 0.66
21. Rajasthan 12 5 7866.58 1297.67 0.00 5 3933.31 2 1645.93 660.00 6239.24 0.00 7536.91 3329.61 12.43 3342.04 44.34
22. Sikkim 91 703.70 39.08 105.31 1 351.85 — — 25.00 376.85 — 521.24 29.27 — 29.27 5.62
23. Tamil Nadu 11 4 10803.45 2202.07 0.00 4 5401.73 — — 1170.00 6571.73 20.49 8794.29 2108.67 21.82 2130.49 24.23
24. Tripura 12 1 3439.89 1543.37 — 1 1719.95 — — 25.00 1744.95 7.45 3295.77 1527.85 15.43 1543.28 46.83
25. Uttaranchal 12 2 2259.88 1063.68 0.00 1 891.66 — — 585.00 1476.66 0.00 2540.34 446.12 54.58 500.70 19.71
26. Uttar Pradesh 12 15 58738.53 24396.04 0.00 3 4273.76 — — 4120.00 8393.76 3.35 32793.15 8866.32 110.73 8977.05 27.37
27. West Bengal 11 6 25496.32 9490.70 — 6 12748.17 — — 2290.00 15038.17 8.23 24537.10 6616.64 77.81 6694.45 27.28
Total 150 449630.00 130959.31 1421.87 116 155231.56 36 41931.16 30500.00 227662.72 388.70 360432.60 114994.09 1088.78 116082.87 32.21

84
APPENDIX VI
STATEMENT INDICATING NAMES OF 150 MOST BACKWARD
DISTRICTS COVERED UNDER NFFWP
State No. 150 NFFWP Districts
12 3
Andhra Pradesh 1. Adilabad
2. Mahbubnagar
3. Warangal
4. Nalgonda
5. Khammam
6. Anantpur
7. Cudappah
8. Rangareddy
Arunachal Pradesh 1. Upper Subansiri
Assam 1. Kokrajhar
2. North Cachar Hills
3. Karbi Anglong
4. Dhemaji
5. North Lakhimpur
Bihar 1. Araria
2. Vaishali
3. Madhubani
4. Muzaffarpur
5. Nawadah
6. Samastipur
7. Sheohar
8. Katihar
9. Jamui
10. Lakhisarai

85
12 3
11. Purnea
12. Supaul
13. Darbhanga
14. Gaya
15. Monghyr
Chhattisgarh 1. Bastar
2. Dantatewada
3. Kanker
4. Jaspur
5. Rajnandgaon
6. Sarguja
7. Bilaspur
8. Raigarh
9. Koria
10. Dhamtri
Gujarat 1. Dohad
2. Panch Mahals
3. Dangs
4. Sabarkantha
5. Namada
6. Banaskantha
Haryana 1. Mohindergarh
H.P . 1. Chamba
J&K 1. Doda
2. Kupwara
Jharkhand 1. Godda
2. Lohardagga
3. Gumla
4. Saraikela

86
12 3
5. Singhbhum West
6. Simdega
7. Chatra
8. Garhwa
9. Palamau
10. Dumka
11. Jamtara
12. Sahebganj
13. Pakur
14. Latehar
Karnataka 1. Chitradurga
2. Davanagere
3. Bidar
Kerala 1. Waynag
Madhya Pradesh 1. Umaria
2. Shahdol
3. Barwani
4. Balaghat
5. Siddhi
6. Mandla
7. Jhabua
8. Shivpuri
9. Chattarpur
10. Sheopur
11.T ikamgarh
12. Khandwa
13. Betul
14. Dhar
15. Khargone

87
Maharashtra 1. Gadchiroli
2. Gondya
3. Chandrapur
4. Bhandara
5. Dhule
6. Nandurbar
7. Hingoli
8. Nanded
9. Ahmednagar
10. Aurangabad
11.Y awatmal
Manipur 1. Tamenlong
Meghalaya 1. South Garo Hills
Mizoram 1. Saiha
Nagaland 1. Mon
Orissa 1. Keonjhar
2. Koraput
3. Malkangiri
4. Nabarangpur
5. Rayagada
6. Mayurbhanj
7. Sundergarh
8. Boudh
9. Nuapada
10. Kalahandi
11. Sonepur
12. Ganjam
13. Bolangir
12 3

88
12 3
14. Deogarh
15. Dhenikanal
16. Jharsuguda
17. Sambalpur
18. Phulbani
Punjab 1. Hoshiarpur
Rajasthan 1. Banswara
2. Dungarpur
3. Udaipur
4. Karauli
5. Sirohi
Sikkim 1. North Sikkim
Tripura 1. Dhalai
Tamil Nadu 1. Tiruvannamalai
2. South Arcot/Cuddalore
3. Nagapattinam
4. Villupuram
Uttaranchal 1. Champawat
2. Tehri Garhwal
Uttar Pradesh 1. Sonbhadra
2. Unnao
3. Raebareli
4. Sitapur
5. Hardoi
6. Fatehpur
7. Lalitpur
8. Chitrakoot
9. Banda

89
12 3
10. Mirzapur
11. Kushinagar
12. Mahoba
13. Hamirpur
14. Barabanki
15. Lakhimpur Kheri
West Bengal 1. Purulia
2. Bankura
3. West Midnapur
4. West/North Dinajpur
5. Malda
6. Murshidabad
Total Districts 150

90
APPENDIX VII
STATEMENT INDICATING NAMES OF ADDITIONAL 50 DISTRICTS
IDENTIFIED BY PLANNING COMMISSION
FOR COVERAGE UNDER NREGA
State No.  Additional 50 Districts
12 3
Andhra Pradesh 1 Chittor
2V iziaanagaram
3 Karim Nagar
4M e d ak
5 Nizamabad
Assam 1 Goalpara
2 Bongaigaon
Bihar 1 Aurangabad
2 Bhojpur
3 Jehanabad
4 Kaimur (Bhabua)
5 Nalanda
6P atna
7 Rohtas
8 Kishanganj
Chhattisgarh 1 Kawaradha
haryana 1 Sirsa
H.P . 1 Sirmaur
J&K 1 Poonch
Jharkhand 1 Bokaro
2 Dhanbad
3 Hazaribagh
4 Kodarma

91
12 3
5 Ranchi
6 Giridih
Karnataka 1 Gulbara
2R aichur
Kerala 1 Palakkad
Madhya Pradesh 1 Satna
2 Seoni
3 Dindon
Maharashtra 1 Amravati
Meghalaya 1 West Garo Hills
Mizoram 1 Lawngtlai
Orissa 1 Guajapafi
Rajasthan 1 Jhalawar
Tamil Nadu 1 Dindigul
2 Sivaganga
Uttaranchal 1 Chamoli
Uttar Pradesh 1 Azamgarh
2 Gorakhpur
3 Jalaun
4 Jaunpur
5 Pratapgarh
6 Kaushambi
7 Chandauli
West Bengal 1 Birbhum
2 Jalpaiguri
3 South Dinajpur
4 24 South Parganas
Total Districts 50

92
APPENDIX VIII
PHYSICAL & FINANCIAL PROGRESS UNDER PMGSY
PHASE V (2005-06)
LENGTH IN KM. RELEASE AND EXPENDITURE IN RS. CRORE
(Upto December, 2005)
Sl. No. State Value of Amount No. of road Length of No. of road Length of Expenditure Expenditure
proposals Released works road works works road works (Restricted to (Resticted to
(upto completed completed value of release)
5.2.2006) proposals)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. Andhra Pradesh — — — — — — — —
2. Arunachal Pradesh — — — — — — — —
3. Assam 425.59 — 290 1061.27 — — — —
4. Bihar — — — — — — — —
5. Chhattisgarh 448.62 — 429 1951.27 — 40.07 6.13 0.00
6. Goa — — — — — — — —
7. Gujarat 125.1 — 370 763.72 — — — —
8. Haryana 84.25 — 26 361.93 — — — —
9. Himachal Pradesh 132.93 — 105 614.50 — — 0.13 0.00
10. Jammu & Kashmir — — — — — — — —
11. Jharkhand — — — — — — — —
12. Karnataka 110.83 — 100 661.30 — — — —
13. Kerala — — — — — — — —
14. Madhya Pradesh 537.96 — 579 2678.72 3 3.78 43.30 0.00
15. Maharashtra — — — — — — — —
16. Manipur — — — — — — — —
17. Meghalaya — — — — — — — —
18. Mizoram — — — — — — — —
19. Nagaland — — — — — — — —

93
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
20. Orissa # 530.96 — 483 1907.65 — — — —
21. Punjab — — — — — — — —
22. Rajasthan ## 550.59 273.73 885 3069.28 30 113.16 72.99 72.99
23. Sikkim — — — — — — — —
24. Tamil Nadu — — — — — — — —
25. Tripura — — — — — — — —
26. Uttar Pradesh — — — — — — — —
27. Uttaranchal — — — — — — — —
28. West Bengal — — — — — — — —
Grand Total 2946.83 273.73 3267 13069.64 33 157.01 122.55 72.99
# This includes value (Rs. 73.37 crore), No. of road works (87) & length (254.94 Kms.)
of Missing Links Phase-I & Phase-II and vlaue (Rs. 14.96 crore), No. of road works
(7) & length (45.98 Kms.) of Left Wing district.
## Number & length of road works proposed under Part-III of Phase-V to be intimated
by State Govt.

94
APPENDIX IX
EXTRACTS OF RECOMMENDATION PARA 7 MADE IN
SEVENTH REPORT 2004-05 OF ESTIMATES COMMITTEE
Recommendation Recommendation
Serial No.
7. XXXX. The Committee have gathered an
impression that the Regional Committees
are not sufficiently equipped with the
required manpower, etc. to discharge the
responsibilities effectively. With the
jurisidciton of Regional Committees
extending to a number of States, the
representatives of VOs have to travel from
distant places to pursue the project
proposals. Moreover, monitoring of the
projects approved by Regional Committees
also becomes difficult. The committee,
therefore, desire that the Regional
Committees should be strengthened with
adequate manpower, delegation of powers,
etc. The possibility of establishing more
Regional Offices should also be got
examined. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the action taken by the
Ministry in this regard.

95
APPENDIX X
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH
SITTING OF THE  COMMITTEE HELD ON
TUESDAY, THE 21 MARCH, 2006.
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mohan Jena
3. Shri Dawa Narbula
4. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
5. Shri Prabodh Panda
6. Shri Mohan Singh
7. Shri Sita Ram Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
9. Shri Penumalli Madhu
10. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary

96
Representatives of Ministry of Rural Development (Department of
Rural Development)
1. Dr. Renuka Viswanathan, Secretary (RD)
2. Shri Atul Chaturvedi, AS & FA
3. Shrimati Veena Sreeram Rao, DG, CAPART
4. Shri V .S. Sampat, DG, NIRD
5. Shri J.K. Mohapatra, Joint Secretary
6. Dr. Amar Singh, Joint Secretary
7. Shrimati Smita Chugh, Joint Secretary
8. Shrimati Amita Sharma, Joint Secretary
9. Shrimati Nilam Sawhney, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened for briefing by the representatives of
(i) Department of Rural Development and (ii) Department of Land
Resources on Demands for Grants (2006-2007). He informed the
Committee that the sittings of the Committee for the purpose of
examination of Demands for Grants (2006-2007) (as intimated to the
members of the Committee vide Lok Sabha Secretariat Notice dated
23 March, 2006) had to be rescheduled due to rescheduling of Seventh
Session of Lok Sabha. The detailed revised programme for oral evidence
and consideration and adoption of the Reports was then circulated to
the members of the Committee. Hon’ble Chairman solicited cooperation
of the members of the Committee to finalise the reports on Demands
for Grants (2006-2007).
[The representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development) were then called in.]
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department
of Rural Development and drew their attention to the provisions of
direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker. He in his welcome
address raised the main issues which included underspending of outlay,
huge opening balances with various State Governments,
underachievement of targets, mismatch of physical and financial
achievement as indicated in the various Budget documents of the
respective Departments.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development then briefed the
Committee about the main features of Demands for Grants (2006-2007).
She also responded to the various concerns raised through the

97
Hon’ble Chairman’s address, supplemented by queries of members of
the Committee. The Secretary also responded to the various queries
raised by members of the Committee.
[The representatives of the Department of Rural Development then
withdrew at 1625 hrs. Since the Secretary, Department of Rural Development
is also looking after the Department of Land Resources, she along with the
common officers of both the Departments (Department of Rural Development
and Department of Land Resources) stayed back and officers dealing with the
Department of Land Resources joined them.]
5. ** ** **
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on
22 March, 2006 at 1500 hrs.

98
APPENDIX XI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 12 APRIL, 2006.
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room
G-074, Parliament Library Building(PLB), New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mohan Jena
3. Shri Subhash Maharia
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri Dawa Narbula
6. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
7. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
8. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
9. Shri Mohan Singh
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
13. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
23. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
24. Shri Penumalli Madhu
25. Dr. Chandan Mitra
26. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania

99
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Rural Development (Department of
Rural Development)
1. Dr. Renuka Viswanathan, Secretary (RD)
2. Shri Atul Chaturvedi, AS & FA
3. Shri J.K. Mohapatra, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Amar Singh, Joint Secretary
5.  Shrimati Smita Chugh, Joint Secretary
6. Shrimati Amita Sharma, Joint Secretary
7. Shrimati Nilam Sawhney, Joint Secretary
8. Shri K.B.L. Mathur, Eco. Adviser
9. Shrimati Veena Sreeram Rao, DG, CAPART
10. Shrimati Lakshmi Prasad, DDG, CAPART
11. Shri A. Bhattacharrya, DDG, CAPART
12. Shri R.P . Meena, CVO, CAPART
13. Shri V .S. Sampat, DG, NIRD
14. Shri Chinmoy Basu, DDG, NIRD
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee to take oral evidence of the Ministry of Rural
Development on Demands for Grants(2006-2007).
[The representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development) were then called in.]
3. The Chairman thereafter welcomed the representatives of the
Department of Rural Development and drew their attention to the
provisions of direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker. He in
his welcome address raised the main issues which included huge
under-spending of outlays , poor performance of some major schemes
like National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP), Indira Awaas
Yojana(IAY) and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) and
delay in finalisation of BPL list by different States. The Hon’ble

100
Chairman referred to the targets fixed under Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) whereby all the villages having the population
of 1000 in plains and 500 in tribal and hilly areas would be provided
connectivity by road by the year 2009. He invited the comments of
the representatives of the Department on how the gap between the
required outlay and the existing available resources would be met.
The Hon’ble Chairman also referred to the statement made by Hon’ble
Minister of Rural Development in Lok Sabha on 10th March, 2006
whereby he informed the House about a laudable initiative taken by
the Union Government whereby the States have been requested to
prepare a permanent Indira Awaas Yojana wait list separately for SC/
ST and beneficiaries which would be painted on the wall at a
prominent place and made available on the website of the district for
wider publicity and transparency. He desired to know about the similar
initiatives in the other schemes of the Department and also to put
BPL List of a district on the website.
4. The members then raised several queries pertaining to the
physical and financial performance of National Food for Work
Programme (NFFWP), Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
and the newly launched National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(NREGS). The issues raised by Hon’ble Chairman in his introductory
address were further supplemented by the queries by members. The
representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development replied to the
queries raised by the members.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1500 hrs. to take
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
on Demands for Grants (2006-2007).

101
APPENDIX XII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
MINUTES  OF  THE  NINETEENTH  SITTING  OF  THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 8TH MAY, 2006
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1320 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah— In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
4. Shri Prabodh Panda
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
6. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
7. Shri Sita Ram Singh
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
9. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
11. Shri Penumalli Madhu
12. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary

102
2. In the absence of Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Hannan
Mollah, M.P . to act as Chairman for the sitting under Rule 258(3) of
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the draft Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department
of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development) and adopted
the draft Report with slight modifications.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Report on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned for lunch to meet again at 1430 hrs..

103
APPENDIX XIII
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.6 The Committee note that the primary objective
of inserting direction 73A in the Directions by
the Speaker was to make the Government more
accountable for implementation of the various
recommendations of the Committee. The
Committee are concerned to note that even after
a lapse of around six months when the
statement on Ninth Report had fallen due and
about three months when the Ministry was
requested for making the revised statement in
respect of Third Report, the statements are yet
to be tabled by the Hon’ble Minister. The
Committee also find that the Department is
taking the desired action to make the
statements in the Second part of the Seventh
Session as stated by the Secretary during the
course of oral evidence. The Committee would
like the Government to ensure that the
statements are made at the earliest during the
Second part of the Seventh Session. They
further strongly recommend that in future, the
Department should ensure that the statements
on each of the reports are mandatorily made
within the specified period i.e. six months after
the presentation of the Report to Parliament as
per direction 73A of the Directions by the
Speaker.
2. 2.14 The Committee note with concern that although
our neighbouring countries could improve the
human development index, India has remained
static at 127th position for the last three years.
Since out of three parameters for determining

104
12 3
human development index, one parameter i.e.
employment is the mandate of the Department
of Rural Development, the Department has
therefore, a key role in improving the human
development index. The Committee would like
to point out that employment being the basic
parameter to improve the economic and social
status of a person, once an individual gets
employment, the other issues like education and
basic health services are taken care of. There is
a co-relation between the status of employment
of an individual and his social and economic
status.
3. 2.15 From the status of allocation of outlay as
indicated above, the Committee note that
although there may be some enhancement of
outlay in each plan as compared to the previous
plans, the percentage increase in outlay when
compared to the overall outlay of the
Government of India do not indicate any
substantial enhancement in rural development
sector. There was marginal increase in allocation
of resources for rural development for each of
the plan as compared to the previous plan up
to 9th Plan. However, during 10th Plan, when
the targets for GDP growth are being set at 8.1
per cent and the Indian economy has been
acknowledged as booming economy worldwide,
the percentage distribution of allocation has
decreased from 8.7 per cent to 8 per cent.
4. 2.16 The Committee further note that some of the
States such as Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh are not doing well.
The scheme-wise position has been reviewed
in the subsequent chapters of the report. In
view of this scenario, the Committee
recommend the Government to enhance the
allocation for rural development adequately so
that the benefit of the booming economy reach

105
12 3
the poorest of the poor in the country. Further,
there is an urgent need to ensure even
development of different States in the country.
The Committee would like to strongly
recommend to the Department to review the
position of implementation of schemes State-
wise and after addressing the shortcomings,
suggest some remedial measures and inform
the Committee accordingly.
5. 2.21 The Committee observe that while requirement
of funds for foodgrains component and special
component is an important feature, the funds
are being made available only at the
Supplementary Grants or RE stage. The
Committee have repeatedly been recommending
in this regard in their respective reports. Inspite
of that the practice of allocating funds for
foodgrains component at Supplementary Grants
stage still continue. The Committee are of the
opinion that demanding huge allocation at
Supplementary Grants stage is not a healthy
practice of Budgeting. It does not give an idea
about the allocation made under a scheme in
different districts. The implementing agencies
should be well aware of the provisions made
under a scheme well in time i.e. in the
beginning of the financial year. In view of this,
the Committee strongly recommend that the
practice of allocating funds at RE stage for a
component which is certain and for which
estimates are available at BE stage should be
dispensed with and funds should be made
available at the BE stage itself. The Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance should be
apprised of the concerns of the Committee in
this regard.
6. 2.22 The Committee find from the data indicated
above that there is enhancement of only Rs.
2691.62 crore in B.E. 2006-07 as compared to

106
12 3
R.E. 2005-06, although Rs. 11,300 crore have
been allocated for the ambitious programme
‘National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme’. Not only that, ambitious targets have
also been fixed for Rural Housing. The
comparative position of outlay scheme-wise has
been analysed in the subsequent Chapters of
the Report. Here the Committee feel that the
enhancement of outlay in one programme may
be due to the decrease in outlay in some other
scheme. The Committee disapprove of this
tendency of the Government. The Committee
strongly recommend that adequate outlay under
different schemes should be provided to achieve
the laudable objectives. Besides, the
enhancement of outlay for the ambitious
programme i.e. NREGA should not be at the
cost of the established programmes of the
Department.
7. 2.33 The Committee find that the results of the BPL
Census 2002 have inordinately been delayed.
BPL Census is conducted at the beginning of
each Five Year Plan so as to identify the
households living Below Poverty Line (BPL)
who could be benefited by the different
schemes of the Ministry. Although the Tenth
Five Year Plan is coming to an end, the results
of the BPL Census conducted for the said Five
Year Plan are yet to be finalised. While noting
the fact that the results were delayed due to
the stay imposed by the Supreme Court in this
matter, the Committee have repeatedly been
recommending to the Department in the
respective reports to direct the State
Governments to complete the exercise and be
ready with the provisional results pending
decision of the Supreme Court. Even when the
announcement regarding the vacation of the
stay by the Supreme Court has been made by
Hon’ble Minister in Lok Sabha on 10 March,

107
12 3
2006, the results are yet to be finalised. As
stated by the Secretary , Department of Rural
Development, it will take two or three months
to finalise the results. While expressing the
concern over the inordinate delay in finalisation
of the BPL List, the Committee would like to
recommend for finalisation of the BPL list
without any further delay.
8. 2.34 The Committee further note that the next
official estimates of poverty incidence based on
NSSO (61st) round of Sample Survey conducted
in 2004-05 are expected by 2006. The Committee
hope that the results would be made available
during the year 2006 so that the genuine
beneficiaries i.e. below poverty line persons
could be provided assistance under the different
schemes of the Government. Till the results of
the latest survey are made available, the Census
report 2002, the results of which are still to be
finalised, could be used for the purpose of
different schemes of the Government.
9. 2.35 The Committee in their earlier reports have
repeatedly been expressing their unhappiness
over the decision of the Government according
to which the number of BPL persons estimated
should not exceed those identified as per 1999-
2000 survey. The Committee find that the
concerns of the Committee have been conveyed
to Planning Commission and it has responded
that since the cap on the total number of BPL
families to be identified was recommended by
the Expert Committee, the issue may be looked
into in detail by the Expert Committee to be
constituted for the BPL Census to be conducted
for Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee feel
that such an arbitrary limit on BPL persons to
be identified will do a great injustice to the
genuine BPL persons who could be debarred
from certain benefits. Not only that, such

108
12 3
limitations can provide unreasonable authority
to the agencies involved thereby inviting
corruption and malpractice. Therefore, the
Committee would like the Department to
pursue the matter with the Planning
Commission so that such limitations are not
imposed while finalizing the number of BPL
persons during latest survey.
10. 2.36 The Committee further note that as reported
in the Economic Survey, the extent of the actual
decline in the proportion of BPL between 1993-
99 and 1999-2000 has been a subject of an
intense debate by academicians because of
change in the methodology for collection of
basic data in 1999-2000 and possible non-
comparability with earlier rounds of consumer
expenditure surveys. The Committee would like
to be informed about the details of the
methodology adopted during the latest survey
being conducted for Eleventh Plan. They would
also like to be informed whether the results of
the BPL Census 2002 and 2006 would be
comparable keeping in view the specific
methodologies adopted during these two
surveys.
11. 2.46 The Committee find that even though the
Department has a detailed monitoring
mechanism to oversee the implementation of
various schemes/programmes meant for the
upliftment of rural masses, much needs to be
done to improve the delivery mechanism of the
schemes/programmes. Huge unspent balances
amounting to Rs. 9,162 crore lying with the
State Governments is certainly an area of
concern. The Committee further feel that more
than putting in place different monitoring
mechanisms, there is an urgent need to see that
the system works effectively. The working of
the district and State level Vigilance and

109
12 3
Monitoring committees speaks volume about
the ineffective state of monitoring mechanism
put in place by the Ministry of Rural
Development. Although there is a provision to
hold at least one meeting in each quarter, most
of the Districts and Vigilance Committees could
succeed in holding barely one meeting during
the year 2005. If this is the state of affairs of
the committees which are to be appointed by
the Department of Rural Development, the
status of other monitoring mechanisms can be
well imagined. Further, although the
Department has claimed that there has been
an increase in monitoring and vigilance of rural
development programmes at all levels
particularly at the grass-root level, no
information has been furnished by the
Department to substantiate the aforesaid claim.
In view of the aforesaid scenario, the
Committee hold the opinion that there is an
urgent need to implement the best of the
systems evolved for monitoring of schemes. The
Committee hope that with the implementation
of the Right to Information Act, there will be
a check on the proper implementation of
various programmes and schemes. Further
dissemination of information as required under
the provisions of the Act would make the
public aware about the various schemes and
programmes which automatically would put a
pressure on the implementing agencies to
perform better and deliver results.
12. 2.47 The Committee further find that a laudable
initiative has been taken by the Department to
prepare a permanent Indira Awaas Yojana wait
list. The Committee would like that similar
initiatives may be taken for other schemes of
the Department. Besides, it would be desirable
to put the BPL list of each district on the
website so as to ensure fair and transparent

110
12 3
selection of beneficiaries under different
schemes. The Committee would also like the
Government to pursue further with the State
Governments so that the directions issued by
the Department are really complied with. The
Committee may also be kept informed in this
regard.
13. 2.53 The Committee appreciate the concept of
Gender Budgeting covering as many as 24
Demands for Grants in 18 Ministries/
Departments and five Union territories and
schemes with an outlay of Rs. 28,737 crore. The
noble objective of Gender Budgeting is to
remove the disparity between the two genders
by giving more and more benefits to women
in all the schemes of the Government. The
Committee would like to emphasise that by
mere constitution of Gender Budget Cell, the
objectives behind Gender Budgeting would not
be achieved. The Committee are concerned to
find that although under the different schemes
of the Department of Rural Development,
particularly under IAY, SGSY and SGRY, specific
provisions for women have been made in the
guidelines, the implementation of the said
provisions is far from satisfactorily. As reported
in various Budget documents like Economic
Survey and Mid-Term Appraisal document the
targeted benefits are not reaching the female
beneficiaries.
14. 2.54 The Committee therefore desire that the
Government should seriously try to achieve the
targets specified for women beneficiaries in the
guidelines of each scheme so that the gap in
terms of employment, housing, wages etc.
between men and women is bridged to a great
extent. Further, survey at regular intervals be
undertaken by independent research agencies
to evaluate the effects of Gender Budgeting.

111
12 3
15. 2.56 The Committee note that preparations for
Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2011) are being
made and priorities are being finalized. The
Committee urge that the plan proposals should
be finalized expeditiously well before the start
of the Plan. Besides, the Committee would also
like that the State Governments should be
consulted before finalising the plan proposals.
The various recommendations made by the
Committee in their respective reports should
also be considered in this regard.
16. 3.20 The Committee note that the physical and
financial performance under the Sampoorna
Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) is very poor.
As on 31 January, 2006, the Government could
utilise only 54.57 per cent of the allocated
outlay for SGRY. Even in regard to physical
achievements, the Government could complete
only 55.70 per cent of the works undertaken.
Further, it could only generate 66.21 crore
mandays whereas the target was 86.11 crore
mandays. The quarter-wise achievements in
terms of mandays generated further indicate
shortfall of around 50 per cent during the first
quarter and around 40 per cent during the third
quarter. The Committee are not inclined to
accept the reasons put forth by the Department
that utilisation status always runs behind
schedule particularly when there is shortfall in
expenditure during 2004-05 when the financial
achievement was 83.42 per cent. Not only that,
11 States/Union territories could utilize less
than 75 per cent of the outlay. There are huge
unspent balances to the time of  Rs. 2,764.36
crore lying with the respective States/Union
territory Governments. Around 20 per cent of
the works undertaken during 2004-05 are still
incomplete. Besides, the Committee feel that the
plea of late receipt of Utilisation Certificates
cannot be accepted in this era of technological

112
12 3
advancement. The Committee would like to
know the State-wise reasons for under-
performance. Besides, the State/Union
territories and implementing agencies should be
impressed upon to furnish the timely Utilisation
Certificates. There should also be physical
inspection by Senior Officers of the Ministry to
check whether the works shown by the States
in their records, have actually been done/
completed in that particular year. The
shortcomings reflected by the Area Officers
during their visits and the corrective action
taken by the Department should be reflected
in the Budget documents.
17. 3.21 The Committee further find that 10 per cent of
allocation under different schemes is exclusively
earmarked for North-Eastern Region. The data
with regard to physical and financial
achievement under SGRY since 2002-03 indicate
that although the position is improving year
after year, still there is huge gap between the
total available funds and the expenditure
reported. Around 40 per cent of the funds are
still lying unspent. The position of mandays
generated improved during 2003-04, but there
is huge decline in the mandays generated
during 2004-05 and 2005-06. While 1464.60 lakh
mandays were generated during 2003-04, the
achievement declined to 823.53 lakh during
2004-05 and further to 785.91 lakh during 2005-
06. Further the expenditure position during
2004-05 is also worse as compared to the
previous year. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the reasons for shortfall in
physical and financial achievement during 2004-
05 and 2005-06 in North-Eastern Region. The
Committee urge the Department to take
necessary corrective action so as to ensure
meaningful utilisation of the exclusive outlay
made for these States.

113
12 3
18. 3.36 The Committee are concerned to note the poor
performance of a very important programme
of the Department i.e. ‘National Food for Work
Programme’ which has now been converted
into ‘National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme’. Not only that, the utilisation of outlay
is dismal i.e. 28.21 per cent during 2004-05 and
32.21 per cent during 2005-06 (as on 31 January,
2006). Even if the latest data is taken into
account, the percentage of expenditure to total
available funds is almost one-third. Out of total
available funds of Rs. 5,800 crore, expenditure
reported as on February, 2006 is Rs. 1,944.31
crore. Not only that a large number of works
taken up under the programme are still to be
completed. In this scenario, the Committee
express their apprehension about the success
of the National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme which is the top most priority
programme of the Government. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Government to plug
the loopholes which resulted into poor
implementation of National Food for Work
Programme and take stringent measures to
ensure that the objectives of National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act are met.
19. 3.37 The Committee further find that National Food
for Work Programme initially started in 150
districts has now been subsumed into National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. They
also note that during 2004-05 out of 73,183
number of total works undertaken, 18,130
works could actually be completed. Similarly,
during 2005-06 out of total works of 1,80,396
actually 1,03,625 works were completed. Besides
as on 31 December, 2005, an amount of
Rs. 1,910.73 crore was lying as unspent balances
under the programme. The Committee also note
that as per the information provided by the
Department, State Governments have been

114
12 3
directed to complete all ongoing works under
NFFWP latest by 30 June, 2006. Instructions
have also been issued whereby the works can
be completed under NREGA. The Committee
feel that there is an urgent need to monitor
the status of the incomplete works taken under
NFFWP . Besides the monitoring of the position
of utilisation of huge unspent balances is
urgently required. The Committee would like
the Department to pursue with the State/UT
Governments and a strict monitoring of the
programme should be done. The Committee
should also be kept apprised in this regard.
20. 3.38 The Committee further find that during 2005-
06 at the Budget Estimates stage, Rs. 6,000 crore
was provided under National Food for Work
Programme. At Revised Estimates stage, a cut
of Rs.1,500 crore was imposed thereby reducing
the allocation to Rs.4,500 crore. They also find
from the position indicated by the Department
that Rs. 1,500 crore were transferred from
NFFWP to SGRY to maintain at least the
previous SGRY allocation. Further the
Department has also acknowledged that the
revised allocation was sufficient to meet
NFFWP requirement. The Committee are
surprised at the statement given by the
Department whereby the estimated outlay
indicated at the Budget Estimates stage when
reduced substantially has been found to be
sufficient to meet the requirement of a
programme. The Committee, therefore, conclude
that the implementation of the programme was
very poor whereby the part of the allocation
made under NFFWP was transferred to another
programme. What is worse, even the reduced
allocation could not be utilised and the
implementation of the programme was quite
poor during the year 2005-06 as indicated in
the preceding paras of the Report. The

115
12 3
Committee deplore the tendency of the
Government whereby the allocation made
under a programme at Budget Estimates stage
is transferred to another scheme at Revised
Estimates stage. The Committee therefore
strongly recommend that efforts should be
made for meaningful utilisation of the allocated
resources in a year.
21. 3.39 The Committee further find that in the districts
not covered by National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme, the employment generation
scheme SGRY would be applicable till the
Guarantee Scheme is made applicable in all the
districts of the country. In view of this position,
the Committee would like that adequate
allocation under SGRY should be made so that
the districts where NREGA Scheme is not being
applicable are not deprived of the allocation
made under an old programme of employment
generation i.e. SGRY.
22. 3.55 The Committee reiterate the importance of the
National Rural Employment Guarantee
Legislation as indicated in their Thirteenth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) whereby it had
been observed that the National Rural
Employment Guarantee legislation is one of the
most important legislations introduced in
Parliament after Independence and it is the first
step of the Government towards ensuring some
sort of economic and social security by way of
guaranteed wage employment to the millions
of poor in rural areas in the country. The
Committee, while noting that only two months
have passed since the legislation was enacted,
feel that it is too early to draw any conclusions
about the success of the Guarantee Scheme. The
initial data of implementation provided by the
Department indicate that whereas in some of
the States viz., Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat,

116
12 3
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and West Bengal,
a good number of applications have been
received, in Haryana and Karnataka, the
number of applications received is quite less.
The Committee also find that the number of
applications received is quite dismal with
reference to the number of districts covered in
a particular State. The highest number of
districts covered are in Bihar i.e. 23, followed
by Uttar Pradesh i.e. 22. The data with regard
to applications as received in both the States is
quite comparable. Performance-wise, Andhra
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh which have
13 and 18 districts respectively covered under
the scheme have comparatively received almost
three times the applications as received by Bihar
and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee would like
the Department to find out the reasons why
lesser number of applications have been
received in these States where the poverty index
may be quite high as compared to Andhra
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh and apprise the
Committee accordingly. Further, the Committee
note that there is vast difference between
applications registered, job cards issued and
employment offered. Out of 2.24 crore
applications received, job cards have been
issued to around 83 lakhs applicants. Further
there is a huge gap between job cards issued
and employment demand and employment
offered. Out of 83 lakh job cards issued,
employment was offered to only 6,14,838
workers which is a very sorry state of affairs.
The Committee would like to urge the
Department to analyse the aforesaid data
critically and take corrective action, so that the
ambitious programme is implemented with full
vigour and the benefits reach to the intended
beneficiaries. For this, the Government has to
undertake effective long term planning, provide
the necessary ground training to implementing

117
12 3
agencies, identify the work timely, create the
necessary demand for work and ensure timely
employment to the job seekers for the specified
period. Since the legal responsibility of
providing employment rests primarily with the
State Governments and the responsibility of
providing commensurate funds rests primarily
with the Central Government, the Government
should ensure that the NREGA does not
become a liability if it is unable to generate
adequate employment commensurate to the
demand. The Department should maintain the
district-wise data with regard to implementation
of NREGA and it should be put on the website
so that public can have access to the data and
be aware of the implementation status.
23. 3.58 The Committee find that the provision of
unemployment allowance under the Guarantee
Scheme is the legal right of a person who has
been issued a job card. The huge difference
between the employment demand and
employment offered is a matter of concern.
Besides the expenditure with regard to
unemployment allowance has to be borne by
the State Governments as per the provisions
made under the legislation. In view of this
scenario, it will be a huge burden on the State
exchequer if the job opportunities are not
created by way of initiating the admissible
projects/schemes in a specific area. The
Committee would like to strongly recommend
to the Government to keep a watch on the data
and take the necessary action to bridge the gap
between the job cards issued, demand for
employment and employment offered so as to
avoid unnecessary litigation.
24. 3.61 The Committee are concerned to note the vague
reply of the Department on such a serious issue
of preparation of action plan to cover all the

118
12 3
districts under the provision of NREGA. Instead
of taking immediate action in this regard, it
has been stated that the performance of the
Act would be watched. The Committee note
that the guarantee of 100 days of wage
employment to each household in rural areas
in the country has been provided under the
enactment and further under the provisions of
the Act it has been specifically mentioned that
the guarantee shall be applicable to the whole
of the rural areas in the country within a period
of five years from the date of enactment of the
Act and as such there is no scope for delaying
the implementation of the Act. The Committee
are of the firm opinion that an action plan for
coverage should be prepared by the
Department and transparency in this regard
should be maintained so that the part of the
country where the Guarantee Scheme at present
is not applicable can be reassured about the
applicability of the legislation in the near future.
25. 3.63 The Committee find that in the absence of
information with regard to total area (districts/
blocks) falling under Schedule Fifth and
Schedule Sixth areas in the country, it is difficult
to draw any conclusion on the issue of
according priority to such areas in the country.
In view of the aforesaid position, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the
total area (districts/blocks) in each State in
Schedule Fifth and Schedule Sixth areas and
the areas covered by the NREGA so far so as
to draw any meaningful conclusion and
recommend further in this regard. The
Committee would like that the information in
this regard should be furnished separately for
Schedule Fifth and Schedule Sixth areas.
26. 3.65 The Committee note that handling of such a
voluminous work related to implementation of

119
12 3
50 per cent of the Employment Guarantee
Scheme by Panchayati Raj Institution is a huge
challenge. The capacity building of the
Panchayats by way of empowering these
institutions through funds and functionaries is
the prerequisite to ensure the success of the
programme. Conducting a few programmes by
NIRD is not sufficient. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to take the
desired action in coordination with the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj for empowering the
Panchayats so as to enable these institutions to
take the responsibility of implementation of a
scheme of this level.
27. 3.67 The Committee find from the reply of the
Department that no attention has been paid to
ensure the distribution of foodgrains under the
Guarantee Scheme whereas 75 per cent of the
wages under the scheme can be paid by way
of foodgrains. It has simply been stated that
only cash resources would be provided to the
State Governments. The Committee would like
the Department to clarify further whether the
procurement and distribution of foodgrains will
be the sole responsibility of the State
Governments and what will be role of the
undertakings involved in foodgrains like Food
Corporation of India (FCI) so as to enable the
Committee to recommend further in this regard.
28. 3.69 The Committee while noting that only seven
States only have so far notified Guarantee
Scheme under NREGA, urge the Department
to pursue with the State Governments for an
early notification of the Scheme.
29 3.70 Further, the Committee find that a detailed
implementing and monitoring mechanism as
proposed under the provisions of the Guarantee
Act has to be created to ensure the successful

120
12 3
implementation of the Guarantee Scheme. The
Committee note with concern that State
Governments have not yet initiated action in
this regard. In view of this scenario, the
Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to pursue with the State
Governments for appointment of different
agencies to ensure the success of the
programme. In the absence of the desired
mechanism as provided in the provisions made
under the Act, the Committee have their
apprehensions that the Guarantee Scheme may
meet the fate of the other Centrally Sponsored
Schemes of the Department.
30. 3.80 The committee are perturbed to note the poor
lending rate by Banks. During 2004-05,
applications at the rate of four out of every
ten applicant were rejected. The rejection rate
has further increased to about five persons out
of every ten applicants. This inter-alia means
that over fifty per cent of the needy are unable
to take benefit under SGSY due to some reason
or other. The Committee observe that this is a
disturbing trend and would ultimately lead to
collapse of the scheme. The Department cannot
wash away its hands simply by shifting its
responsibility on Reserve Bank of India which
is entrusted with the responsibility to coordinate
and motivate Banks on all issues relating to
SGSY. The Department needs to resolve all the
issues pertaining to poor lending rate by taking
the matter at the highest level in the Reserve
Bank of India, Finance Ministry and the Chief
of leading Banks. The Committee are of the
view that applicant approach the Banks with
great hope and expectations and they feel let
down when their applications are rejected on
flimsy grounds or due to cumbersome
procedure. The Committee, therefore, suggest
that the procedure for lending under SGSY be

121
12 3
simplified and paper work should be reduced
so that people are not unnecessarily harassed.
Help counters may be opened either at the
Bank or DRDA Office to assist the illiterate
applicant in filling up the forms, explaining
them the highlights of the scheme, the liability
of the applicant, the procedure for taking the
benefit under the scheme etc. Further, the role
of DRDAs and Panchayati Raj Institutions(PRIs)
should be strengthened for effective
coordination between them and the Banks so
that the needy applicants are not unnecessarily
turned away by Banks.
31. 3.88 The Committee are concerned to note that the
physical targets meant for disadvantaged
groups like SC/ST and handicap category have
not been met satisfactorily. While some States
have fared well, the figures indicate that the
SC/ST Swarozgaris assisted in more than
13 States and Union territories are less than
fifty per cent. Further, the statement indicates
that except in Tamil Nadu and Manipur the
percentage of handicap Swarozgaris assisted is
less than the three per cent target. On an
average, by the end of February 2006, only
43.13 per cent of the targeted Swarozgaris could
be assisted which also highlights the poor
performance of the scheme. Further, the
Committee note that the utilization of funds
by many States is very poor. While more than
13 States have disbursed less than 50 per cent
of the credit marked for them, the Committee
note that the overall percentage of credit
disbursed is only 36.02 per cent. The Committee
observe that the poor performance could be
attributed to the slack attention paid by the
Government. Something is lacking due to which
the Government has failed to attract the
targeted number of Swarozgaris. The DRDAs/
Zilla Parishads are also not trained enough to

122
12 3
meet their objectives. As revealed by the
Concurrent Evaluation, the scheme is facing a
lot of problems which include indifferent
attitude of Banks, inadequate infrastructure,
problems in identifying projects etc. There is
an urgent need to address all these issues to
ensure the success of the programme. The
Committee would like the Department to look
into the matter and take remedial action in
consultation with State Governments, Banks,
DRDAs and all other concerned.
32. 3.90 The Committee note that in addition to the
Public Sector Commercial Banks, Cooperative
Banks, Regional Rural Banks, some Private
Sector Banks are also being involved in the
implementation of SGSY. The Committee
would, therefore, like to know the performance
of various Private Sector Banks vis-a-vis the
Public Sector Banks, Cooperative Banks and
Regional Rural Banks in term of the credit
target vis-à-vis achievement in each year since
these Banks were involved to analyse the role
of Private Sector Banks critically and comment
further in this regard. The information with
regard to total number of beneficiaries assisted
and the total credit made available in each year,
and the average benefit made available to each
beneficiary in each case of Commercial Banks,
Cooperative Banks, Regional Rural Banks and
Private Sector Banks may be provided for the
information of the Committee.
33. 3.105 The Committee find that the data with regard
to physical targets fixed during each year of
Tenth Plan indicate that although the targets
made during 2006-2007, are 92,237 higher than
the targets fixed during 2005-2006 but are lesser
by 28,858 houses, if compared to the year 2004-
2005. In view of this position the Committee
note that although ambitious commitments are

123
12 3
being made with regard to providing housing
under IAY, there is no such enhancement of
targets and outlay to meet such commitments.
Not only that the resources made available are
not being utilised fully. The information
provided above indicates that in most of the
States less than 50 per cent of physical and
financial targets could be achieved. The
Committee observe that as per the
Government’s own data the housing shortage
in rural areas is 148 lakh. The said shortage
will increaw by shortage of 9 lakh houses
annually due to various reasons. The annual
targets fixed under Bharat Nirman are over
15 lakh houses. Around 60 lakh houses would
be constructed by the year 2009. The net
shortage of houses by the year 2009 as per the
Government’s own estimate would be 184 lakh
(148 lakh + 36 lakh) houses. Even if 60 lakh
houses are provided by 2009, there would be
shortage of 124 lakh houses by 2009. The
Committee have selected the subject ‘Rural
Housing’ for examination and report and
different issues in this regard would be
examined in detail during the course of
examination of the subject. Here the Committee
would like to recommend that besides
augmenting the resources, there is an urgent
need to ensure that the targets fixed are met
and every paise earmarked for the scheme
meant for rural masses is meaningfully utilised.
Further, to augment the resources for rural
housing, there is an urgent need to expand
institutional credit.
34. 3.106 As already indicated in the preceding para of
the report, the Committee appreciate the
initiatives of the Department to instruct the
State Governments to prepare the wait list for
IAY as per the ranking in the BPL list and
display it at the prominent places. The

124
12 3
Committee would like the Government to
ensure that the instructions issued by the State
Government are complied with. Further, similar
initiatives are required in other Schemes of the
Department. The Committee would like the
Department to take action in this regard and
inform the Committee accordingly.
35. 3.116 The Committee observe that Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana is a very laudable
programme initiated by the Government with
the objective to provide connectivity by road
to all the unconnected habitations in rural areas
in the country. From the information provided
by the Department, it seems that the progress
is not very encouraging. Initially, at the launch
of the programme, the objective was set to
provide connectivity to all unconnected
habitations having a population of 500 and
above (250 and above in hill States, tribal and
desert areas) by the end of Tenth Plan i.e.
(2006-07). The targets have now been spilled
over. The Government now target to connect
all the habitations having a population of 1000
and above (500 in case of hilly States, tribal
and desert areas) by the year 2009. The
Committee apprehend that it would be difficult
to achieve even the spilled over targets with
the existing pace of implementation of the
programme, whereby even the roads started in
Phase I and Phase II during the years
2000-2001 and 2002-2003 are lying incomplete.
The Committee find that as per stipulated
parameters set by the Department, the roads
should be ready within 12 months in normal
and within 18 months in hilly areas after award
of work. Even after the lapse of five or six
years, a number of roads started are incomplete
which is a major area of concern. Many reasons
such as availability of land, forest clearance,
programme management & provision,

125
12 3
contracting capacity of States, institutional
arrangement, training etc. have been cited as
the reasons for such a state of affairs of the
programme.
36. 3.117 The Committee also find that one of the reasons
for these bottlenecks being faced in the
implementation of the programme is very old
and out dated enactment ‘Land Acquisition Act,
1894’. The said enactment is under the
administrative control of the Ministry of Rural
Development. The Committee have repeatedly
been recommending to the Ministry to amend
the out dated provisions made under the Act.
But the same has not been done so far. Even
though the Government has found the ways
and means to provide the required allocation
of Rs. 48,000 crore by the year 2009 to complete
the uphill task of providing connectivity to all
the habitations of population of 1000 and above,
the Committee are of the opinion that the
targets cannot be achieved unless the problem
areas are addressed urgently. The Department
has to work on a mission-mode. There is an
urgent need to enhance the capacity of the State
Governments/implementing agencies to absorb
the enhanced resources. Besides, various
bottlenecks found in the implementation of the
programme as noted above need to be
discussed at various meetings held with the
State Governments. Frequent Central
interventions are required to motivate the State
Governments to take the challenge of providing
connectivity by the target date. Further, the old
and outdated laws like ‘Land Acquisition Act,
1894’ need to be amended expeditiously which
would solve the major problems like acquisition
of land for construction of roads etc. The
Committee should be kept informed about the
action taken in this regard.

126
12 3
37. 3.120 The Committee are perturbed to note that most
of the works under PMGSY are being sublet to
contractors by the principal contractors. Further
the Committee express their apprehension on
the quality of roads built under PMGSY.
Despite deploying monitors at various levels,
the quality of roads at the field level is very
poor. Many roads would have vanished in a
single rain. Some would have vanished after
few months of their construction and in other
areas, where the roads do exist the same are
very poorly maintained. This is a vital area
which needs to be addressed by the
Government on top priority otherwise the work
done under PMGSY will bear no result and
the connected habitations would again revert
to unconnected status. The Committee
recommend that to address this situation and
to improve the quality of roads, the
Government should make the monitors more
accountable. If roads are found to be bad and
of poor quality, further work to the concerned
contractors should not be awarded. Besides, a
notice board at the entrance and at prominent
milestones of every road constructed under
PMGSY should be erected indicating that the
road is constructed under PMGSY, the month
and year of its construction, the month and
year till the road is expected to be maintained
by the contractor as per the agreement and the
name, designation, phone number of the officers
whom the people can contact in case the quality
of road is not up to the mark or is maintained
poorly. The status of roads should also be
accessible on the website and people should
be able to put their complaints on the website
so that Senior Officers of the State/Union
Governments are able to monitor the status of
roads. The accountability of monitors who
inspect the roads should also be increased so
that they are brought to book in the event of

127
12 3
non-performance. Another area of concern,
which the Committee would like the Ministry
to address is to impress upon a separate fund
for the maintenance of roads. The Committee
would like to hear further in this regard.
38. 3.127 The Committee observe that the Steering
Committee on Provision of Urban Amenities in
Rural Areas (PURA) in its first meeting held
on 11 January, 2005 had decided that each
cluster would be financed to the tune of
Rs. 4-5 crore over a period of three years in
the initial pilot phase. After a gap of two
months, the decision of this meeting was
implemented and Rs. 10 crore were released to
provide physical or road connectivity in
selected clusters during March 2005. Thereafter,
up to 31 January, 2006, no further funds have
been released. The Committee conclude that
during 2005-06 no progress seems to have been
made in the selected PURA clusters as no funds
have been released even after a span of more
than one year. The Committee while noting the
slow pace of work, express their apprehension
that it would take a long time to get the results
from the pilot clusters and thereafter launch
the scheme nationwide. The Committee find
that a visionary programme to bridge the gap
between urban and rural divide has been
proposed by Hon’ble President. There is an
urgent need to translate the visionary idea into
a reality. For this the pilot project should be
completed expeditiously so that the programme
can be launched nation-wide.
39. 3.137 The Committee observe that DRDA is an
important district level agency for
implementation of Centrally Sponsored
Schemes. As per the Guidelines, 25 per cent of
the funds are to be allocated and released by
the State Governments. However, the

128
12 3
Performance Budget of the Department does
not monitor the progress of State’s share of
funds. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Government should invariably monitor
the State’s share of funds and reflect the same
in the Performance Budget of the Department.
40. 3.138 The Committee further find from the
information furnished by the Department that
seven utilisation certificates amounting to
Rs. 125.21 crore were due with regard to the
funds released by 31 March, 2004. The
Committee observe that DRDA is the main
agency through which funds for different
schemes of the Department are allocated to the
States/implementing agencies. The non-
furnishing of utilisation certificate by a
Government agency who is responsible for
effective management of rural development
programmes at district Panchayat level is really
a matter of concern. The Committee would like
the Department to explain the reasons for non
furnishing of utilisation certificates by DRDA.
Besides, the other issues which need to be
addressed are training of the officers and other
administrative initiatives relating to the service
matters to improve the efficiency and
accountability of officers involved in manning
DRDAs.
41. 3.150 The Committee find from the information given
above that the performance of CAPART has
deteriorated over the years. CAPART came into
existence in 1986 with the principal objective
to involve the people in the implementation of
development programmes and promote need
based, innovative projects through non-
governmental voluntary organization. The great
shortfall in achievement of targets during
2005-2006 are indicated in the Budget documents
speaks volumes about the inefficiency of

129
12 3
CAPART. Further, the report of the Estimates
Committee highlights the collapse of the
CAPART. Even the DG, CAPART has admitted
this during the course of oral evidence. In view
of this scenario, the Committee strongly
recommend the Department to look into the
matter seriously in the light of the poor
performance of CAPART and make all out
efforts to review/restructure the functioning of
CAPART. The Committee would like to be
apprised further in this regard.
42. 3.163 The Committee find that capacity building of
the implementing agencies are the major input
for the successful implementation of rural
development programmes for which crores of
rupees are annually being allocated. Besides,
with the decentralisation of responsibilities in
pursuance of article 243G of the Constitution
of India, there is a great responsibility to equip
Panchayats to take the huge responsibility. With
the introduction of ‘National Employment
Guarantee Scheme, the responsibilities of
Panchayats would increase manifold. The
Committee further find that NIRD at the
Central level, SIRD at the State level and ETCs
at the district/block level are the premier
institutions involved for imparting training and
capacity building of Panchayats and other
functionaries involved with the implementation
of various programmes/schemes meant for
upliftment of rural masses. The shortfall in
achievement of targets by these institutions is
a matter of great concern. Out of 21 research
studies, NIRD could undertake only one study.
There is huge shortfall in achievement with
regard to training programmes of SIRD/ETCs
during the first three quarters during 2005-06.
The Committee while expressing their
unhappiness over the shortfall in achievement
of targets during 2005-06, would like the

130
12 3
Department to explain the reasons and to take
the corrective actions. The Committee should
be kept informed in this regard.
43. 3.164 The Committee further note that with the
added responsibilities as stated above, the
challenge of imparting training to Panchayats
and other implementing agencies cannot be met
only by these Government agencies. There is
an urgent need to train some of the NGOs as
the mother trainers who can impart training to
PRIs and others involved in implementation of
rural development schemes. Besides, the
possibilities of taking the benefit of other local
institutions can also be explored. The allocation
for training needs to be enhanced substantially.
The Committee urge the Department to take
all possible measures so that the objectives set
under the laudable schemes/programmes are
met. The Committee may also be informed of
the further action taken by the Department in
this regard.