14
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
FOURTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


FOURTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on …………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on …………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

C.R.D. No. 017
Price : Rs. 43.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2005-2006) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 26
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
reply ............................................................................. 48
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 49
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 64
APPENDICES
I. Statement of Operational Guidelines on capital
investment subsidy scheme for construction
of rainwater harvesting structures for Individual
Households, Community and Institutions ......... 67
II. Statement indicating position of enactment of
legislation on control and development of
ground water resources in various States as
on the 12th March, 2003 ........................................ 88
III. Extracts of minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 27 October, 2005 ................. 92
IV . Analysis of Action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Eleventh Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 99
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
12. Shri Prabodh Panda
13. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shrimati Vanga Geetha
24. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
25. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
26. Shri Penumalli Madhu
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
4. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Fourteenth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2004-2005) on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of
Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005.
The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained
in the Report were received on 24 August, 2005.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
27 October, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee
is given in Appendix IV .
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
22 November, 2005 Chairman,
1 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2005-2006)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Eleventh Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006)
of the Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 41 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.15, 2.32, 2.33, 2.43, 2.44, 2.64, 2.65, 3.12, 3.13,
3.14, 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, 4.17, 4.20, 4.23, 5.9, 5.10, 6.29, 6.30 and
6.31.
(ii) Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s reply:
Para No. 2.63.
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.30, 2.31, 2.34, 2.45, 2.49, 2.50, 2.51, 2.66, 4.10,
4.11, 4.15, 4.16, 5.8, 6.26, 6.27 and 6.28.
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.53, 4.24 and 5.7.
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Survey with regard to Slippage of Habitations
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.30, 2.31 and 2.34)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee for the last three years have been emphasizing
the need to have the exact data of slippage of habitations. They
note that in this direction a State-wise habitation survey was
initiated and in 26 States the results have been made available.
However there were some discrepancies in the data and the
results are being revalidated by Indian Institute of Public
Administration (IIPA). The Committee would like to be apprised
of the final position with regard to slippage of habitations, after
the revalidation is completed.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
“The Committee are constrained to note the handling of ‘Not
Covered’ and ‘Partially Covered’ habitations by the Department.
Although the Department admits that slippage of habitations is
at a larger level and for that the Working Group for Tenth Plan
has estimated 2.8 lakh slipped back habitations, the picture of
slipped back habitations will be more clear when the final results
of the aforesaid survey are made available. With the said state of
affairs, the Department has continued to claim that the position
of coverage of habitations in the country is 95 per cent. Not only
that, States of Bihar, Chhattigarh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Daman and Diu and
Delhi are stated to be the States/Union territories which have
achieved 100 per cent coverage. The Committee disapprove the
way a very bright picture as opposed to the ground position
with regard to the availability of drinking water in the country
is projected by the Department. The Committee strongly
recommend that announcements regarding achievement of the
Department should be realistic and accurately presented in various
Budget documents presented to the Parliament as well as
submitted to the Parliamentary Committees.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.31)
“On the issue of periodical updation of data of slipped back
habitations, the Committee note that the Department propose
revalidation on the quarterly basis. The Committee find that
revalidation is a detailed exercise and as such revalidation should

3
be done on yearly basis. On the issue of the reservations of State
Governments, that they have no infrastructure in this regard, the
Committee would like the Department to sort out the matter in
consultation with the State Governments and the viable option
of appointing some agency for the purpose and also for allocating
outlay from the allocation of ARWSP should be explored. The
details in this regard when finalized should be placed before the
Committee for further review and comments.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.34)
6. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as under:
“As per the agreement, the Indian Institute of Public
Administration (IIPA) is required to give validated data of
habitation survey by February 2006. IIPA has initiated the data
cleansing process in respect of 22 States till date. So the final
position with regard to slippage is still not known at present. To
expedite the revalidation process, the Department has called the
representatives of States/UTs in different groups to discuss with
the representatives of this Department, NIC and IIPA for effective
and time bound action. The Committee will be apprised in due
course of time.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
“The observation of the Committee have been noted and the
process of obtaining slippage of habitations from States on annual
basis has been initiated.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.31)
“Under the Action Plan for Bharat Nirman the Department has
asked the States/UTs to provide web-enabled computerized data
of the uncovered habitations of CAP 99, as well as uncovered
rural schools and quality affected and slipped back habitations.
This would be in addition to obtaining annual slippages data
from States. The Department has initiated the process of obtaining
the data on annual basis, which is likely to result in presentation
of realistic data on ongoing basis. The validation exercise is
currently been done by IIPA. The Department will continue to
do the validation annually through agency/agencies as and when
required.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.34)

4
7. The Committee have persistently been expressing their
strongest concern over the dichotomy in the data with regard to
accessibility and availability of drinking water in rural areas in the
country. The said issue was stressed upon in the aforesaid
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee note from the
replies that the current position in this regard is as under:
(i) surveys results with regard to slippage of habitations in
22 States are being revalidated by the Indian Institute of
Public Administration (IIPA). The revalidated data of
habitation survey is to be made available by IIPA by
February, 2006; and
(ii) pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee, the
Department has initiated the process of obtaining the
information regarding the slippage of habitations from
States on annual basis.
The Committee find that updation of the information with regard
to slippage of FC and PC habitations to NC habitations on annual
basis is not possible without procuring the initial data for which
the survey is being initiated/revalidated as stated above. The
Committee would like the Department to ensure that revalidation is
completed by the stipulated date i.e. February, 2006 so that the future
action with regard to regular updation of data on annual basis can
be initiated by the State Governments.
The Committee also find that data with regard to 22 States/Union
territory Administrations is being updated by IIPA. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the status of the States/Union territory
Administrations from which survey results are still awaited.
The Committee further find from the replies that the Department
propose to discuss the issue of time bound action for completion as
well as revalidation of survey with the State Governments/Union
territory Administrations in different groups. The Committee would
like that the issue of annual reporting of slippage of habitations
should also be discussed with the representatives of State
Governments/UT Administrations at the said meeting so that an
effective mechanism can be worked out for the purpose. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the outcome of the
aforesaid meeting.

5
The Committee in their earlier recommendation (refer para
No. 2.34) had further observed that the State Governments had certain
reservations with regard to infrastructure for periodic updation of
slipped back habitations. The Committee had recommended to sort
out the matter in consultation with the State Governments so that
the viable option of appointing some agency for the purpose of and
for allocating outlay from the allocation of ARWSP could be explored.
The replies of the Department are silent on the aforesaid issue. The
Committee would like the Department to respond on the matter so
as to enable them to further review the position in this regard.
B. Analysis of the mechanism of reporting by State Governments
Recommendation (Para No. 2.45)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are further constrained to note that while in
some States physical achievement is less than 50 per cent, some
States could achieve the inflated targets as high as upto 2320 per
cent in Orissa and 1300 per cent in Goa. The Committee are not
satisfied with the reply of the Department that these States fix
the targets on a vary low scale whereas these States could cover
much more habitations. The Committee find that there is gross
mismatch between physical and financial achievements. besides
such a data reflects that there is some sort of confusion in
reporting the data by the State Governments. The Committee
strongly recommend the Department to have a critical and
indepth analysis of the mechanism of reporting by State
Governments and explain the position to the Committee so as to
enable them to understand State specific performance in a better
way and comment further in this regard.”
9. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“This year the Department has undertaken a detailed exercise
for fixing the realistic targets. The unit cost involved in coverage
of not covered and partially covered habitations and the amount
allocated to the States/UTs were taken into account while working
out the targets.
It is pertinent to point out that even in 2004-05 the net physical
achievement was to the extent of 92.63 per cent as against the
target of coverage of 74,868 habitations, the actual achievement
reported is 69,347. During 2005-06, the States and UTs have been
given realistic targets for schools as well as habitations, keeping
in view unit cost of coverage and availability of funds with
different States.”

6
10. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had noticed
that while in some States physical achievement of ARWSP was
50 per cent, some States could achieve the inflated targets as high
as upto 2320 per cent in Orissa and 1300 per cent in Goa. While
expressing concern over the gross mismatch between physical and
financial achievements, the Committee had recommended to have a
critical and in depth analysis of the mechanism of reporting by
State Governments. In pursuance of the recommendation of the
Committee, the Department has undertaken a detailed exercise for
fixing the realistic targets whereby the unit cost involved in coverage
of not covered and partially covered habitations and the amount
allocated to States/UTs were taken into account. The Committee while
appreciating the stand taken by the Department to ensure realistic
targets note that nothing has been done to analyse the system of
reporting by the State Governments. The reporting of achievement
of inflated targets as high as 2320 per cent clearly indicates that
there is some sort of confusion in reporting of data by State
Governments.
The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation to check
and analyse the mechanism of reporting by State Governments/Union
territory Administrations and would like the Department to undertake
critical assessment in this regard and inform the Committee
accordingly.
C. Inter-component Allocation of ARWSP
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.49, 2.50, 4.10 and 4.11)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that different funding patterns have been
adopted under the various components of ARWSP . Under ARWSP
(Normal) 50 : 50 is the Central and State Government contribution,
but in case of DDP , 100 per cent is the Central allocation. For
quality and sustainability for which 15 per cent and 5 per cent
of allocation respectively under ARWSP can be utilized, the
Centre : State ratio is 75 : 25. For Swajaldhara for which 20 per
cent of the outlay under ARWSP is earmarked, 90 per cent is the
Central contribution and 10 per cent is the community
contribution. While appreciating the fact that for quality and
sustainability, States are being provided more Central funds, the
Committee note that monitoring of such a complex inter-State
allocation criterion is a difficult task. The Committee would like
the Department to explain how the monitoring is being done so

7
as to ensure that the specified State contribution and specified
inter-scheme allocation is ensured for the specific purpose, to
enable the Committee to come to some meaningful conclusion
and comment further in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.49)
“The Committee also note the water tight compartments for
allocating resources for various components of ARWSP . For
example for sustainability 5 per cent outlay is earmarked and for
quality 15 per cent allocation can be used. 20 per cent of funds
are earmarked for Swajaldhara. The Committee feel that there is
an urgent need to simplify the inter-component allocation of
ARWSP . The Department may examine the issue and apprise the
Committee accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.50)
“The Committee find from what has been stated above that the
sustainability of system itself is dependent on sustainability of
sources. Another noticeable issue is that 90 per cent of all drinking
water is dependent on ground water sources. The gorund water
is depleting fast which may be the main reason for slippage of
FC and PC habitations to NC habitations the details of which
have been given in the previous chapter of the Report. In this
scenario, the Committee conclude that the major challenge that
the Department may have to face in the coming years is the
sustainability of sources.”
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
“The Committee further note that although the Department
accepts the magnitude of the problem relating to sustainability
of water sources, substantial efforts have not been made in this
regard. Only 5 per cent of the funds under ARWSP could be
used for water sustainability. The issue of water tight
compartments for different components under ARWSP has been
dealt with in the previous part of the report. Here the Committee
would like to recommend to the Government to give more thrust
on sustainability and the allocation for the purpose should be
enhanced. There is an urgent need to enhance the allocation for
sustainability since the issue of  slippage of habitations can only
be tackled by handling this issue. The Department would be
able to achieve the objective of full coverage of habitations only
when the problem of sustainability is properly handled. The

8
Committee would like the Department to take earnest action in
this regard and inform the Committee accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 4.11)
12. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“In so far as ARWSP (DDP), ARWSP (Calamity Relief) and
ARWSP (Swajaldhara) are concerned, there is no difficulty in
monitoring as there is no State share for these components.
However, in respect of remaining components watch has to be
kept as for coverage as well as operation and maintenance,
funding pattern is 50:50, and in respect of Quality and
Sustainability it is 75 per cent Central and 25 per cent State.
While releasing the second instalment, it is scrutinized whether
the State Government has made provision for State contribution
in accordance with the funding pattern. In case the contribution
from the State is less than their due share as per the funding
pattern, the release of Central funds are reduced accordingly in
the release of second instalment.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.49)
“To give due weightage to various aspects of the rural drinking
water supply it is necessary to bifurcate the ARWSP funds in
various components, viz., quality, sustainability, calamity relief,
Swajaldhara etc. The funds for rural drinking water supply are
mainly for the coverage of habitations through ARWSP (normal)
but focus has also to be given on the coverage through reform
process under Swajaldhara and also for quality and sustainability.
For calamity relief, funds are required to be earmarked to leave
some rooms to meet the contingencies arising out of natural
calamities and other emergent situations.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.50)
“Sustainability of sources is dependent on the replenishment of
ground water table, which is the mandate of Ministry of Water
Resources. As a User-Department, this Department contributes
its share to the overall cause, by various methods of rain-water
harvesting, roof-top harvesting and artificial recharge. This
requires integrated efforts of various Ministries.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)

9
“It is proposed to make sustainability, a part of coverage for
which 70 per cent of ARWSP allocation will be earmarked. It is
also proposed to make source-strengthening an integral part of
all coverage schemes. Depending on requirement, States can utilize
more funds for sustainability. Under Swajaldhara programme,
sustainability of drinking water sources is an integral component
of the water supply scheme. In this regard State Governments
have been provided with a CD on Rainwater Harvesting and a
Manual on Artificial Recharge and Rainwater Harvesting. Also,
in order to identify the correct location for existing drinking water
sources and also for locating water harvesting structures,
hydrogeomorphological maps (groundwater prospect maps) have
been got prepared for 10 States and sent to State Governments
by utilizing services of National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA),
Hyderabad.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 4.11)
13. The Committee in their respective reports have repeatedly
been recommending to the Department to lay more stress on
sustainability and quality. The Committee find that there is no clarity
in the stand of the Department in this regard. Pursuant to
recommendation No. 2.50, whereby the Committee had recommended
for simplication of the inter-component allocation of ARWSP , the
Department has reproduced the already known inter-component
allocation criterion as per the guidelines. However, in response to
recommendation no. 4.11, the Department has stated that there is a
proposal to make sustainability, a part of coverage for which 70 per
cent of ARWSP allocation will be earmarked. As per the said
proposal, State Governments would be provided flexibility to utilize
funds for sustainability.
The Committee note that the problem of coverage is directly
related to sustainability of the water resources. Not only this, the
issue of quality of water is too related to sustainability. Besides, it
is very difficult to monitor such a complex formula of Centre : State
allocation whereby for each category different criteria have been
fixed. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to provide
some sort of flexibility to State Governments in addressing the issues
of coverage, sustainability and quality. In view of the aforesaid
position, the Department should reconsider the earlier
recommendations of the Committee. The State Governments should
be provided some flexibility in utilisation of allocation under ARWSP
for coverage, sustainability and quality depending upon the

10
requirement. Besides, Centre-State inter-scheme allocation criteria
should be simplified. The Committee would like a categorical
response of the Department in this regard.
D. State’s contribution under ARWSP
Recommendation (Para No. 2.51)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee further note that under normal ARWSP , States
are unable to contribute equal amount of what is allocated by
the Central Government in a year. In this regard the Committee
desire that the total outlay provided by the Union Government
as well as State  Governments so far may be furnished so as to
enable the Committee to analyse the position of matching share
by State Governments in a better way and comment further in
this regard.”
15. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“As desired by the Committee the year-wise and State-wise details
of the Central as well as State share is given as under:
Investment in Rural Drinking Water Supply—Centre and States
(Rs. in Crore)
       Investment in Rural Drinking Water Supply
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Name of the State Central* State Central* State Central* State
12 3 4 5 6 7
Andhra Pradesh 208.73 161.18 316.40 182.40 373.88 96.61
Bihar 37.03 44.55 36.05 67.65 96.72 53.33
Chhattisgarh 29.43 65.15 32.40 72.75 26.90 75.11
Goa 0.00 0.00 0.13 0.00 0.61 0.00
Gujarat 99.98 195.18 145.68 199.42 114.06 186.60
Haryana 33.57 64.76 34.83 100.29 29.64 102.28
Himachal Pradesh 82.29 98.23 64.86 85.36 66.03 93.58

11
12 3 4 5 6 7
Jammu and Kashmir 111.96 80.85 150.59 108.00 150.22 125.00
Jharkhand 19.50 80.00 25.00 70.06 31.66 78.25
Karnataka 143.56 109.37 183.50 109.97 198.94 141.72
Kerala 18.99 66.70 70.14 76.82 63.25 113.39
Madhya Pradesh 95.86 124.38 113.65 115.61 120.27 89.96
Maharashtra 224.63 261.67 230.02 263.71 293.67 200.94
Orissa 61.47 64.43 84.53 68.96 104.38 59.53
Punjab 30.81 84.95 26.73 76.19 35.33 109.77
Rajasthan 247.18 379.31 298.18 440.10 370.79 475.93
Tamil Nadu 129.28 411.00 135.92 375.00 161.59 411.00
Uttaranchal 45.05 71.56 27.63 73.70 40.71 77.11
Uttar Pradesh 113.66 192.04 135.10 197.14 169.92 101.58
West Bengal 101.15 120.03 109.46 68.79 103.05 88.87
Arunachal Pradesh 36.50 30.09 45.92 53.11 70.79 55.70
Assam 56.23 56.30 106.33 70.25 140.76 87.86
Manipur 9.47 21.79 17.02 9.00 21.03 17.00
Meghalaya 29.36 22.60 22.14 29.25 30.86 31.00
Mizoram 21.96 18.20 14.75 17.56 20.77 16.78
Nagaland 21.81 21.81 19.81 15.61 20.85 15.41
Sikkim 8.96 12.70 7.91 12.96 9.03 15.38
Tripura 31.98 20.14 28.64 20.21 24.43 18.61
Total 2050.40 2878.97 2483.32 2979.86 2890.11 2938.31
Total Central 2100.70 2564.90 2930.78
Budget Utilised
*Central releases include releases under ARWSP (normal), DDP , Calamity, PM’s
programme. Sector Reforms/Swajaldhara and Management Information System (MIS)

12
16. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had desired
the information relating to total outlay provided by the Union
Government and State Governments so far under normal ARWSP .
The Department instead of furnishing the total outlay in this regard
has given the data for the years 2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005.
The Committee would like the Department to furnish the requisite
data as per the earlier recommendation.
While analysing the data furnished for the aforesaid three years,
the Committee find that Andhra Pradesh, J&K, Goa, Karnataka and
Tripura have contributed considerably lesser amount than Central
allocation under ARWSP in all the three years. Another trend noticed
is that the number of States not contributing equal matching share
as per the guidelines is increasing year  after year. In 2002-03, eight
States/Union Territory Administrations contributed lesser than the
Central allocation. The number of States/Union territory
Administrations increased to ten in 2003-04 and seventeen in
2004-05.
The Committee further note that as per the guidelines (refer
Para 2.5.1 of guidelines for implementation of Rural Water Supply
Programmes) the allocation of Central Assistance under the ARWSP
is subject to the matching provision/expenditure by the States under
the State Sector Minimum Needs Programme (MNP). Releases under
the ARWSP would not exceed the provision for Rural Water Supply
made by the State Government under the MNP . In such a situation
the Committee fail to understand how the Central allocation is being
released without ensuring the equal allocation by the State
Governments as per the stipulated guidelines. The Committee while
expressing the strong concern over the matter would like the
Department to analyse the reasons therefor and inform the Committee
accordingly.
E. Special Allocation under ARWSP
Recommendation (Para No. 2.53)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee appreciate that special allocation is indicated in
the aforesaid para has been made for Tsunami affected States viz.,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Pondicherry and Kerala. The Committee call for strict monitoring
so as to ensure that the allocation earmarked for Tsunami affected
areas is utilized for the intended objective i.e. restoration of water
supply to such areas.”

13
18. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The funds have been released to the States/UTs concerned for
the purpose of restoration of water supply in such areas and this
intention has been indicated to them while releasing funds from
calamity relief component of ARWSP . The States/UTs concerned
have been asked to provide information about the utilization of
fund and restoration of water supply in the affected areas.”
19. The Committee note that Tsunami affected States/Union
territory Administrations which provided special funds under ARWSP
have been asked to report about the utilisation of funds and
restoration of water supply in the affected areas. The Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation for strict monitoring and would
like to be apprised about the details of physical and financial
achievement in this regard.
E-1 Replacing ARWSP by Swajaldhara
Recommendation (Para No. 2.65)
19A. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee in their earlier report (Para No. 2.60 of 1st
Report—14th Lok Sabha) had examined the concept of replacing
ARWSP by Swajaldhara and expressed serious concerns in this
regard. * * * The Committee strongly recommend to review the
position in this regard in the light of what has been stated above
and the apprehensions expressed by the Committee. The
Committee may be adequately explained about the position to
enable them to analyse the not so encouraging performance of
ARWSP as evaluated above.”
19B. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The Committee have noted earlier that now the Department
has initiated action to extend the reforms process to ARWSP
instead of replacing it with Swajaldhara. The detailed modalities
for this are still being discussed in the EFC and the Committee
shall be informed of the same when finalised. It is proposed to
gradually incorporate the reforms, i.e. community participation,
from the Eleventh Plan.  In the intervening period,  the States
are to be guided towards a Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) with the Department to enable them to take up the
reforms. * * *”

14
19C The Committee note that the detailed modalities to extend
the reforms process to ARWSP are being discussed in the Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) and it is proposed to gradually incorporate
the reforms i.e. community participation from the Eleventh Plan.
The Committee while noting that ARWSP and Swajaldhara are two
district schemes of drinking water, would like to reiterate their earlier
stand on the issue of replacing ARWSP by Swajaldhara. These two
schemes should be implemented separately. The concern of the
Committee expressed in their earlier recommendations should be
considered while finalizing the policy for drinking water schemes
for Eleventh Plan.
The Committee further note that as per the guidelines (refer
Para 3.4.1. of the Guidelines for implementation of Rural Water
Supply Programmme and Para No. 15.4 of guidelines of  Swajaldhara)
funds for Sector reforms and Swajaldhara are released district-wise.
The Committee would like that the guidelines in this regard should
be strictly followed and the unit of allocation/releases of funds for
all the Central Sector Schemes of drinking water should be the
district.
F. Relaxed norms for backward districts under  Swajaldhara
Recommendation (Para No. 2.66)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that recently Swajaldhara guidelines have
been amended to reduce proportion of cash contribution from
5 per cent to 2.5 per cent in the case of Scheduled Tribe/
Scheduled Caste habitations. The remaining 7.5 per cent
contribution can be in kind (labour, material etc.). The Committee
would like that the possibility of extending the facility of said
relaxed norms should be explored in case of most backward
districts in the country.”
21. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“Extent of SC/ST population is one of the criteria for identification
of the most backward districts, along with agricultural
productivity per worker and agriculture wage rate. There are
specific poverty alleviation schemes for the most backward
districts; it may not be desirable to extend the relaxed community
contribution in these districts. However, as burden of community
contribution is related to the cost of schemes, which in turn is
dependent on geohydrological conditions, a proposal to give
flexibility to State Governments/SWSM to further relax the extent
of the cash contribution in DDP and hill areas is under
consideration.”

15
22. The Committee find that their earlier recommendation to
extend the facility of relaxed norms with regard to proportion of
cash contribution under ‘Swajaldhara’ on the lines of relaxation
provided to Scheduled Tribes/Scheduled Castes habitations to most
backward districts in the country has not been agreed by the
Department. The plea taken is that there are specific poverty
alleviation schemes for the most backward districts.
The Committee are not inclined to accept the reply of the
Department. The Committee find that there is a proposal to extend
the relaxation in condition of community contribution in DDP and
hill areas on the basis of higher costs due to geohydrological
conditions. While appreciating the said proposal of the Department,
the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to consider most
backward districts too for said relaxation. The people in most
backward districts may not be in a position to contribute ten per cent
of community contribution in cash. However, they may contribute
by kind (labour, material). The Committee also note that the main
purpose of community contribution  is to provide ownership concept
of assets created under a scheme and contribution by way of labour
or material is altogether appreciable in this context. The Committee
would like the Department to reconsider the earlier recommendation
to extend the facility of relaxed norms to most backward districts so
that more and more Swajaldhara schemes can be taken in such
districts.
G. Water Testing Laboratories
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that in order to address the water quality
problems, it is essential to identify the exact problems besides
ascertaining the magnitude of the problem. The Committee feel
that if the water quality is tested correctly it will go a long way
in dealing with the problem of contamination of drinking water.
The Committee appreciate the position of the Government to
institutionalize community based water quality monitoring and
surveillance programme by adoption of catchment area project
wherein quality will be tested  at the grass roots level by the
Panchayats/VWSC. The Committee also note that some efforts
are being made to provide district level testing laboratories, for

16
which Rs. 425.95 lakh have been released by the Department.
The Committee would like to know the physical performance of
the funds released in this regard so far. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the funding pattern for water quality
testing laboratories at the Panchayats/VWSC level.”
24. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The physical performance of the funds released for providing
district level water quality testing laboratories for which, an
amount of Rs. 429.95 lakh has been released by the Department,
is as follows:
Labs sanctioned = 442; Labs established = 268.
The State Governments are being requested to send the updated
status reports and also to expedite setting up of the remaining
labs. Uttar Pradesh is seeking funds as per the revised norms as
they could not set up the labs in the year in which these were
sanctioned. Wherever required, like in Bihar, revalidation requests
are being processed. Gujarat has informed that they would out-
source water quality monitoring services. Some States are facing
problems of non-availability of technical staff for manning these
laboratories, due to ban on creation of posts by the State
Governments. Options like out-sourcing, employing trained
manpower on contract basis, etc. are to be considered in such
cases. As regards funding pattern for water quality testing
laboratory at the Panchayat/VWSC level, 100 per cent funding
from Central Government for provision of field-testing kits, one
for each revenue village, has been proposed under the National
Rural Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance Programme.”
25. The Committee appreciate the proposal of the Department to
provide 100 per cent Central funding for providing field testing kits,
one for each revenue village. They hope that the decision in this
regard is taken at the earliest. As regards the existing position with
regard to district level laboratories, the Committee find from the
data that there is a huge gap between labs sanctioned and labs
established. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons
for this huge difference specifically when 100 per cent funds are to
be provided by the Central Government. Since water testing labs
can go a long way in tackling the problem of contamination of
water, the Committee would like the Department to pursue the matter
further with the State Governments.

17
Besides, the Committee find that problems are also being faced
for manning these laboratories by some of the State Governments.
The Committee would like the Department to interact with the State
Governments in this regard so that a viable solution can be found.
H. Water Conservation
Recommendation (Para No. 4.15)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:
“On the issue of water conservation, the Committee note that
ARWSP guidelines provide for dual water policy for rural
habitations facing acute water problems. The Committee feel that
dual water policy should apply to all areas of the country since
scarcity of drinking water is the issue concerning all the States/
Union Territories. It should be ensured that every habitation
should use the treated water for drinking and cooking and for
other purposes, like washing and ablution, untreated water can
be used. The Committee recommend to the Department to think
of revising ARWSP guidelines and inform them about the action
taken in this regard.”
27. The Government in the action taken  reply have stated as under:
“As per ARWSP guidelines, dual water policy is to be followed
in quality affected habitations only, for serving the minimum
needs for cooking and drinking purposes. Only about 14 per
cent of the total habitations are affected with water quality. In
the remaining 86 per cent non-contaminated habitations, the
norms of 40 lpcd are being followed for water supply.”
28. The Committee are constrained to note the casual reply
furnished by the Department on such a serious issue i.e. water
conservation and management. On the recommendation of the
Committee to have dual water policy for all rural areas in the country,
it has simply been stated that as per the guidelines dual water policy
is to be followed in quality-affected habitations. The Committee
deplore the way their recommendation on such a serious matter is
dealt with. The Committee find that there is an urgent need to
conserve each drop of drinking water. As such there is an urgent
need to implement dual water policy in each area in the country.
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation would
like that the issue of dual policy with regard to use of water in
rural areas should be dealt with seriously and the guidelines revised
accordingly.

18
I. Water Management
Recommendation (Para No. 4.16)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that efforts have not been made so far for
treating the used water and then supplying the same for drinking
water purposes. Besides another issue which needs urgent
attention is the leakage of water where water is being supplied
through pipes. The Committee would like the Department to
analyze the position in this regard, take the desired action and
inform them accordingly.”
30. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“During various review meetings and also during the technical
review meetings held by the officials of this Department, the
concerned State Government are requested to pay more attention
to reduce leakage of water especially through pipelines. In rural
areas, the predominant water supply is arranged through hand
pumps. Guidelines on sustainability have been issued in 2002.”
31. The Committee note that the reply of the Department on the
aforesaid recommendation is incomplete. No response has been given
to the part of the recommendation whereby the Committee have
desired to analyse the position with regard to treating the used water
and then supplying the same for drinking purposes. The Committee
would like the Department to respond on the aforesaid issue.
J. Desalination Project at Lakshadweep
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24)
32. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee further note that Union Territory of Lakshadweep
has furnished a request for setting up of sea water based
desalination plant at Kavaratti. The proposal is being processed
for SFC approval. The Committee would like the early clearance
of the said project. The Committee also calls for more serious
attempts by the Department on this issue in view of what has
been stated above.”

19
33. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The proposal of setting up a desalination plant, 300 cubic meter
per day capacity at Kavaratti has been approved by the SFC in
April, 2005 at a cost of Rs. 8.97 crore. The Administrator of UT
of Lakshadweep has recently informed that a 100 cubic meter
per day desalination plant based on the latest technology called
as low temperature thermal desalination has been installed at
Kavaratti at a cost of Rs. 4.95 crore. Services of National Institute
of Ocean Technology, Chennai have been taken for the purpose.
This Department has asked the UT of Lakshadweep to identify
whether this particular plant can be upgraded from 100 cubic
meter per day capacity to 300 cubic meter per day capacity, which
will be the requirement of Kavaratti. Reply from Lakshadweep
UT Administration is awaited.”
34. The Committee find that the proposal for setting up
desalination plant of 300 cubic meter per day capacity costing
Rs. 8.97 crore at Kavaratti in Lakshadweep has been approved by
SFC. The Committee also note that UT of Lakshadweep has been
requested to identify whether the recently installed desalination plant
of the capacity of 100 cubic meter per day can be upgraded to
300 cubic meter per day capacity. The Committee hope that the State
Government of Lakshadweep may have responded by now. The
Committee would like early action in this regard so that the
desalination plant of 300 cubic meter can be installed/upgraded
expeditiously. The Committee would also like to be informed in
this regard.
K. Drinking Water in Schools
Recommendation (Para No. 5.7)
35. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee have repeatedly been drawing the attention of
the Department towards the urgent need to provide safe drinking
water in rural schools in a stipulated time frame. In spite of that
the work has not been done at the desired level. As per
Government’s own data 34 per cent of the Government schools
are yet to have facility of drinking water. The ground reality in
this regard may be further grim. About private, public and
Government aided schools, the data of drinking water availability
is yet to be procured. Further alarming is the data with regard
to achievement of physical targets by States/Union territories

20
during 2003-2004 and 2004-2005. As many as 8 States/Union
Territories reported nil performance during 2003-2004. Further,
for Haryana, Daman and Diu, Delhi and Lakshadweep no targets
were fixed. The worse is the position during 2004-2005. Twelve
States/Union Territories reported nil achievement. The Committee
find that the Government have set the targets of coverage of all
schools by the end of Tenth Plan. In this scenario it seems difficult
to achieve the targets. Another disturbing fact noticed by the
Committee is the Department’s concept that there is no question
of slippage of coverage of schools. The Committee fail to
understand as to how the Department can stop the various issues
such as the resources being dry, or the system going
non-operational which is rampant in case of rural habitations
when it comes to the issue of school coverage. The Committee
are constrained to note the thinking of the Department in this
regard. Without verifying the ground reality, the Department has
chosen to state that the position of slippage of coverage of schools
for non-coverage is not applicable to schools. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the reaction of the Department in
this regard.”
36. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Department agrees with the observation of the Committee
that there could be slippage in schools too. In the light of
observations of the Committee and pending receipt of results of
the Seventh All India Education Survey, the Department has
initiated collection of data on schools where drinking water
facilities are not functioning, as well as data on availability of
drinking water facilities in Government-aided and private
schools.”
37. The Committee find that pursuant to their recommendation
to verify the position of slippage of coverage of schools, the
Department has initiated action for collection of data in this regard
from Government, Government aided and private schools. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the agencies
involved for the collection of the said data and the targets fixed in
this regard.
L. Drinking Water in Schools under Swajaldhara
Recommendation (Para No. 5.8)
38.  The Committee had recommended as under:
“On the issue of contributing 10 per cent community contribution
from MPLAD funds for the schools covered under Swajaldhara,

21
the Committee fail to understand the logic furnished by the
Ministry of Planning and Programme Implementation that
MPLAD funds, which is Government’s funding cannot be
substitute for community contribution. The Committee strongly
feel that schools cannot be treated at par with other rural
habitations. The schools can not be deprived of drinking water
or sanitation in case community is not ready to contribute. If
MPLAD funds can not be equated with community contribution,
then 100 percent Central assistance should be provided for
coverage of schools in this regard.”
39. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“For the coverage of schools under ARWSP , there is no
contribution from community as funding pattern is 50 per cent
Central and 50 per cent State. Swajaldhara is a contributory
approach with 90 per cent Central and 10 per cent community
contribution. Rural schools can be covered by the States and UTs
from the funds provided under ARWSP .”
40. The Committee find the reply of the Department vague and
evasive. The Committee had raised the issue of contributing 10 per
cent community contribution from MPLAD funds for the schools
covered under Swajaldhara or 100 per cent contribution for schools
under the scheme. The Department instead of working on the
formula suggested by the Committee have chosen to clarify the
position of Centre-State contribution under ARWSP . The Committee
find that school coverage is part of Swajaldhara too and the
recommendation of the Committee related to school coverage under
Swajaldhara only. The Committee deplore the way the Department
has dealt with their recommendation. The Committee would like
the Department to reconsider their recommendation and take action
urgently.
M. Adequate Outlay for Rural Sanitation
Recommendations (Para Nos. 6.26 and 6.27)
41. The Committee had recommended as  under:
“The Committee have repeatedly been expressing their strongest
concern on the issue of sanitation in rural areas in their respective
reports. However, nothing substantial could be done so far. It is
a matter of serious concern that even after more than five decades
of planned development in the country only 31 per cent of the

22
rural households, that too as per the Government’s own data
could be provided latrines, not to speak of the total sanitation.
As many as 64 per cent of the rural households defacate in
open. As rightly admitted by the Finance Minister, sanitation
remains critically deficient out of Rs. 3,663 crore proposed during
Tenth Plan, the Department has got Rs. 955 crore which is around
one-fourth of the proposed outlay of the Department. The
Committee further note that fund required for rural sanitation
would be of the order of Rs. 676 billion and Rs. 503 billion
respectively if the goal of achieving 50 per cent of rural sanitation
by 2015 and full sanitation by 2025 has to be achieved as set by
‘World Summit for Sustainable Development’ held at Johannesburg
in 2002. More so as per Department’s own estimates, a total of
Rs. 5,932 crore would be required if the target of covering the
whole country by Total Sanitation Programme has to be achieved
by 2010. The Committee observe that during 2005-2006, the outlay
has been increased from Rs. 400 crore as provided during
2004-2005 to Rs. 700 crore. But even the enhanced outlay is not
sufficient. There is an urgent need to step up the outlay
considerably.”
Recommendation (Para No. 6.26)
“The Committee further find that the Department has initiated
action for mobilizing resources through domestic resources and
World Bank. The proposal in this regard after the approval of
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission has been
forwarded to the World Bank. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the details of the projects to be taken up by the
World Bank assistance. Besides the Committee note that there is
enough potential to mobilise resources through internal as well
as international resources like World Bank. The Committee urge
to pay more attention in this regard keeping in view the funds
constraint.”
Recommendation (Para No. 6.27)
42. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“It is true that Rural Sanitation coverage in the country is low.
It was only 22 percent in 2001 which has increased to 33 percent
in 2005. There could be 11 percent increase in rural sanitation
coverage since 2001 due to implementation of Total Sanitation
Campaign. During the 10th Plan Period, Planning Commission

23
had allocated only Rs. 955 crore which was a meagre amount.
However, in the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan, Planning
Commission has agreed to increase it by another Rs. 1,350 crore
and already during the four years of the current Plan
approximately Rs. 1,450 crore has been made available. It is
expected that the actual availability of fund for rural sanitation
in the Tenth Plan would be Rs. 2,300 crore.
The Department has estimated that for implementation of Total
Sanitation Campaign in all the districts in the country,
approximately Rs. 5,951 crore would be required. Of late Planning
Commission has already stepped up the allocation for rural
sanitation and it is expected that adequate funds would be
provided by the Planning Commission for rural sanitation in the
years to come.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 6.26)
“In the year 2003, Department has estimated a budgetary gap of
Rs. 4,086 crore for implementation of Total Sanitation Campaign
and accordingly initiated steps to mobilise resources from World
Bank funding. Proposal in this regard has been sent to
Department of Economic Affairs which in turn has forwarded it
to the World Bank. In the meantime, considering the necessity of
promoting rural sanitation coverage, Planning Commission has
already enhanced the budgetary allocation. Considering the
current level of budgetary allocation of Rs. 700 crore in 2005-06
and maintaining a normal growth rate in the allocation, it is
expected that the budgetary gap of Rs. 4,086 crore can easily be
met and there may not be any necessity to seek World Bank
funding for rural sanitation sector.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 6.27)
43. The Committee find from the replies of the Department that
out of Rs. 5,951 crore projected outlay for Tenth Plan, actual
availability of funds for rural sanitation would be to the tune of
Rs. 2,300 crore. Thus, there will be a gap of Rs. 3,651 crore. Further
in the year 2003, the Department has estimated a budgetary gap of
Rs. 4,086 crore. On the one hand it has been stated that steps are
being taken to mobilize resources from World Bank funding, on the
other hand it has been submitted that it may not be necessary to
seek World Bank funding for rural sanitation sector keeping in view
the current level of budgeting. The Committee fail to understand
the line of action taken by the Department so far as the issue of

24
mobilization of funds for rural sanitation is concerned. There is no
clarity on the data as well as the policy of the Department to
mobilize resources for the purpose. The Committee while expressing
their deep concern over the way the replies have been furnished by
the Department would like the Department to clarify the position
so as to enable the Committee to analyse the position and comment
further in this regard.
N. Construction of Toilets in rural areas in the country
Recommendation (Para No. 6.28)
44. The Committee had recommended as under:
“Besides funds constraint, the Committee find that implementation
of the sanitation programme is not too impressive. Out of
3,94,48,353 sanctioned BPL toilets, the achievement is
94,94,525. Community complexes position is further worse. Out
of 30,203 community complexes sanctioned so far, the achievement
is 4,607. The State-wise position also indicates the similar view.
There is huge difference between releases and expenditure.  Worst
is the position in certain North-Eastern States. In 2003-2004 and
2004-2005, in Mizoram, Manipur and Meghalaya the position of
expenditure reported as well as toilets constructed is nil. As per
Government’s own admission States like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Gujarat, North-Eastern States, Himachal Pradesh, Goa
and Karnataka are some of the non-performing States. In this
scenario the Committee find that merely enhancing the outlay
will not be sufficient. Since Total Sanitation Campaign is a
demand driven programme there is an urgent need for educating
the masses about the ill effects of open defecation. The success
of the programme can be achieved through public involvement.
More needs to be done with regard to the involvement of
Panchayats, NGOs/VOs so that public through them can be
educated and more   projects could be demanded by them. State
Governments too need to be motivated in this regard. The
Committee feel that the Department has to work on war footing,
if the objective of total sanitation is to be achieved within a
stipulated time frame.”
45. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“It is true that in order to promote rural sanitation, the
Department has to work on war-footing and it has been doing
so since the launch of the programme. The implementation of

25
Total Sanitation Campaign programme is not uniform throughout
the country. There are States where the implementation is picking
up quickly whereas in some States it is slow. However, various
steps have been taken to improve the pace of implementation
and to ensure that higher priority is given by the States and
district implementing agencies to this programme. As a result
the implementation has improved significantly in the past
3-4 years and more than 1.31 crore household toilets have been
constructed under TSC which is more than the number of toilets
constructed under erstwhile CRSP during 1986 to 2002. All out
efforts are being made to ensure that slow moving States also
give high priority to TSC implementation.
In order to ensure greater community involvement, the
Department has launched Nirmal Gram Puraskar which is an
incentive scheme for the PRIs, individuals and organizations
working for successful implementation of the programme. This
has evoked good response and in 2005, 38 Gram Panchayats and
2 Block Panchayats have got this award. In addition to this,
greater focus on Information Education and Communication (IEC)
as well as capacity building of different stakeholders has been
given to ensure better implementation of the programme. It is
expected that Department will get good results of these efforts in
near future.”
46. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had expressed
concern over the poor performance of rural sanitation programme
and stressed on the need for public involvement through Panchayats
and NGOs/VOs. The Committee also laid emphasis on motivation
of State Governments in this regard. The Committee find from the
replies of the Department that while on the one hand it has accepted
the challenge of providing sanitation facilities to rural areas in the
country, on the other hand a sense of complacency is reflected in
the reply. The achievement of targets with regard to providing
sanitary latrines is as low as around 25 per cent. The position of
community complexes is worse where the achievement is as low as
around 15 per cent. Even then the Department has tried to justify
the achievement by comparing the cumulative data between 1986 to
2002 and the last 3-4 years. The Committee express strong concern
over the poor performance of Rural Sanitation Programme. They
would like to be apprised about the concrete corrective action taken
by the Department so far. The Committee are of the view that there
is an urgent need to work on this in the mission mode and there is
no scope of being complacent. As such the Committee calls for
concrete action on the lines suggested in the earlier recommendation.

26
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para 2.15)
The Committee note from the data furnished by the Department
that during Tenth Plan, the allocation made for drinking water is
Rs. 13.245 crore against the proposed outlay of the Department
amounting to Rs. 24,800 crore. The Department has later projected
outlay of Rs. 26,000 crore. Thus almost half of what was proposed for
Tenth Plan has been made available for the Department. Further during
the first four years of Tenth Plan upto 2005-2006, Rs. 7275.19 crore
could be allocated. Thus Rs. 5,969.81 crore is the balance amount.
Besides, the Committee find that to achieve the target envisaged in
the National Common Minimum Programme of the Government the
requirement of outlay for the next five years has been assessed as
Rs. 31,950 crore. As regards the releases from the Department, the
data indicate 100% achievement. State-wise allocation and spending
position has been reviewed in the subsequent part of the report.
The Committee find from the information provided by the
Department that the gap between the projected outlay and the existing
allocation is to be filled through enhanced budgetary and extra
budgetary support. For the said purpose three projects in Kerala,
Karnataka and Maharashtra with World Bank loan component of
US $ 398.10 million were taken up. Out of these, two projects have
been completed. Further three more projects in the said States are
being taken up with World Bank assistance. Another method suggested
is taking up the projects on private-public partnership. The Department
has proposed to analyze the private-public partnership in five States
namely Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and West
Bengal.
In the aforesaid scenario the Committee conclude that resource
constraint is the major challenge for achieving the laudable targets set
by the Government. Even the proposed extra budgetary support is not
to be required level. The Committee note that drinking water is the
fundamental need for the survival of life in the world. As such, it

27
needs top most priority. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
the following:
(i) Central allocation for drinking water should further be
augmented. There cannot be any compromise on the issue
of drinking water. The Government should provide the
requisite outlay to achieve the set objective;
(ii) There is enough scope for getting loans from the World
Bank and other international institutions/organizations etc.
Efforts should be made in this regard and more projects in
the remaining States should be taken up; and
(iii) The proposal for private-public partnership should be
analysed expeditiously and the Committee be apprised of
the outcome of such analysis in the aforesaid five States.
Reply of the Government
(i) The Department has been pursuing augmentation of central
allocation for drinking water supply vigorously with the
result that it became possible to increase the central
allocation. This would be evident from the fact that as
against Rs. 2900 crores in 2004-05, the allocation for 2005-06
is Rs. 4050 crores. In the mid-term review of the 10th plan,
Planning Commission has agreed to provide an additional
amount of Rs. 3,500 crore during the 10th Plan for rural
drinking water sector.
(ii) Three projects are currently being implemented with World
Bank Aid in the States of Karnataka, Maharashtra and
Kerala. 3 more projects for States of Uttaranchal, Punjab
and Tamil Nadu are in advanced stages of negotiations with
the World Bank. Also a proposal for funding through the
World Bank for tackling water quality problems in 9 selected
States (which would cover 90% of the problem) is under
consideration. Additionally Rajasthan has also approached
European Union Commission for funding in the rural water
sector in the State.
(iii) Since drinking water supply is a State subject, it is for the
State Governments to take up projects on private-public
partnership. A Conference of State Secretaries was held on
25th May 2005 at Vigyan Bhawan and the observations of
the Standing Committee in regard to public-private
partnership projects were brought into the notice of all State

28
Secretaries concerned with rural drinking water supply.
WSP-SA has already prepared an approach paper on Public
Private Partnership in rural water supply sector, have also
finalized Terms of Reference (ToR) and invited Expression
of Interest for hiring local consultants to support WSP-SA
and RGNDWM in developing a PPP framework and risk
assessment for rural water supply schemes in deepening
and broadening the scope of their existing engagements with
the private sector and civil society organizations.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.32)
The Committee are disturbed to find that the position of actual
coverage of habitations reflects a sharp decline as compared to previous
year. Equally disturbing is the fact that same routine reply stating that
Not Covered (NC) habitations are in the difficult terrain is furnished
by the Department every year. The Committee fail to understand the
said reply of the Department in this age of technological advancement.
They would like the Department to inform the Committee about the
technology options explored to provide such difficult areas with
drinking water. It should be ensured that the said difficult areas are
covered within a stipulated time frame.
Reply of the Government
As on 1st April, 2005, there are 55067NC/PC habitations of
CAP 99 which are yet to be covered. Under Bharat Nirman it is
envisaged to cover all these balance habitations of CAP 99 by 2008-09.
Yearly targets have also been given to the States and the department
is in the process of obtaining the list of all the balance habitations of
CAP 99 in order to monitor their coverage in each of the next 4 years.
Further for transparency and accountability, they have been asked to
prepare list of habitations to be covered each year which would be
hosted on the web-site of the Department. The technology options to
provide difficult areas with drinking water are multi stage pumping,
rain water harvesting by check dams and gully plugs, roof top rain
water harvesting and hydrams. Another technological option is the
cunjunctive use of ground and surface water and/or combination of
conjunctive use and rainwater harvesting structures.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]

29
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
The Committee further find that there is utter confusion with regard
to the data indicated regarding coverage of habitations. Two Budget
Speeches of Finance Minister made during 2004-2005 and 2005-2006
reflect this position. The Finance Minister during 2004-2005 indicated
the number of to be covered habitations as 75,000 and during
2005-2006 this data has been stated to be as 74,000 indicating
achievement of only 1,000 habitations. The Department’s data reflect
the achievement of 35,591 habitations during 2004-2005. Even the
Secretary has acknowledged the discrepancy in the data. The Committee
find from the aforesaid position that perhaps there is a race for chasing
data irrespective of the ground reality in this regard. The Committee
are really disappointed to note such a situation and strongly
recommend that the data presented by the Department should be
realistic.
Reply of the Government
The data is compiled on the basis of input received from State/
UTs. In 2004-05 the physical achievement was 69,347 habitations which
included the uncovered CAP 99 habitations as well as slipped back
and quality affected habitations. As per the reports received from the
States and UTs, as on 1st April 2005, there are 55,067 habitations of
CAP 99, which are yet to be covered. The process of obtaining data
of slipped back habitations from States on annual basis has already
been initiated and this is likely to result in presentation of realistic
data on ongoing basis. The States and UTs have been asked to provide
the list of the habitations, which are yet to be covered in electronic
form which can be put on the website so that realistic data is available.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.43)
The Committee after analyzing the position of the performance of
States, note that whereas from the side of the Union Government, the
spending is ensured almost 100 per cent as could be seen from the
earlier part of the report, the State-wise performance is not so
encouraging. Only 66.03 per cent of the total available funds could be
utilized during 2003-2004, whereas during 2004-2005, 38.47 per cent is
the utilization position. The Committee note that the data during
2004-2005 may further increase with more States indicating physical
achievement, but with the level of the achievement noted during
2003-2004, the performance is not so favourable.

30
Another disappointing fact is the lower absorption capacity of State
Governments as indicated by the Secretary during the course of oral
evidence. The Committee are really confused with the paradox of
demanding more outlay without ensuring the absorption capacity of
the State Governments. As noted earlier by the Committee, on the
issue of drinking water, there is no scope for compromise. In this
situation the Department has to work on war footing. The issue of
increasing the absorption capacity of State Governments and better
performance on the drinking water sector should be taken up at the
highest level so that a dialogue on this aspect could be held at various
Chief Ministers conferences/seminars. Further on the Department’s part,
the issue should be debated in various workshops/seminars arranged
where the officials of the State Governments represent so that the
situation could be analyzed State-wise and corrective action initiated
thereon. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action initiated
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department organize State Secretaries Conference on 25th May,
2005 and the issue of increasing absorption capacity of the States was
discussed. It was emphasized that there is need for early coverage of
habitations (uncovered of CAP 99 as well as slipped back habitations)
and minimize the closing balances. It was also impressed upon that
the States which are still having left over uncovered habitations of
CAP 99 need to make extra efforts. The enhanced allocation for
2005-06 was brought to the notice of State Secretaries and they were
advised to make advance planning to ensure full utilization. The
progress of utilisation of fund is also being reviewed in the Quarterly
Performance Reviews undertaken in the Planning Commission. The
targets for 2005-06 have been drawn taking into account the allocation
for 2005-06 and cost of coverage of habitations. It is also proposed to
seriously take up the issue in the forthcoming regional conferences
with State Secretaries in charge of Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation
which are scheduled to be held in September—October, 2005 and
conference of Ministers of State Governments in-charge of rural drinking
water supply scheduled in October 2005.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)
The Committee note that during 2004-2005, the unspent balances
were to the tune of Rs. 39,834.37 lakh against the said data of

31
Rs. 40,068.96 lakh during the previous year. It is significant to note
that there is only improvement of Rs. 234.59 lakh as compared to
previous year. The Committee find that when the issue for huge
unspent balances, was brought to the knowledge of the Department,
instead of taking the desired action the Department has tried to justify
the position by stating that unspent balances during 2004-2005 are
lesser than 2003-2004. The Committee disapproves the aforesaid
tendency on the part of the Department and feel that urgent and
desired action should be taken in case of under spending of scarce
resources.
Reply of the Government
The Department is making sincere efforts and taking all possible
steps to ensure maximum utilization of the funds by the States. The
issue is being discussed in all for a, including State Secretaries
Conferences. The last Conference was held on 25th May 2005 wherein
the progress of utilization of funds was discussed. The progress on
utilization of funds is being monitored on a regular basis through
various reports. To give disincentive to the States having large
unutilized funds, there already exists a provision for reduction of release
in the second instalment to the extent of the amount of the Opening
Balance in excess of 15% of the allocation. From this year the provision
has been made further strict by Ministry of Finance and now the
Opening Balance in excess of 10% of allocation will be taken for
reducing the release in second instalment.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.64)
The Committee note that the performance of Swajaldhara is not
very encouraging. The number of projects taken under Swajaldhara,
which was 4,723 during 2002-03, has further declined to 3,791 during
2003-2004. During 2004-2005, the position is further worse. Only 2,074
schemes could be taken up. The number of completed schemes has
also declined. During 2002-2003, 1,102 schemes were completed. The
number increased to 1,145 during 2003-2004 but declined considerably
during 2004-2005 to only 6 schemes. To understand more about the
implementation of the scheme, the Committee would like to be apprised
of the cumulative data of number of projects taken up so far,
habitations/population benefited, expenditure incurred, projects
completed etc.

32
Reply of the Government
The desired cumulative data on progress of schemes under
Swajaldhara since inception of the scheme (year 2002-03) to 11.8.2005
is annexed.
Swajaldhara Scheme including SRP
As on 11.8.2005
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. State Total No. of Total Total Total No. Schemes Total
No. Allocation Districts Release Expenditure of Completed amount
under Schemes released
Swajaldhara for SRP
Schemes
so far
12 3 4 5 6789
1. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 24.69 0 0.00 0 0
2. Andhra Pradesh* 11200.15 20 13677.43 7710.10 2676 1589 19646.56
3. Arunachal Pradesh 921.17 15 228.08 0.00 181 75 680.62
4. Assam 2309.54 14 1033.2 661.98 474 70 1225.90
5. Bihar 1797.71 5 725.84 0.00 21 0 1122.00
6. Chandigarh 0.00 0 0.00 0 0
7. Chhattisgarh 858.00 14 552.11 115.84 163 53 1122.00
8. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 25.94 1 9.14 0.00 1 0
9. Daman & Diu 0.00 0 0.00 0 0
10. Delhi 12.35 0 0.00 0 0
11. Goa 29.59 0 0.00 0 0
12. Gujarat 2933.62 13 2590.4 1121.58 183 21 10117.23
13. Haryana 502.66 10 361.64 7.85 157 0 1391.16
14. Himachal Pradesh 2010.13 9 1219.63 131.94 911 36 607.36
15. Jammu & Kashmir 3057.92 14 2227.87 314.29 341 64 2197.99
16. Jharkhand 724.14 21 195.81 0.00 0 0 1122.00
17. Karnataka* 3130.22 25 4061.65 412.97 270 57 8336.08
18. Kerala 1532.28 12 1094.92 360.85 235 4 4986.88
19. Lakshadweep 0.00 0 0.00 0 0 0

33
12 3 4 5 6789
20. Madhya Pradesh 2336.04 30 1817.97 572.72 1269 149 4837.74
21. Maharashtra 12535.27 24 9585.87 3137.60 1370 0 9863.67
22. Manipur 316.45 0 0.00 0 0
23. Meghalaya 363.08 6 167.51 0.00 43 0 272.10
24. Mizoram 260.13 3 116.03 17.75 5 0 223.35
25. Nagaland* 267.70 3 288.38 57.80 13 0 333.22
26. Orissa 2270.19 31 1758.65 372.82 645 72 6060.00
27. Pondicherry 12.35 0 0.00 0 0
28. Punjab 664.90 11 484.76 11.33 20 0 1426.69
29. Rajasthan 5433.10 28 4591.16 748.91 1452 240 6801.62
30. Sikkim 110.53 4 0 0.00 0 0 607.97
31. Tamil Nadu 3187.02 29 3186.83 1797.79 1200 983 18987.81
32. Tripura 321.90 4 260.69 0.00 195 0 2310.21
33. Uttar Pradesh 4286.02 70 3209.94 585.50 1137 82 5556.56
34. Uttaranchal 743.00 11 601.21 0.00 106 0 1122.00
35. West Bengal 2055.72 15 1234.58 113.43 135 5 3597.61
Total 66233.51 442 55281.3 18253.05 13203 3500 114556.33
*This includes amount released to complete schemes of SRP under Swajaldhara.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.65)
The Committee in their earlier report (Para No. 2.60 of 1st Report—
14th Lok Sabha) had examined the concept of replacing ARWSP by
Swajaldhara and expressed serious concerns in this regard. The
concerned expressed by the Committee have been given at Appendix-
III. The Committee strongly recommend to review the position in this
regard in the light of what has been stated above and the apprehensions
expressed by the Committee. The Committee may be adequately
explained about the position to enable them to analyse the not so
encouraging performance of ARWSP as evaluated above.

34
Reply of the Government
The Committee have noted earlier that now the Department  has
initiated action to extend the reforms process to ARWSP instead of
replacing it with Swajaldhara. The detailed modalities for this are still
being discussed in the EFC and the Committee shall be informed of
the same when finalised. It is proposed to gradually incorporate the
reforms, i.e. community participation, from the XI Plan.  In the
intervening period,  the States are to be guided towards a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Department to enable
them to take up the reforms. The salient features of the proposed
MoU are:
• Role of State Governments
—T ransfer funds, functions and functionaries to the appropriate
PRIs for management of the village DWS systems,
— Responsible for multi-village and capital intensive schemes
and for addressing problems of water quality, setting up
water testing laboratories,
—P roper training and capacity development of GPs/VWSC,
etc. on various aspects of DWS e.g. to O&M; water quality;
system and source sustainability .
— Conduct Sector Status studies, prepare State Vision
Statement, a comprehensive Water & Sanitation Policy and
Action Framework;
— Enacting legislative measures, amend rules, and institutional
strengthening of PRIs to enable them effectively manage
rural water supply;
— Commitment to various aspects of the reforms initiative and
key policy parameters of Centrally Sponsored schemes.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19C of Chapter I of the Report).

35
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12)
The Committee find from the data furnished by the Department
that so far 2,16,794 habitations have been affected by various
contaminations like fluoride, arsenic, salinity, iron, nitrate etc. The worst
affected States having drinking water quality problems in rural areas
are West Bengal, Bihar, Rajasthan, Orissa, Karnataka, Gujarat, Assam,
Tripura, Tamilnadu, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and
Andhra Pradesh. The Committee further find that as per the existing
position, 15 percent of ARWSP funds can be utilized for taking care
of quality problem. While analyzing the Demands for Grants of
previous year (refer Para 2.90 of 1st Report-14th Lok Sabha), the
committee were informed that the Department has proposed to enhance
the earmarked outlay for water quality from 15 percent to 30 percent.
The Committee further note that as per the estimates prepared by the
Department, additional fund of Rs. 13,000 crore is required to tackle
the problem of quality habitations in various States. The Committee
concludes that the funds constraint is the major factor, which needs to
be tackled urgently. On the proposal of the Department to enhance
and earmark funds of up to 15% to 30% for quality under ARWSP
funds, the Committee would like to hear from the Department about
the exact position in this regard. The Committee further note that the
Finance Minister while presenting the Budget 2005-06 emphasised on
the issue of quality of drinking water in the affected habitations. The
Committee hope that adequate outlay would be provided for in this
regard and they be appraised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
As per the existing ARWSP guidelines upto 15% of funds released
to the State Governments under normal ARWSP can be utilized for
tackling water quality problems. This ceiling can be relaxed for fully
covered States with the approval of the Central Government. The
Department’s endeavour has been to arrange the requisite funds to
tackle water-quality problems in all the affected habitations. During
the Xth Plan period, re-orientation of Sub-Mission on water quality
and retention of 15% of ARWSP funds is proposed at the Centre, for
allocation to limited States having water quality problems. It is also
proposed to increase the limit to upto 20% of ARWSP funds for tackling
water quality problems. These quality problems to have focused
funding as per requirement and funds not to be allocated as per
ARWSP inter-State criteria. Projects to be sanctioned by a Committee
at the State with mandatory representation of RGNDWM. Monitoring
of these projects would be done at the Central level. State share of

36
these projects to remain as 25%. Funds allocated for water quality by
GoI as per weightage proposed below:
Arsenic = 35%
Fluoride = 35%
Brackishness = 15%
Iron = 5%
Nitrate = 5%
Multiple problems = 5%
The XIIth Finance Commission has also awarded funds to the
acutely affected States for tackling water quality problems—West Bengal
has been allocated Rs. 600 crore for arsenic, Andhra Pradesh—
Rs. 325 crore for fluoride,  Rajasthan-Rs. 150 crore for fluoride,
Haryana—Rs. 100 crore for salinity and water logging. The Government
has formulated Bharat Nirman, which is conceived as a plan to be
implemented in four years, from 2005-06 to 2008-09 for building rural
infrastructure. Tackling all water quality problems in 2,16,968 habitations
is one of the sub-components of the drinking water supply component
of Bharat Nirman. All State Governments have been requested to
submit Action Plans for the Bharat Nirman programme. The total funds
estimated for tackling water quality problems is Rs. 8451 crore and
Rs. 465 crore for National Rural Water Quality Monitoring &
Surveillance Programme. The Department has approached Planning
Commission to consider additional Central assistance for tackling these
water quality problems. The Planning Commission has indicated that
there is likelihood in providing additional central budget to tackle
water quality problems. However, the balance funds need to be tied
up with funding from World Bank.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.13)
The Committee further note that State Governments are not serious
in tackling the issue of quality of drinking water which is evident
from the fact that 1st phase of survey as initiated in 1999 which require
stratified random sampling of 10 percent of sources in blocks has not
been completed so far by all States. With regard to 2nd phase involving
coverage of 100 percent survey of blocks, only a few States could
complete the survey. Similar is the position with regard to action plans

37
by the State Governments. Only Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and West
Bengal have furnished the proposals in this regard. The Committee
feel that in this scenario, Union Government have to play a more pro
active role in this regard. The State Governments will have to be
motivated to address the problem of quality habitations on a priority
basis. The Department should take the desired steps in this regard
and apprise the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Inthe recent meeting held with representatives of States having
major water quality problems on 21/7/2005, it was informed that Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar have not yet completed the first phase of survey.
West Bengal, Assam, Jharkhand and Maharashtra have not yet
completed Phase-II survey. Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Madhya
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh have
completed both phases of survey. All the States have been requested
to prepare Action Plan on the basis of quality affected habitations as
on 1/4/2005 (list of affected habitations to be enclosed with the Action
Plan) for tackling these problems in a phased manner of 4 years from
now and submit to the Ministry immediately, along with cost norms
and estimates.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
The Committee find that in order to address the water quality
problems, it is essential to identify the exact problems besides
ascertaining the magnitude of the problem. The Committee feel that if
the water quality is tested correctly it will go a long way in dealing
with the problem of contamination of drinking water. The Committee
appreciate the position of the Government to institutionalize community
based water quality monitoring and surveillance programme by
adoption of catchment area project wherein quality will be tested   at
the grass roots level by the Panchayats/VWSC. The Committee also
note that some efforts are being made to provide district level testing
laboratories, for which Rs. 425.95 lakh have been released by the
Department. The Committee would like to know the physical
performance of the funds released in this regard so far. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the funding pattern for water quality
testing laboratories at the Panchayats/VWSC level.

38
Reply of the Government
The physical performance of the funds released for providing
district level water quality testing laboratories for which, an amount
of Rs. 429.95 lakh has been released by the Department, is as follows:
Labs sanctioned = 442; Labs established = 268. The State Governments
are being requested to send the updated status reports and also to
expedite setting up of the remaining labs. Uttar Pradesh is seeking
funds as per the revised norms as they could not set up the labs in
the year in which these were sanctioned. Wherever required, like in
Bihar, revalidation requests are being processed. Gujarat has informed
that they would out-source water quality monitoring services. Some
States are facing problems of non-availability of technical staff for
manning these laboratories, due to ban on creation of posts by the
State Governments. Options like out-sourcing, employing trained
manpower on contract basis, etc. are to be considered in such cases.
As regards funding pattern for water quality testing laboratory at the
Panchayat/VWSC level, 100% funding from Central Government for
provision of field-testing kits, one for each revenue village, has been
proposed under the National Rural Water Quality Monitoring &
Surveillance Programme.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 4.12)
The Committee further find that efforts are being made in different
directions by several Ministries of the Union Government like the
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources and
Drinking Water Supply), Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of
Agriculture etc. Similarly the problem is being tackled by the State
Governments under their own schemes. There is an urgent need to
coordinate the efforts being made on the issue of sustainability as well
as water conservation. There should be some sort of coordinating
mechanism through which efforts made in the separate directions can
be coordinated so that the issue may be tackled more effectively. More
so, there is also an urgent need to coordinate the schemes being
implemented by the State Governments at the field level. All these
coordinating mechanisms would not only help in coordinating the
efforts made in different directions, but would also help in having a

39
clear idea of the magnitude of the problem which may be the basic
input for the future planning. The Committee would like the
Department to duly communicate tot he Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission and Ministry of Water Resources the nodal Ministry for
water conservation, the concerns of the Committee in this regard.
Besides, this issue needs to be appropriately raised during various
interactions, conferences, seminars etc. The Committee may also be
kept apprised about the outcome of such interactions.
Reply of the Government
Concerns of the Committee in regard to co-ordination of efforts
for sustainability of ground water sources being handled by a number
of Ministries have been conveyed to the Ministry of Water Resources,
the nodal Ministry for water conservation. A Coordinating mechanism
through which, efforts made in separate directions by several Ministries
of Union Government like Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of
Environment and Forest, Department of Land Resources, Ministry of
Rural Development, Ministry of Agriculture apart from Department of
Drinking Water Supply has been worked out by Ministry of Water
Resources, who have constituted a Committee for this purpose and a
representative of the Department is a member of this Committee. As
regards co-ordinating the schemes being implemented by the State
Governments at the field level, the integrated approach of Govt. of
Andhra Pradesh can be a role model under which funds from various
Governments sources are pooled up to take up rain water harvesting
structures for recharging the ground water. Other State  Governments
like Tamil Nadu, Guajrat, Mizoram are also doing exemplary work for
sustainability of sources. The suggestion of the Committee of raising
the issues on coordinated effort for sustainability of drinking water
sources in various interactions, conferences, Seminars has been noted.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13)
The Committee further note that around 90 per cent of drinking
water is dependant on ground water and there is an urgent need to
discourage water schemes dependent on ground water. More stress
needs to be given on the use of surface water and to water harvesting.
The Committee find that the Department has proposed a bankable
scheme for extending financial assistance for household and community
level rain water harvesting structures. The said scheme has been
formulated in consultation with NABARD and circulated to the State

40
Governments for the purpose. The Committee also note that majority
of the States who have sent comments desire enhancement of subsidy
component. The Committee would like the Department to furnish the
details of the scheme so as to enable the Committee for comment
further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The complete details of the draft scheme on NABARD assisted
Capital investment subsidy scheme for construction of rainwater
harvesting structures for individual households, community and
institutions is enclosed at Annexure I for kind perusal.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14)
The Committee observe from the information provided by the
Department that State Governments are not serious on such a serious
issue of water sustainability and water management. On the aforesaid
scheme for water harvesting, in spite of the pursuance of the
Department, only 8 State Governments have so far responded. Further
on the model Bill for protection and conservation of water resources,
none of the State Governments have furnished their comments. The
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to have reforms in the
land bye-laws of the State Governments whereby water harvesting
structures in individual buildings may be made compulsory. Since State
Governments have to implement various schemes, their cooperation is
the prerequisite. The Committee feel that perhaps there is an urgent
need to play a more pro-active role by the Union Government. Certain
efforts need to be made for motivating the State Governments. These
issues further need to be taken at the Cabinet Secretariat level so that
more constructive dialogue can be undertaken at various Chief
Ministers Conferences being conducted by the Government. The
Department may also deliberate this issue in various conferences and
seminars held with the officers of State Governments and suitable
action may be taken by the mixed tactics of persuasion and compulsion.
The Committee would like the Department to take the desired action
in this regard and apprise them accordingly.
Reply of the Government
A Draft Bill on Control and Development of Ground Water
Resources prepared by Ministry of Water Resources was circulated to

41
all the States for enactment. The latest status in this regard is given in
Annexure II. Comments of Ministry of Water Resources on the draft
model Bill prepared by this Department on ‘Conservation and
protection of drinking water sources” have been received. It has been
opined by them that this would lead to duplication of work and
ambiguity. However, MoWR has agreed to incorporate the concerns of
this Department in this regard in their model Bill, which is being
framed as per the recommendations of a Working Group, which has
been constituted in that Ministry for the purpose.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.17)
The Committee would also like to recommend to the Department
to involve more and more NGOs/VOs on the various issues specifically
on the issue of enlightening the public about the magnitude of the
problem of sustainability and water conservation. The milestones in
different directions can be achieved only when the public is made
aware of the need to conserve each drop of water. Besides for
technology dissemination for various projects specifically for individual
water harvesting mechanism, people’s participation through NGOs/
VOs of having good track records can play an important and crucial
role. The Department should take the desired action in this regard
and inform the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
NGOs/Voluntary Organisations (VOs) are being involved in various
States for generating awareness on sustainability and water
conservation. For this purpose, the process of setting up Communication
and Capacity Development units have been set in motion in all the
States where State specific IEC activities would be taken up in the
areas of rural water supply and sanitation.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.20)
The Committee find that the Department has initiated process for
full involvement of Panchayati Raj Institution for handling the various
schemes related to drinking water supply and sanitation sectors. The
Committee feel that capacity building of the Panchayati Raj Institution

42
is the major constraint. Association of Panchayats with the various
drinking water supply schemes and programmes will not be enough.
There is an urgent need that the drinking water and sanitation schemes
are implemented fully by the Panchayati Raj Institutions in true spirit
of the mandate of the Constitution as entered in article 243G. Not
only that, outlay for the purpose should also be devolved in the specific
accounts of PRIs. The Committee feel that by implementing the schemes
through PRIs the community participation to the greatest extent can
be ensured. Once the community is motivated and ready to evince
interest and feel the ownership of these schemes, all the elated issues
like maintenance of sources and sustainability will automatically be
taken care of. The Committee strongly recommend to the Government
to initiate the process in this regard and apprise them accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Rural Drinking Water as well as laws governing the Panchayati
Raj Institutions are State subjects. While the Central Government may
not intervene directly, the Department has initiated steps to encourage
States for greater involvement of PRIs in the Rural Drinking Water
Sector. This is proposed to be done by adding a weightage in the
inter-state allocation of ARWSP funds for rural population managing
their drinking water assets and by encouraging States to set up O&M
Corpus Fund for Gram Panchayats for which matching grant upto
10% of capital cost of the scheme would be provided by the Centre.
Also, the States are being supported to prepare a Sector Status Study,
which will give a snapshot of the current status and gaps. The States
would then be entering into an MoU with the Department to carry
out the required changes for involvement of PRIs in a time bound
manner. All States are being financially supported to set-up
Communication and Capacity Development Units (CCDUs), inter-alia
for building capacity of functionaries of Panchayati Raj Institutions.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23)
The Committee in their earlier reports have been drawing the
attention of the Department to pay more attention to desalination of
sea water for drinking purposes. The reply of the Department smacks
of the casual approach in this regard. Instead of taking an urgent
action, the Department seems to be contended simply by stating that
drinking water is a State subject. The Committee fail to understand

43
the mindset of the Department. Inspite of the fact that massive
investment is being made by the Union Government and the
Government’s resolve to provide drinking water to each and everybody
in rural areas, the Department has chosen to respond to the critical
issues simply by stating that water is a State subject. The Committee
feel that the problem of drinking water in coastal areas has to be
handled in a different way. The desalination of sea water is perhaps
the desired option for these areas. The Committee would like the
Department to pay more attention towards various related issues, like
R&D for having cost effective technology, for desalination plants.
Further there is an urgent need to study the experience of desalination
plants in other countries.
Reply of the Government
Tackling excess salinity in drinking water was one of the 5 Sub-
Mission programmes launched by this Department. 15% of the funds
allocated for tackling water quality problems was earmarked for
tackling salinity. There are 6 technology options for desalination which
are Electrodialysis, Reverse Osmosis (SWRO), Multistage Flash thermal
desalination (MSF), Multi-effect Distillation (MED), Vapour Compression
and solar stills. A total of 194 desalination plants were approved in
the country, of which 150 were installed and only 77  of them are
working. A Committee is being set-up to examine the reasons for
failure of desalination plants and suggest improvements so that, in
future, when desalination plants would be set up by State Governments,
they would be in position to runt hem satisfactorily, involving active
community participation. UT of Lakshadweep has recently set up a
desalination plant on a new technology, i.e., low temperature thermal
desalination. A Central Team has been formed to assess his new
technology developed by NIOT, Chennai. World Bank and UNICEF
are being approached for providing information on different
technologies being adopted across the world along with their
economics.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.9)
In the aforesaid scenario, the Committee feel that it is really
shameful to find that inspite of five and a half decades of planned
development, providing drinking water to schools is a distant reality.
The Committee while expressing their strong concerns in this regard
call for taking the issue on a mission mode. The Committee note that
education and drinking water is on top most priority of the

44
Government. Not only that, cess for education is being levied since
2004-2005. Besides recommending for adequate outlay for the purpose,
there is an urgent need to have a coordinate approach with all the
Union Ministries related with the subject and the State Government in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department has already initiated action for coordinated
approach for the coverage of rural schools with drinking water supply.
All out efforts are being made to cover all the rural schools with
drinking water supply by 2006-07. Most of the States have been given
targets to cover all rural schools during the current year itself.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.10)
The Committee also call for a high level intervention in this regard
since the country cannot wait further on this issue. The Committee
would like that their concerns in this regard should be duly
communicated to the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance and
Cabinet Secretariat and all the other concerned Ministries and they be
apprised of their reaction in this regard. The Committee would further
like to be apprised about the reasons for nil achievement of targets in
the aforesaid States. Besides, the Committee would like the Department
to explain whether fixing no targets for as many as five States, the
details of which have been furnished above, means 100 per  cent
coverage of schools,, in those States. The Committee urge for the
clarification in this regard.
Reply of the Government
These concerns were taken up at various forums including
Conferences with the State/UTs Secretaries in charge of rural drinking
water supply and sanitation. The Department has included coverage
of rural schools under Bharat Nirman in its presentation to National
Rural Infrastructure Committee, which has agreed to the intervention
required in this regard. The States/UTs have been advised accordingly
to prepare the Action Plan for the coverage of all the rural schools
under Bharat Nirman by 2006-07.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]

45
Recommendation (Para No. 6.29)
The worst and critically deficient status is school sanitation. It is
really a matter of shame for the country that whereas 31 per cent of
the rural areas are stated to be having sanitary latrines when it comes
to schools only 15 per cent of the primary schools could be provided
toilets. The Committee in their earlier reports have repeatedly been
drawing the attention of the Department in this regard, but it seems
nothing substantial could be done so far. The Committee have no data
to substantiate the percentage of dropouts from schools due to the
basic facilities of drinking water and sanitation specifically with regard
to girls, yet they feel that this may be the major factor of dropouts
from schools. The schools should be provided toilets without any
further loss of time. The Department has to work on a mission mode.
Besides adequate outlay, State Governments should be consulted
urgently so that the objective of having separate toilets for boys and
girls is achieved within stipulated time frame.
Reply of the Government
School sanitation is one of the areas of concern and that is why
it has been included as a component in Total Sanitation Campaign
and separate fund has been earmarked for it. The objective is to provide
separate toilet blocks for boys and girl students. School sanitation
coverage was only 15% as per 6th All India Educational Survey
conducted in 1993. However, based on the findings of our survey, it
emerges that approximately 40-50% schools have sanitation facilities.
The Department is striving hard to work in coordination with
Department of Elementary Education of Ministry of Human Resource
Development and to ensure 100% coverage of schools with water
supply and sanitation facilities. States have been asked to try a time
bound action plan so that this problem is taken care of during the
10th Plan itself. With acceleration in pace of implementation, it is
expected that the desired objectives could be achieved by the end of
10th Plan period.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.30)
The Committee further find that having the toilets in schools will
be a major factor for awareness creation. Since children are the
motivating factors for adults, the inculcation of habits of sanitation
will automatically be a forceful factor for awareness in adults in the

46
family. Sanitation is more related to mindset. Once the habit is
developed, the society themselves will demand for the facilities and
this will pat pressure on the implementing authorities to perform better
and deliver results. The Committee hold the view that to achieve the
objective of school sanitation, there is an urgent need to take
coordinated and concerted efforts in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance, Planning Commission, State Governments, District Authorities,
PRIs, NGOs and all other concerned Ministries/Departments. The
Committee strongly feel that since too many Ministries/Departments
are involved in the task higher level intervention is needed. The
Committee would like that the concerns of the Committee may be
brought to the knowledge of Cabinet Secretariat in this regard.
Reply of the Government
It is true that for proper implementation of school sanitation and
hygiene education programme, greater coordinated efforts are required
between various line Ministries of Government of India as well as
State Governments, District implementing agencies, PRIs, NGOs, etc.
In order to ensure greater coordination at the Central level, Ministry
of Rural Development has already constituted a Coordination Panel
for school sanitation programme headed by Secretary (DWS) with Joint
Secretaries of Deptt. of Elementary Education, Deptt. of Women &
Child Development, Department of Tribal Welfare, Deptt. of Health &
Family Welfare and Department of Drinking Water supply as members.
As per the observations of the Committee, the matter has been brought
to the knowledge of the Cabinet Secretariat.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.31)
The Committee conclude that sanitation and drinking water are
the inter related issues. It is alarming to note the fact that 64 per cent
of India defecates in open resulting in 20,900 MT of excreta everyday.
The Committee find that open defecation not only pollutes the
environment but also is the major factor for water contamination. Not
only that, the use of toilets can be ensured if water is made available.
Thus there is an urgent need to have a coordinated approach in this
regard. The Committee may further like to add here that with the use
of water efficient devices, huge saving of water can be made.
The Committee calls for the effective steps by the Department in this
regard.

47
Reply of the Government
The Committee has recommended for coordinated approach for
rural sanitation and drinking water supply programme which are inter-
related. The Department is also of the same view and as a result,
water supply and sanitation issues are being handled by the same
Department in Government of India and it has been emphasised upon
the State Governments to implement the programme in a coordinated
manner with proper linkages with two programmes.
The Department also feels that for promotion of rural sanitation,
water efficient devices are necessary and as a result, the Department
is promoting the use of ‘Rural Plans’ which consume less water for
flushing excreta and are useful for water scarce areas.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]

48
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
Recommendation (Para No. 2.63)
The Committee understand that at present 20 per cent of annual
allocation under ARWSP can be spent on demand driven Swajaldhara
for which 10 per cent of the outlay has to be contributed by the
community. They also note that as per the existing position there is no
flexibility of allocation of more than 20 per cent of outlay if more
projects are demanded by State Governments. So far as the issue of
replacing ARWSP by Swajaldhara is concerned, the Committee find
that the Department has already initiated the necessary plans and
changes to facilitate phased extension of reform proposals to ARWSP
from the beginning of the Eleventh Plan.
The Committee would like to add here that since Swajaldhara is
a demand driven scheme, the better performing States would only be
able to take the benefits of the scheme. Thus, the less performing
States would be deprived of the Central allocation.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has noted that the Department has initiated plans
for phased extension of reforms to ARWSP from the beginning of the
Eleventh Plan. As regards apprehension of the Committee regarding
better performing States concerning benefits of the scheme, it may be
mentioned that funds under Swajaldhara are allocated to the States
every year as per the inter-state ARWSP allocation ratio fixed for the
year. For the current financial year (2005-06), the States have been
informed that if there are no demands driven Swajaldhara schemes in
the States, the Swajaldhara allocation may be utilized in ARWSP mode.
Hence the apprehension of the Committee that less performing States
will be deprived of Central allocation has been taken care of.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]

49
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
The Committee for the last three years have been emphasizing the
need to have the exact data of slippage of habitations. They note that
in this direction a State-wise habitation survey was initiated and in 26
States the results have been made available. However there were some
discrepancies in the data and the results are being revalidated by Indian
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA). The Committee would like to
be apprised of the final position with regard to slippage of habitations,
after the revalidation is completed.
Reply of the Government
As per the agreement, the Indian Institute of Public Administration
(IIPA) is required to give validated data of habitation survey by
February 2006. IIPA has initiated the data cleansing process in respect
of 22 States till date. So the final position with regard to slippage is
still not known at present. To expedite the revalidation process, the
Department has called the representatives of States/UTs in different
groups to discuss with the representatives of this Department, NIC
and IIPA for effective and time bound action. The Committee will be
apprised in due course of time.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.31)
The Committee are constrained to note the handling of ‘Not
Covered’ and ‘Partially Covered’ habitations by the Department.
Although the Department admits that slippage of habitations is at a
larger level and for that the Working Group for Tenth Plan has

50
estimated 2.8 lakh slipped back habitations, the picture of slipped back
habitations will be more clear when the final results of the aforesaid
survey are made available. With the said state of affairs, the Department
has continued to claim that the position of coverage of habitations in
the country is 95 per cent. Not only that, States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh,
Daman and Diu and Delhi are stated to be the States/Union territories
which have achieved 100 per cent coverage. The Committee disapprove
the way a very bright picture as opposed to the ground position with
regard to the availability of drinking water in the country is projected
by the Department. The Committee strongly recommend that
announcements regarding achievement of the Department should be
realistic and accurately presented in various Budget documents
presented to the Parliament as well as submitted to the Parliamentary
Committees.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee have been noted and the process
of obtaining slippage of habitations from States on annual basis has
been initiated.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.34)
On the issue of periodical updation of data of slipped back
habitations, the Committee note that the Department propose
revalidation on the quarterly basis. The Committee find that revalidation
is a detailed exercise and as such revalidation should be done on
yearly basis. On the issue of the reservations of State Governments,
that they have no infrastructure in this regard, the Committee would
like the Department to sort out the matter in consultation with the
State Governments and the viable option of appointing some agency
for the purpose and also for allocating outlay from the allocation of
ARWSP should be explored. The details in this regard when finalized
should be placed before the Committee for further review and
comments.

51
Reply of the Government
Under the Action Plan for Bharat Nirman the Department has
asked the States/UTs to provide web-enabled computerized data of
the uncovered habitations of CAP 99, as well as uncovered rural schools
and quality affected and slipped back habitations. This would be in
addition to obtaining annual slippages data from States. The
Department has initiated the process of obtaining the data on annual
basis, which is likely to result in presentation on realistic data on
ongoing basis. The validation exercise is currently been done by IIPA.
The Department will continue to do the validation annually through
agency/agencies as and when required.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.45)
The Committee are further constrained to note that while in some
States physical achievement is less than 50 per cent, some States could
achieve the inflated targets as high as upto 2320 per cent in Orissa
and 1300 per cent in Goa. The Committee are not satisfied with the
reply of the Department that these States fix the targets on a vary low
scale whereas these States could cover much more habitations. The
Committee find that there is gross mismatch between physical and
financial achievements. besides such a data reflects that there is some
sort of confusion in reporting the data by the State Governments. The
Committee strongly recommend the Department to have a critical and
indepth analysis of the mechanism of reporting by State Governments
and explain the position to the Committee so as to enable them to
understand State specific performance in a better way and comment
further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
This year the Department has undertaken a detailed exercise for
fixing the realistic targets. The unit cost involved in coverage of not
covered and partially covered habitations and the amount allocated to
the States/UTs were taken into account while working out the targets.
It is pertinent to point out that even in 2004-05 the net physical
achievement was to the extent of 92.63 per cent as against the target

52
of coverage of 74,868 habitations, the actual achievement reported is
69,347. During 2005-06, the States and UTs have been given realistic
targets for schools as well as habitations, keeping in view unit cost of
coverage and availability of funds with different States.”
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.49)
The Committee find that different funding patterns have been
adopted under the various components of ARWSP. Under ARWSP
(Normal) 50 : 50 is the Central and State Government contribution,
but in case of DDP , 100 per cent is the Central allocation. For quality
and sustainability for which 15 per cent and 5 per cent of allocation
respectively under ARWSP can be utilized, the Centre : State ratio is
75 : 25. For Swajaldhara for which 20 per cent of the outlay under
ARWSP is earmarked, 90 per cent is the Central contribution and 10
per cent is the community contribution. While appreciating the fact
that for quality and sustainability, States are being provided more
Central funds, the Committee note that monitoring of such a complex
inter-State allocation criterion is a difficult task. The Committee would
like the Department to explain how the monitoring is being done so
as to ensure that the specified State contribution and specified inter-
scheme allocation is ensured for the specific purpose, to enable the
Committee to come to some meaningful conclusion and comment
further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In so far as ARWSP (DDP), ARWSP (Calamity Relief) and ARWSP
(Swajaldhara) are concerned, there is no difficulty in monitoring as
there is no State share for these components. However, in respect of
remaining components watch has to be kept as for coverage as well
as operation and maintenance, funding pattern is 50 : 50, and in respect
of Quality and Sustainability it is 75 per cent central and 25 per cent
State. While releasing the second installment, it is scrutinized whether
the State Government has made provision for State contribution in
accordance with the funding pattern. In case the contribution from the
State is less than their due share as per the funding pattern, the release

53
of Central funds are reduced accordingly in the release of second
installment.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.50)
The Committee also note the water tight compartments for
allocating resources for various components of ARWSP . For example
for sustainability 5 per cent outlay is earmarked and for quality 15
per cent allocation can be used. 20 per cent of funds are earmarked
for Swajaldhara. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to
simplify the inter-component allocation of ARWSP . The Department
may examine the issue and apprise the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
To give due weightage to various aspects of the rural drinking
water supply it is necessary to bifurcate the ARWSP funds in various
components, viz., quality, sustainability, calamity relief, Swajaldhara etc.
The funds for rural drinking water supply are mainly for the coverage
of habitations through ARWSP (normal) but focus has also to be given
on the coverage through reform process under Swajaldhara and also
for quality and sustainability. For calamity relief, funds are required to
be earmarked to leave some rooms to meet the contingencies arising
out of natural calamities and other emergent situations.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.51)
The Committee further note that under normal ARWSP , States are
unable to contribute equal amount of what is allocated by the Central
Government in a year. In this regard the Committee desire that the
total outlay provided by the Union Government as well as State
Governments so far may be furnished so as to enable the Committee

54
to analyse the position of matching share by State Governments in a
better way and comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As desired by the Committee the year-wise and State-wise details
of the Central as well as State share is Annexed.
(Rs. in Crore)
Investment in Rural Drinking Water Supply—Centre and States
Investment in Rural Drinking Water Supply
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Name of the State Central* State Central* State Central* State
12 3 4 5 6 7
Andhra Pradesh 183.77 161.18 316.40 182.40 373.88 96.61
Bihar 37.03 44.55 36.05 67.65 96.72 53.33
Chhattisgarh 29.43 65.15 32.40 72.75 26.90 75.11
Goa 0.00 0.00 0.13 0.00 0.61 0.00
Gujarat 99.98 195.18 145.68 199.42 114.06 186.60
Haryana 33.57 64.76 34.83 100.29 29.64 102.28
Himachal Pradesh 113.56 98.23 64.86 85.36 66.03 93.58
Jammu and Kashmir 111.96 80.85 150.59 108.00 150.22 125.00
Jharkhand 19.50 80.00 25.00 70.06 31.66 78.25
Karnataka 143.56 109.37 183.50 109.97 198.94 141.72
Kerala 18.99 66.70 70.14 76.82 63.25 113.39
Madhya Pradesh 95.86 124.38 113.65 115.61 120.27 89.96
Maharashtra 193.36 261.67 230.02 263.71 293.67 200.94
Orissa 61.47 64.43 84.53 68.96 104.38 59.53
Punjab 30.81 84.95 26.73 76.19 35.33 109.77
Rajasthan 235.96 379.31 298.18 440.10 370.79 475.93

55
12 3 4 5 6 7
Tamil Nadu 79.92 411.00 135.92 375.00 161.59 411.00
Uttaranchal 36.83 71.56 27.63 73.70 40.71 77.11
Uttar Pradesh 113.66 192.04 135.10 197.14 169.92 101.58
West Bengal 101.15 120.03 109.46 68.79 103.05 88.87
Arunachal Pradesh 36.50 30.09 45.92 53.11 70.79 55.70
Assam 56.23 56.30 106.33 70.25 140.76 87.86
Manipur 9.47 21.79 17.02 9.00 21.03 17.00
Meghalaya 29.36 22.60 22.14 29.25 30.86 31.00
Mizoram 21.22 18.20 14.75 17.56 20.77 16.78
Nagaland 21.81 21.81 19.81 15.61 20.85 15.41
Sikkim 8.96 12.70 7.91 12.96 9.03 15.38
Tripura 24.28 20.14 28.64 20.21 24.43 18.61
Total 1948.20 2878.97 2483.32 2979.86 2890.11 2938.31
Total Central 2100.70 2564.90 2930.78
Budget Utilised
Central releases include releases under ARWSP [normal, DDP , Calamity, PM’s programme.
Sector Reforms/Swajaldhara and Management Information System (MIS)]
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.66)
The Committee notes that recently Swajaldhara guidelines have
been amended to reduce proportion of cash contribution from 5 per
cent to 2.5 per cent in the case of Scheduled Tribe/Scheduled Caste
habitations. The remaining 7.5 per cent contribution can be in kind
(labour, material etc.). The Committee would like that the possibility
of extending the facility of said relaxed norms should be explored in
case of most backward districts in the country .

56
Reply of the Government
Extent of SC/ST population is one of the criteria for identification
of the most backward districts, along with agricultural productivity
per worker and agriculture wage rate. There are specific poverty
alleviation schemes for the most backward districts; it may not be
desirable to extend the relaxed community contribution in these
districts. However, as burden of community contribution is related to
the cost of schemes, which in turn is dependent on geohydrological
conditions, a proposal to give flexibility to State Governments/SWSM
to further relax the extent of the cash contribution in DDP and hill
areas is under consideration.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
The Committee find from what has been stated above that the
sustainability of system itself is dependent on sustainability of sources.
Another noticeable issue is that 90 per cent of all drinking water is
dependent on ground water sources. The ground water is depleting
fast which may be the main reason for slippage of FC and PC
habitations to NC habitations the details of which have been given in
the previous chapter of the Report. In this scenario, the Committee
concludes that the major challenge that the Department may have to
face in the coming years is the sustainability of sources.
Reply of the Government
Sustainability of sources is dependent on the replenishment of
ground water table, which is the mandate of Ministry of Water
Resources. As a User-Department, this Department contributes its share
to the overall cause, by various methods of rain-water harvesting,
roof-top harvesting and artificial recharge. This requires integrated
efforts of various Ministries.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)

57
Recommendation (Para No. 4.11)
The Committee further note that although the Department accepts
the magnitude of the problem relating to sustainability of water sources,
substantial efforts have not been made in this regard. Only 5 per cent
of the funds under ARWSP could be used for water sustainability. The
issue of water tight compartments for different components under
ARWSP has been dealt with in the previous part of the report. Here
the Committee would like to recommend to the Government to give
more thrust on sustainability and the allocation for the purpose should
be enhanced. There is an urgent need to enhance the allocation for
sustainability since the issue of  slippage of habitations can only be
tackled by handling this issue. The Department would be able to
achieve the objective of full coverage of habitations only when the
problem of sustainability is properly handled. The Committee would
like the Department to take earnest action in this regard and inform
the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
It is proposed to make sustainability, a part of coverage for which
70 percent of ARWSP allocation will be earmarked. It is also proposed
to make source-strengthening an integral part of all coverage schemes.
Depending on requirement, States can utilize more funds for
sustainability. Under Swajaldhara programme, sustainability of drinking
water sources is an integral component of the water supply scheme.
In this regard State Governments have been provided with a CD on
Rainwater Harvesting and a Manual on Artificial Recharge and
Rainwater Harvesting. Also, in order to identify the correct location
for existing drinking water sources and also for locating water
harvesting structures, hydrogeomorphological maps (groundwater
prospect maps) have been got prepared for 10 States and sent to State
Governments by utilizing services of National Remote Sensing Agency
(NRSA), Hyderabad.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)

58
Recommendation (Para No. 4.15)
On the issue of water conservation, the Committee note that
ARWSP guidelines provide for dual water policy for rural habitations
facing acute water problems. The Committee feel that dual water policy
should apply to all areas of the country since scarcity of drinking
water is the issue concerning all the States/Union Territories. It should
be ensured that every habitation should use the treated water for
drinking and cooking and for other purposes, like washing and
ablution, untreated water can be used. The Committee recommend to
the Department to think of revising ARWSP guidelines and inform
them about the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As per ARWSP guidelines, dual water policy is to be followed in
quality affected habitations only, for serving the minimum needs for
cooking and drinking purposes. Only about 14 per cent of the total
habitations are affected with water quality. In the remaining 86 per
cent non-contaminated habitations, the norms of 40 lpcd are being
followed for water supply.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.16)
The Committee find that efforts have not been made so far for
treating the used water and then supplying the same for drinking
water purposes. Besides another issue which needs urgent attention is
the leakage of water where water is being supplied through pipes.
The Committee would like the Department to analyze the position in
this regard, take the desired action and inform them accordingly.
Reply of the Government
During various review meetings and also during the technical
review meetings held by the officials of this Department, the concerned
State Governments are requested to pay more attention to reduce
leakage of water especially through pipelines. In rural areas, the

59
predominant water supply is arranged through hand pumps. Guidelines
on sustainability have been issued in 2002.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.8)
On the issue of contributing 10 per cent community contribution
from MPLAD funds for the schools covered under Swajaldhara, the
Committee fail to understand the logic furnished by the Ministry of
Planning and Programme Implementation that MPLAD funds, which
is Government’s funding cannot be substitute for community
contribution. The Committee strongly feel that schools cannot be treated
at par with other rural habitations. The schools cannot be deprived of
drinking water or sanitation in case community is not ready to
contribute. If MPLAD funds cannot be equated with community
contribution, then 100 percent Central assistance should be provided
for coverage of schools in this regard.
Reply of the Government
For the coverage of schools under ARWSP , there is no contribution
from community as funding pattern is 50 per cent Central and 50 per
cent State. Swajaldhara is a contributory approach with 90 per cent
Central and 10 per cent community contribution. Rural schools can be
covered by the States and UTs from the funds provided under ARWSP .
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 40 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.26)
The Committee have repeatedly been expressing their strongest
concern on the issue of sanitation in rural areas in their respective
reports. However, nothing substantial could be done so far. It is a

60
matter of serious concern that even after more than five decades of
planned development in the country only 31 per cent of the rural
households, that too as per the Government’s own data could be
provided latrines, not to speak of the total sanitation. As many as
64 per cent of the rural households defacate in open. As rightly
admitted by the Finance Minister, sanitation remains critically deficient
out of Rs. 3,663 crore proposed during Tenth Plan, the Department
has got Rs. 955 crore which is around one-fourth of the proposed
outlay of the Department. The Committee further note that fund
required for rural sanitation would be of the order of Rs. 676 billion
and Rs. 503 billion respectively if the goal of achieving 50 per cent of
rural sanitation by 2015 and full sanitation by 2025 has to be achieved
as set by ‘World Summit for Sustainable Development’ held at
Johannesburg in 2002. More so as per Department’s own estimates, a
total of Rs. 5,932 crore would be required if the target of covering the
whole country by Total Sanitation Programme has to be achieved by
2010. The Committee observe that during 2005-2006, the outlay has
been increased from Rs. 400 crore as provided during 2004-2005 to
Rs. 700 crore. But even the enhanced outlay is not sufficient. There is
an urgent need to step up the outlay considerably.
Reply of the Government
It is true that Rural Sanitation coverage in the country is low. It
was only 22 percent in 2001 which has increased to 33 percent in
2005. There could be 11 percent increase in rural sanitation coverage
since 2001 due to implementation of Total Sanitation Campaign. During
the 10th Plan Period, Planning Commission had allocated only Rs. 955
crore which was a meagre amount. However, in the Mid-Term
Appraisal of the Tenth Plan, Planning Commission has agreed to
increase it by another Rs. 1,350 crore and already during the four
years of the current Plan approximately Rs. 1,450 crore has been made
available. It is expected that the actual availability of fund for rural
sanitation in the Tenth Plan would be Rs. 2,300 crore.
Department has estimated that for implementation of Total
Sanitation Campaign in all the districts in the country, approximately
Rs. 5,951 crore would be required. Of late Planning Commission has
already stepped up the allocation for rural sanitation and it is expected
that adequate funds would be provided by the Planning Commission
for rural sanitation in the years to come.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]

61
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 43 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.27)
The Committee further find that the Department has initiated action
for mobilizing resources through domestic resources and World Bank.
The proposal in this regard after the approval of Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission has been forwarded to the World Bank.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the projects
to be taken up by the World Bank assistance. Besides the Committee
note that there is enough potential to mobilise resources through
internal as well as international resources like World Bank. The
Committee urge to pay more attention in this regard keeping in view
the funds constraint.
Reply of the Government
In the year 2003, Department has estimated a budgetary gap of
Rs. 4,086 crore for implementation of Total Sanitation Campaign and
accordingly initiated steps to mobilise resources from World Bank
funding. Proposal in this regard has been sent to Department of
Economic Affairs which in turn has forwarded it to the World Bank.
In the meantime, considering the necessity of promoting rural sanitation
coverage, Planning Commission has already enhanced the budgetary
allocation. Considering the current level of budgetary allocation of
Rs. 700 crore in 2005-06 and maintaining a normal growth rate in the
allocation, it is expected that the budgetary gap of Rs. 4,086 crore can
easily be met and there may not be any necessity to seek World Bank
funding for rural sanitation sector.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 43 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.28)
Besides funds constraint, the Committee find that implementation
of the sanitation programme is not too impressive. Out of 3,94,48,353
sanctioned BPL toilets, the achievement is 94,94,525. Community

62
complexes position is further worse. Out of 30,203 community
complexes sanctioned so far, the achievement is 4,607. The State-wise
position also indicates the similar view. There is huge difference
between releases and expenditure.  Worst is the position in certain
North-Eastern States. In 2003-2004 and 2004-2005, in Mizoram, Manipur
and Meghalaya the position of expenditure reported as well as toilets
constructed is nil. As per Government’s own admission States like
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Gujarat, North-Eastern States, Himachal
Pradesh, Goa and Karnataka are some of the non-performing States.
In this scenario the Committee find that merely enhancing the outlay
will not be sufficient. Since Total Sanitation Campaign is a demand
driven programme there is an urgent need for educating the masses
about the ill effects of open defecation. The success of the programme
can be achieved through public involvement. More needs to be done
with regard to the involvement of Panchayats, NGOs/VOs so that
public through them can be educated and more projects could be
demanded by them. State Governments too need to be motivated in
this regard. The Committee feel that the Department has to work on
war-footing, if the objective of total sanitation is to be achieved within
a stipulated time frame.
Reply of the Government
It is true that in order to promote rural sanitation, the Department
has to work on war-footing and it has been doing so since the launch
of the programme. The implementation of Total Sanitation Campaign
programme is not uniform throughout the country. There are States
where the implementation is picking up quickly whereas in some States
it is slow. However, various steps have been taken to improve the
pace of implementation and to ensure that higher priority is given by
the States and district implementing agencies to this programme. As a
result the implementation has improved significantly in the past
3-4 years and more than 1.31 crore household toilets have been
constructed under TSC which is more than the number of toilets
constructed under erstwhile CRSP during 1986 to 2002. All out efforts
are being made to ensure that slow moving States also give high
priority to TSC implementation.
In order to ensure greater community involvement, the Department
has launched Nirmal Gram Puraskar which is an incentive scheme for
the PRIs, individuals and organizations working for successful
implementation of the programme. This has evoked good response
and in 2005, 38 Gram Panchayats and 2 Block Panchayats have got
this award. In addition to this, greater focus on Information Education

63
and Communication (IEC) as well as capacity building of different
stakeholders has been given to ensure better implementation of the
programme. It is expected that Department will get good results of
these efforts in near future.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 46 of Chapter I of the Report)

64
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 2.53)
The Committee appreciate that special allocation as indicated in
the aforesaid para has been made for Tsunami affected States viz.,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Pondicherry and Kerala. The Committee call for strict monitoring so
as to ensure that the allocation earmarked for Tsunami affected areas
is utilized for the intended objective i.e. restoration of water supply to
such areas.
Reply of the Government
The funds have been released to the States/UTs concerned for the
purpose of restoration of water supply in such areas and this intention
has been indicated to them while releasing funds from calamity relief
component of ARWSP . The States/UTs concerned have been asked to
provide information about the utilization of fund and restoration of
water supply in the affected areas.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24)
The Committee further note that Union territory of Lakshadweep
has furnished a request for setting up of sea water based desalination
plant at Kavaratti. The proposal is being processed for SFC approval.
The Committee would like the early clearance of the said project. The
Committee also calls for more serious attempts by the Department on
this issue in view of what has been stated above.
Reply of the Government
The proposal of setting up a desalination plant, 300 cubic meter
per day capacity at Kavaratti has been approved by the SFC in April,

65
2005 at a cost of Rs. 8.97 crore. The Administrator of UT of
Lakshadweep has recently informed that a 100 cubic meter per day
desalination plant based on the latest technology called as low
temperature thermal desalination has been installed at Kavaratti at a
cost of Rs. 4.95 crore. Services of National Institute of Ocean Technology,
Chennai have been taken for the purpose. This Department has asked
the UT of Lakshadweep to identify whether this particular plant can
be upgraded from 100 cubic meter per day capacity to 300 cubic meter
per day capacity, which will be the requirement of Kavaratti. Reply
from Lakshadweep UT Administration is awaited.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.7)
The Committee have repeatedly been drawing the attention of the
Department towards the urgent need to provide safe drinking water
in rural schools in a stipulated time frame. In spite of that the work
has not been done at the desired level. As per Government’s own
data 34 per cent of the Government schools are yet to have facility of
drinking water. The ground reality in this regard may be further grim.
About private, public and Government aided schools, the data of
drinking water availability is yet to be procured. Further alarming is
the data with regard to achievement of physical targets by States/
Union territories during 2003-2004 and 2004-2005. As many as 8 States/
Union territories reported nil performance during 2003-2004. Further,
for Haryana, Daman and Diu, Delhi and Lakshadweep no targets were
fixed. The worse is the position during 2004-2005. Twelve States/Union
territories reported nil achievement. The Committee find that the
Government have set the targets of coverage of all schools by the end
of Tenth Plan. In this scenario it seems difficult to achieve the targets.
Another disturbing fact noticed by the Committee is the Department’s
concept that there is no question of slippage of coverage of schools.
The Committee fail to understand as to how the Department can stop
the various issues such as the resources being dry, or the system going
non-operational which is rampant in case of rural habitations when it
comes to the issue of school coverage. The Committee are constrained
to note the thinking of the Department in this regard. Without verifying
the ground reality, the Department has chosen to state that the position

66
of slippage of coverage of schools for non coverage is not applicable
to schools. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reaction
of the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department agrees with the observation of the Committee
that there could be slippage in schools too. In the light of observations
of the Committee and pending receipt of results of the Seventh All
India Education Survey, the Department has initiated collection of data
on schools where drinking water facilities are not functioning, as well
as data on availability of drinking water facilities in Government-aided
and private schools.
[File No. H-11011/1/2005/SW/DWS-III dated 24 August, 2005 of Department
of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
22 November, 2005 Chairman,
1 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

67
APPENDIX I
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES
CAPITAL INVESTMENT SUBSIDY SCHEME FOR CONSTRUCTION
OF RAINWATER HARVESTING STRUCTURES FOR INDIVIDUAL
HOUSEHOLDS, COMMUNITY AND INSTITUTIONS

68
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY
RAINWATER HARVESTING
Background
There is no denying the truth that water is life. However, this
scarce resource is fast depleting and its management and conservation
is not getting the due attention which it deserves. The scarcity of safe
drinking water has made rainwater harvesting techno-economically
feasible worth considering for alternate supply, supplementary supply
or improved supply. There is no O&M cost though one time initial
capital investment is high. For overcoming this problem of initial capital
investment, the scheme for financing rainwater-harvesting structures
at individual household, community and institutional levels is being
introduced.
Objective
The main objective of the scheme is to enable the community,
individual households and institutions to serve their own needs of
drinking water for 100 non-rainy days in a year at the rate of 10 litres
per capita per day by taking loan and repaying it in easy instalments
for DDA/DPAP/HADP areas and North-Eastern States. This safe
drinking water will save them about Rs. 2000 per family in a year as
water borne disease.
It will generate employment for 2 skilled and 2 unskilled persons
for construction of 10,000 litres capacity ferro-cement tank.
Salient Features
Eligible Organizations
(a) The project for construction of rainwater harvesting system/
structure can be taken up by individuals, community based
organizations, institutions, schools and offices, non-
governmental organizations, voluntary organizations, self-
help groups, Punchayati Raj Institutions for RWH structures

69
constructed by them for community purposes (RWH
structures for Panchayats will be constructed from their own
budgets.
(b) Government bodies/institutions are not eligible for the
scheme as they can construct the rainwater harvesting
structures from their normal budget.
(c) For schools, loan may be availed and repaid either by
Panchayats or PTA for Government schools, it should be
provided in the normal budget of the Education Department.
Location
(d) Under the scheme, the beneficiaries will be free to construct
at any place as per Type designs, which necessarily includes
a connecting over-flow pipe to recharge pit/shaft for ground
water recharge. Wherever individual recharge pit is not
possible, the entire street’s overflowing pipe can be
connected to common recharge pit, and capacities as suitable
to their use.
(Details of approximate estimate of ferro-cement rain water
harvesting systems are enclosed as Annexures I-IV).
Conditions for Scientific Storage
(e) RWH structure (ferro-cement tank) built under the scheme
shall be structurally sound or of engineering considerations
and functionally suitable to store rain water. The general
conditions for scientific conditions will be as follows:
(i) The construction of RWH structures shall be as per
Guidelines issued by DDWS/State Public Health Engineering
Department specification laid down in this behalf.
(ii) The RWH structure shall have protection from rodents.
(iii) The RWH structures will have protection from birds.
Credit Linked Assistance
(a) Subsidy under the scheme is linked to institutional credit
and will be available only to those beneficiaries who take
finance from commercial banks, cooperative banks and
regional rural banks.

70
(b) Assistance under the scheme shall be available on capital
cost of construction of RWH structures.
Training
A general awareness programme on the scheme for the beneficiaries
and a training programme for the skilled/unskilled workers for
construction, maintenance and operation of rainwater harvesting
structures will be organized by NIRD/NGRI/PHED/NGO.
Implementation Period
(i) The scheme shall be implemented during the 10th Five Year
Plan with an approved outlay of Rs. crore and with financial
assistance of Rs. crore from the GOI;
(ii) The scheme will be applicable to all beneficiaries for
construction of RWH structures in respect of which loans
are sanctioned during the 10th Five Year Plan.
Target
(i) Under the scheme, creation of no. of rainwater harvesting
structures is targeted.
(ii) The scheme shall be implemented by the DWSMs/PHEDs
Insurance
(iii) It will be the responsibility of the owner of the rainwater
storage system to have the insurance for the rainwater
storage system.
Subsidy
A. Subsidy under the scheme shall be provided on the capital cost of
the project as follows:
(i) Rate of subsidy shall be 22.5% of the capital cost of the
project.
(ii) Details of RWH system giving capacity and cost are available
in Annexures I-IV .
(iii) Subsidy for the project under the scheme shall be released
through NABARD for projects financed by the commercial,

71
cooperative and regional rural banks, ADFCs, scheduled
PCBs, NFDFI and other institutions eligible for refinance
from NABARD and through DWSM for projects financed
by DWSM.
B. Subsidy will be released in two instalments:
(i) 50% of the subsidy amount will be released to NABARD
by DWSM/PHED/RWS Department in advance.
Accordingly, NABARD would release subsidy to the
participating banks in advance for keeping the same in a
Subsidy Reserve Fund Account of the concerned borrowers,
to be adjusted finally against loan amount of the bank on
completion of the project. This amount of 50% advance
subsidy would be released by NABARD to the participating
bank on submission of a project profile cum claim form.
(ii) The remaining 50% of the subsidy amount would be
disbursed to the participating bank(s) by NABARD after
conduct of an inspection by the inspection committee
consisting of officials from NABARD, participating bank(s)
and DWSM/PHED/RWS Department in the concerned state.
C. Adjustment of subsidy in borrower’s account
The subsidy released to the bank/DWSM for an individual project
will be kept in a separate borrower-wise account. The adjustment of
subsidy will be back ended. Accordingly, the full project cost including
the subsidy amount, but excluding the margin money contribution
from the beneficiary, would be back ended. Accordingly, the full project
cost including the subsidy amount, but disbursed as a loan by the
banks. The repayment schedule will be drawn on the loan amount in
such a way that the total subsidy amount is adjusted after the full
bank loan component with interest is liquidated.
D. No interest chargeable on subsidy portion:
The subsidy admissible to the beneficiary under the scheme will
be kept in the subsidy reserve fund account (borrower-wise) in the
books of the financing banks. No interest should be charged on this
by the bank. In view of this, for purposes of charging interest on the
loan component, the subsidy amount should be excluded. The balance
lying to the credit of the subsidy reserve fund account will not form
part of demand and time liabilities for the purpose of SLR/CRR.

72
Pattern of Assistance
For projects financed through banks/NABARD
(i) Owner’s contribution —   10%
(ii) Subsidy from the State Govt. —   22.5%
(iii) Institutional loan from commercial/ —   67.5%
cooperative banks etc.
Institutional Lending
A. Eligible Financing Institutions
The eligible financing institutions under the scheme are:
(i) Commercial banks, regional rural banks (RRBs), State
cooperative banks (SCBs), state cooperative agricultural and
rural development banks (SARDBs), north-eastern
development finance corporation (NDFC) and such other
institutions which will be eligible for refinance from
NABARD.
B. Term Loan
(i) 67.5% of the project cost can be raised as term loan from
the financing banks. As the subsidy is back-ended, eligible
amount of the subsidy (22.5%) would be initially allowed
as term loan to the beneficiary. The repayment schedule
will be drawn on the total loan amount (including subsidy)
in such a way that the subsidy amount is adjusted after
liquidation of net bank loan (excluding subsidy).
(ii) Repayment period will depend upon the cash flow and will
be upto 7-8 years including a grace period of one year. The
first annual instalment will fall due after 23 months from
the date of first disbursement.
(iii) Rate of interest to borrowers on term loan shall be 12% per
annum (being negotiated). This is applicable from the date
of the first disbursement of loan.
Time Limit for Completion
A time limit of 15 months is prescribed for completion of the
project from the date of sanction by bank. However, if reasons for

73
delay are justified, a further grace period of 3 months may be allowed
by the participating bank. If the project is not completed within the
stipulated period, the benefit of subsidy shall not be available and
advance subsidy has to be refunded forthwith.
Refinance Assistance from NABARD
A. For Construction of RWH Structures
For construction of RWH structures, NABARD would provided
refinance to commercial bank/RRBs/SCBs/SCARDBs and such other
eligible institutions @ 90% of the amount financed by the banks as
term loan. However, quantum of refinance is 95% in case of SCARDBs
in north-eastern region. Rate of interest of refinance will be decided
by NABARD from time to time and at present it is @ 8.5% per annum.
Publicity and Training
A general awareness programme on the scheme for the beneficiaries
and a training programme for the skilled/unskilled workers for
construction, maintenance and operation of rainwater harvesting
structures will be organized by NIRD/NGRI/PHED/NGO.
Other Conditions:
(i) RWH system may be treated as infrastructure for financing
(ii) The participating banks/VWSCs/NABARD etc. will adhere
to their own norms for appraisal of project.
(iii) It will be the responsibility of the owner of the rainwater
harvesting system to have the insurance for the rainwater
harvesting system.
(iv) A signboard at the site assisted under “Ministry of Rural
Development, Department of Drinking Water Supply” will
be exhibited.
(v) Government’s interpretation of various terms will be final.
(vi) Any other pre and post inspection may be undertaken to
verify physical and financial progress as and when required.
(vii) Government reserves the right to modify, add and delete
any term and condition without assigning any reason.

74
Procedure to be followed for sanctioning of project and release of
subsidy
Projects financed through banks
(a) Any beneficiary individually, community based
organizations, SHG, Voluntary Organizations, NGOs, PRIs
and DWSMs will submit the project proposal for term loan
and subsidy to the bank on an application form as
prescribed by the concerned bank along with report and
other documents for appraisal and sanction of loan after
getting approval of DWSM.
(b) Bank after appraisal and sanctioning and disbursement of
the first instalment of loan will furnish a brief project profile-
cum-claim form for advance subsidy in the prescribed format
given at Annexure I along with a copy of bank’s sanction
letter to RO, NABARD with a copy to the DWSM.
(c) NABARD on receipt of project profile-cum-claim form from
the participating bank, will sanction and released 50%
advance subsidy to the participating bank for keeping the
same in the Subsidy Reserve Fund Account (borrower-wise).
NABARD will forward a copy of the sanction and project
profile as indicated in Annexure I to the head office of
DWSM project-wise for replenishment or adjustment against
advance subsidy provided by State Government to
NABARD. The release of subsidy by NABARD will be
subject to availability of funds from State Government.
(d) When the project is nearing completion, the DWSM/RD
Department will inform the bank who will initiate action
for an inspection by the committee consisting of officials
from the bank, NABARD and DWSM to ensure that the
rainwater harvesting structures conform to technical and
financial parameters. After inspection is conducted, the bank
will submit the claim form for final subsidy in the prescribed
format given in Annexure II to NABARD, in triplicate, with
a copy to DWSM. The inspection report of the committee
and completion certificate should invariably be enclosed with
the claim form for final subsidy. NABARD shall release the
final subsidy to banks which will be replenished by PHED/
State Government or adjusted against the subsidy amount
provided to NABARD in advance.

75
Projects financed through DWSM
(a) DWSM shall provide assistance to the VWSCs for
construction of RWH systems.
(b) The VWSCs shall formulate proposals in the format
prescribed by DWSM and shall submit to DWSM.
(c) The VWSCs shall examine the proposal and shall
recommend to DWSM for consideration.
(d) DWSM shall consider the proposals by way of table/field
appraisal according to the quantum of assistance involved.
(e) The pattern of funding, interest rate, mode of release of
sanctioned assistance shall be as per DDWS letter no. Dt.
(f) The sanctioned assistance shall be released through
NABARD to the VWSCs.
(g) The DWSM shall periodically furnish progress reports to
State Governments/DDWS.
(h) DWSM shall release advance subsidy for parking in VWSC’s
account. The project-wise subsidy shall be adjusted/
replenished by DWSM.
(i) DWSM shall furnish utilization certificate to State
Government/DDWS.
(j) DWSM shall furnish utilization certificate to State
Government/DDWS.
(k) DWSM may undertake inspection of RWH structures to
verify the utilization on a random basis.
Monitoring
(i) The monitoring of each project shall be done by DWSM
and review will be done on a monthly basis with NABARD/
SWSM.
(ii) As indicated in paragraph, a committee consisting of officials
from NABARD, DWSM/DDWS, participating bank(s) as the
case may be and State Government would inspect the project
work within the overall scope of the operational guidelines
of the above scheme and would submit its report which
should be enclosed with Annexure II. For this purpose, the
promoters/participating banks/NABARD will initiate
necessary action to get the inspection conducted on the
project site by the committee at the time when the project
is completed so as to avoid any delay in release/adjustment
of subsidy.
(iii) The progress report of the scheme as per format at
Annexures-IV & V shall be sent by NABARD/DWSM
directly to the DDWS on a monthly basis.

76
NOTE FOR DISCUSSION WITH STATE ON SCHEME FOR
EXTENDING FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR HOUSEHOLD,
COMMUNITY AND INSTITUTIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION
OF RAIN WATER HARVESTING STRUCTURES
IN RURAL AREAS
Department of Drinking Water Supply proposes to introduce a
credit linked scheme to promote rain water harvesting structure by
individual households, community and institutions. The scheme is being
discussed with NABARD at present. Salient features of the scheme
will be as given below:
• The objective of the scheme will be to give credit to
individual, community and institutions for creating rain
water harvesting structures.
• The scheme will be operational in DDP , HADP , DPAP areas
and North Eastern States.
• Investment subsidy as well as interest subsidy is proposed
to be given to the beneficiaries. It is proposed to given 20%
investment subsidy and full interest subsidy to the
individual household for promoting rain water harvesting
structures.
• Interest subsidy is considered justified to ensure willingness
of the beneficiary to come forward for the loan as he/she
is investing for the future generation’s benefit as well as
contributing to groundwater recharge. As interest burden
on a household RWH structure costing Rs. 19,000 comes to
Rs. 4857.49 for a six-year period at the rate of 9%.
Investment subsidy can be enhanced to 20% of the
cost+interest burden.
• The interest rate will be negotiated with the bank and
expected to be about 9-10%.
• The scheme will be implemented through DWSMs at the
district level.
• The identification of beneficiaries will be done by DWSM
along with the bank.
• There will be a Central and State level Monitoring
Committee headed by Secretary (DWS) and SWSM
respectively.
• The subsidy funds to the banks will released by State
Governments directly.
State Government can offer their comments on the salient features
of the guidelines so that any modification if required may be
incorporated.

77
ANNEXURE-I
FORMAT FOR PROJECT PROFILE CUM CLAIM FOR CALMING
50% ADVANCE SUBSIDY/REFINANCE (TO BE SUBMITTED BY
BANK IN TRIPLICATE TO NABARD WITH A COPY TO DWSM)
(1) Regional Office, NABARD
(2) DWSM
Capital investment Subsidy Scheme for construction of RWH Systems
Part-I
For use by bank
1. Name & address of project:
2. Name & address of beneficiary
3. Name & address of financing bank
4. Date of receipt of proposal/application:
5. (a) date of sanction of term loan by bank:
(b) Date of disbursement of first instalment:
6. Means of Finance:
•T otal outlay
• Beneficiary
• Bank Loan
7. Item wise financial projection:
8. Capacity to be created
(i) 50000 litres
(ii) 10000 litres
(iii)
(iv)

78
9. Rate of interest (to be) charged
(a) in the case of CBS
(b) In the case of others convenor bank of SLBC
10. Brief coverage on technical feasibility and financial viability
(Enclose separate sheet along with project report)
11. Other relevant information
12. The project has been appraised and found to be technically
feasible and financially viable. We intend/do not intend to avail
of refinance from NABARD. The refinance amount is
Rs. ………… (if to be availed).
13. An Amount of Rs. …………. (Rupees ……………) being 50% of
the eligible amount of subsidy may please be released in respect
of the project for crediting to the “Subsidy reserve Fund Account-
Borrowerwise.”
14. We note that a time limit of 15 months is stipulated for
completion of the project from the date of sanction of project. If
reasons for delay in completion of the project are justified, a
maximum grace period of 3 months may be allowed for
completion of project. We also note that the advance subsidy
has to be refunded rth-with if the project is not competed within
the above stipulated period and as per the broad parameter of
the scheme. It is further noted that in case of any delay in
refund of subsidy the participating bank/beneficiary will be liable
for payment of the scheme.
Place: ( _______________ )
Date: Seal and signature of the
authorized signatory of bank

79
Part II
(For use of RO, NABARD)
(A) (For use by NABARD)
Advance Subsidy
The claim of advance subsidy for Rs._________ is forwarded
herewith for release of the same.
Date: ( _______________ )
Authorised Signatory
Regional Office, NABARD
(B) For use by NABARD
Scheme Code
State Code Project Code
District Code Bank code
An amount of Rs. ______ is released as advance subsidy on _______
(name of the bank) vide subsidy disbursement advice no. ____ (copy
enclosed). This amount may please be replenished/adjusted by DWSM.
Date: ( _______________ )
Authorised Signatory
Head Office, NABARD
(C) For use by DWSM/PHED
An amount of Rs. _______ as advance subsidy against above mentioned
claim is hereby released/replenished to NABARD vide D.D. No. ______
dated ________ drawn on ______ (Bank)
Date: ( _______________ )
Authorised Signatory
Member Secretary, DWSC/DWSM

80
ANNEXURE II
FORMAT FOR CLAIMING FINAL INSTALMENT OF SUBSIDY
HAD LIKE (TO BE SUBMITTED BY BANK IN TRIPLICATE
TO NABARD WITH A COPY TO DWSM
To
(1) Regional Office, NABARD
(2) DWSM
Capital investment Subsidy Scheme for construction of Rain Water
Harvesting Systems
Part I
For use by bank
1. Name, address/location of project:
2. Name & address of beneficiary
3. Name & address of financing bank
4. Date of sanction of term loan by bank:
5. Date of sanction of refinance by NABARD, if applicable:
6. Date and amount of refinance released by NABARD:
7. Date of last inspection of project by bank:
(enclose copy of inspection report)
8. (i) Total cost of project Rs.
(ii) beneficiary contribution Rs.
(iii) Bank loan Rs.
9. Capacity to be created
1. 5000 litres
2. 10000 litres
3. 25000 litres

81
10. Advance subsidy
(i)  Date of receipt
(ii) Amount Rs.
11. Rate of interest being charged by financing bank
(a) In the case of CBs PLR %
(b) In the case of others PLR of convenor bank of SLBC %
12. Whether construction has been carried out as per the technical
parameters envisaged under the project.
13. Total amount of expenditure incurred in the project-itemwise
details duly certified by a chartered accountant (copy of all
receipts & certificates the chartered accountant are to be
enclosed).
14. Various permissions/approvals obtained by the NGOs/PRc for
establishment and commissioning of the project from various
government authorities. (copy of each such approval is to be
enclosed)
15. The completion/commissioning certificate is required to be
signed by the beneficiary & verified by a qualified/approved
engineer/architecture certificate is required to be counter signed
by the branch manager of the financing bank.
Since the above project is complete as per terms and conditions
stipulated under the scheme, final inspection of the RWH system has
been arranged, and an amount of Rs. ––––––––––– (Rupees –––––––––
–––––––––––) being the final instalment of subsidy may please be
released for crediting to the “Subsidy reserve Fund Account-Borrower-
wise.” Copy of the inspection report of IC is enclosed.
16. This is to certify that the remarks given by IC have been complied
with.
Place: ( _____________ )
Date: Seal and signature of the
Enclosure: Completion certificate licence Branch Manager
inspection report of Committee, etc. (Bank)

82
Part II
(For use of RO, NABARD)
(A) (For use RO NABARD)
An amount of Rs. _________ as final instalment of subsidy towards
the above claim of _________ (name of the bank) in respect of
______________ (name of the project) may be released.
Place: ( ____________ )
Date: Authorised signatory
Regional Office, NABARD
(B) For use by Head Office NABARD
Scheme Code
State Code Project Code
District Code Bank code
An amount of Rs. ______ is released as final subsidy on _______
(name of the bank) vide subsidy disbursement advice no. ______
(copy enclosed). This amount may please be released by DWSM.
Date: ( _______________ )
Authorised signatory
Head Office, NABARD
(C) For use by DWSM
An amount of Rs. _______ as final subsidy against above mentioned
claim is hereby released/replenished to NABARD vide D.D. No. ______
dated ________ drawn on ______ (Bank)
Date: ( _______________ )
Authorised signatory
Head Office/DWSM

83
ANNEXURE III
FORMAT FOR UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE
FOR THE USE OF FINANCING BANK TO BE SUBMITTED, IN
TRIPLICATE, TO THE REGIONAL OFFICE OF NABARD
CAPITAL INVESTMENT SUBSIDY SCHEME FOR
CONSTRUCTION/RENOVATION OF RWHS
Utilisation Certificate
1. Name, address and location of the beneficiary and project
2. Name of the financing bank
3. Name and address of the financing branch
4. Date of sanction of loan by bank
5. Date of inspection by Monitoring Committee
6. Date of commission of the unit
7. (i) Total Financial Outlay Rs. ___________
(ii) Margin Money Rs. ___________
(iii) Bank Loan Rs. ___________
(iv) Subsidy Received
Date of receipt Amount Date of credit to the
from NABARD (Rs.) Subsidy Reserve
Fund A/c of the Borrower
(a) 50% Advance Subsidy
(b) Final installment of subsidy
     Total
8. (i) Capacity created
(a) New unit—Litres
9. Rates of interest charged by financing bank % p.a.
(a) In the case of CBs-PLR-% P .A.
(b) In the case of others-
    PLR of Convener Bank of SLB(C)

84
10. The bank has not availed refinance from NABARD.
11. This is to certify that the full amount of subsidy received in
respect of the above project has been fully utilized (by way of
crediting to the “Subsidy Reserve Fund Account—borrower-wise)
and adjusted in the books of account under the sanctioned terms
and conditions of the project within the overall guidelines of the
scheme.
Place: ( ____________ )
Date: Seal and signature of the
authorized signatory of bank.

85
ANNEXURE IV&V
PROGRESS OF CAPITAL INVESTMENT SUBSIDY SCHEME
FOR RURAL GODOWNS
SANCTIONED SCHEMES
STATUS AS ON
 Sl.No. State Name of Location Capacity TFO Bank Promoter’s Total Subsidy
the Litres sanctioned loan equity eligible released
party subsidy to
financing
banks

86
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT
Department of Drinking SHRI S.K. HAZRA,
Water Supply GENERAL MANAGER,
National Bank for Agriculture &
Rural Development,
Plot No. C-24, G Block,
Bandra Kurla Complex,
Bandra East, Mumbai-400 051
Tel.    : 022-6539324, 6530029
Fax   : 022-6530090
E-Mail : nabicd@boms5.vsnl.net.in
DWSM

87
6. Consolidated details of pending applications/sanctions (for all
banks in the State)
 Sl.No. Activity Number Number Number Number Disbursed***
of of of
Applications Applications Applications
Received Sanctioned Pending Fully Partly Total
 12 345678
1. Shallow
Tube
Well with
pump Set
2. Low lift
irrigation
points
3. Pump Set
4. Dug Well
5. Total
***Problems and constraints if any.
RO-in-charge/on-charge of ICD-RO
(To be submitted to HO by 21st of the succeeding month)

88
APPENDIX II
POSITION OF ENACTMENT OF LEGISLATION ON CONTROL
AND DEVELOPMENT OF GROUND WATER RESOURCES IN
VARIOUS STATES AS ON 12.03.2003
STATES/UTs WHERE LEGISLATION ENACTED AND
BEING IMPLEMENTED
Sl.No. States/UTs Status of Implementation
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh Water, Land and Trees Act,
2002 covering whole State has been enacted
with effect from 18.04.2002.
2. Goa The Goa Ground Water Regulation Act, 2002
has already been enacted by the State
Legislature on 25.01.2002.
3. Tamil Nadu The Chennai Metropolitan Area Ground
Water (Regulation) Amendment Act, 1987
has been enacted to regulate ground water
development in Chennai and some of the
nearby revenue villages. The President has
assented to the Tamil Nadu Ground Water
(Development & Management) Bill, 2002.
4. Lakshadweep Lakshadweep Ground Water (Development
& Control) Regulation, 2001 has been
enacted with effect from 01.11.2001.
5. Kerala The “Kerala Ground Water (Control and
Regulation) Act, 1997” has since been passed
by the State Legislative Assembly.
STATES/UTs WHERE BILLS PASSED BUT NOT ENACTED
1. Gujarat Has enacted legislation on 1987 as “Bombay
Irrigation (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1976”
by amending the “Bombay Irrigation Act,
1976”. The legislation is applicable only to
nine identified districts in the Gujarat State.

89
12 3
2. Maharashtra The Maharashtra Ground Water (Control
and Regulation of Development and
Management) Bill, 2000 has been sent for
assent of Hon’ble President of India.
3. West Bengal “West Bengal Water Resources Conservation,
Protection and Development (Management,
Control and Regulation) Bill, 2000” has been
received for assent of the Hon’ble President
of India. Some changes are proposed to be
incorporated in the Bill.
4. Pondicherry Pondicherry Ground Water (Control &
Regulation) Bill, 2002 has been passed by
the State Legislature and referred to the
Ministry of Home Affairs for President’s
assent.
STATES/UTs WHICH HAVE INITIATED ACTION FOR
PREPARING LEGISLATION
1. Assam Model Bill to regulate and control the
development of ground water has been
framed by the State Government and is sent
to Committee Members for comments.
2. Bihar The State Government has set up a
Committee to consider the matter and
decision will be taken as per
recommendations of the Committee.
3. Haryana Draft Bill is under preparation by the State
Government.
4. Himachal Pradesh The Draft Bill is under consideration of the
State Government.
5. Jammu & Kashmir The draft Bill is being examined by the State
Government.
6. Karnataka The Karnataka Ground Water (Regulation
and Control) Bill, 2002 is under
consideration of the State Government.

90
12 3
7. Mizoram Prepar ation of Draft Bill for regulating
ground water with reference to Model Bill
for the State is under process in PHED.
8. Orissa The matter is under consideration of
Government of Orissa.
9. Punjab The Government of Punjab has prepared a
draft on “Punjab Ground Water (Control
and Regulation) Act, 1998” and sent it to
CGWA for comments.
10. Rajasthan Rajasthan Ground Water (Regulation) Bill,
1997 is under consideration of the State
Government.
11. Uttar Pradesh Draft Bill on U.P . Ground Water (Control
and Regulation Act), 1997 has been prepared
and circulated to Members of State Water
Council for suggestion and modifications.
12. Daman & Diu Ground Water (Control & Regulation) Act,
2002 has been prepared and referred to the
Ministry of Rural Development for
concurrence.
13. NCT Delhi The State Government proposes to amend
the Delhi Water Board Act to accommodate
concerns expressed in the Model Bill, draft
of which has since been prepared and at
consultation stage.
STATES/UTs WHICH FEEL IT NOT NECESSARY
TO ENACT LEGISLATION
1. Nagaland In view of State Government at this stage
it may not be necessary to enact any law.
2. Sikkim In view of State Government enactment of
legislation to control the extraction of
ground water considered not necessary in
the State.

91
12 3
3. Tripura In view of the State Government it
is felt not necessary to make
legislation to regulated ground water
development in the State at this
stage.
4. Chandigarh In UT of Chandigar h there is already
a Bye-law requiring permission of
Chandigarh Administration for
withdrawal of ground water in
Capital Project Areas. No action was
required.
STATES/UTs WHICH HAVE NOT RESPONDED YET
1. Arunachal Pradesh No response.
2. Chhattisgarh A copy of Model Bill was sent to
the State Government as requested
by them.
3. Jharkhand Letter from Hon’ble Minister (WR)
acknowledged.
4. Madhya Pradesh “Madhya Pradesh Peyjal Parirakshan
Adhiniyam, 1986” for protection of
drinking water sources exists.
5. Manipur No response.
6. Meghalaya No response.
7. Uttaranchal No response.
8. Andaman & Nicobar No response.
9. Dadar & Nagar Haveli No response.

92
APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY THE 27 OCTOBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Mohan Jena
4. Shri Subash Maharia
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri Dawan Narbula
7. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
8. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
9. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
10. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
14. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
15. Shrimati Vanga Geetha
16. Shri Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
17. Shri Penumalli Madhu
18. Shri Kalraj Mishra
19. Dr. Chandan Mitra
20. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
21. Prof. R.B.S. Varma

93
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
4. Shrimati Gurjeet Kaur — Assistant Director
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee and felicitated Smt. Vanga Geetha, MP , Rajya
Sabha on her nomination as the member of the Committee. Thereafter,
the Committee took up for consideration Memorandum No. 2 regarding
action taken report on Eleventh Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development). The Committee after deliberation
adopted the draft report with certain modifications as indicated in
Annexure.
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft action taken Reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the next sitting might
be convened on Thursday, the 10th November, 2005.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Not related with the Report.

94
ANNEXURE
[See Para 2 of the Minutes of the sitting held on 27.10.2005]
Sl.No. Page No. Para No. Line No. Modifications
12 3 4 5
1. 15 & 16 — 4 from For  “The Committee while
below expressing concern over the
trend of diminishing States’
matching contribution would
like the Department to analyse
the reasons therefore and
inform the Committee
accordingly.”
Read “The Committee further
note that as per the guidelines
(refer Para 2.5.1 of guidelines
for implementation of Rural
Water Supply Programmes) the
allocation of Central Assistance
under the ARWSP is subject to
the matching provision/
expenditure by the States
under the State Sector MNP .
Releases under ARWSP would
not exceed the provision for
Rural Water Supply made by
the State Government under
the MNP . In such a situation
the Committee fail to
understand how the Central
allocation is being released
without ensuring the equal
allocation by the State
Governments as per the
stipulated guidelines. The
Committee while expressing
the strong concern over the
matter would like the

95
12 3 4 5
Department to analyse the
reasons therefore and inform
the Committee accordingly.”
2. 17 & 18 — 2 Add at the end:
“E-1 Replacing ARWSP by
Swajaldhara Recommendation
(Para No. 2.65)
19A The Committee had
recommended as under:
“The Committee in their
earlier report (Para No. 2.60 of
1st Report—14th Lok Sabha)
had examined the concept of
replacing ARWSP by
Swajaldhara and expressed
serious concerns in this regard.
Xxx xxx xxx The Committee
strongly recommend to review
the position in this regard in
the light of what has been
stated above and the
apprehensions expressed by
the Committee. The Committee
may be adequately explained
about the position to enable
them to analyse the not so
encouraging performance of
ARWSP as evaluated above.”
19B The Government in the
action taken reply have stated
as under:
“The Committee have noted
earlier that now the
Department has initiated
action to extend the reforms
process to ARWSP instead of
replacing it with Swajaldhara.
The detailed modalities for this

96
12 3 4 5
are still being discussed in the
EFC and the Committee shall
be informed of the same when
finalised. It is proposed to
gradually incorporate the
reforms, i.e. community
participation, from the
Eleventh Plan. In the
intervening period, the States
are to be guided towards a
Memorandum of Under-
standing (MoU) with the
Department to enable them to
take up the reforms. xx xx xx”
19C The Committee note that
the detailed modalities to
extend the reforms process to
ARWSP are being discussed in
the EFC and it is proposed to
gradually incorporate the
reforms  i.e.  community
participation from the Eleventh
Plan. The Committee while
noting that ARWSP and
Swajaldhara are two distinct
scheme of drinking water,
would like to reiterate their
earlier stand on the issue of
replacing ARWSP by
Swajaldhara. These two
schemes should be imple-
mented separately. The concern
of the Committee expressed in
their earlier recommendations
should be considered while
finalizing the policy for
drinking water schemes for
Eleventh Plan.

97
12 3 4 5
The Committee further note
that as per the guidelines
(refer Para 3.4.1 of the
guidelines for implementation
of Rural Water Supply
Programme and Para No. 15.4
of guidelines of Swajaldhara)
funds for Sector reforms and
Swajaldhara are released
district-wise. The Committee
would like that the guidelines
in this regard should be
strictly followed and the unit
of allocation/releases of funds
for all the Central Sector
Schemes of drinking water
should be a district.”
3. 21 25 10 For “Besides the Committee
find that problems are also
being faced for manning these
laboratories by some of the
State Governments. The
Committee note that the
options like out sourcing and
employing trained manpower
on contract basis are being
considered by State Govern-
ments. The Committee would
like the Department to interact
with the State Governments in
this regard so that a viable
solution can be found.”
Read “Besides, the Committee
find that problems are also
being faced for manning these
laboratories by some of the
State Governments. The
Committee would like the
Department to interact with
the State Governments in this
regard so that a viable solution
can be found.”

98
12 3 4 5
4. 31 46 8 After “last 3-4 years” Add “The
Committee express strong
concern over the poor
performance of Rural
Sanitation Programme. They
would like to be apprised
about the concrete corrective
action taken by the
Department so far.”

99
APPENDIX IV
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 41
II. Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 2.15, 2.32, 2.33, 3.43, 2.44, 2.64,
2.65, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, 4.17,
4.20, 4.23, 5.9, 5.10, 6.29, 6.30 and 6.31 21
Percentage to the Total recommendations (51.22%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies:
Para No. 2.63 1
Percentage to the total recommendations (2.44%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.30, 2.31, 2.34, 2.45, 2.49, 2.50,
2.51, 2.66, 4.10, 4.11, 4.15, 4.16, 5.8, 6.26,
6.27 and 6.28 16
Percentage to the total recommendations (39.02%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.53, 4.24 and 5.7 3
Percentage to the total recommendations (7.32%)