29
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.5.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 10.5.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 035
Price : Rs. 171.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (v)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (xi)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory.................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Overall Evaluation of the Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Department of Rural
Development ................................................................ 3
A. Status of Implementation of Direction 73A ... 3
B. Comparative position of allocation under
different Plans ..................................................... 3
C. Expediting the finalisation of BPL List ........ 7
D. Unspent balance under various schemes
of the Department of Rural Development,
furnishing of Utilisation Certificate and
the Monitoring Mechanism .............................. 11
E. Right to Information.......................................... 17
F. Role of District Rural Development
Agencies (DRDAs).............................................. 18
(i) Social and Gender Empowerment .......... 20
(ii) Improvement in Budgeting Exercise ...... 20
C
HAPTER III Scheme-wise analysis of Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Department of Rural
Development ................................................................ 25
A. National Rural Employment Guarantee
Agency (NREGA) ............................................... 25
B. Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)...... 36
(i)

C. Rural Housing (RH)—Indira Awas Yojana
(IAY) ....................................................................... 46
D. PMGSY .................................................................. 54
E. SGSY ...................................................................... 65
F. CAPART ................................................................ 73
G. NIRD...................................................................... 79
A
PPENDICES
I. Critical analysis of Statement made by the Hon’ble
Minister for Rural Development under Direction 73A
of the Direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on the
status of implementation of the recommendations
contained in the 9th Report of the Standing
Committee on Rural Development (2005-2006) ............. 85
II. BE, RE and actual expenditure during the Tenth Plan
Period ....................................................................................... 86
III. Programme and State-wise unspent balance of funds
as on 31.12.2006 ..................................................................... 88
IV . District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
Meeting held during 2006-07 ............................................. 91
V. State-wise list of Districts from where reports about
holding Meetings of District Level Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees have not been received so
far .............................................................................................. 93
VI. List of 113 districts proposed to be covered during
2007-08 out of the 130 new districts proposed to
be covered ............................................................................... 97
VII. Physical Performance of NREGA during 2006-07 ........ 103
VIII. Financial Performance of NREGA during 2006-07....... 106
IX. State-wise information on the number of households,
which have completed 100 days of employment ........ 109
X. Physical and Financial Performance of SGRY during
2006-07...................................................................................... 111
XI. State-wise information on fixation of cost of
foodgrains at APL or BPL rates ....................................... 114
P
AGE
(ii)

XII. State-wise information on status of eligible habitations,
habitations connected and habitations to be covered
under PMGSY ........................................................................ 116
XIII. The State-wise allocation for new connectivity and
upgradation under PMGSY ................................................ 118
XIV State-wise information on the number of poor
performing bank Branches under SGSY during
2005-06...................................................................................... 120
XV. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee
held on 28 March, 2007 ...................................................... 122
XVI. M inutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee
held on 28 March, 2007 ...................................................... 125
XVII. Extracts Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the
Committee held on 13 April, 2007................................... 127
XVIII. Statement of observations/recommendations ................. 129
PAGE
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shrimati Susmita Bauri
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri George Fernandes
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
9. Shri Hannan Mollah
10. Shri D. Narbula
11. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
12. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
13. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
16. Shri Sita Ram Singh
*17. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
18. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(v)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri D.C. Srikantappa, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Urban Development to Committee on Rural Development vice
the vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Shrichand Kriplani MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Rural Development to Standing Committee on Chemicals
and Fertilizers vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, para no. 2847 dated August 31, 2006.

(vi)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary
5. Shri G.C. Prasad — Committee Officer

ABBREVIATIONS
ADB — Asian Development Bank
APL — Above Poverty Line
APO — Assistant Project Officer
ARTS — Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme
BE — Budget Estimates
BLCC — Block Level Coordination Committee for SGSY
BPL — Below Poverty Line
CAPART — Council for Advancement of People’s Action
and Rural Technology
CCSS — Credit-cum-Subsidy Scheme
CIRDAP — Centre on Integrated Rural Development in
Asia and Pacific
CLCC — Centre Level Corodination Committee for SGSY
DG — Director General
DLCC — District Level Coordination Committee
DLM — District Level Monitoring
DRDA — District Rural Development Agency
DWCRA — Developent of Women and Children in Rural
Areas
EAS — Employment Assurance Scheme
ETC — Extension Training Centre
FAQ— Fair Average Quality
FCI — Food Corporation of India
GDP — Gross Domestic Product
GKY — Ganga Kalyan Yojana
IAY — Indira Awaas Yojana
IEC — Information, Education and Communication
IBRD — International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
IEC — Information, Education and Communication
IRDP — Integrated Rural Development Programme
IT — Information Technology
(vii)

JGSY — Jawahar Gram Samridhi Yojana
JRY — Jawahar Rozgar Yojana
MIS — Management Information System
MLA — Member of Legislative Assembly
MNP — Minimum Needs Programme
MP — Member of Parliament
MPR — Monthly Progress Report
MWS — Million Wells Scheme
NABARD — National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development
NC — Not Covered
NCT — National Capital Territory
NFFWP _ National Food For Work Programme
NGO — Non-Government Organization
NICD — National Institute of Community Development
NIRD — National Institute of Rural Development
NLM — National Level Monitors
NREGA — National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
NREGS — National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
NRRDA — National Rural Roads Development Agency
NSC — National Standing Committee
NSSO — National Sample Survey Organisation
NYK _ Nehru Yuvak Kendra
OB — Organization of Beneficiaries
OM _ Office Memorandum
OTC —O rganisation of Training Courses/Seminars/
Workshops
PADI — People’s Action for Development Initiatives
PC — Public Cooperation regarding promotion of
Voluntary Action in Rural Development
PDS — Public Distribution Ssytem
PMGY — Prime Minister’s Gramodaya Yojana
PMGSY — Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
PUCL — People’s Union for Civil Liberties
PURA — Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas
PRIs — Panchayati Raj Institutions
(viii)

RBI — Reserve Bank of India
RBC — Rural Building Centres
RC — Regional Committees of CAPART
RD — Rural Development
RE — Revised Estimates
RH — Rural Housing Schemes
RIDF — Roads Infrastructure Development Fund
RSVY — Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana
SAY — Samagra Awaas Yojana
SC — Scheduled Caste
SDM — Sub-Divisional Magistrate
SHG — Self Help Group
SGRY — Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
SGSY — Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
SIRD — State Institute of Rural Development
SITRA — Supply of Improved Tool Kits to Rural Artisans
SLCC — State Level Coordination Committee
SLSC — State Level Sanctioning Committee
ST — Scheduled Tribe
SVO — Support Voluntary Organisations
TRC — Technology Resource Centre
TRYSEM — Training of Rural Youth for Self-Employment
UB/OB — Unspent Balance/Opening Balance
UC — Utilisation Certificate
UNDP — United Nations Development Programme
UT — Union Territory
ZP — Zilla Parishad
(ix)

(xi)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty Ninth Report on Demands
for Grants (2007-2008) of the Department of Rural Development
(Ministry of Rural Development).
2. Demands for Grants have been examined by the Committee
under Rule 331 E(1) (a) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
on 28 March, 2007.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 13 April, 2007.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development)
for placing before them the requisite material and their considered
views in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them
by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
9 May, 2007 Chairman,
19 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The basic function of the Ministry of Rural Development is to
realise the objectives of alleviating rural poverty, ensuring improved
quality of life for the rural population, especially of those living below
the poverty line through formulating and implementing different
Yojanas/Programmes/Schemes relating to various spheres of rural
life and activities. The Ministry consists of the following three
Departments:
(i) Department of Rural Development;
(ii) Department of Land Resources; and
(iii) Department of Drinking Water Supply.
Department of Rural Development
1.2 The Department of Rural Development formulates and
implements Schemes for generation of self-employment and wage
employment, provision of housing to rural poor, rural roads and
provides support services and other quality inputs such as assistance
for strengthening of District Rural Development Agency Administration,
training and research, human resource development, development of
voluntary action etc. for proper implementation of the Programme.
1.3 The Department implements various Central Sector and
Centrally Sponsored Schemes. Some of the main Schemes being
implemented by the Department are:
(a) Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY);
(b) Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY);
(c) National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA);
(d) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY);
(e) Rural Housing (RH): Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY);
(f) District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) Administration
Scheme.

2
1.4 The Department of Rural Development has three autonomous
bodies under its administrative control viz. (i) Council for Advancement
of People’s Action and Rural Technology (CAPART); (ii) National
Institute of Rural Development (NIRD); and (iii) National Rural Roads
Development Agency (NRRDA).
1.5 The overall Demands for Grants of the Department for BE
2007-08 are for Rs. 43,347.86 crore. However, after deducting the
recoveries (Rs. 15,825 crore) expected during the year, the net Budget
of the Department during BE 2007-08 is Rs. 27,522.86 crore both for
Plan and non-Plan.
1.6 The Demands for Grants of the Department have been
presented to Parliament under Demand No. 78. The detailed Demands
for Grants of the Department were laid in Lok Sabha on 16 March
2007.
1.7 In the present Report, the Committee have restricted their
examination only to the major issues concerning the Department and
to some of the major Programmes/Schemes that are being implemented
in the context of Demands for Grants 2007-2008.

3
CHAPTER II
OVERALL EVALUATION OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
2007-2008 OF THE DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
A. Status of Implementation of the recommendations made by the
Committee in their Eighteenth Report under direction 73-A of
the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
2.1 As per direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha, the Minister concerned shall make once in six months, a
statement in the House regarding the status of implementation of
recommendations contained in Reports of Departmentally Related
Standing Committees of Lok Sabha with regard to his Ministry. The
Committee had presented the Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Department of Rural Development on 18 May 2006. In
view of the aforesaid direction, the statement of the Minister has
become due in November 2006. Yet, as on date, the statement of the
Minister in respect of the status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee
has not been tabled in Lok Sabha.
2.2 When asked the reasons for delay in making the statements
on the status of implementation of recommendations of the Committee
as mentioned above, the Secretary, Department of Rural Development
has stated that the Statement on the status of implementation of the
recommendation contained in the 18th Report of the Standing
Committee on Demands for Grants (2006-07) was tabled in Rajya Sabha
on 23 March, 2007. The Department has also informed that efforts will
be made to lay such statements in time in future.
2.3 The Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department
of Rural Development was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005.
The Statement with regard to this Report had fallen due on 19 October,
2005. However, the Statement on the said Report was made by Hon’ble
Minister for Rural Development in Lok Sabha on 28 July, 2006. The
critical analysis of the Statement is at Appendix-I.
B. Comparative position of allocation made for the Department of
Rural Development under different Plan Schemes
2.4 The Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates, Actual Expenditure
during each year of Tenth Plan and first year of Eleventh Plan i.e.

4
2007-08 are given at Appendix- II. The comparative position of data
with regard to allocation made during the year 2004-05 to 2007-08 is
as under:
Plan-Schemes
(Rs. in crore)
10th Plan proposed allocation 129464.27
Outlay agreed by Planning Commission  56748
Total releases  85563
BE 2004-05  11437.40
RE 2004-05  13866.40
Actual Expenditure 2004-05  13433.57
BE 2005-06  18334.00
RE 2005-06  21334.00
Actual Expenditure  21334.00
BE 2006-07  24025.62
RE 2006-07  24275.62
Actual Expenditure (upto 21.3.2007)  20248.74
Proposed BE 2007-08  45202.13
BE 2007-08  27500.00
Percentage hike over previous year
2002-03 —
2003-04 0 per cent
2004-05 10.21 per cent
2005-06 37.62 per cent
2006-07 23.69 per cent
2007-08 13.28 per cent
2.5 If we analyse the above data, the following observations can
be drawn:
(i) During Tenth Plan, the outlay agreed is a little over half of
the proposed allocation;

5
(ii) the releases during Tenth Plan are for Rs. 18815.43 crore
more than the agreed allocation;
(iii) during the year 2007-2008, the outlay provided at BE
2007-2008 is 33 per cent lesser than the proposed allocation;
and
(iv) as regards, the percentage hike in the allocation during
different years of Tenth Plan , the maximum hike was during
2005-06, when the allocation was raised by 37.62 percent as
compared to previous year allocation. During the year
2006-2007, the percentage hike was 23.69 percent whereas
during the year 2007-08, the hike is 13.28 per cent.
2.6 Hon’ble Finance Minister in his speech on Budget 2007-08 has
indicated that the Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan aims at putting
the economy on a sustainable growth trajectory with a growth rate of
approximately 10 per cent by the end of Eleventh Plan. The Standing
Committee in their Twenty-fifth report had recommended to accord
top priority to rural development sector while allocating resources.
The percentage growth in tax revenue during the year 2006-07 is 28.01
per cent where as the growth in the allocation of the Department as
compare to the previous year is 13.28 per cent.
2.7 As regards the increase/decrease in allocation under different
schemes of the Department the information has been given in
Appendix–II, it could be seen there from that under NREGA there is
enhancement of Rs. 700 crore. Under SGSY, there is enhanced allocation
of Rs. 600 crore. Under Rural Housing and PMGSY which are the two
components of Bharat Nirman Programme, Rs. 1128 crore and Rs. 1024
crore respectively more have been provided. However, under the
programme SGRY, the allocation has been decreased by Rs. 200 crore.
Further the allocation under DRDA and assistance to CAPART has
been marginally decreased.
2.8 As per Demands for Grants 2007-08, the outlay accorded to
the Department is Rs. 43,347.86 crore out of which total recoveries are
for Rs. 15,825 crore. After deducting the recoveries the net allocation
is Rs. 27,522.86 crore. The recoveries under the Head 2505 are for
Rs. 12,000 crore which relates to deduction on account of National
Rural Employment Guarantee Fund. As regard the recoveries under
the Head 3054 and 8012 it includes amount from Central Road Fund
Special Securities issued to FCI etc.
2.9 The Committee note that Indian economy has been in a robust
condition for the last couple of years and has been acknowledged as
the booming economy world-wide. The Approach paper for the

6
Eleventh Plan aims at a sustainable growth with a growth rate of
ten per cent by the end of the Tenth Plan. To achieve the growth in
real terms it is imperative that the poorest of the poor share the
benefit of growing economy. In this regard, the Department of Rural
Development has launched various Centrally sponsored progrmmes
which aim at alleviating poverty by providing guarantee of
employment and self employment. Various schemes SGRY, SGSY
and particularly NREGA aim to achieve the aforesaid objective.
Besides, the other schemes of the Department like PMGSY and IAY
aim to improve objectives quality of life for the rural population.
The objectives of the various schemes can be achieved only with
the adequate allocation during different Plans.
2.10 The Committee find that the percentage hike in allocation
of outlay has declined after 2005-2006. As against the hike of
37.62 per cent during 2005-2006 and 23.69 per cent during 2006-2007,
the hike is just 13.28 per cent during the year 2007-2008. Besides,
the outlay allocated is 33 per cent less than the projected outlay of
the Department. Not only that, there is reduction of outlay under
some of the schemes like SGRY, CAPART and DRDA Administration.
2.11 Another trend noticed by the Committee is that whereas
during the year 2006-2007, the percentage growth in tax revenue is
28.01 per cent, the additional resources being made available through
favourable tax collection have not been shared correspondingly in
the social sector. The hike of just 13.28 per cent in the outlay of the
Department of Rural Development substantiates the aforesaid
observation. The aforesaid hike of the outlay of the Department of
Rural Development is not adequate particularly when NREGA would
be applicable in additional 130 districts thereby increasing the
number of districts from 200 to 330.
2.12 The scheme-wise analysis of the position of outlay has been
made in the subsequent Chapters of the report. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Government to enhance the outlay under
different schemes so as to achieve the set objectives.
2.13 The Committee further find that the total outlay of the
Department has been indicated as Rs. 43,347.86 crore in Demands
for Grants 2007-2008. However, after deducting the recoveries to the
tune of Rs. 15,825 crore expected during the year, the net Budget of
the Department during BE 2007-2008 has been indicated as
Rs. 27,522.86 crore for Plan and Non-Plan. The Committee urge the
Department to furnish the details of the recoveries so as to enable

7
the Committee to understand the purpose of recoveries and to
comment further in this regard.
C. Expediting the finalisation of BPL List
2.14 The Department has informed that in order to get the new
BPL list finalized on the basis of BPL Census 2002, immediately after
the vacation of the Stay by the Supreme Court on 14 February, 2006,
the Ministry has been actively pursuing the matter with the States
and Union territories through different forums and a number of letters
on the subject have been sent to the States. The issue was also discussed
in each Performance Review Committee(PRC) meeting held during the
current year and particularly in the meeting held on 20-21 December,
2006. The States have also been informed that release of funds may
also be tied up with finalisation of BPL list. Further, progress is also
reviewed in the meetings of Nodal Officers from the States/ Union
territories which is held every month. The matter has also been taken
up with the Chief Secretaries of all the States and Union territories. A
meeting of the Performance Review Committee is scheduled to be
held on 12 and 13 April, 2007 where the issue of finalizing the results
of BPL Census 2002 will be discussed with the State Secretaries and
time frame finalised.
2.15 Regarding the status of BPL list in various States, the Ministry
have submitted that a consolidated BPL list at the Block level, District
level and at the State level is to be prepared after getting the approval
of Gram Sabha/Ward Sabha as the case may be. The States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Uttar
Pradesh and Uttarakhand have already finalised the list after
completing the process of getting it approved by the Gram Sabha. In
other States, this process is still going on. In some States/UTs like
Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar, Rajasthan, a large number of objections were
filed with the appellate authorities and it is taking time to resolve
these objections to the satisfaction of the people.
2.16 About the role of Gram Sabhas in finalisation of BPL list, the
Department has submitted that it is only the Gram Sabha which has
been authorized to finalise and approve the BPL list under the
guidelines of BPL Census 2002. Information for each household with
score has to be displayed at the Panchayat Headquarters so that every
rural household knows his status in the survey list.
2.17 The Committee in their 25th Report (para 19) had expressed
concerns over the decision of the Government regarding cap on the
total number of BPL families according to which the number of BPL

8
persons estimated should not exceed those identified as per 1999-2000
survey and desired that such limitations should not be imposed while
finalizing the number of BPL persons for Eleventh Plan. When the
matter was pursued further, the Department has clarified that the
number of BPL families to be identified under BPL Census 2002 is not
limited to the 1999-2000 survey. In fact, the States and Union territories
have been given the option of identifying the number of BPL families
which may be equal to the poverty estimates of 1999-2000 or Adjusted
Share worked out by the Planning Commission which ever is higher.
In addition, another 10 per cent flexibility is allowed on account of
transient poor. Under the guidelines of BPL Census 2002, the
methodology has been followed under which the families are to be
ranked on the basis of the score obtained by them representing the
extent of deprivation. The BPL list has to be prepared in a transparent
manner with the approval of Gram Sabha. Further, in order to redress
the grievances of the people with regard to their poverty status, a
two-stage appeal mechanism has already been provided. The limits
have been kept to keep total number of BPL identified in proportion
of financial resources available during the Plan for assistance to the
poor and also to ensure that by keeping large number of BPL families,
available resources are not thinly distributed among large number of
persons and thereby there is no impact on poverty by assisting the
poor under the programmes. The BPL list prepared under these
guidelines is required to be maintained at the Panchayat Headquarters
in the form of a booklet and also to be displayed on the website and
painted on the walls of Gram Sabha and Panchayats so that the
transparency is ensured. The present methodology has been designed
with the purpose to ensure that poorest of the poor get the preference
under the programmes of this Ministry. Since the BPL list in order of
priority is finalized by the Gram Sabha, therefore, the programme
implementing agencies will not have the discretion in selection of the
poor.
2.18 When asked whether BPL Census for Eleventh Plan has been
undertaken, the Department has stated that the BPL Census is generally
conducted in the beginning of the Five Year Plan and first such Census
was conducted for the 8th Plan in 1992. The results of the BPL Census
2002 conducted for the Tenth Five Year Plan have been delayed because
the matter was pending before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The BPL
list on the basis of BPL Census 2002 is being finalized after taking the
approval of Gram Sabha and also by taking into account the objections
of the people. On the direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, a
provision has been made in the guidelines to allow new names to be
added and ineligible names deleted from the BPL list on a continuous

9
basis during the period to which the list applies. The BPL list based
on BPL Census 2002 is yet to be prepared and finalized in all the
States/Union territories. In view of this, the Ministry has yet not taken
any decision to conduct the BPL Census for the Eleventh Plan, however,
the process of consultation with the States and other stakeholders is
under way.
2.19 The Committee note that the BPL list based on 2002 census
has been delayed for a long time. The Committee in their various
reports of previous years have been repeatedly emphasizing on the
expeditious finalisation of BPL list. But even after so many years,
the Committee find that the results of the BPL survey have not
been finalised. Initially the results were delayed due to the
imposition of stay by Hon’ble Supreme Court. Now when the stay
has been vacated by the Supreme Court w.e.f. 14 February 2006, the
results are further being delayed by various State and Union territory
Administrations. The Committee find that the BPL list so far has
been approved only in six States by the Gram Sabhas viz. Arunachal
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh
and Uttarakhand. In other States, the process of getting the mandatory
approval from Gram Sabhas is still going on. In some States like
Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar, Rajasthan, large number of objections were
filed with the appellate authorities to resolve the objections filed by
people in connection with the BPL list which means that there would
be further delay in finalisation of BPL list. On the part of the
Ministry, they have reportedly discussed the issue in every
Performance Review Committee (PRC) besides taking up the matter
with the Chief Secretaries of the defaulting States. The Committee
further note that a lot of efforts are being made by the Department
to put pressure on the State Governments to finalize the BPL list.
The issue has been discussed in each Performance Review Committee
meeting held during the current year. The matter was particularly
discussed in the meeting held on 20-21 December, 2006. States have
also been informed that release of funds can be tied up with
finalisation of BPL list. A meeting of the Performance Review
Committee is scheduled to be held in April, 2007 where the issue
would be discussed with the State Secretaries and the timeframe
finalized.
2.20 The Committee find that crores of rupees are being allocated
by the Union Government through various welfare schemes meant
for the poorest of the poor. Unless, the BPL list is finalized, the
benefit envisaged under these schemes can not reach to the intended
beneficiaries. Inspite of best efforts made by the Department, the

10
results are not forthcoming and the fate of the genuine poor is
hanging and thus they are being deprived of the benefits of the
various developmental schemes. The Committee strongly recommend
to the Department to take up this matter at the highest level. The
State Governments should be strictly told to finalise the BPL lists
without further delay through meetings with State Secretaries/Chief
Secretaries/Ministers of State Governments etc. Besides, the matter
needs to be deliberated at the Chief Ministers level. There is an
urgent need to fix a deadline. The Committee strongly recommend
the Department to take all the desired steps so that the BPL list is
finalized and displayed at Gram Panchayat Headquarters so that
every household knows its status in the survey list and feels secured
that he would get the benefits envisaged under the various
programmes.
2.21 Further, the Committee do not understand the logic of the
mandatory cut imposed on the number of households to be identified
under the BPL Census 2002 in accordance with the mandatory cut
off limit imposed by Planning Commission according to which the
number of BPL families cannot exceed the limit of 10 per cent of
BPL families identified in 1999-2000 BPL survey. The Department
has stated that since the resources of the country are limited and
thinly distributed, the intention of imposing the mandatory cut off
is to ensure that the poorest of the poor in the rural areas are able
to avail the benefit of the schemes. The Committee have repeatedly
been emphasizing in the various reports that such a cut off limit
can be a source of corruption and other malpractices. The Committee
had strongly recommended that such cut off limit should not be
applicable while finalizing the BPL list for Eleventh Plan. The
Department has stated that the ranking of the poorest of the poor as
decided by the Gram Sabha would address to the concerns of the
Committee. The Committee fail to understand the logic of putting
unnecessary limitation on BPL persons specifically when the benefit
of the schemes has to be provided on the basis of the scores, a BPL
family gets in the BPL list. In such a situation the logic of available
resources being thinly distributed cannot be understood. Further, the
Committee are of the firm opinion that any restriction on the number
of BPL families would provide unnecessary discretion to the agencies
involved in finalisation of BPL lists and can invite corruption and
malpractices. The Committee do not accept all the logic put forth by
the Department and strongly recommend to the Government not to
impose unnecessary limitations on the number of BPL persons for
the purpose of the Eleventh Plan.
2.22 The Committee further find that on the direction of Hon’ble
Supreme Court, a provision has been made in the guidelines to
allow new names to be added and ineligible names deleted from

11
the BPL list on a continuous basis during the period to which the
BPL list applies. The Committee welcome the aforesaid move of the
Government. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
modalities of exclusion/inclusion of BPL families in the BPL list so
as to understand the entire process of revision of BPL list and
comment further in this regard.
D. Unspent balances under various Schemes of the Department of
Rural Development, furnishing of Utilization Certificates and the
Monitoring Mechanism
2.23 As per information provided in the Performance Budget 2007-
08 of the Ministry of Rural Development, as on 31 December 2006 ,
an amount of Rs. 10,277.97 crore is lying unspent under various major
Schemes (viz. SGSY, SGRY, IAY, NREGA, PMGSY)of the Department
of Rural Development. The Statement showing the programme and
State-wise unspent balance under the said schemes of the Department
of Rural Development is given at Appendix-III. It may be seen there
from that the following is the position of allocation during the Revised
Estimate stage and the unspent balance of funds as on 31 December
2006:
Schemes Allocation in RE Unspent Balance Per cent of UB
2006-07 as on 31.12.06 to Allocation
SGSY  1200  558.04 46.50
SGRY  3000  1352 45.07
IAY  2920 1333.55 45.67
NREGA 11300 4478.55 39.63
PMGSY  5475.62 2555.83 46.68
Total  23895.62 10277.97 43.01
Utilisation Certificates
2.24 As regards the position of outstanding Utilisation Certificates
in respect of Grants/loans released upto 31st March, 2005, the following
information has been given:
(Rupees in crore)
Type of Guarantee/Loan Total UCs outstanding Total Amount
as on 31.12.2006 involved
        1 2 3
AUTONOMOUS BODIES
State Institute of Rural Development 12 3.19

12
        1 2 3
VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS
SGSY 17 2.00
SGRY 4 1.51
DRDA Administration 10 1.66
IAY 87 345.08
NREGS 21 391.01
TOTAL 151 744.45
2.25 It may be seen from the above data as many as 151 Utilisation
Certificates to the tune of Rs. 744.45 crore are still pending. The
maximum amount involved is in the scheme IAY (Rs. 345.08 crore)
and NREGS (Rs. 391.01 crore).
2.26 When asking the reasons for pending Utilization Certificates,
the department has replied that the amount of Rs. 741.26 crore
for which Utilisation Certificates are pending constitutes only
5.34 per cent of the total allocation of 2004-2005. The Utilisation
Certificates for a small portion of grants-in-aid released up to
31 March 2005 are no doubt pending from certain States due to slow
utilization of funds on some of the programmes.
2.27 When asked about the problem with the organizations in
furnishing the Utilisation Certificates especially in case of two schemes
viz. IAY and NREGS, the Department has submitted that under IAY,
more efforts and time is required for rehabilitation and for innovative
schemes than for the normal programme. For NREGA, further funds
are released on the receipt of proposals from the districts and no
problem has so far been noticed by the Ministry. Second regular
installment is released on receipt of Utilisation Certificate for the funds
already spent. The pending Utilisation Certificates of 2004-2005 from
21 districts were with regard to NFFWP and not NREGA as NREGA
was not in existence at that time. The Ministry has been constantly
persuading these districts and the State Governments concerned to
furnish the Utilisation Certificate for 2004-2005. The districts of
Narmada, Waynad, Fatehpur, Sonbhadra, Banda, Lakhimpur Khiri,
Hardoi, Rae Barelli and Barabanki have furnished the Utilisation
Certificate for 2004-2005 under NFFWP . As such, the number of districts
which have not sent Utilisation Certificates for 2004-2005 has come
down to 12.

13
2.28 When asked about the normal time required for rehabilitation
under IAY, the Department has submitted that rehabilitation following
a disaster varies from State to State and is also related to specific
disasters. Houses under IAY scheme are sanctioned as a part of
rehabilitation package. Normally, it is expected that the process of
construction of an IAY house will be completed within one year.
However, the IAY guidelines provide that completion of a dwelling
unit, in no case, should take more than two years.
Monitoring Mechanism
2.29 As per the information furnished by the Department, the
Ministry of Rural Development has developed a multi-level and multi-
tool comprehensive system of monitoring the programmes through
Periodical Progress Reports, On-line reporting, Performance Review
Committee meetings, Area Officer’s visit, Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees at the State/District level, with greater involvement of
Members of Parliament, District Level Monitoring and National Level
Monitors, Utilisation Certificates, Audit Reports, Physical verification
reports and various conditions for release of funds etc. The State
Government’s District and Block Level officials are doing monthly
physical verification of assets created under our programmes as per
direction of this Ministry. In addition, Minister of Rural Development
and Minister of State also monitor implementation of the programmes
through field visits, meetings with the State Governments etc. A new
initiative of holding meetings of State Nodal officers has been
introduced this year.
2.30 When asked whether there is any monitoring system for
reporting of expenditure, the Department has stated that the existing
monitoring mechanism through progress reports includes the system
for reporting of expenditure in each programme on monthly basis to
ascertain the pattern of utilisation of funds. A detail e-governance
friendly periodic reporting system has been put in place.
2.31 Regarding the use of e-governance for furnishing the montly
progress reports, the Department has submitted that the Ministry of
Rural Development has been using e-governance in Central Ministries/
Departments and State Governments in all possible areas such as
financial and physical progress reports of rural development
programmes on monthly basis from the State Governments/UTs
administrations, monitoring programmes through Video Conferencing,
seeking and furnishing of information/data to various Ministries/
Department and State Governments. The Ministry has also its website

14
offering software solutions for various in house activities. The Ministry
has also provided software and training to the State Governments for
on-line monitoring of rural development programmes. The Monthly
progress reports are being received through e-governance from more
than 550 districts and necessary action is being taken up with the
concerned State Governments for furnishing progress reports through
e-governance. Most release procedures are e-governance compatible.
2.32 When asked in what light are the reports of the Area Officers
taken and whether any action is taken by the Ministry on adverse
reports made by Area Officers on any particular district, the Department
has submitted that the Area Officers Reports are fact finding rather
than fault finding. Their approach is constructive, indicating areas for
improvement and innovation. All efforts are made to ensure that there
is no element of inspection or audit in the visit of the Area Officers
and the idea is to strengthen the relationship between the State
Governments and the Ministry. The reports of the Area Officers are
quite useful for the Ministry to take stock of the implementation in all
respects including operational problems and deficiencies/issues in the
implementation process. Since the Area Officers are officials of the
Ministry, their visits in addition to monitoring the programme, also
provide inputs for them to have ground realities/bottlenecks, which
help in formulation of policies and modifying the guidelines/
instructions. Besides, all the reports of the Area Officers are arranged
in a standard format of NIC. The strength and area concerns are
communicated to the Secretary, Rural Development and Department
of the concerned State for taking necessary action in respect of the
shortcomings. The State Governments are also requested to furnish
action taken report on issues/observations of the Area Officers Report.
2.33 Further, it has been stated in the Performance Budget 2007-
2008 of the Ministry that, with a view to revitalizing the role and
functions of the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees for making them
important instruments of effective monitoring of the implementation
of the programmes of the Ministry , these Committees at State/ Union
Territory and District levels were reconstituted in October, 2004. Detailed
guidelines on composition, role and functions of these reconstituted
Committees as well as instructions for conducting meetings have been
issued to all concerned. It has been stipulated that the meetings of
these Committees may be held on quarterly basis. Elected
representatives i.e. Members of Parliament have been assigned a Central
role in the reconstituted V&MCs.
2.34 The Department has given the details of the meetings held
by District level V&MCs during 2006-2007 as given in Appendix V

15
When asked the name of the districts where the V&MCs have not
been able to hold even a single meeting since their constitution, the
Department has stated that out of 597 districts, 531 meetings could be
held in 389 districts which means that in 208 districts not even a
single meeting was held. As regards the position of meeting of State
level Vigilance Committee etc. the data given by the Department shows
that out of 28 States and Union Territories only 12 meetings were held
in 8 States and one Union Territory. Further as per the guidelines the
meetings of the Vigilance & Monitoring Committee at each level are
to be held at least once in every quarter, after giving sufficient notice
to all the Members including the Hon’ble MPs/MLAs .
2.35 The Committee find that there is an elaborate system of
monitoring introduced at various levels which includes periodical
progress reports, on line monitoring mechanism, District level and
National level monitors, utilizaiton certificates, audit reports etc. In
addition to it the officials of the Ministry under area officers scheme
and the State level officials undertake field visits to know the ground
situation with regard to various schemes. There are District and State
level Vigilance Committees constituted by the Union Ministry of
Rural Development. Besides, Union and State Ministers of Rural
Development also monitor the implementation of the programmes
through field visits and meetings. A new initiative of holding a
meeting of State Nodal Officers has been introduced by the
Department. The Committee find that inspite of having such an
elaborate system of monitoring, Rs. 10,277.97 crore which comes to
43.01 per cent of the allocated outlay during 2006-07 are lying unspent
with various implementing agencies. Besides, 151 Utilization
Certificates amounting to Rs. 744.45 crore are still pending under
different schemes of the Department.
2.36 As regards the position of the meetings of District and State
level, Vigilance and Monitoring Committees held during 2006-07 (upto
10 January, 2007), 531 district level meetings were held in only
389 districts. There are 597 districts in the country which means
208 districts did not hold even a single meeting. Similarly, 12
meetings of State level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees, were
held by 8 States and one Union territory which means that most of
the States did not hold even a single meeting. As per the guidelines
district and State level Vigilance Committees shall hold at least one
sitting in each quarter during the year. The aforesaid data indicates
the failure of the above system of monitoring. With regard to the
Area Officers scheme, when the Committee enquired about the
shortcomings noticed by different area officers, the Department has

16
replied that the Area Officers undertake field visits not with the
fault finding mission rather with the constructive approach which
strengthens the relationship between the State Governments and the
Union Ministry. The Committee strongly disapprove the way various
systems of monitoring are working. The Committee feel that perhaps
more than introducing various systems, it is essential that the system
works properly with the given objective. The purpose of monitoring
by the Area Officers should be to know the various bottlenecks and
difficulties being faced by the implementing agencies as well as the
beneficiaries. Besides, interacting with the implementing agencies/
district level officials, said officers should try to know the ground
situation from the beneficiaries and physically check the quality of
the various assets created under the scheme. Meeting with the district
level officials alone can not provide the desired results. The findings
of the area officers should be indicated in the Outcome Budget
document.
2.37 With regard to the system of Vigilance and Monitoring
Committee the Standing Committee in their 25th Report (refer Para
No. 22) while reviewing the position of these Committees has
recommended that Member/Secretary should be held responsible for
not conducting the meetings at the regular intervals as per the
guidelines. The Committee has also recommended that reporting
format of utilization certificate should include the number of
meetings of Vigilance and Monitoring Committees held in each
quarter of the year. The Committee emphasize that crores of rupees
every year are being allocated under different schemes of the
Department and there is a genuine concern on the part of the
exchequer that the taxes deducted from their income/revenue are
purposefully utilised and the outlays allocated in the social sector
projects actually reach to the intended beneficiaries.
2.38 The Committee further feel that none of the aforesaid
monitoring mechanisms involve general public to act as catalyst in
effective monitoring. At least, one issue i.e. checking the quality of
projects and permanent assets created can be done effectively by
active participation of the general public. This could be done by
developing effective mechanism for receiving feed back. There is a
need to strengthen the complaint mechanism. The minimum
standards prescribed for a project, durability of assets created etc.
should be publicized by way of prominently displaying at notice
board at the site of the project. Besides, there is an urgent need to
fix time limit for disposal of each nature of complaint alongwith the
name, telephone number and contact address of the authority who

17
can be contacted in the event of deficiency. In addition to what has
been stated above, the Committee recommend to the Department to
strengthen the monitoring mechanism on the aforesaid levels.
Perhaps, there is a need to fix accountability for each specific work.
2.39 The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to
act on the suggested lines by the Committee and take all possible
measures to strengthen the Monitoring Mechanism without any
further delay. The Committee should also be kept apprised.
E. Right to Information
2.40 As per information provided to the Committee the information
on the website of the Ministry includes schemes, guidelines, their
physical and financial progress, tenders invited, policies, information
on fund allocation and sanctions under various programmes, various
circulars, emails of DRDAs, States’ Secretaries of Rural Development,
links to important websites etc. The information on the website is
people and user oriented. The NREGA site has a separate link for
citizens, officials and Panchayati Raj Institutions.
2.41 When asked whether there is any complaint mechanism on
the website for the help of the general public regarding the
implementation of various rural development schemes, the Department
informed that a person can enter through the ‘feedback’ link in the
site rural.nic.in and send his complaint at the NREGA site which also
has discussion forum. People can even complain regarding a PMGSY
road by clicking the feedback link on ommas.nic.in by which an in-
site complaint will be lodged. The complaint is routed to the concerned
officer and the complaint gets redressed as per the time period in the
RTI Act. The website of the Ministry is updated on a regular basis
everyday. The periodicity of updation depends on the nature of
information, e.g. entries under ‘RD News’ are updated everyday and
under ‘Circulars’, as and when issued. The Programme Divisions, jointly
with the IT Division and the National Informatics Centre unit of the
Ministry ensure updation of the website. As the information is provided
by the Programme Divisions , it is authentic and updated regularly.
The names, addresses, contact numbers and fax numbers of officers
responsible for the schemes are also given on the website.
2.42 The Committee note the various measures taken by the
Ministry to display information on the website. The Committee desire
that the Ministry should disclose as much information as possible
to the public on their official website so that people need not resort
to the provisions of Information Act for getting even small

18
information. The Ministry should also display vital documents such
as the Outcome Budget, Annual Report of the Ministry, physical
and financial performance of various schemes, minutes of various
meetings, highlights of various research studies on rural development
etc. on their official website. Besides, there is a need to develop an
on-line complaint mechanism with unique complaint ID number
under each scheme so as to draw attention of senior officers who
should dispose the complaints in a time bound manner and inform
the complainant about the action taken.
2.43 The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Department in
providing various tools to the public to lodge as well as redressal of
complaints through the user friendly technological interventions.
People can lodge their complaint through user-friendly websites. The
Committee however feel that innocent and illiterate people living in
rural areas, at present need the help of NGOs to invoke the various
provisions of Right to Information Act. Perhaps there is an urgent
need to first of all, enlighten the rural masses about their rights
provided through Right to Information Act. In this regard there is
an urgent need to empower the Panchayati Raj Institutions in tune
with the provisions made under Part IX of the Constitution. The
Panchayats equipped with the latest technology and trained
manpower can help the public to lodge the complaints. The
Committee would like the comments of the Department on the
aforesaid observation. Besides the Committee would like to be
apprised of the status of data with regard to the number of
complaints registered and addressed so far under the Right to
Information Act so as to analyze the position and comment further
in this regard.
F. Role of District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs)
2.44 As per information provided by the Ministry, miscellaneous
receipts essentially include the interest earned by the DRDAs while
the funds lie with the Banks. And in such cases where the subsidy
already sanctioned by the Banks could not be availed of by the
beneficiary for whatever reasons, the same amount is returned to the
DRDAs that gets into the Miscellaneous Receipts. Miscellaneous
Receipts form a part of the Opening Balance and get expended for the
programme. As examples during 2005-2006, the State of Jharkhand has
shown an interest income of Rs. 70.92 lakh, and a returned subsidy of
Rs. 4.72 lakh. Likewise, Punjab has shown an amount of Rs. 32.40
lakh as interest and Rs. 22.11 lakh as returned subsidy.

19
2.45 On the role of DRDAs, the Department has submitted that in
one of the most recent studies conducted by the NIRD general that
SGSY is a well-designed programme but hampered a bit by operational
deficiencies. Inadequate or ineffective participation of the programme
implementing agencies such as DRDAs and Banks is found to be
responsible for the slightly indifferent performance of the programme.
While there are dynamic DRDAs, there appear to be also cases where
the DRDAs do not have the required professional competence to hand-
hold the Swarozgaris and develop their entrepreneurship skills. The
competence of some of the DRDAs with regard to doing market
analysis, project preparation and appraisals also has been found to be
inadequate. Similarly, the study pointed out that the DRDAs have not
been able to ensure effective participation of the Line Departments in
certain cases. Boradly, there is resonance within the Ministry to the
thought that the DRDAs professional competence would have to be
raised if we were to improve the performance of the SGSY scheme, as
others. So, the Ministry decided to allow the DRDAs to engage
competent professionals as Consultants, to assist them in better
managing the technical matters. Doing a work-study analysis of a few
selected DRDAs, to find out the actual quantum of work currently
being handled by various staff and officers of the DRDAs is another
idea that is being mulled.
2.46 The Committee are perturbed to note that huge amount of
funds are lying with DRDAs as miscellaneous receipts. Miscellaneous
receipts essentially include the interest earned by DRDAs while the
funds lie with the Banks. The amount of subsidy sanctioned by the
Banks which could not be availed of by the beneficiaries and
whatever remains, is refunded to DRDAs that gets into a
miscellaneous receipt and form part of the opening balances and get
expanded. In this regard the interest income has been shown against
some of the States. For example the State of Jharkhand has shown
an interest income of Rs. 70.92 lakh when Punjab has shown an
amount of Rs. 32.40 lakh as interest. The Committee fail to
understand the concept of miscellaneous receipts and funds lying
with DRDAs which are being deposited in Banks to earn interest.
2.47 The Committee observe that this is a very serious issue as
funds are not given to the States to earn interest but to carry out
various rural development programmes. This trend must be
discontinued and the concerned DRDAs may be instructed
accordingly. Financial performance may be reviewed periodically so
that expenditure is actually incurred and do not lie with Banks as
unspent balance. The problems faced by Government in disbursement

20
of credit should also be discussed with all the concerned Banks at
the highest level.
2.48 The Committee also find that inadequate or ineffective
participation of the programme implementing agencies such as the
DRDAs and the Banks is found to be responsible for the slightly
indifferent performance of the Programme as indicated in the study
conducted by NIRD. DRDAs do not have the required professional
competence to provide training to the Swarozgaris and develop their
entrepreneurship skills. Besides, the study point out that the DRDAs
have not been able to ensure effective participation of the Line
Departments. The Committee observe that there is a need to have a
relook into the functioning of DRDAs which is main agency
responsible for carrying out various rural development programmes.
The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to analyze
the performance of DRDAs in the light of the aforesaid observation
of the Committee. All the required steps should be taken to make
DRDAs professionally competent. All the areas concerned with the
capacity building of DRDAs should be addressed to and the
Committee be apprised accordingly:
(i) Social and Gender Empowerment
(ii) Improvement in Budgeting Exercise
2.49 As per information provided by the Ministry, three major
programmes of the Ministry i.e. Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY), SGRY and
SGSY have been identified where the direct flow of benefits to the
rural women can be ensured. Accordingly, the performance of
implementation of these programmes is monitored where information
is sought from the programme implementing agencies separately on
the physical coverage of women.
2.50 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence have stated
that “from this year, we have taken a special initiative in the Outcome
Budget to specify the gender budgeting and we have also made and
attempt in the Budget document to segregate, out of total available
funds, how much would be allocated to women beneficiaries. We are
trying to do a study about benefits accruing to women under various
schemes. Out of the programmes which we have discussed so far,
under NREGA, the guidelines stipulate that one-third of the
beneficiaries should be women. So, that is specifically provided in the
guidelines. In SGRY guidelines, it is mentioned that 30 per cent of the
beneficiaries should be women. Similarly, in SGSY guidelines, it is
mentioned that 40 per cent of the beneficiaries should be women.

21
Under Indira Awaas Yojana, the houses are allotted either in the name
of women member of the household or jointly with male and female
members of the household. In addition to that, there are programmes
like PMGSY and Integrated Watershed Development Programme
(IWDP) and Sanitation Programme which have got special importance
to women. We have commissioned a study recently to find out as to
how the PMGSY connectivity has altered the status or living conditions
of women in rural areas. We have commissioned this study to find
out the indirect benefits to women. In case of IWDP also we have
commissioned a study to find out as to whether it has made any
difference. Another important programme is the Rural Drinking Water
Programme which has got a direct impact on women in rural areas.
Keeping that in view, we have tried to bring it at a consolidated place
and in this document we have tried to quantify also. For example, our
total budget allocation for SGRY is Rs. 2,800 crore of which the specific
outlay for women beneficiaries is Rs. 840 crore which constitute about
30 per cent which should result in creation of 10.74 crore mandays for
women only. This is the output which we have indicated based on the
gender budgeting. Similarly, SGSY out of Rs. 1,800 crore, Rs. 724 crore
is earmarked for women swarozgaris. It would create 6.54 lakh
employment under SGSY. In Indira Awaas Yojana, since houses are
allotted in the name of women are in joint names, 100 per cent funds
are basically earmarked.
2.51A When asked whether the physical and financial targets under
the group has been achieved, the Ministry have submitted that while
it may be difficult to monitor the direct flow of financial allocations to
the women under these programmes, however, the flow of physical
benefits are monitored separately. During 2005-2006 and 2006-2007
(provisional), the women swarozgaris both individuals and members
of Self-Help Groups (SHGs) who were assisted under SGSY accounted
for 57.58 per cent and 63.37 per cent respectively. Under SGRY,
25.53 per cent mandays of employment was generated for women
during 2005-2006 where as the available information for 2006-2007
reveals this percentage as 22.85 per cent. Under IAY, 78.02 per cent
houses were allotted either in the name of women or jointly in the
name of husband and wife in 2005-2006. This percentage during
2006-2007 works out as 83.46 as per available information.
2.51A From the year 2007-2008, the Performance Budget has been
merged with the Outcome Budget. The Outcome Budget 2007-2008 of
the Department indicates the consolidated position of the quarter-wise
targets fixed during the year 2007-2008. As regards the performance
during the previous two years i.e. 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, the position

22
has been indicated while reflecting the achievement of different
schemes. The consolidated data with regard to the physical and
financial targets and achievements of the previous two years alongwith
the physical and financial targets of the current year has not been
mentioned at one place. In the absence of the aforesaid data at one
place, which used to be part of the earlier exercise of Performance
Budget, it is difficult to have a comparative position of the targets and
achievements in three years i.e. the current and the previous two years.
2.52 Further, as per information provided in the Outcome Budget,
from 2006-2007, October onwards, 15 per cent of financial and physical
targets at the National level have been earmarked for minority
community and State-wise/district-wise earmarking is to be done on
the basis of their BPL population.
2.53 Even during the course of oral evidence, the Secretary,
Department of Rural Development has stated as under:—
“During the current year, the Government has decided that at
the national level, 15 per cent of resources of the Ministry of
Rural Development for three schemes, SGSY, IAY and SGRY
should be reserved for minorities and minorities are identified as
Muslims, Sikhs, Buddhists, Christians and Parsis. In the States
where the minority community is in majority, the benefit will
not go in that, like, for example, in J&K the Muslims are not
eligible. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in consultation with
the Planning Commission, has given a State-wise ratio as to how
this 15 per cent should be divided among the States. On the
basis of that, we have decided this target for the States and
conveyed to the State Governments. The States have to further
given this target to the districts based on their data of the
minority population in the respective districts. We have already
communicated this decision to the State Governments in the
month of October. We have also modified the monitoring formats
just to capture the physical and financial progress. We have
received the first report from some of the States for the month
of December and we have conveyed that to the Ministry of
Minority Affairs. In the case of SGSY, IAY etc., 15 per cent has
been fixed for the States. In the SGRY, since the scheme is being
discontinued, it was decided that out of the funds going to district
and inter-Panchayat level, 15 per cent of that should be for
minorities. They can take up work relating to minorities benefit.”

23
2.54 A specific allocation under the employment schemes of the
Department where targets of mandays are fixed, keeping in view
the specified targets  i.e. 30 per cent has been separately made for
women. Besides the impact of various other schemes some of the
schemes like PMGSY, help women indirectly. The impact of such
schemes on the women is being studied through a study
commissioned by the Department. The Committee note that whereas
under SGSY, the performance of women is remarkable where
63.37 per cent of the swarozgaris during the year 2006-07 are women.
However, the employment schemes, the stipulated targets are not
being achieved. During the year 2006-07 the percentage of mandays
of employment for women under SGRY scheme during 2006-07 was
22.85 per cent which is below the set targets of 30 per cent. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the position of mandays
generated for women during the year 2006-07 under NREGA so as
to know the evaluation of Gender Budgeting under one of the
important programmes. The Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to take all the desired steps so that the targets fixed
under different schemes for women are achieved.
2.55 The Committee note that w.e.f. 2007-08 Performance Budget
has been merged with the Outcome Budget. The Outcome Budget
2007-08 of the Department indicates the consolidated position of the
quarter-wise targets fixed during the year 2007-08. As regards the
performance during the previous two years i.e. 2005-06 and 2006-07,
the position has been indicated while reflecting the achievement of
different schemes. The consolidated data with regard to the physical
and financial targets and achievements of the previous two years
alongwith the physical and financial targets of the current year has
not been mentioned at one place. In the absence of the aforesaid
data at one place, which used to be part of the earlier exercise of
Performance Budget, it is difficult to have a comparative position of
the targets and achievements in three years i.e. the current and the
previous two years. The Committee recommend to the Department
to ensure that the consolidated position of the quarter-wise targets
and achievements of the three years is reflected in the Outcome
Budget.
2.56 The Committee further find that 15 per cent of financial
and physical targets at the National level have been earmarked for
minority community and State-wise/district-wise earmarking is done
on the basis of their BPL population. The identified minority
communities are Muslims, Sikhs, Buddhists, Christians and Parsis.
However, these communities would not be treated as minority in
the States where their population is in majority. The Ministry of
Minority Affairs in consultation with the Planning Commission has

24
given a State-wise ratio as to how this 15 per cent should be divided
among the States. The Committee would like to be apprised on the
action taken in this regard by the Department of Rural Development
and about the response received from various State Governments.
The Committee also desire that adequate publicity in this regard be
given in all the States so that the minority population are aware of
their rights and are able to avail of the benefits provided under the
scheme. Further, the Department should maintain a separate data on
minority community so that an assessment can be made on whether
the minority community is actually benefiting from the rural
development schemes.

25
CHAPTER III
SCHEME-WISE ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
The Committee in this Chapter have analysed the Demands for
Grants and performance of some of the major Central Sector and
Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Department of Rural Development
as indicated under:—
(i) Wage Employment programmes: (a) National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS), and
(b) Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)
(ii) Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY);
(iii) Rural Housing (RH): Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY);
(iv) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY);
(v) Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA);
(vi) DRDA Administration Scheme; and
(vii) Assistance to Council for Advancement of People’s Action
and Rural Technology (CAPART);
(viii) Training Schemes.
A. National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA)
Objective
3.2 The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (NREGA)
was enacted in Septemeber, 2005. The Act provides for enhancement
of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the country
by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage
employment in every financial year to every household whose adult
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
In that sense the NREGA provides a Social safety net for the
vulnerable groups and an opportunity to combine growth with equity.
Its objectivity is to ensure that local employment is available to every
rural household for at least 100 days in a financial year. It is envisaged
that in the process of employment generation durable assets are built

26
up that strengthen the livelihood resource base of the rural poor, thus
transforming the ‘Geography of poverty’.
Coverage
3.3 The Act will be applicable to areas notified by the Central
Government and will cover the whole country within five years. During
the year 2006-07 i.e. the first year of NREGA, the scheme was in
200 districts across the country, out of which 150 are those where
National Food For Work Programme (NFFWP) was in existence and
50 new Districts have been identified by the Planning Commission for
coverage under NREGA. During the year 2007-08, an additional
130 districts have been included to be covered in the second phase of
the programme.
3.4 As per information provided by the Department ‘it has now
been decided by the Government that SGRY in 130 additional districts
would be subsumed into NREGA in the second phase during 2007-08.
The list does not include the names of districts of Uttar Pradesh in
view of the Assembly elections in the State.’
3.5 A list of the 113 districts out of the 130 additional districts
proposed to be covered under NREGA is given at Appendix-VI.
Background
3.6 Due to the failure of trickle down theory and the Harrod Domar
Model in the Indian context, the concept of direct attack on rural
poverty gained momentum that paved the way for evolution of many
poverty alleviation programmes in a big way from Sixth Five Year
Plan that may be categorized in four major groups viz. (a) Self
Employment Programmes, (b) Wage Employment Programmes, (c) Area
Development Programmes, and (d) Minimum Needs Programmes.
Design shift in NREGA
3.7 The NREGA marks a paradigm shift from the existing Wage
Employment Programme (WEPs), the primary difference is that NREGA
is not a scheme but an Act passed by Parliament. In other words, the
NREGA introduces a Right’s Based framework, that provides a legal
guarantee and it mandates time bound action to fulfill guarantee which
hinges on an incentive structure for performance (Centre funds 90 per
cent of costs of generating employment) and there is a concomitant
Disincentive for non-performance (Unemployment allowance is a State
liability). The NREGA ensures adequate resource support by making

27
resource availability Demand Based and giving the Demand a legal
authority. Another critical factor built in the framework of NREGA is
that the public delivery system has been made accountable, as it
envisages an annual report on the outcomes of NREGA to be presented
by the Central Government to the Parliament and to the Legislature
by the State Government. The basic shift in the design and approach
of NREGA from that of earlier wage employment programmes can be
summarized as under:
(a) Demand driven as compared to supply driven approach in
earlier programmes,
(b) Statutory time bound provision for providing employment,
(c) Shift from work led to employment generation,
(d) Compensation in the form of unemployment allowance, and
(e) Greater focus on accountability and transparency etc.
Salient features of NREGA
3.8 The salient features of NREGA and the implementation format
are as follows:—
(a) Employment to be provided to every rural household in
the notified district whose adult member volunteer to do
unskilled manual work.
(b) Household means a nuclear family comprising mother,
father, their children and may include any person wholly
or substantially dependent on the head of the family.
Household may also comprise a single member family.
(c) Such household is to be provided work for 100 days in a
financial year
(d) This is a demand based Programme and demand emanating
from the village through the Gram Sabha.
(e) Every person who has done the work to be provided
minimum wages as prescribed under the Minimum Wages
Act, 1948 for agricultural labourers in the State. And such
wages shall not be less than sixty rupees per day.
(f) Disbursement of wages to be done on weekly basis but not
beyond a fortnight.
(g) Under Section 4 of the Act every State to formulate the
State’s Employment Guarantee Scheme to give effect to the
provisions to the provisions of the NREGA.

28
(h) Each employment seeker to be registered by Gram Panchayat
after due verification and the household to be provided a
Job Card.
(i)A  Gram Sabha shall be convened on commencement of the
Act for explaining the provisions of the Act, mobilizing
applications, registration and verification. Door to door
survey may also be undertaken to identify the persons
willing to register for employment under the Act.
(j) Each registered employment seeking household to be
provided a job card. A suggestive proforma for the job card
is annexed with the guidelines framed by Ministry of Rural
Development to implement NREGA, which contains
permanent information of the household as well as entries
of work given for five years. Permanent information of the
job card will include family registration code number,
particulars of the applicant and all members of the family
regarding sex, age and the names of adults willing to work.
Individual identity slips may also be given to each registered
applicant of the family.
(k) Employment will be given within 15 days of application
for work by an employment seeker.
(l) If Employment is not provided within 15 days, daily
unemployment allowance, in cash has to be paid. The legal
liability to provide employment is of the States and liability
to provide commensurate funds is of the Centre.
(m) Liability of payment of Unemployment Allowance is of the
States.
(n) A new work to be commenced if at least 50 labourers
become available for work.
(o) At least one-third beneficiaries have to be women.
(p) Gram Sabha to recommend works. Panchayat Raj Institutions
(PRIs) have a principal role in planning and implementation.
(q) Gram Panchayats to execute at least 50% of works
(r) Gram Panchayat is responsible for planning, registering,
issuing job cards to beneficiaries, allocating employment and
monitoring of works.
(s) The Programme Officer at the Block level, is not to below
the rank of Block Development Officer would be critical to
coordinating implementation processes. He is responsible for

29
scrutinising village plans, ensuring that the matching
between works and employment demand, the employment
demand is met within time and the works receive their due
entitlements. He is also entrusted with the responsibility of
ensuring that the social audit is conducted by Gram Sabha.
(t) The power to allocate employment is vested in both the
Programme Officer and Gram Panchayat. The Guidelines
framed by MORD have suggested State Governments to
delineate clear coordination mechanisms so that the data
on, request for work and work allotment between the
Programme Officer and the Gram Panchayat is properly
maintained and recorded on the Job Card.
(u) Such work would be selected from the shelf of Projects,
which would be the projects ready with administrative and
technical approvals. Shelf of projects is to be prepared on
the basis of priority assigned by Gram Panchayat and
accordingly a Perspective Plan prepared.
(v) While allocating work, Priority must be given to allot
employment on a local work. The work should ordinarily
be provided within 5 km radius of the village or else extra
wages to the tune of 10 per cent are payable. If some
persons have to be directed to report for work beyond
5 km persons older in age and women shall be given
preference to work on worksites nearer to their residence.
(w) Transparencies, Public accountability, Social Audit are to be
ensured through institutional mechanisms at all levels.
(x) Grievance redressal mechanism to be put in place for
ensuring a responsive implementation process.
(y) All accounts and records relating to the Scheme shall be
made available for public scrutiny and any person desirous
of obtaining a copy of such records may be provided such
copies on demand and after paying specified fee.
(z) A copy of muster rolls of each scheme shall be made
available in the officers of Gram Panchayat and the
Progamme Officer [at the Block level] for inspection by any
person interested after paying specified fee.
3.9 The details regarding Financial Activities under NREGA:—
B.E. 2006-07 11300 (200 districts)
Actual expenditure during 2006-07 5033.96
Underspending 6266.04
B.E. 2007-08 12000

30
3.10 The Secretary of the Ministry during the course of oral
evidence stated that during the year 2006-07, including the opening
balance, total available funds were roughly 12,000 crore out of which
8000 crore have been spent by February , 2007. Thus, roughly
4000 crore are the unspent amount. The representative of the Ministry
further clarified that during the year 2006-2007 the savings got from
NGREA has been declared to liquidate the FCI dues. Thus, Rs. 12,000
crore will be available under NREGA during the year 2007-08.
Physical performance and financial performance
3.11 A statement showing the physical and financial performance
of NREGA is given at Appendix–VII & Appendix-VIII respectively.
3.12 The Department in their Outcome Budget has given the
following information on NREGA.
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Items Ist Qtr. 2nd Qtr. 3rd Qtr. (*)
(Cumulative) (Cumulative)
12 3 4 5
1. Total number of Rural Household 5.40 5.40 5.40
a. Rural BPL household 1.65 1.65 1.65
b. Job Cards issued 2.03 2.99 3.47
c. Employment Demanded 0.63 1.01 1.51
d. Employment provided 0.53 0.96 1.47
2. Funds released in 2006-07
a. By Centre 3976.75 5603.15 6714.98
b. By States 210.10 310.21 539.81
c. Total: 4186.85 5913.36 7254.79
3. Total available fund [including 6143.57 8417.84 9896.92
OB for current year]
4. Expenditure 1419.63 3214.20 5033.96
5. Total works taken up 2.50 3.91 5.81
a. Works completed 0.60 1.36 2.34
b. Works in progress 1.90 2.55 3.47

31
12 3 4 5
6. Outcomes:
a. Mandays Generated 1858.13 3663.36 5365.00
b. SC 389.26 870.86 1319.02
(20.95%) (23.77%) (24.59%)
c. ST 848.19 1488.69 2042.70
(45.65%) (40.64%) (38.70%)
d. Women 756.74 1452.2 2112.99
(40.73%) (39.645%) (39.38%)
*Funds released upto 31st January, 2007 and expenditure as per State report upto
December, 2006.
3.13 It could be seen from the above data that 3.47 crore
households have been issued Job Cards during the year 2006-07 out of
which 1.51 crore households have demanded employment and
1.47 crore have been provided employment. 53.65 mandays were
generated. Out of 5.81 crore works undertaken, 2.34 crore have been
completed and 3.47 crore works are in progress.
3.14 During the course of oral evidence when asked whether some
of the schemes that are being undertaken by the Ministry are capable
of generating 100 days of employment, the Secretary , Department of
Rural Development as stated as under:
“As I very briefly mentioned earlier, a lot of calibration needs to
be done at the ground level. Normally, a perspective plan is
prepared which is a set of schemes with a fairly large portfolio.
For every Panchayat we will try to Plan on the basis of roughly
the number of BPL families multiplied by 100 days which will
give us the number of mandays required, and try to give a shelf
of projects at least twice that number. I am not saying that it
will happen tomorrow. But this is an approach which we would
like to follow from the next year”.
3.15 When asked whether payment of unemployment allowance
has been reported by any of the State Governments, the Department
has replied that the Government of Madhya Pradesh has informed a
total of Rs. 4,75,386 was paid to 1574 applicants as unemployment
allowance in Barwani district. Payment of unemployment allowance
has not been reported by any other State.

32
3.16 When asked whether in any State, the payment of wages is
done through post offices, the Department has stated that the payment
of wages through post offices is being made in some of the districts
of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and West Bengal on pilot basis.
3.17 During the Study visit of Sub-Committee-II to various
backward districts of Uttar Pradesh, the Committee found lack of
awareness of the scheme among the people. In this connection, the
extracts of the tour notes of the visit of the sub-Committee-II to Bari
village in Sidhauli Block, Sitapur District of Uttar Pradesh are
reproduced below:
“The sub-Committee learnt that most of the people gathered there
did not know about NREGA. Even the President of the Kisan
Mazdoor Sangathan who was present there was not aware of
NREGA. When the Sub-Committee was discussing about job
cards, most of the people did not know what a job card is and
presumed that ration card was also named as job card”.
3.18 Even during the Study visit of sub-Committee II to
Simri Village, Masauli Block, Barabanki district of Uttar Pradesh, the
Committee found that there was low level of awareness among people
regarding not only the NREGA but of other schemes (Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj) as well. Even the Gram Pradhan
had rudimentary knowledge of the NREGA and no knowledge of
Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY).
3.19 The Standing Committee during the Study visit to Andhra
Pradesh and Karnataka has found that 2 per cent service expense was
being charged by the Post Offices for the transaction to be made under
NREGA. In this regard the Secretary during the course of oral evidence
submitted that they had taken the matter with the Postal Department
and they have intimated that computerisation should be done in the
Branches of Post Offices. The Secretary also informed that the
Department is ready to consider to have some preliminary expenses
when the account under NREGA is opened in post offices. However,
for every transaction, 2 per cent of the service charges by Post Offices
are not justified. There are only 4 per cent administrative expenditure
available under NREGA and it is difficult to meet the additional
expenditure if 2 per cent is paid to Post Offices.
3.20 Further, the sub-Committee found that even the district
administration officials were not aware that the benefits of NREGA
could be availed by all rural poor who volunteer to do work
irrespective of BPL or APL status.

33
3.21 The Committee examined the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Bill, 2004 and presented 13th Report to Parliament. With
regard to the provision of minimum number of persons required for
starting a work, the Committee had recommended as follows:
“The Committee feel that the prescribed number of labourers i.e.
50 for starting a new work is very much on the higher side.
Such a provision may restrict the scope of taking small works
under the scheme. The Committee also note that the Department
of Rural Development has agreed to reconsider the said provision.
The Committee would like that the prescribed number of
minimum labourers should be reduced to ten. Besides, the
implementing authority may be empowered to take up new work
with even lesser than ten number of labourers. Para 13 of
Schedule II may accordingly be amended.”
3.22 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence informed
the Committee as under:
“Sir, we have made a small amendment in the guidelines by
allowing work on the individual land holdings that is only a
month or so back. We have given that clearance and we have
also made small improvement. For the kind information of the
Hon’ble Chairman and the Hon’ble Members, I would like to
mention that earlier the number was 50 for starting the work,
but now we have reduced it to 10. This is particularly helpful
for the weaker sections of the people on farm work, like digging
a well or in the field of plantation. We can take up these works.
These will be in addition to the community work done and it
may benefit those people.”
3.23 When asked whether any preparation has been done in the
event of transfer of 130 new districts from SGRY to NREGA, the
Secretary, Department of Rural Development has stated that:
“As I mentioned this morning, we are making a plan for
transition. What we have done this time is that we have written
to all the State Governments saying that please prepare a list of
the works which are on-going under SGRY and which have not
been completed and try to complete it quickly in the next two
months or so. It is because for the starting of the NREGA, they
will require some minimum preparatory time. They have to issue
the job cards and they have to prepare a list of works and then
they have to issue the muster rolls.”

34
3.24 A statement showing the number of households that have
completed 100 days of employment is given in Appendix IX. It could
be seen, therefrom that out of 1.47 crore households who have been
provided employment, only 10,89,017 households could complete 100
days of employment. The State-wise performance reflects that in
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland, none
of the families could get 100 days of employment. In the progressive
State of Kerala only 66 families could get 100 days of employment. In
West Bengal also the number was quite less. Only 4357 families got
100 days employment.
3.25 The Committee note from the position of outlay provided
under NREGA, that Rs. 11,300 crore was provided during the year
2006-07 when 200 districts were to be covered in the first phase.
Including the Opening Balance, the Department has roughly
Rs. 12,000 crore during 2006-07. Out of this 8,000 crore could actually
be spent while the balance Rs. 4,000 crore which should have been
deposited in Central Employment Guarantee Fund (CEGF), have
actually been diverted to liquidate the FCI bills. During 2007-08 an
additional 130 districts have been proposed to be added thus making
the total number to 330 districts. The allocation during 2007-08 has
been made for Rs. 12,000 crore which is equal to the total available
funds during 2006-07, although 130 additional districts are proposed
to be covered during 2007-08.
3.26 The Committee strongly object to the aforesaid diversion of
funds of NREGA. The Committee find that the year 2006-07 was the
first year of implementation of NREGA and the total available funds
could not be utilised fully. Since the scheme might pick up during
2007-08 providing of outlay equal to the allocation made during
2006-2007 is not justified particularly when 130 additional districts
are proposed to be covered during 2007-2008. In view of the aforesaid
position, the Committee strongly recommend the Government to
provide adequate allocation under NREGA. Ministry of Finance/
Planning Commission may be apprised of the concerns of the
Committee in this regard. Besides the transaction of funds should
be made strictly as per rules and savings under NREGA should be
deposited in National Employment Guarantee Fund and not diverted
elsewhere.
3.27 The Committee further note that, out of 1.47 crore
households who have been provided employment, only 10,89,017 i.e.
7.41 percent households could complete 100 days of employment,
which is the main objective of the Act. The State-wise performance

35
indicates that in Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram
and Nagaland, none of the families could get 100 days of
employment. In the progressive State of Kerala, only 66 families
could get 100 days of employment. The Committee also note that an
amount of Rs. 4,75,386 was paid as unemployment allowance in
Barwani District of Madhya Pradesh. The Committee feel that the
aforesaid data need to be analysed carefully by the Department so
as to understand the peculiar State-wise problems in the
implementation of NREGA. Such an analysis would provide the
Government necessary input to take the desired State specific action
so as to achieve the objectives of ambitious legislation of NREGA.
3.28 The Committee further note that one of the aspect that need
to be addressed is to generate works in different districts that can
provide 100 days of employment to the families who demand
employment particularly when it is a statutory requirement. With
the existing works being undertaken under NREGA like deepening
of water bodies, water harvesting, drought proofing etc. the
Committee have their apprehension that these works may not provide
100 days employment to a family in a year. The Department has to
study the implementation of the programme in various States and
analyse the position in view of the aforesaid observation of the
Committee and also to take decision on allowing certain other works
which are at present not permissible under NREGA.
3.29 The Committee during the Study visit to various backward
districts of the country have found that the payment of wages to
beneficiaries is being made by different methods. In Uttar Pradesh,
the payment is being made in cash. In Andhra Pradesh it is being
done through Post Offices. In Karnataka, payment is being made
through Bank and Post Offices. The Committee have also noted that
2 per cent service expenses were being charged by Post Offices and
the representatives of the Banks requested the Committee that similar
two percent transaction charges, should be allowed to Banks also.
The Committee have selected the subject implementation of NREGA
and the issues will be dealt with, in detail, during the course of
examination.
3.30 Here the Committee find that the matter regarding charging
of service expenses is being taken up with the Department of Posts.
The Committee recommend that the matter should be settled between
the Department of Rural Development and Department of Posts by
sitting across the table. The representatives of the Department of
Posts should be persuaded not to deduct any service charges since

36
this is a social sector scheme meant for the poorest of the poor and
every section of the Government has the responsibility to ensure
that maximum benefit reaches to the beneficiaries. Charging of
2 per cent as service expenses would ultimately result in reduction
of 2 per cent of the allocation meant for the poorest of the poor.
3.31 The Committee feel that there is not enough awareness
about the scheme among people. In most of the districts in which
the Committee visited during the study tours, the Committee found
that people mistook the ration card for job card. The Committee
have noted that in many places even the local Panchayat is not
educated enough to carry out the scheme. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry of Rural Development in consultation with the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj draw a module covering all rural
development schemes for the training of PRIs so that PRIs can
effectively discharge their responsibility in carrying out the schemes.
The role of NIRD and SIRDs may also be strengthened to organize
training programmes for PRIs and District and Block level officials.
3.32 The Committee further note that the guidelines have been
slightly amended to allow work on the individual land holdings
and the number of persons required to start a work has been reduced
to 10 from the existing 50 persons. The Committee only hope that
with this amendment more and more people will be benefited by
the scheme.
3.33 The Committee note that 130 new districts have been added
to the scheme from 2007-2008. During the launching of the scheme
in its initial phase, the Committee had observed that the States were
not equipped and needed some preparatory time for transfer of work
from NFFWP to NREGA. The Committee desire that the concerned
State and District Administrations be ready with the plan for the
transition by making a list of works which are on-going and try to
complete it as starting of the NREGA will require some minimum
preparatory time. The machinery for wide publicity of the NREG
scheme, issue of job cards, preparation of muster rolls may be geared
up so that the problems experienced in the implementation of scheme
in its initial phases does not recur.
B. Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)
Objectives
(a) Primary Objective
3.34 The primary objective of the scheme is to provide additional
and supplementary wage employment and thereby provide food
security and improve nutritional levels in all rural areas.

37
(b) Secondary Objective
3.35 The secondary objective is the creation of durable community,
social and economic assets and infrastructural development in rural
areas.
Target Group
3.36 The SGRY is open to all rural poor who are in need of wage
employment and desire to do manual and unskilled work in and
around their village/habitat. The Programme is self-targeting in nature.
While providing wage employment, preference shall be given to
women, members of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and parents
of child labour withdrawn from hazardous occupations, who are
desirous of working of wage employment.
Foodgrains as part of wages under SGRY
3.37 Distribution of foodgrains as part of wages under the SGRY
is based on the principle of protecting the real wages of the workers
besides improving the nutritional standards of the families of the rural
poor. Foodgrains are given as part of wages under SGRY to the rural
poor at the rate of 5 kg. per manday. Should State Government wish
to give more than 5 kg. of foodgrains per manday, it may do so
within the existing State allocation (subject to a minimum of 25 percent
of the wages to be paid in cash). The State Government and UT
Administrations are free to calculate the cost of foodgrains paid as
part of wages, at a uniform rate which may be either BPL rate or APL
rate or anywhere between the two. The workers will be paid the
balance of wages in cash, so that they are assured of the notified
Minimum Wages.
3.38 In the event of non-availability/inadequate availability of
foodgrains, wages in kind may be less than 5 kg. of foodgrains per
manday and the remaining portion may be given in cash. In the reverse
case of less availability of cash, the wages in cash may be less than
25 percent and the remaining portion may be given in kind as
foodgrains. However, the norm of minimum 5 kg. of foodgrains and
minimum of 25 percent wages in cash should be maintained as far as
possible. No additional allocation of cash in lieu of foodgrains will be
made by the Central Government.
Special Component
3.39 There is a Special Component of SGRY for augmenting food
security through additional wage employment in the calamity affected

38
rural areas after due notification by the State Government and its
acceptance by the Ministry of the Agriculture. A certain percentage of
the allotted foodgrains under SGRY will be reserved for this purpose.
Foodgrains under the Special Component can be utilised in any scheme
of the Central or State Government being implemented for generation
of wage employment in the districts affected by a natural calamity
and duly notified as such. The cash component of the wages and
material cost will be met from the scheme under which the sub-
component will be used or dovetailed.
Budget Estimates, Revised Estimate and Actual Expenditure under
SGRY during the Tenth Plan
3.40 As per information provided by the Department under the
SGRY, Rs. 48,538 crores was proposed as Central Allocation for Tenth
Plan while submitting the proposal to the Planning Commission, which
includes Rs. 27,500 crore for payment to FCI and Rs. 20,625 crores for
cash component. However, Planning Commission allocated Rs. 30,000
crore under SGRY for the Tenth Plan. No allocation was made by the
Planning Commission for payment to FCI at the time of finalisation of
Tenth Plan.
3.41 The Department has given the BE, RE and Actual under SGRY
during Tenth Plan and financial year 2007-2008 as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE Actual
  1 2 3 4 5
2002-2003 Cash component 3750.00 3750.00 3688.93
Payment to FCI under SGRY 690.00 4236.00 4297.00
Payment to FCI under SGRY (SC)* 600.00 1100.00 1100.00
2003-2004 Cash component 4125.00 4125.00 4124.93
Payment to FCI under SGRY 736.25 1116.25 1116.25
Payment to FCI under SGRY (SC) 38.75 4888.75 4888.74
2004-2005 Cash component 4500.00 4500.00 4500.30
Payment to FCI under SGRY 300.00 300.00 300.00
Payment to FCI under SGRY (SC) 300.00 300.00 300.00
2005-2006 Cash component 4000.00 5500.00 5500.47
Payment to FCI under SGRY 0.00 1665.00 1701.73
Payment to FCI under SGRY (SC) 0.00 1335.00 1229.23

39
123 4 5
2006-2007 Cash component 3000.00 3000.00 2439.01
(as on
28.2.07)
Payment to FCI under SGRY 0.00 # - -
Payment to FCI under SGRY (SC) 0.00 # - -
Total 22040.00 35816.00 35186.59
2007-2008 Cash component 2600.00 2600.00 N.A.
Payment to FCI under SGRY 200.00 N.A. N.A.
Payment to FCI under SGRY (SC) 0.00 N.A. N.A.
Expenditure (-) 621.41 crore of 10th Plan(RE)
During the year 2007-08 the proposed allocation was Rs. 3284 crore.
*Includes allocation for Food For Work Programme (FFWP).
#In addition, Ministry of Finance has notified Special Securities of Rs. 16,200 crore
towards payment of outstanding FCI Bills for the foodgrains lifted under SGRY and
budgetary provision has been made in this regard. The Ministry of Finance has already
issued notification for raising entire amount as Special Securities by FCI.
3.42 The Department has further informed that in the year
2007-2008, Rs. 3,284 crore was proposed for 155 districts only on the
presumption that SGRY programme in 233 districts will subsume into
NREGA. The proposed amount excluded Rs. 14,989.64 crore towards
settlement of FCI Bills. However, the Planning Commission agreed to
provide Rs. 2,620 crore for 338 districts as cash allocation and 15 lakh
tonnes of foodgrains. As per the indication, Rs. 2,600 crore has been
provided for cash component and Rs. 200 crore for foodgrains
component.
3.43 The following conclusions can be drawn from the above
information.
(a) BE during the Tenth Plan was Rs. 22,040 crore
(b) RE during the Tenth Plan was Rs. 35,816 crore (62.50 per
cent increase over BE)
(c) The actual expenditure during the Tenth Plan (upto February,
2007) is Rs. 35,186.59 crore.
(d) Payment to FCI under SGRY was projected as Rs. 1,665
crore at RE 2005-2006 stage while the actual expenditure
for the component was Rs. 1,701.73 crore.

40
(e) Payment to FCI under SGRY(Spl. Component) was projected
as Rs. 1,335 crore at RE 2005-2006 stage while the actual
expenditure for the component was Rs. 1,229.23 crore.
(f) No allocation has been made either in foodgrains component
or Special Component of SGRY during the year 2006-2007.
However, Ministry of Finance has notified Special Securities
of Rs. 16,200 crore towards payment of outstanding FCI
Bills.
(g) Rs. 200 crore under foodgrains component of SGRY has
been made for the year 2007-2008 while no allocation has
been made for Special Component under SGRY.
(h) The allocation during the year 2007-08 has been reduced by
Rs. 400 crore.
The physical and financial peformance under SGRY
3.44 During the year 2005-06, the percentage expenditure of total
available funds has been indicated as 83.79 percent. The expenditure
is less than 50 percent in States like Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Andaman & Nicobar Island, Lakshdweep. In Daman & Diu the
expenditure is nil and nothing has been indicated with regard to Dadra
and Nagar Haveli.
3.45 During the year 2006-07, the percentage expenditure of the
total available funds has been indicated as 43.86 percent. As regards
State-wise performance almost all the States bearing Assam, Gujarat,
Orissa, and Sikkim have utilised less than 50 percent of the available
funds.
3.46 The physical performance under SGRY during 2006-07 as
provided by the Department has been given in Appendix-X.
3.47 From the statement, it may be seen that no work has been
completed in Manipur, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and
Lakshadweep while in Goa only 12 works, in Andaman & Nicobar
Islands 37 works and in Pondicherry, only 81 works have been
completed during 2006-2007. In Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman
& Diu, during the entire Tenth Plan, not even a single work was
completed. Similarly, in Lakshadweep, during the entire Tenth Plan
period, only 12 works were completed.

41
3.48 As per information furnished by the Ministry. The quarterly
achievement of mandays generated during the year 2006-2007 is as
under:
Quarter Indicative target Achievement
First Quarter 10.02 crore mandays 2.35 crore mandays
Second Quarter 10.02 crore mandays 11.14 crore mandays
Third Quarter 17.55 crore mandays 8.51 crore mandays
Fourth Quarter 12.54 crore mandays —
Financial allocation
3.49 When asked for the reasons for reduced allocation during the
year 2005-06 and 2007-08. The Department has informed that Rs. 4,500
crore and Rs. 5,500 crore were allocated during the years 2004-05 and
2005-06 respectively for all the SGRY districts except those of Delhi
and Chandigarh. During 2006-07, Rs. 3,000 crores has been allocated
funds for 388 districts consequent upon SGRY programme in
200 districts subsumed into NREGA in the first phase during the year.
However, Rs. 2,600 crores have been earmarked provisionally as BE
for 2007-08 under SGRY for 338 presuming that SGRY programme in
50 districts will subsume in NREGA in 2007-08. As per the details
given by the Department, SGRY Programme in 130 additional districts
will subsume into NREGA in the second phase in 2007-08. The
allocation of cash component for the year 2007-08 has not been reduced
in respect of remaining districts covered under SGRY during the year.
The provision for the foodgrain is not met in the cash component of
the Budget but is given in addition.
3.50 When the Department was asked as to why that in the Budget
allocation for payment to FCI was not projected during 2006-2007
whereas the Ministry of Finance has notified Rs. 16,200 crores towards
payment of outstanding FCI bills at the fag end of the financial year,
the Department has stated as under:
“In the proposal for Annual Plan of SGRY for 2006-07, Rs. 27,768
crore were proposed for payment as backlog liability for payment
of unpaid Bills under SGRY and Special Component of SGRY, in
addition to normal requirement of funds for foodgrains for the
year 2006-07. No allocation of funds for foodgrains has been
made in BE 2006-07. However,  a budgetary provision of Rs. 16,200
crore has been made in the Supplementary Grants of this Ministry

42
against Special Securities to be raised by FCI as per decision of
the Government of India. After it was decided to issue Special
Securities for Rs. 16,200 crores, modalities for issue of such Special
Securities were to be formulated. After detailed consultations with
concerned authorities, Ministry of Finance decided to issue Special
Securities in three phases i.e. Rs. 5,000 crore each in first and
second phase and Rs. 6200 crore in third phase. After making
necessary provision through Supplementary Demands for Grants
for raising Special Securities and completing all other formalities,
the Government could notify the Special Securities during
December, 06 to February, 2007.”
3.51 When asked, from where has the budgetary provision for the
payment of outstanding FCI bills been made, the Department has
submitted as under:
‘This provision is a notional provision outside the purview of
Gross Budgetary Support of this Ministry . This Security has been
given by the Reserve Bank of India on behalf of the Central
Government.’
3.52 Regarding the calculation of cost of foodgrains at BPL rates
and APL rates by various States, the Department have furnished the
statement as given at Appendix-XI.
3.53 From the statement which gives the information for the year
2004-2005, it can be inferred that in Chhattisgarh and Karnataka, the
cost of wheat has been fixed at APL rates while in case of rice, none
of the States have fixed the cost of rice at APL rates. In five States viz.
Manipur, Orrisa, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar Islands
and Pondicherry, the cost of rice has been fixed below BPL rates.
Further, the information regarding the fixation of cost of foodgrains
for the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Maharashtra,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh and
Dadra & Nagar Haveli have not been indicated.
3.54 When asked whether certain states are not interested in taking
foodgrains because the quality of foodgrains is very poor and are of
higher price, the Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated as
under:
“Actually, we pay the FCI at economic rate. We pay them at
around an average price of Rs. 12 per kilogram. It is the Central
Government which is subsiding this foodgrains. So the FCI is
not giving poor quality because workers are getting foodgrains

43
somewhere around Rs. 6 or Rs. 8 per day . We are paying the
FCI at economic rate. That is not the reason for the poor quality.
Regarding quality, we have instructions that the State Government
is to check periodically the quality. In Bihar, Jharkhand and some
North-Eastern States, the problem is very complex and racks do
not reach the FCI godowns. Due to the problems, some States
like Arunachal Pradesh were exempted from the provision of
foodgrains.”
3.55 Further, when asked as to whether the Department maintained
the information with regard to the number of samples picked by the
concerned Officer of DPs/DPAPs, the Department has stated as under:-
‘it is the responsibility of the State Government and District
Panchayats to implement the provisions of the SGRY guidelines.
It would not be desirable to interfere into the powers delegated
to the States for smooth implementation of the programme. In
view of these, the Ministry has never procured the information
regarding the number of samples checked by the officials of DPs/
DRDAs. This Ministry always settle the FCI bills for foodgrains
after the bills are authenticated by the respective DP/DRDA.’
3.56 As per information given in the Performance Budget 2007-
2008 of the Ministry, during 2005-2006 11 States were allocated
foodgrains under Special Component and during 2006-2007 only 3
States were allocated foodgrains under the Special Component of the
Scheme.
3.57 The Committee find that during the year 2006-07, the
releases made under SGRY against the Revised Estimate allocation
is almost 100 per cent. Further, during the year 2006-07, out of
Rs. 3,000 crore, Rs. 2439 crore have actually been released as on
28 February, 2007. As regards State-wise performance during the year
2005-06 the percentage expenditure of total available fund is
83.79 per cent. Further, in some of the States like Arunachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep the expenditure
is less than 50 per cent and in Daman & Diu the expenditure is nil.
During the year 2006-07, the percentage expenditure of the total
available fund is 43.86 per cent. As regards State-wise performance,
almost all the States barring Assam, Gujarat, Orissa and Sikkim
have utilized less than 60 per cent of the outlay. With regard to
physical performance in different States, the information given by
the Department indicates that no work has been completed in
Manipur, Daman & Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep

44
while in Goa only 12 works, in Andaman & Nicobar Islands
37 works and in Pondicherry 81 works have been completed during
the year 2006-07. In Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and
Lakshadweep during the entire Tenth Plan, not even a single work
was completed. From the aforesaid scenario, the Committee conclude
that whereas the releases from the Union Government are almost
100 per cent, there are problems in certain States as indicated in the
financial and physical performance of various States. The Committee
would like the Department to analyze the position in various States/
UTs and take the necessary action. The Committee may also be kept
apprised.
3.58 As regards allocation made under SGRY during the year
2007-08, the Committee note that Rs. 400 crore lesser than the previous
year have been allocated. The Committee also note that during the
year 2006-07 an additional 130 districts would be covered under
NREGA and as such SGRY would be implemented in 130 lesser
districts. As per the information provided by the Department, the
allocation of cash component for the year 2007-08 has not been
reduced in respect of remaining districts covered under SGRY during
the year. The Committee also find that the allocation made under
SGRY is lesser by Rs. 684 crore if compared to the proposed
allocation. The Committee find that the districts where SGRY is
being implemented have actually not been covered under NREGA.
In view of the aforesaid position, the Department should ensure
that adequate outlay to each of the districts is provided by the
Department.
3.59 The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the
Government to indicate the outlay required for foodgrains component
under SGRY and special component of SGRY, the payment for which
has to be paid to FCI/Ministry of Food in the Budget documents
and allocate adequate outlay at BE Stage. In spite of this, the position
of indicating outlay at supplementary Grants stage continue with
the Department. During the years 2005-06 and 2006-07, no allocation
for food component was made at BE Stage. However, at the Revised
Estimates stage Rs. 2,998 crore (including SGRY special component)
and Rs. 3,000 crore respectively were allocated. During the year
2007-08, only Rs. 200 crore have been earmarked at the Budget
Estimates stage. The Committee further note that to clear the
outstanding dues to FCI, the Government of India has allowed FCI
to raise special securities to the tune of Rs. 16,200 crore. This special
security has been given by the Reserve Bank of India on behalf of
the Central Government. The Department has further stated that the

45
proposed amount during the year 2007-08 excluded Rs. 14989.64 crore
towards settlement of FCI bills. It means that against the requirement
of 14989.64 crore, only 200 crore have been provided during the year
2007-08 for foodgrains component. The Committee observe from the
aforesaid information that there is utter confusion with regard to
the settlement of dues to FCI on account of foodgrains component
under SGRY and the erstwhile scheme ‘National Food for Work
Programme’. The Committee strongly recommend to the Government
to settle all the dues to FCI. Besides sufficient allocation should be
made at the Budget Estimates stage for foodgrains component under
SGRY as has repeatedly been recommended by the Committee. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the clear position of the
outstanding dues to FCI as on date.
3.60 The Committee further find that the Department has no
monitoring mechanism to ensure the quality of foodgrains being
provided to the beneficiaries under SGRY. The Ministry has never
procured the information regarding the number of samples being
checked by the officials of DPs/DRDAs. The Department has
mentioned that they settle the FCI bills for foodgrains after the bills
are authenticated by the respective DP/DRDA. It has further been
mentioned that it would not be advisable to interfere into the powers
delegated to the States for smooth implementation of the programme.
The Committee are concerned to note the position with regard to
the monitoring of quality of foodgrains provided under the aforesaid
schemes. Although the allocation is being made by the Union
Government, The Department has no concern with regard to the
quality of foodgrains. The Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to monitor the data with regard to the samples checked
by the officials of DPs/DRDAs and take the necessary action to
ensure that the foodgrains supplied to the beneficiaries are of at
least minimum standard.
3.61 As regards the cost of foodgrains provided under SGRY,
the Committee find that there is variation in various States/UTs.
Whereas the cost of rice has been fixed at BPL rates, in case of
wheat in Chhattisgarh and Karnataka the cost of wheat has been
fixed above APL rates. In all other States for which information has
been provided, the rate is below BPL rates. The information with
regard to 11 different States/UTs has not been indicated in the
information given by the Department. The Committee further find
that the equal rate of foodgrains calculated at BPL/APL rate is actually
deducted from the wages payable to a labourer under SGRY and
thus affects the interest of the poorest of the poor. In view of the

46
aforesaid position, the Committee feel that the position of fixing the
rate of foodgrains at BPL and APL rates needs to be reviewed. The
Committee would like to be informed about the position of rates of
foodgrains in the States in case of which the information has not
been furnished so as to analyze the position and comment further
in this regard.
3.62 The Committee further find that out of 8,16,813 number of
works undertaken under SGRY, as many as 3,74,905 works are still
under progress. The Committee would like to strongly recommend
to the Department to ensure that the issue of committed liabilities
for these ongoing works is handled carefully while switching on
from the erstwhile NFFWP and SGRY to NREGA specially when
the type of projects allowed under SGRY are not allowed under
NREGA. The Committee would also like to be apprised about how
the Department has handled the committed liabilities for projects
under implementation under SGRY in the 200 districts earlier merged
with NREGA and the additional 130 districts which have now been
merged with NREGA.
C. Rural Housing (RH) Scheme - Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)
3.63 Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) is being implemented since 1985-
86 to provide assistance to Below Poverty Line (BPL) households in
rural areas belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, freed
bonded labourers and also from 1993-94 onwards to non-Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes families, households of rural BPL, families of
ex-servicemen of the armed forces and para military forces killed in
action. The IAY became an independent Scheme w.e.f. 1 January 1996.
The ceiling on construction assistance under IAY is Rs. 25,000 per unit
for plain areas and Rs. 27,500 for hilly/difficult areas and conversion
of kutcha house into pucca house ( i.e. upgradation) is Rs. 12,500 w.e.f.
1 April 2004. The funds under the Scheme are shared between the
Centre and the States in the ratio of 75:25. The Union territories are
provided 100 per cent Central assistance. From 2005-06 onwards the
allocation criteria for IAY has been modified to assign 75 per cent
weightage to housing shortage and 25 per cent to poverty ratio for
the State level allocation. Further, giving 75 per cent weightage to
housing shortage and 25 per cent weightage to SC/ST component
makes the allocation for IAY amongst districts.
3.64 The overall Budget allocation (Central share) for the Indira
Awaas Yojana (IAY) during 2006-07 was Rs. 2,920 crore, out of which
Rs. 2,111.88 crore was released by 1 March 2007. The BE 2007-08 under

47
Indira Awaas Yojana has been fixed at Rs. 4,040 crore ( i.e. an increase
of 38.36 per cent increase in the Central allocation over 2006-07). As
per the Outcome Budget 2007-08 of the Department, in addition to the
Central Plan Budget, different State Governments are expected to release
Rs. 1341.49 crore during 2007-08.
3.65 Rural Housing is also one of the six components of ‘Bharat
Nirman’, the ambitious programme of the Government. Under ‘Bharat
Nirman’ sixty lakh houses are to be constructed during the next four
years starting from 2005-06. As per the replies, the Planning
Commission have set monitorable Socio-Economic Targets of the
Eleventh Plan in the ‘Approach Paper to the Eleventh Five Year Plan’
as per which houses have to be provided to all rural poor by
2016-17.
3.66 As per the guidelines of the scheme certain amount of funds
under IAY is kept a part to meet exigencies arising out of Natural
Calamities which is as below:
“4.4.15 per cent of the total allocated funds under IAY will be
kept apart to meet the exigencies arising out of natural calamities
and other emergent situations like riot, arson, fire, rehabilitation
under exceptional circumstances etc.
Proposals for this purpose have to come from State Governments/
Admn. of Union territories showing the extent of damage and
the estimated fund requirement in respect of the proposed IAY
houses provided assistance has not been obtained from other
sources. Funds to be released for this purpose shall not exceed
Rs. 50 lakhs per district. The relief will be as per the norms with
regard to per unit ceiling of assistance for IAY house prescribed
under the scheme.”
3.67 As per the information furnished to the Committee, the
financial and physical performance of IAY since 2005-06 is as below:
Financial Achievement of IAY since 2005-06
Year Allocation Central Percentage of
(RE) Releases Financial
Achievement
2005-2006 2750 2746.56 99.47
2006-2007* 2920 2111.88 72.32
2007-2008 4040 - -
*As on 1 March 2007.

48
Physical Achievement of IAY since 2005-06
Year Target Number of Houses Percentage of
(in Nos.) constructed Physical
(Achievement) Achievement
2004-2005 1562356 1516222 97.5
2005-2006 1441241 1515923 107.68
2006-2007* 1533498  892907  58.23
2007-2008 2127184 - -
* As per the information received from the State Governments upto 1 March 2007.
State-wise performance under IAY
3.68 Outcome Budget indicates the poor financial performance
during 2007-08 in respect of the following States/UTs: Arunachal
Pradesh (31.91 per cent), Bihar (51.65 per cent), Chhattisgarh (53.43
per cent), Goa (42.75 per cent), Haryana (50.39 per cent), Kerala (44.29
per cent), Manipur (Zero per cent), Meghalaya (48.97 per cent),
Rajasthan (44.95 per cent), Andaman and Nicobar Islands (4.99 per
cent), Daman and Diu (3.08 per cent) and Pondicherry (40.79 per cent).
3.69 When asked about the reasons for non-satisfactory
performance of IAY so far during 2006-2007 in each of the States and
Union territories mentioned above, the Department has replied that
9.72 lakh houses have been constructed and 9.28 lakh are under
construction as per the reports of the States/Union territories till
January/February. There was delay in the release of the first instalment
of funds under Indira Awaas Yojana because of non-preparation of
permanent Indira Awaas Yojana waitlist by the States. Subsequently,
the funds were released with the stipulation that the beneficiaries would
be selected only out of the Permanent Indira Awaas Yojana waitlist.
This resulted in delayed implementation of the programme during the
year. When asked about the corrective action to be taken by the
Department during 2007-2008 for a better performance of IAY in the
above said States and Union territories, the Department has replied
that apart from releasing the Central funds especially the first
instalment in the month of April itself, they will pursue the matter
vigorously with the State Governments to ensure 100 per cent
achievement during the year.

49
3.70 Regarding the performance of the scheme in Manipur, the
representative of the Ministry during the course of oral evidence has
stated as under:-
“We have had a lot of problems there. Not a single monthly
progress report has come. Every month, we are holding the nodal
officers’ meeting; the person does not come. We are writing letters
and ringing them up. In the case of Manipur, really there has
been non-report from it. Recently now, in the last release for this
year, I was trying to make sure that in spite of all this, we are
able to release, but we have been left with about a crore, which
we could not release to Manipur.”
Per Unit assistance of a dwelling unit under Indira Awaas Yojana
3.71 As per the Outcome Budget 2007-2008, the ceiling of assistance
for construction of a new house w.e.f. 1 April, 2004 is Rs. 25,000 for
plain areas and Rs. 27,500 for hilly/difficult areas. The Committee in
their 22nd Report, 14th Lok Sabha had strongly recommended ( vide
recommendation Para 2.69) that Government should enhance the per
unit assistance from the existing rate to Rs. 50,000 in plain areas and
Rs. 60,000 in hilly/difficult areas. When asked about the steps taken
by the Government in pursuance of the said recommendation of the
Committee, the Department has replied that this matter is under
consideration and Ministry is actively pursuing it. When the Committee
asked about the possible impact of enhancement in the per unit cost
of assistance, then the Department has replied that the proposal under
consideration is to increase the unit cost for houses without affecting
the physical target.
3.72 On the issue of shelterlessness in the country the
representative of the Department during the course of oral evidence
stated as under:
“The Department estimates it that it is from 200 lakh to
400 lakh. If we take the kutcha houses also as those who need
houses, then it becomes 400 lakh. But if you take people in a
very bad condition only, then, you can restrict it to 200 lakh.”
3.73 The Committee find that rural housing is one of the six
components of Bharat Nirman, the ambitious programme of the
Government. The Government plan to construct 60 lakh houses under
Indira Awaas Yojana during the Bharat Nirman period i.e. 2005-06 to
2008-09. Besides as per the Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan the
Planning Commission have set monitorable Socio-Economic Targets

50
under which houses have to be provided to all rural poor by 2016-
17. The Secretary during the course of oral evidence has informed
the requirement of 200 lakh housing units to end shelterlessness in
rural areas. However, if upgradation of kutcha houses is also
included, the number comes to 400 lakhs. The data indicated by the
Department show that during the year 2005-06 i.e. first year of Bharat
Nirman period, the Department has achieved more than the physical
targets of 15 lakh houses. However, during the year 2006-07, the
achievement is just 58.23 per cent. The Department has indicated
that the aforesaid shortfall in achievement of target was due to the
fact that there was delay in the release of first instalment of funds
under Indira Awaas Yojana because of non-preparation of permanent
Indira Awaas Yojana waitlist by the States. Subsequently, the funds
were released with the stipulation that the beneficiaries will be
selected only out of the permanent Indira Awaas Yojana waitlist.
This resulted in delayed implementation of the programme during
the year 2006-07. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
State-wise status of the preparation of permanent Indira Awaas
Yojana waitlist. The Committee also emphasize to take the desired
steps so that the targets set under Bharat Nirman period are fully
achieved.
3.74 The Standing Committee in the earlier report (refer para
2.69 of 22nd Report) had recommended to enhance the existing per
unit assistance for construction of IAY house from Rs. 25,000 to Rs.
50,000 in plain areas and from Rs. 27,500 to Rs. 60,000 in hilly difficult
areas. The Department has informed that the matter regarding
enhancement in per unit cost of construction of IAY house is under
consideration and the Department is actively pursuing it. The
Committee note that the aforesaid scale of assistance under IAY was
fixed way back during 2004. Since then there has been no revision
in per unit assistance. Since the prices of construction material have
increased considerably specifically during the last couple of years,
the Committee strongly recommend that the per unit assistance under
IAY should be enhanced as recommended earlier by the Committee.
While recommending for enhancement of per unit cost of IAY house,
the Committee also recommend that the annual allocation made under
IAY needs to be enhanced considerably so that there is no reduction
in the set targets under Bharat Nirman period and Eleventh Five
Year Plan.
Mismatch between Financial achievement and the Physical
achievement
3.75 While analyzing the performance of IAY during 2005-06 and
as per the Outcome Budget 2007-08 of the Department, 79.67 per cent

51
of the total available funds were reportedly been utilized during 2005-
06 to attain physical target of 107.68 per cent. When the attention of
the Department was drawn towards the said mismatch ( i.e. a physical
achievement of 107.68 per cent has been reportedly shown by utilizing
79.67 per cent of the available funds), the Department has replied that
the achievement is due to completion of houses under construction
from the previous year and the inclusion of houses upgraded at a
lower cost. During the course of oral evidence, about the mismatch,
the representative of the Department has stated as under:—
“ ……….. It is a rolling completion, it happened because we had
opening balance available with us. Houses under construction
were already there to the tune of about six lakh. We have
achieved that. We allow the States to take up both new
construction and up gradation. We have up gradation of about
20 per cent. The unit cost is half of the new construction. When
we fix up the target we speak only about new construction that
is why this difference has arisen. Another reason as to why this
has happened is, we give some target for construction of houses
under special package even if, the funds for the construction of
these houses has already been provided in the last year. The
opening balance funds left with projects implementing agencies
or the State Governments/ Union territory administrations are
the funds against which physical targets continue to remain from
the previous years”.
3.76 The Committee find from the data indicated in the Outcome
Budget that there is gross mis-match between the physical and
financial achievement during different years. During the year 2005-
06 whereas the financial achievement was to the tune of 107.68 per
cent, the physical achievement was 79.67 per cent. To this anomaly,
the Secretary during the course of oral evidence has stated that the
mis-match may be due to huge opening balances, achievement of
targets under special component and the combined data of new
construction and upgradation, (the assistance provided for
upgradation is around half of the assistance provided for
construction). The Committee note that whereas the Department has
separate data for shelterlessness and upgradation the achievement is
not monitored separately for upgradation and shelterlessness. The
Committee feel that it is difficult to know the position of
shelterlessness in the absence of the aforesaid data. The Committee
therefore recommend that the targets and achievement for
upgradation, new construction as well as special component should
be maintained separately so as to know the exact position and do
the proper planning.

52
The provision of outlay under IAY for natural calamity
Performance of Indira Awaas Yojana Scheme funds released under
the special package in Bihar
3.77 As per the information provided by the Department, Rs. 400
crore was approved during 2004-2005 by the Prime Minister in order
to reconstruct IAY Houses damaged by flood in 20 districts (Araria,
Begusarai, Bhagalpur, Champaran East, Champaran West, Darbhanga,
Gopalganj, Katihar, Khagaria, Kishanganj, Madhepura, Madhubani,
Muzaffarpur, Purnia, Saharsa, Samastipur, Sheohar, Sitamarhi, Supul,
Vaishali districts) of Bihar. As per replies, rehabilitation following a
disaster varies from state-to-state and is also related to specific disasters.
Houses under IAY scheme are sanctioned as a part of rehabilitation
package. Normally, it is expected that the process of construction of
an IAY house will be completed within one year. However, IAY
guidelines provide that completion of a dwelling unit, in no case,
should take more than two years.
3.78 The Department has informed that full amount of Rs. 400
crore as sanctioned, was released to the State Government. Regarding
the physical achievements of the funds released under the special
package, there was a target of constructing 2.13 lakh houses against
which 91,655 houses only (i.e. physical performance of 43.03 per cent)
could reportedly constructed so far, as per the reports received from
the State Government. Further, as regards the district-wise unspent
balance the Department has stated that there is an unspent balance of
Rs. 270.74 crore lying with 19 different districts except Darbhanga.
3.79 Rs. 400 crore were sanctioned to 20 flood affected districts of
Bihar was in addition to the release made under IAY to these districts
during 2004-2005. The Committee were informed that since 2004-2005
till date, only 51.27 per cent of the total available funds could be
utilized and only 43.03 per cent of the physical targets could be
achieved. Regarding the reasons for this under achievement, the
Committee were informed that in spite of constant persuasion and
linkage of release of funds to normal Indira Awaas Yojana programme,
the implementation of the rehabilitation under special package has
been slow in Bihar. Recently, during a meeting with State Government
Officers, it was informed that they had no more houses for
reconstruction as damaged by floods during the year 2004-05. The
State Government officers had, therefore, requested to allow them to
transfer the unspent funds under this Head to the normal Indira Awaas
Yojana. The case on these lines will be processed after receipt of formal
request from the State Government.

53
3.80 Regarding receipt of utilisation certificates from the concerned
twenty districts the Committee were informed that in so far as Bihar
is concerned, the Utilisation Certificates for the amount of Rs. 337.95
crore as actually utilised by them out of the special package, has been
already received but not for the total amount. As regards other pending
Utilisation Certificates, a meeting was taken by Director (RH) with the
Project Directors of all the Organisations implementing Rural Building
Centre (RBC) where the Utilisation Certificates are pending, in which
all concerned were advised to submit the Utilisation Certificate and
avail the next instalment of funds to complete the projects at the
earliest. This is being followed up through correspondence. During
the course of oral evidence, the representative of the Ministry on the
issue of the non-utilisation of funds submitted as below:—
“They (Bihar Government) have to either return back the money
to us or they have to convert it into the normal Indira Awaas
Yojana programme.. …Regarding the poor physical achievements,
it is submitted that it has got two reasons. One, they had not
identified the target beneficiary. Regarding the Rs. 270 crore
unspent, it has further been found that the State release
corresponding to the amount utilised is also yet to be made.
There has been inconsistency about the information furnished by
them.”
3.81 When the Committee wanted to know about the process of
declaration of a district as flood affected the Department has replied
that a district is declared ‘flood affected’ by the District authorities/
State Government. Department of Rural Development does not make
any such declaration.
3.82 The Committee find that Rs. 400 crore were sanctioned and
released to the State Government of Bihar, during the year 2004-05
in order to re-construct IAY houses damaged by flood in 20 districts.
At one place, the Department has stated that out of Rs. 400 crore,
Rs. 270.74 crore were lying unspent thereby indicating that only
Rs. 129.26 crore i.e. a little over 30 per cent could be utilized. At
another place it has been mentioned that only 51.27 per cent of the
total available funds could be utilized. As regards the physical targets
it has been mentioned that 43.03 per cent of the target could be
achieved. At another place it has been mentioned that the utilization
certificates for the amount of Rs. 337.95 crore actually utilized out of
the special package had already been received. The Secretary during
the course of oral evidence further stated that State releases
corresponding to the amount utilized is also yet to be made. The

54
Committee find from the aforesaid data that there is utter confusion
about the releases made and physical and financial targets achieved
for the outlay released to Bihar under natural calamities.
3.83 The Committee further observe from the information
provided by the Department that the funds allocated for calamity
relief to 20 districts of Bihar could not be utilized inspite of the
linkage of releases of funds to normal IAY. In the same para it has
been stated that the State Government officers had requested to allow
them to transfer the unspent balance under the calamity head to the
normal IAY. Again it has been stated that a case on these lines will
be processed after receipt of formal request from the State
Government. Three contradictory positions have been indicated in
the same para. The Committee disapprove the way the IAY funds
for natural calamities are being handled by the Department. The
Committee would like clarifications from the Department on the
aforesaid observations. They would like to be apprised about the
visit of National Level Monitors, Area Officers to these flood affected
districts where rehabilitation programme was going on along with
their findings so as to know the ground reality in this regard.
D. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
3.84 ‘Rural Roads’ is a State subject and finds mention at Entry
No.13 of the State List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
However, it is recognized that rural connectivity is an important
instrument in rural poverty reduction. Accordingly, the Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was launched on 25 December, 2000, as
a 100 per cent Centrally funded Scheme, with the target of connecting
every habitation with a population of more than 500 by the year 2007
through good all-weather roads.
Objective of the Yojana
3.85 The targets have been revised, and as stated earlier it is now
proposed to connect all habitations having a population of 1000 and
above, and in hilly, tribal and desert areas habitations having a
population of 500 or more by 2009. The remaining habitations are
proposed to be taken up thereafter. Fund requirement for implementing
the targets under Bharat Nirman is also being firmly tied up so as to
ensure timely completion of the works sanctioned.
3.86 As per the information furnished in Performance Budget
2006-2007 under PMGSY, out of total 30,00,000 Kms. of road length,
3,69,386 Kms. are eligible and 1,72,772 habitations in 28 States are to

55
be provided with new connectivity. As per the information furnished
by the Department, PMGSY is one of the six components of Bharat
Nirman, the ambitious programme of the Government of India. To
meet the targets of providing all-weather road connectivity and
upgradation proposed for the years 2005-06 to 2008-09, the estimated
requirement of funds is Rs. 48,000 crore (at 2003-04 rates). Of this
Rs. 16,000 crore is likely availability from Cess on High Speed Diesel.
Rs. 9,000 crore will be available from the World Bank & the Asian
Development Bank leaving a gap of Rs. 23,000 crore. It is proposed to
raise Rs. 16,500 crore through NABARD to meet the gap. The Finance
Minister, in his Budget Speech on 28 February, 2006, had proposed to
open a separate window under RIDF XII for rural roads with a corpus
of Rs. 4,000 crore during 2006-07. The remaining gap is proposed to
be funded through Budgetary support. In addition to the Central share,
Rs. 4,500 crore loan from NABARD would be obtained during
2007-08 as per BE 2007-08.
3.87 The targets of road works are determined on the basis of
annual allocations and proposals of States for road works to be taken
up. Physical and financial targets during the year 2005-06 and 2006-07
are as under:
2005-06  2006-07
(up to Dec.06)
Target Achievement Target Achievement
No. of habitations to be connected: 7895 8031 9435 5239
Road length to be constructed (KMs): 17454 22785 27250 17702
Expenditure: 4220 4100 5225 4560
3.88 Regarding the value of proposals cleared, amount released,
number of road works, percentage of expenditure and the percentage
of road works completed, the Ministry in their Annual Report
2006-2007 have given the following information:
(Rs. in crore)
Phase Value of Amount No. of % age of %age of road
proposals released road works expenditure works
cleared completed
12 345 6
I(2000-2001) 2547.63 2565.30 13192 92.92 96.51
II(2001-2003) 5163.88 5023.55 10963 90.98 92.15

56
12 345 6
III(2003-2004) 7153.20 5428.78 9040 83.72 77.75
IV(2004-2005) 5283.54 3438.67 7001 81.19 37.72
V(2005-2006) 6806.25 1704.44 7444 78.80 14.37
VI(2006-2007) 5727.52 549.64 6390 98.07 -
ADB/WB 5232.11 1845.64 5071 96.34 29.24
TOTAL 37573.36 20330.52 58947 88.30 59.68
3.89 It may be seen from the above data that the percentage of
road works completed in Phase IV is only 37.72 per cent, and in
Phase V it is only 14.37 per cent.
3.90 Further, as on 31 December 2006, Rs. 2555.83 crore were lying
unspent under PMGSY. The data with regard to number of incomplete
roads as taken up from phase-I to Phase-VI is as under:
Year  No. of incomplete
roads
Phase-I 2000-2001 530
Phase-II 2001-2003 1336
Phase-III 2003-2004 3020
Phase-IV 2004-2005 5628
Phase-V 2005-2006 3234
Phase VI 2006-2007 6269
ADB/WB 3676
Total 23693
3.91 As per information provided by the Department, the Physical
and Financial achievement up to December, 2006 under PMGSY is as
follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Phase/Year Value of Amount Expenditure to No. of road No. of road
proposals released* amount works works up
cleared released completed up
to Dec. 2006 to Dec. 2006
12 3 4 5 6
I/2000-01 2547.63 2565.30 2565.30 13192 12732
II/2001-03 5163.88 5023.55 5023.55 10963 10110

57
12 3 4 5 6
III/2003-04 7153.20 5428.78 5428.78  9040 7123
IV/2004-05 5283.54 3438.67 3438.67 7001 3207
V/2005-06 7198.88 1704.44 1704.44  8191 1189
VI/2006-07 5727.52 549.64 549.64 6390 121
ADB/WB 5312.77 1845.64 1845.64 5221 1545
*release for road works of respective Phase.
Implementing Authority
3.92 Each State Government/U nion territory administration
identifies one or two suitable agencies (having a presence in all Districts
and with competence in executing time-bound road construction works)
designated as Executing Agencies (such as the Public Works
Department/Rural Engineering Service/Rural Works Department /Zilla
Parishad/Panchayati Raj Engineering Department).
3.93 As per the reply tendering of works takes around three to
four months. Thereafter the expected time period for completion of
projects is twelve months. Therefore, projects sanctioned under PMGSY
take around sixteen to eighteen months for completion from the date
of clearance.
3.94 The Budget Estimate ( i.e., Central Share) for PMGSY during
2007-08 is Rs. 6,500 crore. Borrowing from International donor
organisations is being obtained viz. borrowing from Asian Development
Bank and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development i.e.,
World Bank etc. The Outlay for BE 2007-08, includes Rs. 3,825 crore as
rural road share of diesel cess, Rs. 75 crore as Budgetary support and
Rs. 2,600 crore as externally aided projects (EAP) assistance. As per
the Outcome Budget 2007-08 of the Department, in addition to the
Central plan budget, different State Governments are expected to release
Rs. 1,341.49 crore during 2007-08. In addition to the Central share,
Rs. 4,500 crore loan from NABARD would be obtained. Thus Rs. 11,000
crore is targeted to construct 55,000 kms. roads by providing
connectivity to 14,000 habitations.
3.95 During the course of oral evidence, Secretary of the
Department stated as below:
“Under PMGSY total value of the projects which we have cleared
by now is Rs. 42,979 crore and we have released Rs. 21,533 crore

58
till now. This is the cumulative figure. By now Rs. 19,824 crore
or roughly about 92 per cent of the funds released have been
spent. …........We have cleared 62,997 road works and 37,704 have
been completed. Around 2,17,811 kms of road projects have been
cleared, of which 1,14,743 kms have been completed which is
roughly about 52.68 per cent because it is on-going project. Phase-
wise, about 97 per cent of Phase-I; 93 per cent of Phase-II; 80 per
cent of Phase-III; 58 per cent of Phase-IV and 18 per cent of
Phase V works have been completed. In the more recent phases,
the progress is less. In this project, 34,691 habitations have already
been connected.”
3.96 When asked about the details on how the Department is going
to raise the funds for achievement of the huge physical targets under
PMGSY, in replies, the Secretary of the Department has stated that for
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Department has projected a total
outlay of Rs. 81,801 crore under PMGSY including 575 crore from the
cess component, Rs. 10,000 crore under the externally aided project
component, Rs. 12,500 crore from NABARD and Rs. 38,726 crore of
budgetary support. The residual amount required for completion of
the targets under PMGSY is proposed to be financed from the cess
accrual, external aid and budgetary support during the Twelfth Five
Year Plan.
3.97 During the course of oral evidence, Secretary of the
Department stated as under:—
“Currently, the PMGSY programme as a whole as per our
assessment cannot be completed in the Eleventh Plan. It has to
spill over to the Twelfth Plan”.
3.98 Regarding the construction of missing road links near small
bridges, the Secretary, Department of Rural Development during the
course of oral evidence has stated as under:
“On the bridges, the current guidelines is that, whenever a road
involves a bridge which is 25 metres or above, we do not allow
the road work to be tendered unless the DPR for the bridge is
approved with provision of funds. Otherwise, the road will be
complete and the bridge will be the missing link and the problem
of access will remain. Up to 25 metres, we provide funds. Beyond
25 metres, the State has to provide funds. We have also
approached NABARD to provide funds for State’s share through
RIDF without any further technical examination of DPR. That
support we have already secured. As far as the States are

59
concerned, State Rural Road Development agencies have been
established in each State. They have the overall responsibility for
construction and maintenance of rural roads, which was
fragmented before. These are to be transferred to this agency.
Annual maintenance plan for the rural roads, provision of
adequate funding and placement of funds are necessary to ensure
proper upkeep of rural roads. We are making efforts towards
this direction to transfer the rural roads nodal responsibility to
this agency. Regarding maintenance, funds have to come from
the State Governments. It is a State subject”.
3.99 The Department has furnished the State-wise number eligible
habitations covered, number of habitations connected and balance
habitations to be covered as per information given in Appendix-XIII.
It can be inferred from the statement that out of 1,72,772 habitations,
only 34,691 habitations could be covered. Thus, 1,38,581 habitations
are yet to be covered. The State-wise position indicates that in Andhra
Pradesh out of 980 eligible habitations, 889 habitations could actually
be connected. In other States where 50 per cent or above eligible
habitations could be covered are Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan and
Tamil Nadu. In other States, the number of habitations covered as
compared to eligible habitations are less than 50 per cent. Further,
analysis of the data indicates that in Bihar, Goa, Jammu and Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Tripura and Uttranchal, the performance is worse. In these
States less than 10 per cent of the eligible habitations could actually
be covered. In Haryana, out of 2 such habitations, none of the
habitations could be covered. The States in which the number of
unconnected habitations are large is given as under:
State No. of unconnected habitations
Assam 11298
Bihar 17480
Chhattisgarh 10558
Jharkhand 9798
Madhya Pradesh 14724
Orissa 11881
Uttar Pradesh 17430
West Bengal 22439
Total (for 28 States) 138081

60
3.100 During the course of oral evidence, Secretary of the
Department stated as under:—
“…. Our 3 to 4 States literally have a lions share in these
programmes because there the infrastructure development is very
poor. For that our focus areas are Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and
West Bengal also to some extent and Orissa. In a few States
availability of land is also a problem. They are Kerala, West
Bengal and Punjab. Delay in obtaining forest clearance here, of
course, we have tried at a policy level to interact with the
Ministry of Enviornment and Forest and we had some success.
…..Almost we are expecting more than 60 per cent increase over
the last year. So the absorption capacity has increased but our
concern continues to the States like Bihar, West Bengal and some
villages in Orissa where the number of villages which are not
connected in the category that I explained 1,000 to 500 and that
number of the total villages of the country is still very large in
these three to four States”.
3.101 Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was launched
w.e.f. 24 December, 2000 with the objective to connect all habitations
in rural areas with a population of 1000 or above by 2003 and all
habitations having population of 500 and above by the year 2007.
The targets were further spilled over and the Government projected
to cover all habitations having the population of 1000 and above by
the end of Tenth Plan. The Tenth Plan is now over and as stated by
the Secretary, it is difficult to achieve the aforesaid target of
connectivity of habitations having 1000 population even by Twelfth
Plan. The Committee deplore the way huge pronouncements of
unachievable targets without doing the proper planning are being
made by the Government during different plans.
3.102 The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of
the initial projections of the outlay required and the present situation
of the requirement of funds to achieve the targets of connectivity of
habitations of 1000 or above population. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the details of the States in which all the
habitations having 1000 plus population have already been covered
to know the exact status of implementation of the programme.
3.103 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants
2004-05 (refer para no. 3.114 of 3rd Report—Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
had been apprised that there are 6,34,321 villages as per 2001 census

61
and the number of habitations having population of 1000 and above
are 2,31,331. The number of habitations below 1000 are as under:
500-1000 205276
250-500 187591
Below 250 285044
Total 909242
3.104 The Department has informed that 1,72,772 habitations
having 1000 and above population are eligible to be covered under
PMGSY. Out of which 34,691 habitations could be connected. Thus,
the balance number of unconnected habitations are 1,38,581. State-
wise position indicates that in Andhra Pradesh out of 980 eligible
habitations, 889 habitations could actually be connected. Other States
where almost 50 per cent or above eligible habitations could be
covered are Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. In other
States, the number of habitations covered as compared to eligible
habitations are less than 50 per cent. Further, analysis of the data
indicates that in Bihar, Goa, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, T ripura
and Uttranchal, the performance is worse. In these States less than
10 per cent of the eligible habitations could actually be covered. In
Haryana, out of 2 such habitations, none of the habitations could be
covered. The Committee conclude from the aforesaid that the
apprehension of the Secretary that it is difficult to achieve the targets
of connecting 1,000 population and above by the end of Twelfth
Plan seems to be correct. The Committee observe that a laudable
initiative has been taken to provide the connectivity in rural areas
under PMGSY. The connectivity is the basic infrastructure which
can further lead to the economic progress of the rural areas. In this
scenario, the Committee would recommend to the Government to
take all the desired steps in consultation with the State Governments
so that the connectivity to habitation of 1,000 and above population
can be provided at least by the end of Eleventh Plan. The issue of
providing connectivity to 9,09,242 habitations having less than 1,000
population can be taken subsequently. Besides, the Committee would
also like to be apprised of the reasons for very slow progress in the
aforesaid States. The Committee would also like to be apprised as
to why only 2 eligible habitations in Haryana could not be covered
under PMGSY.
3.105 The Department has informed that tendering of works
under PMGSY takes around three to four months. Thereafter, the

62
expected time period for completion of projects is twelve months.
The data indicated by the Department show 10,514 incomplete roads
under Phase-I to Phase-IV during the period 2000-2001 to 2004-05.
The Committee fail to understand as to why such a large number of
roads remain incomplete even for the projects taken up during 2004-
05. Some of the road works taken up during Phase I and Phase II
i.e. 2000-2001 and 2002-03 are also lying incomplete, even when six
and seven complete years respectively have been passed. The
Committee are unable to comprehend the position of such a large
number of incomplete works in a programme which contains
provisions of penalties for delay of work. The Committee would
like the Department to explain the specific reasons for such a large
number of incomplete works.
3.106 The Committee find that as per the guidelines of PMGSY,
whenever a road involves a bridge upto 25 metres, the funds are
provided under PMGSY. However, beyond 25 metres the State has
to provide funds. The Department has also stated that NABARD
has been contacted to provide funds for State share through RIDF
without any further technical examination of DPR. The Department
has also mentioned that road work is not tendered unless the DPR
for the bridge is approved with provision of funds. The Committee
note that although the adequate provisions have been made in the
guidelines to ensure that the road constructed under PMGSY do not
remain unutilized due to the missing link and the problem of access,
yet there may be cases where roads may have been constructed
without making provision for the bridges over rivers. The Committee
would like to be informed whether the Department has received
any complaints through various levels of monitoring mechanism as
well as through Area Officers Scheme etc. to know the ground
situation in this regard.
The performance under PMGSY and Bharat Nirman Period
3.107 The Department has informed that Bharat Nirman (period
between 2005-06 to 2008-09) envisage upgradation/renewal of 1,94,130
kms of existing rural roads. This comprises of 60 per cent upgradation
and 40 per cent renewal of surface roads. The requirement of funds
for Bharat Nirman period is estimated at Rs. 48,000 crore. The
availability of funds would be as under:
Cess Rs. 15,000 crore
ADB/World Banck Rs. 9,000 crore
NABARD window Rs. 16,500 crore
Unfinanced gap Rs. 7,500 (to be provided through
budgetary support)

63
3.108 When the Department was asked as to why the separate
targets were not shown in the Outcome Budget, the Department has
stated that steps would be taken to incorporate the aforesaid
information in the future Outcome Budget. The Secretary during the
course of oral evidence of the Department has stated that the rural
roads component of Bharat Nirman is implemented through PMGSY.
Whereas under PMGSY, all habitations with a population of 500+ in
plain areas are eligible for habitations covered under Bharat Nirman,
efforts are being made to cover all habitations having 1,000 population.
There is no separate scheme funding or guidelines for Bharat Nirman.
3.109 The State-wise allocation of funds for new connectivity and
upgradation have been given in Appendix-XIII.
3.110 It could be seen therefrom that the aforesaid ratio of allocation
of funds has not been maintained by various States like in Arunachal
Pradesh and Manipur, no outlay has been allocated for upgradation.
In Meghalaya and Uttar Pradesh , the allocation on upgradation is
more than the new connectivity. In the remaining States expenditure is
more on new connectivity.
3.111 According to the latest Progress Reports received from States,
physical and financial performance of rural roads under Bharat Nirman
and PMGSY is as follows:
Year Bharat Nirman PMGSY Expenditure
(Rupees in crore)
New Connectivity Upgradation* Road length in
(kms) (kms) Kms
2004-05 - - 15543.77 3025.26
2005-06 18053.70 3925.60 22785.44 4100.39
2006-07 16379.93 36589.64 24863.72 6060.68
*Upgradation includes renewal undertaken by States with their own funds.
Creation of State Rural Road Development Agency
3.112 When the attention of the Department was drawn towards
the need of transferring the roads constructed under PMGSY after the
contractual period is over to State Rural Road Development Agencies,
the representative of the Department during the course of oral evidence
stated as under:—
“As far as the States are concerned, State Rural Road Development
agencies have been established in each State. They have the

64
overall responsibility for construction and maintenance of rural
roads, which was fragmented before. These are to be transferred
to this agency. Annual maintenance plan for the rural roads,
provision of adequate funding and placement of funds are
necessary to ensure proper upkeep of rural roads. We are making
efforts towards this direction to transfer the rural roads nodal
responsibility to this agency.”
3.113 Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana is one of the six
components of Bharat Nirman programme. Bharat Nirman is the
ambitious programme of the Government to achieve monitorable
targets under different existing schemes. The Committee find that
under Bharat Nirman component of PMGSY, 60 per cent allocation
is being provided for upgradation and 40 per cent for new
connectivity in different States. The State-wise details of allocation
of funds for new connectivity and upgradation indicate that the
aforesaid ratio of 60:40 has not been maintained in either of the
States. No pattern of new connectivity and upgradation emerges from
the State-wise data. In Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur, no outlay
has been allocated for upgradation. In Meghalaya and Uttar Pradesh,
the allocation of upgradation is more than the new connectivity and
in the remaining States expenditure is more on new connectivity.
The Committee observe that during the Bharat Nirman Period
perhaps more emphasis is being given to upgradation as per the
criteria of 60 per cent for upgradation and 40 per cent for renewal
whereas the foremost objective of the PMGSY was to provide new
connectivity to unconnected habitations. However, 20 per cent of the
outlay could be used for upgradation as per the guidelines of
PMGSY. In view of the aforesaid position under Bharat Nirman
perhaps the objective of connectivity has got the backseat. That may
be the reason for not achieving the targets of connectivity in different
States, the analysis of which has been given in the preceding para
of the report.
3.114 The Committee further find that there is a lot of confusion
with regard to targets fixed under Bharat Nirman and PMGSY. The
Secretary has explained that there is no separate funding or
guidelines for Bharat Nirman whereas the Department has given
separate data for Bharat Nirman and PMGSY works which indicates
that perhaps there are separate targets and achievements under
PMGSY and Bharat Nirman component whereas the Department has
indicated the separate information in the written replies, no such
data has been indicated in the Outcome Budget. However, the
Department has assured that during the next year separate targets

65
versus achievements would be indicated for Bharat Nirman and
PMGSY in the Outcome Budget also. In view of the aforesaid
scenario, there is utter confusion between the position of Bharat
Nirman and PMGSY. As regards the guidelines, on the one hand it
has been stated that the guidelines for PMGSY and Bharat Nirman
are same, on the other hand the allocation for upgradation indicates
that thrust under Bharat Nirman is more on upgradation whereas
PMGSY guidelines give more emphasis on new connectivity. The
Committee would like the clarification from the Department on the
aforesaid observations so as to analyze the position and comment
further in this regard.
3.115 The Committee further observe that under PMGSY the
maintenance after completion of contract work of road has to be
taken care of for five years by the contractor as per the contractual
clause entered in the agreement. The area of concern is maintenance
of roads after five years. The Department has informed that there
are State Rural Road Development Agencies in each State, which
have the overall responsibility for construction and maintenance of
rural roads. The Department is making efforts to transfer the
responsibility of maintenance of rural roads to this agency. The
Committee find that for adequate maintenance of PMGSY roads after
the contract, adequate funding and capacity building of State level
agencies is required. The Committee would like that the Department
should take the decision expeditiously to transfer the roads
constructed under PMGSY to State Rural Road Development agencies
after the contractual period of five years is over so that the roads
constructed after spending crores of money are not damaged after a
certain period of time. Besides taking decision to transfer the PMGSY
roads to State Rural Road Development agencies, the Union
Government has to take decision to partially fund these agencies so
that PMGSY roads are maintained properly.
E. Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
3.116 Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), a holistic
programme of self-employment, was launched w.e.f. 1 April, 1999
following restructuring of the erstwhile Integrated Rural Development
Programme (IRDP), Training of Rural Youth for Self Employment
(TRYSEM), Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas
(DWCRA), Supply of Improved Tool Kits to Rural Artisans (SITRA)
and Ganga Kalyan Yojana (GKY).

66
Funding Pattern
As provided in the Scheme, the funding pattern is:
Central Allocation – 75 per cent,
State Allocation – 25 per cent, and
Union territory Allocation – 100 per cent by Centre.
Objective
3.117 The objective of the SGSY is to bring the assisted poor families
(Swarozgaris) above the poverty line by organizing them into Self
Help Groups (SHGs) through the process of social mobilisation, training,
capacity building and provision of income-generating assets through a
mix of bank credit and Government subsidy.
Subsidy to individuals and Self Help Groups (SHGs)
3.118 Assistance under SGSY, to individual Swarozgaries or Self
Help Groups (SHGs), is given in the form of subsidy by the
Government and credit by the Banks. There is no monetary limit on
subsidy for irrigation projects. The subsidy is back ended. Cooperative
Banks, Regional-Rural Banks and Commercial Banks and some of the
Banks in the private sector disburse the loan and subsidy under the
scheme.
Subsidy for Individuals
3.119 An individual is provided a subsidy @ 30 per cent of the
project cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 7,500. In respect of SCs/STs/
disabled persons, the subsidy is 50 per cent of the project cost upto
a maximum of Rs. 10,000.
Subsidy for Self Help Groups (SHGs)
3.120  Under the Scheme, 50 per cent of the project cost can be
given as subsidy to SHGs subject to per capita subsidy of Rs. 10,000
or Rs. 1.25 lakh, whichever is less.
Implementation
3.121 The Scheme is implemented through District Rural
Development Agencies (DRDAs) in various States with active
involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions, Banks, line departments
and the Non-Government Organisations.

67
3.122 As per the Outcome Budget 2007-08 (p.8), under SGSY,
Rs. 1,800 crore Central share have been allocated. In addition all State
Governments are expected to provide Rs. 567.30 crore as State share
and Bank credit of about 2-3 times of the central + State allocation
would be provided during 2007-08 to assist 115500 new SHGs and
4,81,250 individual swarozgaries. Therefore, the BE 2007-2008 (central
share) of SGSY is Rs. 1,800 crore.
3.123 The utilization under SGSY during 2006-2007 (upto January,
2007) has been only 66.38 per cent. When asked about the reasons for
this under utilization, the Ministry has replied that the percentage
utilisation of funds during the year 2006-07 by now is 71.48% of the
available funds (as at the end of February, 2007). The MPRs of certain
States are  still awaited and the percentage utilisation would go up
further by the time the financial year comes to a close. Hence, there
is no under-utilisation. Over the last three financial years it has been
seen that the percentage utilisation to funds available has been around
86 per cent which is a satisfactory achievement. Besides, the pace of
implementation picks up during the last quarter of the year.
3.124 The following information can be drawn from the statement
provided under SGSY:
(Rupees in lakh)
Year Opening Central State Total Central State Misc. Total Utilisation %age of Total Total credit %age of
balance alloation allocation allocation releases releases receipts funds utilisation credit target credit
available target disbursed disbersed
2005-06 24182.59 100000.00 33266.67 133266.67 102955.50 31567.41 9076.32 155852.82 133877.53 85.90 251565.47 182316.07 72.47
2006-07 24423.11 110000.00 36600.00 146600.00 96435.83 21738.28 5292.29 135815.51 79146.43 58.27 286912.31 110535.82 38.53
3.125 Similarly the targets fixed and achievements during 2005-
2006 and 2006-2007 (pg. 22, SGSY, pre-mat) has been given as under:
Year SHGs formed %age of Total Swarozgaris %age of Average
achievement assisted achievement Achievement
Target Achievement Target Achievement under both
categorie
2005-2006 52876 80130 151.54 859230 1151116 133.97 142.75
2006-2007* 77018 103015 133.75 1091081 1341965 122.99 128.37
2007-2008 115500   Not available 1636250  Not available
*upto January, 2007

68
3.126 From the above statements it emerges that during 2005-2006,
the total funds available with the State Governments were
Rs. 1,55,852.82 lakh and during 2006-2007, the total funds available
with the State Governments was Rs. 1,35,815.51 lakh. The percentage
of utilisation in the corresponding years was 85.90 per cent and
58.27 per cent (upto January, 2007) respectively.
State-wise performance
3.127 As per statements furnished by the Ministry, The percentage
of credit disbursed by some States like Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, West Bengal and Pondicherry
is dismal and well below 50 per cent during 2005-2006. Even during
2006-2007, these States have not performed well.
3.128 When asked about the reasons for these States lagging behind,
the Department has replied that in general, the situation in the North
Eastern States is attributable to terrain, low population base, under-
banked and un-banked blocks etc. further, insurgency has also forced
the banks to scale down their services in a few areas. With respect to
West Bengal, as a matter of policy the Government is not pushing the
beneficiaries to reach up to Grade-II and encourages them to commence
economic activities at Grade-I stage itself. As a result, the flow of
credit is relatively lower in West Bengal.
3.129 It has been mentioned in the Outcome Budget that the
percentage of credit mobilisation has improved over the years and it
was 72.45 per cent in the year 2005-2006 as compared to 32.96 per
cent in the year 1999-2000. the details of poor performing Bank branches
has been collected from all the States and have been forwarded to RBI
and Ministry of Finance for necessary action and close monitoring.
Various meetings have been organized with the banks to monitor the
pace of credit mobilisation.
3.130 When asked the details of poor performing Bank Branches
indicating number of poor performing Bank Branches in each State,
the Department has furnished the statement as given in Appendix-
XIV .
3.131  It can be inferred from the statement that only in the States
of Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Mizoram,
Orissa, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttaranchal the number of
poor performing Bank branches is below 100. In States like Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, the
number of poor performing bank branches are above 200. Further, the

69
data with regard to Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Nagaland has not been given.
3.132 The Department has further informed that the details of poor
performing Bank Branches have been furnished to RBI and Ministry
for further necessary action and special monitoring during the current
year.
3.133 Ministry of Finance has advised the State Level Bankers
Committee (SLBC) in various States to achieve the credit disbursal
targets and to improve lending by Banks. Ministry of Finance had
issued directions to take stern action against the officers who had
failed to achieve the target under SGSY , RBI has convened a special
meeting of CMDs of commercial banks to review the poor performance
of bank branches on 19 April, 2005. In the Tenth Meeting of CLCC
held on 7 February, 2007 it has been decided that each bank will
designate an officer in the corporate office as well as the State level
for intensive coordination and monitoring of SGSY. Directions have
been given to the State Governments to launch a focused campaign in
coordination with the banks to reduce the pendency of loan applications
by 50 per cent by 31 March, 2007.
3.134 When asked for the outcome of various meetings organised
by Banks to raise the rate of credit mobilisation. The Department replied
that the rate of credit mobilisation has improved over a period of
time. It has improved from 46.9 per cent to 72.47 per cent from the
financial year 2002-03 to financial year 2005-06. The percentage of credit
disbursal improved from 38 per cent in the month of January, 2007 to
57.57 per cent in the month of February, 2007.
3.135 From the data provided by the Department regarding
performance of SGSY, the Committee find that the percentage of
credit disbursed by seven States and one Union territory viz.
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
West Bengal and Pondicherry is dismal and well below 50 per cent
during 2005-2006. Even though the Government has furnished the
reasons behind the poor disbursement credit in these States, the
Committee feel, corrective steps taken are inadequate to have a better
result as during 2006-2007, these States have again not performed
well. As SGSY is one of the oldest and important Schemes of the
Department, the Committee feel that the Government has to critically
analyse the performance of SGSY after interacting with the Banks,
respective State Governments, PRIs and all other stake holders.
Besides, they feel, steps to provide both forward and backward

70
linkages to SHGs and individual swarozgaries be taken to maintain
the viability of the Scheme.
3.136 The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing on the
need to address the issue of poor performance of Bankers which has
resulted in poor credit off-take under SGSY at the various levels.
Inspite of this, there is no considerable improvement in the
performance of various Banks. The information furnished by the
Department indicates that as many as 2,643 Bank Branches have
been marked as poor performing Bank Branches. Out of these 2,643
poor performing Bank Branches, 1,297 are Commercial Bank Branches
and the remaining 1,346 are Regional Rural Banks and Cooperative
Bank Branches. The poor performing Branches are more in Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee further note that the
details of poor performing Bank Branches have been furnished to
Reserve Bank of India and Ministry of Finance for further necessary
action and special monitoring during the current year. Inspite of the
various directions issued by the Ministry of Finance and Reserve
Bank of India through various meetings, there is no considerable
change in the attitude of Bankers. The Committee feel that Bankers
are required to be sensitized about the need to shoulder
responsibility with regard to making credit available at affordable
rate of interest to the Self Help Groups under SGSY. Since the
present efforts being made by way of meetings and directions are
not resulting in considerable improvement, perhaps there is a need
to have the system of incentives and disincentives for various Bank
Branches. Besides, more rural Bank Branches need to be opened by
Commercial Banks. It should be ensured that each Panchayat
Headquarter has a branch of Commercial Bank within a stipulated
period of time. To have proper monitoring by RBI and Ministry of
Finance a separate window for making available credit under SGSY
needs to be opened. The Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to convey aforesaid observations to the Ministry of
Finance and the Heads of various Commercial Banks for taking the
desired initiative. The follow up action in this regard may be
communicated to the Committee.
Marketing of SGSY products
3.137 As per the replies efforts have been made by the Government
to achieve the targets fixed for credit disbursement during 2006-2007.
The percentage of credit disbursed by the end of January, 2007 was
38.53 percent. However, this percentage of credit disbursal has increased

71
to 57.49 percent by the end of February, 2007. It is expected that the
credit disbursal will improve by the end of March, 2007.
3.138 Problems faced by the Government in disbursement of credit
are:—
(a) Indifferent attitude of Bankers to Government sponsored
anti-poverty programme.
(b) Unbanked and under banked areas.
(c) Single-manned Branches/shortage of manpower.
3.139 The Department has informed that certain initiatives have
been taken for creation of permanent marketing infrastructure for SGSY
products at various prominent locations like Pragati Maidan, Jasola,
Pitam Pura etc. in Delhi.
3.140 A part from the creation of Marketing Infrastructure in Delhi,
the Ministry has sanctioned the following special projects for creation
of permanent marketing infrastructure:—
S.No.  Name of the State Name of the Project Project Cost
(Rs. in lakh)
1. Andhra Pradesh Permanent Marketing Centre in all 1300
districts
2. Goa Establishment of Goa Bazaar 982.34
3. Gujarat Gram Haat in all districts 1200.00
4. Himachal Pradesh Marketing Centres in all districts 914.52
5. Madhya Pradesh Haat Bazaar in 17 districts 1500
6. Rajasthan Permanent marketing centres in 700
10 districts
7. Uttaranchal Establishment of Marketing Centres 285
in 3 districts
8. Uttaranchal Gramin Ship Emporiums for marketing 482
of rural products
9. Tamil Nadu Strengthening Marketing Infrastructure 250
and establishment of Nodal Centre for
Rural Technology
10. Uttar Pradesh Establishment of SARAS Marketing 710
Centres and Technology & Training
Centres in 7 districts

72
3.141 Regarding the technical difficulty in allocating funds for
permanent structure to be created for marketing of SGSY products,
the representative of the Department during the course of oral evidence
have stated that:—
“The Marketing genuinely is the biggest concern of this
programme. We have been trying for some time to create some
kind of a national institution. The difficulty in most of the
programmes at the national level, at the Ministry level is that
today our manpower available is very small, but we have been
trying to follow the PMGSY model which has been a good model.
We will be discussing that in a minute. That can be changed.
While we do not want to do any marketing directly, at least we
can give technical support and assistance to the SHGs in
formulating, selecting the right product and developing proper
strategies to market. That is what the hon. Member was saying.
Selling of the rural product to the urban buyers is actually the
crux of this problem. Marketing is a serious concern. One more
area in which we can improve is providing bigger marketing
outlets. In very limited places we have set up exclusive markets.
We are trying to make a beginning in that respect. That
programme can be given bigger support. Bhopal has started some
market for SHGs. Two or three other places are there. In Delhi
also we are trying to start something. We will try to hire some
marketing experts. We will permit the States also to have
marketing experts at the State level and District level. Today we
have to give some exclusive fund out of this though there is no
direct programme in this as such. But as the hon. Member
suggested, there is need for a complete overhaul, for a complete
calibration to see how it can be further improved. Our budget
has got only revenue heads we do not have capital heads. We
will take the support of the Committee in this regard, if we have
to go into that direction, then, we need to have one agency
under SGRY because ultimately even if we create assets,
somebody has to run it and we have no one to run it. We cannot
sit in Krishi Bhavan and run it. We are thinking of creating an
agency, which can actually run it. With the agency and a capital
head, we can construct these kinds of things and make it available
under SGRY.”
3.142 The Committee find that most of the Swarozgaris have to
sell their products in the market on their own because there is lack
of institutional arrangements being made for the aforesaid schemes.
The Committee feel that the profits of Swarozgaris are considerably

73
reduced if they resort to self marketing. Another area of concern is
the competitiveness in the market. The Government has to think of
all these aspects seriously and provide the protection to the self
help groups. Besides, to enable the self help groups to face the
competition in the market stress need to be given to training aspect
so that the products produced by the beneficiaries are competitive
in the market. More and more Gramshree Melas, like SARAS,
organized during the India International Trade Fair in Delhi and
Delhi Haat, should be organized in other States of the country so as
to enable Swarozagirs to sell their products in such Melas.
3.143 The Committee further find that the Department has taken
certain initiatives for creation of permanent infrastructure for
marketing of SGSY products in various cities. For creation of
aforesaid marketing structure, the State Governments have to help
by providing the land free of cost for these projects. However, the
entire expenditure on construction has to be borne by the Union
Government. The Committee also find that the Department is facing
technical problems for addressing to the need of creating marketing
structures in different cities. The Department has informed that the
current marketing sub-head under the SGSY broad head of account
does not permit any capital expenditure it being a revenue head.
The creation of such a capital expenditure sub-head will help in
creating marketing infrastructure for SGSY products. The Committee
recommend to consider creation of a head under the marketing sub-
head under SGSY major head so that the technical problem being
faced by the Department can be addressed. The Committee also
recommend that initially all State Headquarters should have one
dedicated marketing complex for rural products particularly of
artisans which can be extended to cover all the districts in a time
bound manner. The Committee find that at the National level, there
is no agency that can exclusively handle the marketing aspects of
the rural products in a systematic and sustainable basis connecting
all Self Help Groups with domestic and international markets is a
task that is not being addressed institutionally by the Department
at present. There is an urgent need for creating a dedicated National
Marketing Agency for providing professional marketing support to
products of Self Help Groups and act as a facilitator. The Committee
recommend to the Government to consider setting up of the aforesaid
National Marketing Agency.
F. Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural
Technology (CAPART)
3.144 The Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural
Technology (CAPART) came into existence in September, 1986 following

74
the merger of two erstwhile Societies, namely , People’s Action for
Development India (PADI) and Council for Advancement of Rural
Technology (CAPART). CAPART’s principal aim is to involve the people
in the implementation of development programmes and promote need-
based, innovative projects through non-governmental voluntary
organizations and it works towards creating a peoples movement for
development in the rural areas through higher social mobilization,
lowering of social barriers and empowerment of the rural poor. The
main objectives of CAPART include:—
•P romotion of voluntary action through grassroots planning,
organization of seminars and workshops ;
•P roviding a platform for sharing and dissemination of
knowledge and experience ;
•P roviding funding support to innovative need based projects;
• Encouraging voluntary organizations to collaborate amongst
themselves by developing networks;
• Selection and encouragement of innovative technologies and
their dissemination ;
• Reduction of rural poverty ;
• Generation of awareness for conservation of the environment
and natural resources;
•P roviding the minimum needs in respect of safe drinking
water, sanitation etc.
3.145 From the financial year 2001-2002, the Ministry has made
the budget provision for CAPART under a single Head, namely,
‘Assistance to CAPART’. This assistance is principally utilized in
implementing three Schemes, namely, Promotion of Voluntary Action
in Rural Development (PC), Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme
(ARTS) and Organization of Beneficiaries (OB). The administrative costs
are also met from the Head ‘Assistance to CAPART’.
The aims and objectives of the projects implemented under these
programmes are as under:—
(i) Public Cooperation Scheme:— Projects of innovative and
integrated nature only are considered under the scheme
which result in harnessing the collective energies and
creativity of the rural community and lead to capacity
building and enhancement of life.

75
(ii) Or ganisation of Beneficiaries:— Projects for creating
awareness organising the beneficiaries into groups and
strengthening their bargaining position etc., are considered
under this scheme.
(iii) W atershed Development Scheme:— CAPART Watershed
Programme is operational in drought prone and water
scarcity areas with the active involvement of grass root
voluntary organizations and village level beneficiaries. The
programme involves experienced voluntary organizations
representing all the agro-ecological Zones in the Country.
Capacity building stage in the programme is very useful
for the voluntary organizations as well as for village level
workers so that implementation work is done adhering to
the watershed principles, such as top to bottom and ridge
to valley approach. The unique model of Support Voluntary
Organisations (SVOs) to train and technically assist various
voluntary organizations approved for watershed and natural
resource management has been developed for better
implementation of the programme.
(iv) Appropriate Rural Technology Scheme:—Under Rural
Technology activity, the mandate of CAPART is to co-
ordinate all efforts towards advancement of technology
relevant to rural areas except for sectors being dealt with
ICAR and its sister organizations. The broad objective of
the Council under this is development and dissemination
of rural Technology. Projects aimed at conducting need based
study, survey and adaptive research and development,
administration and dissemination of appropriate technologies
amongst the poor are funded under this scheme. A
programme of setting up of Technology Resource Centre
(TRCs) was initiated by CAPART under this scheme. These
are VOs equipped with lab facilities that received annual
grants from CAPART for development of appropriate
technology and dissemination of the same through network
of small VOs within their areas of operation.
(v) Disability:—Projects relating to the Community Based
Rehabilitation of the disabled to facilitate and help them
for integration with the community as dignified, self-reliant
categories so that they can contribute to the development
process of the Society.
3.146 No project under any of CAPART’s schemes is sanctioned
without pre-funding appraisal and the approval of the National

76
Standing Committee/Regional Committees which comprises eminent
persons in the field of rural development. The VO has to submit
progress report in the prescribed proformae within six months of the
release of the 1st instalment. Before the second instalment is released,
mid term evaluation is done. After completion of the project, the VO
has to submit the final progress report and audited statement of
accounts alongwith Utilization Certificate and therefore, the entire
project is post evaluated.
3.147 The extent of assistance to CAPART by Ministry of Rural
Development since 1999-2000 is as below:—
(Rs. in Crore)
Year Funds Release Amount actually
allocation spent
1999-2000 N.A. 31.55 35.44
2000-2001 N.A. 29.65 43.61
2001-2002 N.A. 30 44.44
2002-2003 30 30 58.64
2003-2004 50 54.96 67.22
2004-2005 65 65 55.05
2005-2006 70 70 46.38
2006-2007 70 20 29.43 (up to
28.02.07)
2006-2007 70 35 44.96 (upto
28.03.07)
2007-2008 60 -  -
3.148 As per supplementary replies, the RE allocation for CAPART
in the year 2006-07 is Rs. 70 crore. An amount of Rs. 35 crore has
been released in the financial year 2006-07. However, during this year,
CAPART had an opening balance of Rs. 27.51 crore. Thus total funds
available to CAPART have been Rs. 62.51 crore out of which CAPART
have spent Rs. 44.96 crore as on 28.03.07. During the first and second
quarters of 2006-07, CAPART concentrated its attention in streamlining
the procedure and taking new initiatives as per the recommendations
on future role of CAPART made in the two day National Consultation
with leading NGOs, GB/EC/NSC Members and eminent personalities

77
in the rural development sector, held on 9-10 May, 2006. The new
initiatives focus at the holistic development of the most backward
districts in the States with projects such as Nodal NGO project, Rural
YP/Yuva Jyoti, Gramin Vikas Andolan and Nirmal Gram Abhiyan.
CAPART has also signed MoU with Centre for Sustainable Technologies
(CST) of Indian Institute of Science (IISc), for technology upgradation,
adaptation, standardisation of currently available technologies developed
at IISc to different regions as well as develop new designs in response
to demand on water, sanitation, housing, rural energy, field testing
and networking developmental agencies and nodal NGOs. CAPART
has also set up C-PART, an Institute on Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Technology and launched a radio programme for social messaging
and awareness generation on drinking water, rural sanitation, health
and CAPART’s schemes. CAPART is also creating awareness on water
conservartion, sanitation and programmes of Ministry of Rural
Development through Gramin Vikas Andolan and Nirmal Gram
Abhiyan. In the year 2006-07 CAPART have sanctioned 187 projects. It
is expected that on account of various initiatives the performance of
CAPART will gradually improve.
3.149 Voluntary Organisations (VOs) furnish utilization certificates
to CAPART for the amounts released to them and CAPART furnishes
Utilisation Certificate to the Ministry for the entire amount received
from the Ministry. This is a continuous process involving Utilisation
Certificates relating to releases made in earlier years. It is further
mentioned that no UC in respect of CAPART is pending.
3.150 About the monitoring of activities of CAPART, the Department
has stated that they monitor the activities of CAPART through a series
of meeting at the Secretary (RD) level, which includes monthly staff
meeting of Secretary (RD). In addition, CAPART’s activites are reviewed
by the Chairman, Executive Committee who is also the Minister for
Rural Development as well as through Executive Committee and
General Body meetings.
3.151 The Committee have been informed that the functioning of
CAPART has been decentralized by setting up Regional Committees
(RCs) and these RCs have been empowered to sanction projects upto
Rs. 20 lakh each w.e.f. 04 September 2000. In addition to the RCs at
Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Chandigarh, Dharwad, Guwahati,
Hyderabad, Jaipur, Lucknow and Patna, National Standing Committees
have been constituted to sanction projects upto Rs. 1 crore by the
Headquarters (at New Delhi).

78
3.152 During the course of oral evidence the representative of
CAPART stated as under:—
“We have focused on four or five research areas and we feel
very confident; we are on the right track. We have had our first
meeting with NGOs at Indian Institute of Science. So, I think,
NGOs also know now. We have given them a set of about seven
or eight model programmes and I have a feeling that this year
it is going to be even more smooth because we have finished of
with the administrative restructuring.
Regarding upliftment of health related issues of Rural Housing
in the Kitchen, we have kept it in the biogas model but in
addition to that through our MoU with the Indian Institute of
Science they have an excellent, cheap, completely smoke free
chulla. In fact, we have had a workshop there and we have
exposed NGOs from two States; we had the NGOs from Bihar
and Rajasthan. We plan to step up our exposure of NGOs. That
is a very important part of our agenda.
As far as the conveying a village/block is concerned, that is also
a focus area. We have formulated proposals; we had excellent
response. We have insisted that just going into one village and
covering two houses is not going to help; we have to carpet the
village and the block. Take one village and carpet it. It is because;
only then there is impact.”
3.153 On the query regarding the number of times the officials of
CAPART visit all the districts of the country, to collect information on
Voluntary Organisations/NGOs working at the grassroots level and
whether any standard guidelines exist in this regard, it has been replied
that visiting Districts and Blocks is a regular responsibility of CAPART
Regional Officials. Further, orientation workshops for CAPART
programmes are organised for grassroot level organisations/NGOs and
Gram Shree Melas are held at district level. Problems, if any, faced by
the NGOs are resolved through interfacing with them. CAPART officials
also visit district/block/panchayats for the following purposes:—
1. Visiting NGOs premises
2. Attending workshops
3. Participating in Gram Shree Melas
4. Monitoring of projects.

79
3.154 The Committee are concerned to note the under-spending
by CAPART during 2006-2007. Rs. 70 crore were allocated to CAPART
during 2006-2007 against which Rs. 35 crore were released in February
2007. However, during 2006-2007, CAPART had an opening balance
of Rs. 27.51 crore. Thus, the total available funds with CAPART
during 2006-2007 was Rs. 62.51 crore. The actual expenditure of
CAPART upto February, 2007 is Rs. 44.96 crore which means that
about Rs. 17.55 crore are still lying unspent with CAPART. The
Committee feel that spending of such large amount of funds at the
fag end of the year is not a healthy practice. The Committee desire
that suitable corrective measures be taken from the year 2007-2008
onwards, so that expenditure is evenly spread throughout the year
and heavy expenditure at the fag end of the year is avoided.
3.155 The Committee also note the recent changes like
streamlining the procedure and taking new initiatives which focus
on the holistic development of the most backward districts in the
States. CAPART has also signed a Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) with Centre for Sustainable Technologies (SCT) of Indian
Institute of Science (IISc), for technology upgradation, adaptation,
standardization of currently available technologies developed at
Indian Institute of Science to different regions as well as develop
new designs in response to demand on water, sanitation, housing,
rural energy, field testing and networking developmental agencies
and nodal NGOs. In addition, CAPART is also focusing on four or
five research areas in improvement of health of rural women with
the help of NGOs. CAPART has also set up about eight model
programmes including biogas model for excellent, cheap and smoke
free chullah. The Committee recommend that CAPART should step
up the exposure of NGOs and other implementing agencies to such
activities so that certain problem areas of rural development sector
like water, sanitation, housing, rural energy, field testing etc. are
addressed. The Committee also hope that with the restructuring of
CAPART their functioning would be more effective and help in
coordinating the activities of the NGOs and other implementing
agencies. The Committee would like to be apprised further in this
regard.
G. National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD)
3.156 In April 1962, the Central Institute of Study and Research in
Community Development, Trainers Training Institute were merged to
establish National Institute of Community Development (NICD). The
NICD became an autonomous registered Society in November 1965.

80
The name of NICD was changed to National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD) in September 1977, which has since set up a
regional Centre at Guwahati in July 1983. The NIRDs policy is
determined by a 47 member General Council.
3.157 The NIRD undertakes training programmes for creation and
enhancement of capacity of the delivery mechanism for poverty
alleviation and rural infrastructure programmes, undertakes research
and studies on Panchayati Raj Institutions and Rural Development
programmes for continuous policy, programmes upgradations and
disseminates information through various publications.
3.158 The activities of NIRD relate to training, research, action
research and consultancy in rural development. Action Plan has been
drawn up on each of these activities and is being implemented. During
2005-2006, NIRD had planned to conduct 201 Training Programmes
out of which it could conduct 186 training programmes with 5141
participants up to January 2006. NIRD has also drawn up a plan for
Research Studies, Action Research Projects and consultancy studies were
planned for the year 2006–2007. The NIRD has planned to conduct
230 training programmes by utilizing Rs. 12 crore (Plan) and Rs. 8.70
crore (Non-Plan) in BE 2006-2007.
3.159 The extent of assistance by Department of Rural Development
to NIRD since 1999-2000 is as follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Plan  Non-Plan Total Budget Total Budget
received from of NIRD
Ministry of Rural
Development
1999-2000 5 7.15 12.15
2000-2001 5 7.60 12.60
2001-2002 5 7.55 12.55
2002-2003 5.45 7.55 13.00
2003-2004 6.57 7.50 14.07 17.95
2004-2005 9 7.42 16.42 19.32
2005-2006 10 8.02 18.02 24.98
2006-2007 12 8.86 20.86 24.33
2007-2008 BE 10 9 19 NA

81
3.160 As per the Outcome Budget 2007-08 of the Department the
vision of NIRD is to focus on training in the field of policies and
programmes that benefit rural poor.
3.161 When asked as to whether NIRD has a training module on
each scheme and programme of Ministry of Rural Development being
implemented in the current Financial Year, it has been replied that a
lot of Schemes of the Ministry of Rural Development has been
restructured and is being newly started. Then the Ministry replied
that NIRD has training module for the following four schemes of the
Ministry of Rural Development:
1. NREGP
2. SGSY
3. Swajaldhara
4. Indira Awaas Yojana and IWDP
3.162 It has further been replied that the training modules prepared
are suitably modified to capture the changes that are made in the
schemes of the Ministry from time to time based on requirement and
field level experiences. The Institute has also prepared training modules
for the Ministry of Panchayati Raj at various levels. When further
asked as to whether NIRD was informed in advance about the
restructuring and newly launched schemes of Ministry of Rural
Development so that it can change its training module accordingly, it
has been replied that the Ministry of Rural Development consults the
NIRD from time to time on the implementation of its schemes. The
NIRD is involved in the consultation process during the restructuring
of the existing schemes/programmes and during launch of new
programmes by way of organising consultative meetings, seminars and
workshops. The NIRD modifies its training modules on the restructured
programmes in consultation with the Ministry of Rural Development.
3.163 During the course of oral evidence, the Secretary of the
Department stated as under:
“we have addressed and made some preliminary discussion in
the NIRD that is regarding starting of academic courses relating
to rural development, where NIRD will, hopefully, be able to
make a beginning in the next financial year. Therefore, we have
identified 26 institutions in the country which are imparting
training like IRMA and the Xavier Institute of Management,
Bhubaneswar. Some States are doing rural development related

82
programmes. We will look at it and see to what extent we can
support it (the institutions) …... Some universities are doing good
work. They may have some experience in that area. If they come
forward with focused academic programmes relating to rural
development, we would like to support them and also do a
networking of these institutions so that they can be the source
for knowledge in the rural development areas as a whole. So, to
that extent, we are able to augment our funding. We will try to
do that. But, within the existing programme for allocating some
training programme to these institutions, we are more than willing
to do and we will be happy to take advantage of their expertise”.
3.164 As per information furnished by the Department, the training
schemes (SIRD/ETC, IT) IEC and monitoring mechanism has been
merged under ‘Management support to Rural Development
programmes and strengthening district planning process’ from
2007-08.
‘Management support to Rural Development programmes and
strengthening district planning process’
State Institute of Rural Development (SIRD)
3.165 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Strengthening and
Establishment of State Institute of Rural Development (SIRDs) and
Extension Training Centres (ETCs) is being implemented since
6th Five Year Plan (1980—85).
3.166 At present, there are 28 SIRDs functioning all over the country ,
one in each State. All SIRDs are operating from their own buildings
or in rented buildings. Since 1994-1995, 100 per cent Central assistance
is provided to SIRDs for non-recurring expenditure for developing
infrastructure while the recurring expenditure is shared on 50:50 basis
between the Centre and the States. In addition, Central assistance is
also provided for the procurement of five core faculty members in
each SIRD.
Extension Training Centres (ETCs)
3.167 In order to impart training to village and block level
functionaries, the Scheme of ETCs was taken up since 7th Plan period
(1985—90). In 28 States, 88 different Extension Training Centres (ETCs)
have been established and functioning. A new ETC in Mizoram has
been approved by the Department in 2005-2006. The States that do not
have ETCs are Goa, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttaranchal. The ETCs function

83
under State Governments to impart training to rural development
functionaries and elected representatives of PRIs. The Ministry of Rural
Development through State Governments releases funds for ETCs and
SIRDs on the basis of demands received from State Governments.
Central assistance is provided @ 100 per cent for non-recurring
expenditure and up to a maximum of Rs. 5 lakh per ETC per annum
towards recurring expenditure.
3.168 The Department has furnished the following information in
respect of allocation, amount released, number of training programmes
proposed, number of training programmes conducted, number of
research activities proposed and number of research activities completed
as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Allocation Amount No. of No. of No. of No. of
released training training Research Research
programmes programmes actitivies actitivies
proposed conducted proposed completed
2004-05 9.00 9.00 200 215 - -
2005-06 10.00 10.00 201 230 20 19
2006-2007 12.00 6.00 230 199* 25 **
*As on 31.01.2007
**in progress
3.169 The Committee note that NIRD at the Central level, SIRD
at the State level and ETCs at the district/ block level are the premier
institutions involved for imparting training and capacity building of
Panchayats and other functionaries involved with the implementation
of various programmes meant for the upliftment of rural masses.
However, during 2006-2007, NIRD could conduct only 199
programmes as against the target of conducting 230 programmes.
Further, no research activity has been completed in 2006-2007. The
shortfall in achievement of targets is a matter of great concern. The
Committee feel that with the added responsibilities, the challenge
of imparting training to Panchayats and other implementing agencies
cannot be met only by NIRD, SIRD and ETCs. While NIRD has
designed training modules for some rural development schemes like
NREGA, SGSY, Swajaldhara, IAY and IWDP . Further, NIRD has
identified 26 institutions like IRMA and Xavier Institute of
Management, Bhubaneswar for the purpose of imparting training.
The Committee desire that to meet the huge demand of training and

84
research activities, some Universities and Institutions that are doing
good work in the field of rural development may be roped in and
measures may be taken to support such institutions. Besides, more
training modules may be designed by NIRD to cover other rural
development schemes which should be revised suitably as and when
the rural development schemes are restructured. The Committee
would like to be apprised further in this regard.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
9 May, 2007 Chairman,
19 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

85
APPENDIX I
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
(Standing Committee on Rural Development Branch)
CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF STATEMENTS MADE BY MINISTER UNDER DIRECTION 73A REGARDING
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
9TH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Subject to the Report : Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Rural
Development
Date of presentation : 20 April, 2005
Date of receipt of Action taken notes : 29 August, 2005
Date of presentation of action taken Report : 21 December, 2005
Date of Minister’s Statement : 28 July, 2006
The Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development on Demands for Grants (2004-05) was
presented to Parliament on 20 April, 2005. Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development made a statement in the House in
pursuance of direction 73A on 28 July, 2006. The detailed analysis of the statement has been given in the succeeding
paragraphs:—
Sl.No. Name of Ministry/Department Total Total No. of No. of No. of No. of Recs.
Committee No. of No of Recommend Recs. Recommendations Yet to be
Recs. Recs. -ation Under not implemented
Accepted Implemented Process implemented
1. Committee Department of Rural 53 24 17 16 20 36* [16 under process+20 not
on Rural Development implemented]
Development
*Para No. 2.5 was categoried under ‘need not be pursued’ category in the action-taken and has been put as ‘under process’ categ ory.
(The statement laid by Hon’ble Minister Rural Development on 28 July, 2006 does not include the reply of the Government on two recommendations
made at para Nos. 3.105, 3.106 and categorized under ‘not implemented’.)

86
APPENDIX II
BE, RE AND ACTUAL EXPENDITURE DURING THE TENTH PLAN PERIOD
PLAN (Rs. in Crore)
Sl.No. Name of the Schemes 10th Plan 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-2005 2005-2006 2006-2007 2007-2008
Proposed Outlay Total release B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E. R.E. Actual B.E.
outlay agreed to (upto expen- expen- expen- expen- expen-
by Plg. 21.3.07) diture diture diture diture diture
Commn. in the upto
10th Plan 21.3.2007
12 3 4 56 789 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
1. Sampoorna Gramin 48538.00 30000.00 35438.76 4440.00 9086.00 9085.93 4900.00 10130.00 10129.93 5100.00 5100.00 5014.84 4000.00 8500.00 8501.4 3 3000.00 3000.00 2706.63 2800.00
Rozgar Yojana
2. National Food For — — 6473.08 — — ———— 0.00 2020.00 2019.00 6000.00 4500.00 4454.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Work Programme
3. Food For Work Programme* — — 785.18 600.00 860.00 785.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
4. National Rural Employment — — 8220.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 11300.00 11300.00 8220.25 12000.00
Guarantee Scheme
5. Swarnajayanti Gram 9850.00 3955.00 4548.95 710.00 710.00 706.04 800.00 800.00 797.55 1000.00 1000.00 958.80 960.00 1000.00 1028.88 1200.00 120 0.00 1057.68 1800.00
Sworozgar Yojana
6. Pradhan Mantri Gram 55000.00 12500.00 16730.28 2500.00 2500.00 2500.00 2325.00 2325.00 2328.60 2468.00 2468.00 2305.40 4235.00 4220.00 4220. 00 5225.62 5475.62 5376.28 6500.00
Sadak Yojana
7. DRDA Administration 1586.27 1100.00 1102.91 220.00 220.00 199.19 220.00 220.00 220.00 230.00 230.00 228.92 220.00 220.00 235.00 220.00 220.00 2 19.80 212.00

87
 8. Rural Housing-Indira 13040.00 8603.00 11681.90 1725.00 1725.00 1693.14 1900.00 1900.00 1899.50 2500.00 2900.00 2772.55 2775.00 2750.00 2746 .57 2920.00 2920.00 2570.14 4040.00
Awaas Yojana
 9. N.I.R.D. 35.00 40.00 37.28 5.00 5.00 5.45 6.00 6.00 6.00 9.00 9.00 9.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 12.00 6.83 6.83 10.00
10. Assistance to C.A.P .A.R.T. 250.00 200.00 250.00 30.00 30.00 30.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 65.00 65.00 65.00 70.00 70.00 70.00 70.00 70.00 35.00 60.00
11.P rovision for Urban — — 32.64 — — — 0.00 0.00 5.78 1.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 6.86 10.00
Amenities in Rural Areas
12. Management support to 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 68.00
P.O. Programmes
and strengthening district
planning process
(a) Training Schemes** 315.00 150.00 135.25 20.00 20.00 18.02 39.00 39.00 39.84 24.40 24.40 22.16 24.00 24.00 27.68 30.00 36.97 27.55 0.00
(b) Information, Education 500.00 100.00 63.90 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.50 20.00 20.00 16.12 15.00 15.00 15.58 18.00 18.00 11.60 0.00
& Communication**
(c) Monitoring Mechanism** 350.00 100.00 62.65 10.00 10.00 10.24 20.00 20.00 15.83 20.00 20.00 11.78 15.00 15.00 14.68 20.00 18.20 10.12 0.00
Total-Rural Development 129464.27 56748.00 85563.03 10270.00 15176.00 15043.19 10270.00 15500.00 15503.53 11437.40 13866.40 13433.57 18334.0 0 21334.00 21334.00 24025.62 24275.62 20248.74 27500.00
*The scheme of Food for Work Programme discontinued from 2003-2004.
**The Training scheme (SIRD/ETC, IC, IT), IEC & Monitoring Mechanism has since been merged under Management support to RD progr ammes and strengthening district planning process from 2007-2008.
12 3 4 56 789 1 0 1 1 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21

88
APPENDIX III
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMME & STATE-WISE UNSPENT BALANCE OF FUNDS AS ON 31.12.2006
(Rs. in crore)
Part A
Sl.No. State/UT SGSY SGRY IAY NREGA PMGSY Total
12 3 456 78
1. Andhra Pradesh 29.27 38.13 192.47 553.75 38.45 852.07
2. Arunachal Pradesh 2.74 12.99 7.28 0.42 30.56 53.99
3. Assam 32.38 125.01 97.60 230.81 132.04 617.84
4. Bihar 113.06 161.89 438.33 636.50 179.76 1529.54
5. Chhattisgarh 9.40 23.37 19.63 199.02 16.56 267.98
6. Gujarat 10.91 40.18 53.30 44.55 49.89 198.83
7. Goa 0.24 2.01 1.05 — 4.68 7.98
8. Haryana 7.33 37.16 5.54 11.07 163.56 224.66

89
12 3 456 78
 9. Himachal Pradesh 2.25 10.12 2.25 13.29 38.54 66.45
10. Jammu and Kashmir 5.75 12.82 4.40 26.41 64.00 113.38
11. Jharkhand 22.94 24.60 27.23 299.32 126.98 501.07
12. Karnataka 21.46 93.91 37.29 72.58 57.03 282.27
13. Kerala 10.09 27.70 37.00 28.73 36.14 139.66
14. Madhya Pradesh 26.99 31.06 13.72 580.95 263.65 916.37
15. Maharashtra 28.17 121.68 55.46 249.32 47.74 502.37
16. Manipur 1.04 14.42 5.20 9.50 3.77 33.93
17. Meghalaya 0.60 6.87 6.67 43.95 20.69 78.78
18. Mizoram 0.77 0.73 -0.04 0.89 50.36 52.71
19. Nagaland 0.63 7.78 -2.31 2.21 43.88 52.19
20. Orissa 32.97 47.13 39.66 462.87 336.78 919.41
21. Punjab 0.13 19.18 1.85 20.97 69.14 111.27
22. Rajasthan 22.93 56.79 25.07 325.05 53.09 482.93

90
12 3 456 78
23. Sikkim 0.89 1.27 -1.11 3.21 29.09 33.35
24. Tamil Nadu 29.81 91.68 13.79 88.18 79.37 302.83
25. Tripura 4.73 17.18 4.25 1.48 50.22 77.86
26. Uttar Pradesh 95.67 169.24 2.28 319.68 340.66 927.53
27. Uttaranchal 5.46 24.64 112.30 25.65 45.31 213.36
28. West Bengal 37.07 128.43 130.44 228.19 158.61 682.74
29. A & N Islands 0.60 0.98 2.35 — 10.33 14.26
30. D & N Haveli 0.86 0.00 -0.05 — 5.00 5.81
31. Daman and Diu 0.13 0.04 0.09 — 5.06 5.32
32. Lakshadweep 0.43 1.45 0.07 — 4.89 6.84
33. Pondicherry 0.34 1.56 0.49 — 0.00 2.39
Total 558.04 1352.00 1333.55 4478.55 2555.83 10277.97

91
APPENDIX IV
DISTRICT LEVEL VIGILANCE & MONITORING COMMITTEES
MEETINGS HELD DURING 2006-07
(As on 22.03.2007)
Sl.No. Name of States Total No. of Districts No. of
No. of where Meetings of
Districts meetings District level
held V & MC
12 345
1. Andhra Pradesh 23 18 24
2. Arunachal Pradesh 16 14 17
3. Assam 23 7 9
4. Bihar 38 18 22
5. Chhattisgarh 16 16 24
6. Goa 2 2 3
7. Gujarat 25 10 18
8. Haryana 20 12 17
9. Himachal Pradesh 12 7 10
10. Jammu and Kashmir 14 1 1
11. Jharkhand 22 10 13
12. Karnataka 27 26 32
13. Kerala 14 14 18
14. Madhya Pradesh 48 43 73
15. Maharashtra 35 15 18
16. Manipur 9 4 5
17. Meghalaya 7 2 2
18. Mizoram 8 7 8

92
12 345
19. Nagaland 8 6 6
20. Orissa 30 27 43
21. Punjab 17 5 7
22. Rajasthan 32 20 27
23. Sikkim 4 3 3
24. Tamil Nadu 30 26 32
25. Tripura 4 4 4
26. Uttaranchal 13 13 15
27. Uttar Pradesh 70 57 78
28. West Bengal 18 2 2
29. UTs 10 0 0
Total 597 389 531

93
APPENDIX V
STATE-WISE LIST OF DISTRICTS FROM WHERE REPORTS
ABOUT HOLDING MEETINGS OF DISTRICT LEVEL
VIGILANCE & MONITORING COMMITTEES HAVE
NOT BEEN RECEIVED SO FAR
Sl.No. State/UT District
12 3
1. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 1. Andaman
2. Nicobar
2. Andhra Pradesh 1. Hyderabad
2. Karimnagar
3. Prakasam
3. Assam 1. Bongaigaon
2. Cachar
3. Darrang
4. Dhemaji
5. Dibrugarh
6. Hailakandi
7. Jorhat
8. Karbi Anglong
9. Kokrajhar
10. Lakhimpur
11. Nagoan
12. Nalbari
4. Bihar 1. Aurangabad
2. Banka
3. Buxar
4. Gaya

94
12 3
5. Kaimur (Bhabua)
6. Madhepura
7. Samastipur
8. Sitamarhi
9. Supaul
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli Dadra & Nagar Haveli
6. Daman & Diu 1. Daman
2. Diu
7. Gujarat 1. Ahmedabad
2. Bhavnagar
3. Gandhinagar
8. Haryana 1. Fatehabad
2. Jhajjar
3. Panipat
4. Rewari
9. Himachal Pradesh 1. Chamba
2. Lahul & Spiti
10. Jammu and Kashmir 1. Anantnag
2. Badgam
3. Baramula
4. Doda
5. Jammu
6. Kargil
7. Kathua
8. Kupwara
9. Leh
10. Phulwama
11. Rajauri

95
12 3
11. Udhampur
12. Srinagar
11. Jharkhand 1. Deoghar
2. Dhanbad
3. Giridih
4. Godda
5. Palamu
6. Paschimi Singhbhum
7. Sahibganj
12. Madhya Pradesh 1. Chhindwara
2. Raisen
13. Maharashtra 1. Ahmadnagar
2. Aurangabad
3. Nanded
4. Nandurbar
5. Nashik
6. Wardha
7. Washim
14. Manipur 1. Chandel
2. Churachandpur
3. Ukhrul
15. Punjab 1. Amritsar
2. Ludhiana
3. Muktsar
16. Rajasthan 1. Bharatpur
2. Bikaner
3. Dausa
17. Sikkim East Sikkim

96
12 3
18. Uttar Pradesh 1. Ballia
2. Etah
3. Gautam Budha Nagar
4. Sant Kabir Nagar
19. West Bengal 1. Barddhaman
2. Dakshin Dinajpur
3. Darjiling
4. Jalpaiguri
5. Cooch Behar
6. Kolkata
7. Maldah
8. Medinipur
9. Murshidabad
10. Nadia
11. Noth 24 Parganas
12. Puruliya
13. South 24 Parganas
14. Uttar Dinajpur

97
APPENDIX VI
LIST OF 113 DISTRICTS PROPOSED TO BE COVERED
DURING 2007-2008 OUT OF THE 130 NEW
DISTRICTS PROPOSED TO BE COVERED
Sl.No. State/Districts
12
Andhra Pradesh (6)
 1. E. Godavari
 2. Guntur
 3. Kurnool
 4. Nellore
 5. Prakasam
 6. Srikakulam
Arunachal Pradesh (2)
 7. Lohit
 8. Changlang
Assam (6)
 9. Barpeta
10. Cachar
11. Darrang (Mangaldoi)
12. Hallakandi
13. Morigaon
14. Nalbari
Bihar (15)
15. Arwal
16. Buxar
17. Saran (Chapra)

98
12
18. Siwan
19. Gopalganj
20. Sitamarhi
21. E. Champaran
22. W. Champaran
23. Saharsa
24. Madhepura
25. Bhagalpur
26. Banka
27. Begusarai
28. Khagaria
29. Sekhpura
Chhattisgarh (4)
30. Janjgirchampa
31. Korba
32. Mahasamund
33. Raipur
Gujarat (3)
34. Bharuch
35. Navsari
36. Valsad
Haryana (2)
37. Ambala
38. Mewat
Himachal Pradesh (2)
39. Kangra
40. Mandi

99
12
Jammu and Kashmir (2)
41. Anantnag
42. Jammu
Jharkhand (2)
43. Deoghar
44. E. Singhbhum
Karnataka (6)
45. Belgaum
46. Bellary
47. Chickmagalur
48. Hassan
49. Kodagu
50. Shimoga
Kerala (2)
51. Idukki
52. Kasaragod
Madhya Pradesh (13)
53. Anuppur
54. Ashoknagar
55. Burhanpur
56. Chhindwara
57. Damoh
58. Datia
59. Dewas
60. Guna
61. Harda
62. Katni

100
12
63. Panna
64. Rajgarh
65. Rewa
Maharashtra (6)
66. Thane
67. Osmanabad
68. Buldana
69. Akola
70. Washim
71. Wardha
Manipur (2)
72. Chandel
73. Churachandpur
Meghalaya (3)
74. East Khasi Hills
75. Jaintia Hills
76. Ri Bhol District
Mizoram (2)
77. Champhai
78. Lunglei
Nagaland (4)
79. Kohima
80. Makokchung
81. Tuenseng
82. Wokha
Orissa (5)
83. Angul

101
 12
 84. Balasore
 85. Bargarh
 86. Bhadrak
 87. Jajpur
Punjab (3)
 88. Amritsar
 89. Jalandhar
 90. Nawanshehar
Rajasthan (6)
 91. Barmer
 92. Chittorgarh
 93. Jaisalmer
 94. Jalore
 95. S. Madhopur
 96. Tonk
Sikkim (2)
 97. East Sikkim
 98. South Sikkim
Tripura (2)
 99. South Tripura
100. West Tripura
Tamil Nadu (4)
101. Thanjavur
102. Thiruvarur A.T.P .
103. Karur
104. Tirunelveli

102
Uttaranchal (2)
105. Haridwar
106. Udhamsingh Nagar
West Bengal (7)
107. Cooch Behar
108. Darjeeling D.M.
109. Nadia
110. North 24 Parganas
111. Hooghly
112. Poorvi Midnapur
113. Burdwan
Uttar Pradesh
List of districts in UP will be issued separately
12

103
APPENDIX VII
PHYCIAL PERFORMANCE OF NREGA DURING 2006-07
            Employment Generation under NREGA
Sl.No. State      Employment Generated in Lakhs Persondays (Cumulative for the  year upto reporting month)
SC’s ST’s Others Total No. of No. of Land Disabled
House Persondays House Persondays House Persondays House Persondays days    reform/IAY   beneficiaries
Holds Holds Holds Holds (Col. Worked   beneficiary    out of
(Col. 4+6+8) by  col. 9   col. 9
3+5+7) women
12 34 5 6789 1 01 11 21 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 492905 126.78 207067 50.73 898410 223.64 1598382 401.15 203.46 953868 18416
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0 0 16926 0 0 0 16926 0 0 42 0
3. Assam 38707 27.85 186378 130.41 227390 137.61 452475 295.87 64.76 17175 365
4. Bihar 978709 91.04 14672 3 1080758 120.07 2074139 241.11 38.76 115458 1079
5. Gujarat 7679 4.16 91596 35.38 37817 19.42 137092 58.96 31.58 7086 3
6. Haryana 21680 7.23 0 0 14603 4.92 36283 12.15 3.36 15700 0
7. Himachal Pradesh 22598 5.17 16584 4.14 33239 8.03 72421 17.34 1.76 43959 14506

104
12 34 5 6789 1 01 11 21 3
 8. Jammu and Kashmir 62000 0.63 105630 1.59 672000 7.42 839630 9.65 0.01 3238 7
 9. Karnataka 149025 45.77 101010 29.81 254564 64.74 504599 140.32 75.03 0 0
10. Kerala 6700 0.51 5300 0.48 31500 2.28 43500 3.26 1.94 500 14
11. Madhya Pradesh 350641 263.15 1175226 685.69 909595 536.88 2435462 1485.72 593.63 0 0
12. Maharashtra 0 0 0 00000000
13. Manipur 0 0 0 8.26 0 0 0 8.26 3.31 0 0
14. Meghalaya 0 0 14459 2.01 0 0 14459 2.01 5 14 6
15. Mizoram 0 0 19020 2.43 0 0 19020 2.43 0.79 4800 4800
16. Nagaland 0 0 27800 11.33 0 0 27800 11.33 3.4 1800 870
17. Orissa 290338 110.19 571729 222.39 344875 120.73 1206942 453.31 148.04 81059 452
18. Punjab 0 8.15 0 0 0 2.93 0 11.08 3.82 0 0
19. Rajasthan 150745 107.67 648062 460.41 239282 140.7 1038089 708.78 458.63 2934000 58200
20. Sikkim 32 0.01 4063 1.48 16 0.06 4111 1.55 0.3 45 0
21. Tamil Nadu 199735 39.53 15955 2.23 205141 43.12 420831 84.87 45.92 16885 362
22. Tripura 12567 7.74 36806 27.7 15178 9.99 64551 45.43 33.19 6628 875

105
23. Uttar Pradesh 12567 307.44 35603 21.63 847586 212.8 2059332 541.88 87.31 331402 11278
24. West Bengal 736000 73.97 308000 33.98 1296000 127.57 2340000 235.52 32.79 254810 56700
25. Chhattisgarh 128053 38.81 410836 214.88 348364 128.63 887253 382.32 203.15 0 0
26. Jharkhand 0 48.04 0 92.74 0 76.81 0 217.59 67.04 0 0
27. Uttaranchal 17426 5.19 947 0.32 77464 14.98 95837 20.49 6.08 491 1
Total 4841683 1319.02 4013669 2043.02 7533782 2003.33 163891.34 636537 2113.06 4788960 167934
*0 denote non-reporting by concerned States
12 34 5 6789 1 01 11 21 3

106
APPENDIX VIII
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE NREGA DURING 2006-07
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Sl.No. State Actual Release of last year but received Release during Misc Total Cumulative Expenditure % age of
O.B. as on during the Current Year Current Year Receipt Availability Exp.
1st April Centre State Total Centre State Total (Col. On On On Contigency Total against
of the year 6+9) Unskilled Semi skilled Material (12+13+14 Total
Wage and +15) Avl.
skilled Funds
wage
12 3 4 5678 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7
1. Andhra Pradesh 2538.09 5974.85 0 5974.85 87461.46 2344.44 89805.9 0 98318.84 33470.5 84.51 253.58 4135.48 37944.07 38.59
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0.4 0 0 0 272.85 0 272.85 0 273.25 176.72 0 0 2.96 179.68 65.76
3. Assam 27062.55 8401.16 0 8401.16 13970.85 132.78 14103.63 5644.43 55211.77 21152.6 1809.57 8608.89 559.51 32130.55 58.20
4. Bihar 46991.06 10166.8 0 10166.8 41581.38 4500.35 46081.73 1152.24 104391.9 21346.3 2800.32 15245.63 271.7 39663.98 38.00
5. Gujarat 4018.84 591.52 0 591.52 4113.94 452.11 4586.05 123.08 9299.49 2922.11 26.77 587.34 1308.49 4844.71 52.10
6. Haryana 1169.58 37.17 0 37.17 2129.39 91.34 2220.73 2.48 3429.96 1145.63 22.77 505.82 33.06 1707.28 49.78
7. Himachal Pradesh 1046.69 0 0 0 2207.64 225.19 2432.83 4.18 3482.7 1193.21 219.52 728.41 12.82 2153.96 61.85
8. Jammu and Kashmir 722.06 0 0 0 2776.37 331.74 3108.11 6.51 3836.68 646.73 239.68 154.95 21.29 1062.65 27.70

107
12 3 456 7 891 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 4 1 5 1 6 1 7
 9. Karnataka 5630.06 1177.47 40.23 1217.7 14595.69 723.23 15318.92 0 22166.68 9332.6 275.39 5042.53 258.16 14908.68 67.26
10. Kerala 1162.05 0 0 0 2179.51 0 2179.51 0 3341.56 306.25 3.01 3.56 156.03 468.85 14.03
11. Madhya Pradesh 2405.43 1430.78 673.78 2104.56 160224.2 14997.5 175221.7 10.39 180770.7 76884.9 6699.86 35538.32 1219.15 120342.25 66.57
12. Maharashtra 22391.56 0 0 0 19235.64 0 19235.64 0 41627.2 0 0 0 0 11130.38 26.74
13. Manipur 243.4 436.63 0 436.63 1252.89 0 1252.89 0 1932.92 570 41.8 338.2 0 950 49.15
14. Meghalaya 37.6 2414 0 2414 2064.68 0 2064.68 0 4516.28 77.72 0 12.54 31.02 121.28 2.69
15. Mizoram 645.7 129.44 0 129.44 783.9 0 783.9 0 1559.04 843.73 0 0 32.28 876.01 56.19
16. Nagaland 515.86 498.42 45 543.42 430.11 0 430.11 2.65 1492.04 740.52 8.48 493.5 28.87 1271.37 85.21
17. Orissa 3236.04 1293.73 431.25 1724.98 74856.49 7121.34 81977.83 0 86938.85 21400.8 2671.7 13441.41 338.12 37852.06 43.54
18. Punjab 340.16 398.77 0 398.77 2755.75 323.39 3079.14 6.5 3824.57 1051.83 0 650.72 24.57 1727.12 45.16
19. Rajasthan 1905.08 0 0 0 67961 7551.22 75512.22 0 77417.3 35761.8 1375.21 7366.38 408.81 44912.15 58.01
20. Sikkim 0 0 0 0 451.5 5 456.5 0 456.5 131.87 0 35.63 0 167.5 36.69
21. Tamil Nadu 4195.89 1402.8 0 1402.8 9889.21 0 9889.21 567.76 16055.66 6789.9 0 0 447.79 7237.69 45.08
22. Tripura 905.26 1688 0 1688 1456.66 250 1706.66 2.38 4302.3 2688.25 204.42 1215.48 45.88 4154.01 96.55
23. Uttar Pradesh 27782.55 13512.2 0 13512.2 44498.69 3200 47698.69 186.06 89179.5 30820 2280.05 18372.45 739.32 52211.76 58.55

108
12 3 456 7 891 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 4 1 5 1 6 1 7
24. West Bengal 16741.95 1612.19 0 1612.19 26358.84 2539.86 28898.7 114.46 47367.3 16976.4 .394 3217.26 460.75 21048.45 44.44
25. Chhattisgarh 5788.68 22 0 22 48459.74 4246.33 52706.07 0 58516.75 22472.2 847.78 10971.6 323.89 34615.23 59.15
26. Jharkhand 23025.9 2620.52 0 2620.52 37618.59 4179.81 41798.4 156.58 54901.4 16289.4 1586.84 9022.05 299.99 27198.28 41.91
27. Uttaranchal 1711.09 656.69 29.26 685.95 1910.6 765.61 2676.21 7.38 5080.63 1640.14 43.1 796.78 35.69 2515.71 49.52
Total 199512.63 54465.2 1219.5 55684.7 671497.57 53981.3 725478.8 9015.7 989691.7 326832 21634.77 132603.01 11195.43 503395.65 50.86
0 denotes not-reporting by concerned States

109
APPENDIX IX
STATE-WISE INFORMATION ON THE NUMBER OF
HOUSEHOLDS WHICH HAVE COMPLETED
100 DAYS OF EMPLOYMENT
Sl. No. State Number of households which
have completed 100 days
of employment
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 46368
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0
3. Assam 79767
4. Bihar 33451
5. Chhattisgarh 53631
6. Gujarat 8061
7. Haryana 3438
8. Himachal Pradesh 8128
9. Jammu and Kashmir 11728
10. Jharkhand 15757
11. Karnataka 24265
12. Kerala 66
13. Madhya Pradesh 309193
14. Maharashtra 5323
15. Manipur 0
16. Meghalaya 0
17. Mizoram 0
18. Nagaland 0
19. Orissa 47642

110
12 3
20. Punjab 2045
21. Rajasthan 362313
22. Sikkim 93
23. Tamil Nadu 828
24. Tripura 255
25. Uttar Pradesh 72191
26. Uttaranchal 117
27. West Bengal 4357
Total 1089017

111
APPENDIX X
PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE UNDER SAMPOORNA GRAMIN
ROZGAR YOJANA (SGRY) DURING 2006-2007
(As on 31.1.2007)
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Sl.No. State Reporting Allocation Actual Central Release During Current Year Misc. Total Funds % age Employ- Status of Work in (in Number)
Month Centre State Total O.B. as on release Centre State’s Total Receipt Availa- Utilization/ Total ment No. of Works Works
code Share 1.4.2006 of Share bility Expend- Against Generated Works Under Comp-
2005-06 Actual iture Avail. (in Under- Prog- leted
but Released Funds lakhs taken ress
received Man-
during days)
2006-07
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 41 5 1 61 71 81 9
1. Andhra Pradesh 11 10903.95 3634.65 14536.60 990.72 6542.37 6542.37 3492.13 10034.50 33.55 17601.14 7823.92 44.45 72.31 53668 25673 27995
2. Arunachal Pradesh 10 1403.63 467.88 1871.53 636.56 842.20 842.20 0.00 842.20 1.29 2322.25 180.75 7.78 2.17 871 447 363
3. Assam 12 25385.99 8462.00 33847.99 3429.72 10655.14 15231.59 8697.37 23928.96 39.94 38053.76 31724.12 83.37 471.45 63529 22295 41729
4. Bihar 12 21299.37 7099.79 28399.16 6416.77 1152.47 12779.62 4633.63 17413.25 435.91 25418.40 13697.60 53.89 123.15 27414 14808 12565
5. Chhattisgarh 12 4937.19 1645.73 6582.92 334.01 4372.15 4818.96 1457.38 6276.34 1.41 10983.91 4199.74 38.24 52.09 21352 8587 12765
6. Goa 12 417.64 139.21 556.85 13.94 250.58 250.58 130.00 380.58 9.75 654.85 246.11 37.58 1.75 210 212 12
7. Gujarat 12 8741.19 2913.73 11654.92 1000.39 386.44 7222.60 1898.61 9121.21 0.97 10509.01 6789.57 64.61 55.84 34755 10636 10478

112
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 41 5 1 61 71 81 9
 8. Haryana 12 6048.66 2016.22 8064.88 196.49 5891.64 5891.64 1209.74 7101.38 14.18 13203.69 4157.39 31.49 34.36 9975 3036 6939
 9. Himachal Pradesh 12 2296.24 765.41 3061.65 705.08 1431.08 1529.83 432.18 1962.01 75.64 4173.61 1912.00 45.81 17.11 14731 6383 8349
10. Jammu and Kashmir 11 2628.03 876.01 3504.04 176.68 1900.22 1900.22 1061.26 2961.48 5.11 5043.49 2123.46 42.10 14.47 12946 5617 7397
11. Jharkhand 6 3338.58 1112.86 4451.44 268.96 2671.43 2671.43 0.00 2671.43 0.00 5611.82 480.06 8.55 4.14 2190 3213 611
12. Karnataka 11 16224.75 5408.25 21633.00 2539.06 13734.24 13734.24 3822.65 17556.89 5.35 33835.54 11366.81 33.59 148.82 82337 50887.7 31449.3
13. Kerala 12 8116.50 2705.50 10822.00 809.25 5150.46 5443.63 1623.30 7066.93 135.47 13162.11 6168.59 46.87 36.30 10662 13063 5602
14. Madhya Pradesh 12 16854.62 5618.21 22472.83 653.99 12342.83 15199.95 3853.81 19053.76 119.95 32170.53 15472.06 48.09 176.19 51741 11359 40382
15. Maharashtra 10 25703.73 8567.91 34271.64 1303.86 22042.90 22411.31 7859.21 30270.52 188.61 53805.89 16595.39 30.84 191.61 65829 43168 22661
16. Manipur 2403.18 8010.06 3204.24 1441.90 1441.90 1441.90 2883.80 0.00 0.00 0.00 0
17. Meghalaya 10 1946.47 648.82 2595.24 243.32 1186.06 1186.06 344.87 1530.93 2.93 2963.24 1072.43 36.19 13.19 3463 2240 1223
18. Mizoram 11 556.39 185.46 741.85 9.52 333.84 460.11 83.60 543.71 0.00 887.07 374.98 42.27 8.80 1497 231 1282
19. Nagaland 8 1752.72 584.24 2336.96 16.29 1091.65 1096.12 12.00 1108.12 0.44 2216.50 495.87 22.37 4.50 1372 196 1176
20. Orissa 12 9623.95 3207.98 12831.93 243.64 0.00 9475.27 2102.71 11577.98 4.29 11825.91 7551.89 63.86 115.81 10912 3955 8241
21. Punjab 12 6753.65 2251.22 9004.87 419.77 2931.58 2931.58 2939.59 5871.17 14.30 9236.82 4504.53 48.77 23.47 15792 5708 7084
22. Rajasthan 12 12542.23 4180.74 16722.97 761.06 11534.67 11534.67 4123.85 15658.52 0.00 27954.25 11843.53 42.37 99.57 33669 14798 17306
23. Sikkim 12 562.78 187.59 750.37 19.18 337.67 337.67 100.00 437.67 0.00 794.52 404.86 50.96 2.62 1418 497 921
24. Tamil Nadu 11 18850.46 6283.49 25133.95 318.54 18243.24 18243.24 4118.61 22361.85 157.34 41080.97 14714.78 35.82 127.76 69043 47395 21648

113
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 41 5 1 61 71 81 9
25. Tripura 12 3820.26 1273.42 5093.68 161.62 2843.10 3191.39 835.29 4026.68 18.70 7050.10 2602.16 36.91 34.93 8329 1547 6782
26. Uttaranchal 12 4920.58 1640.19 6560.77 614.45 3332.12 3922.24 1075.09 4997.33 1.75 8945.65 3963.97 44.31 55.59 23061 9210 13856
27. Uttar Pradesh 12 56504.34 18834.78 75339.12 6168.71 38930.05 50058.12 11851.37 61909.49 121.3 107129.38 49313.40 46.03 523.97 143694 42342 10 0233
28. West Bengal 9 15660.57 5220.19 20880.76 6799.83 10670.84 10670.84 3421.62 14092.46 33.93 31597.06 8951.48 28.33 69.35 44129 24349 19780
29. A & N Islands 10 274.01 274.01 105.68 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.51 108.19 9.89 9.14 0.11 38 7 31
30. D & N Haveli 180.40 180.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0
31. Daman and Diu 9 87.44 87.44 3.98 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.98 0.00 0.00 0.00 0
32. Lakshadweep 10 137.05 137.05 28.83 129.55 129.55 129.55 0.03 287.96 13.20 4.58 0.15 4 4 0
33. Pondicherry 12 277.74 277.74 92.73 166.64 166.64 1.44 260.81 106.96 41.01 0.31 182 41 75
All India 291154.31 96732.56 387886.87 35482.64 182372.42 231315.57 71179.87 302495.44 1425.92 521776.42 228861.49 43.86 2481.88 816813 374905 428934
Other Expenditure 411.65
Total 231727.22

114
APPENDIX XI
STATE-WISE INFORMATION ON FIXATION OF COST OF
FOODGRAINS AT APL OR BPL RATES
Sl.No. State/UT                 Cost of foodgrains charged under SGRY per kg.
Wheat Rice
12 3 4
 1. Andhra Pradesh
 2. Arunachal Pradesh Exempted from compulsory distribution of
foodgrains for 2004-05 & 2005-06
 3. Assam — Rs. 8/-
 4. Bihar
 5. Chhattisgarh Rs. 6.50 —
 6. Goa Exempted from compulsory distribution of
foodgrains
 7. Gujarat Rs. 5.05 Rs. 7.00
 8. Haryana Rs. 5.50 —
 9. Himachal Pradesh Rs. 5.15 Rs. 6.90
10. Jammu and Kashmir Rs. 4.75 Rs. 6.25
11. Jharkhand
12. Karnataka Rs. 6.25 —
13. Kerala Rs. 5.50 Rs. 6.20
14. Madhya Pradesh Rs. 5.00 Rs. 6.50
15. Maharashtra
16. Manipur — Rs. 6.10
17. Meghalaya
18. Mizoram
19. Nagaland Rs. 5.00 Rs. 7.00

115
12 3 4
20. Orissa   — Rs. 5.65
21. Punjab Rs. 5.00   —
22. Rajasthan Rs. 4.60   —
23. Sikkim
24. Tamil Nadu   — Rs. 5.65
25. Tripura
26. Uttaranchal
27. Uttar Pradesh
28. West Bengal   — Rs. 6.00
29. A&N Islands   — Rs. 6.06
30. D&N Haveli
31. Daman and Diu Exempted from compulsory distribution of
foodgrains
32. Lakshadweep Exempted from compulsory distribution of
foodgrains
33. Pondicherry   — Rs. 5.00
               Existing Cost Issue Price (CIP) as on 30.6.2006 for
Wheat per quintal Rice per quintal
Above Poverty Line (APL) Rs. 610/- Rs. 830/-
Below Poverty Line (BPL) Rs. 565/- Rs. 615/-

116
APPENDIX XII
STATEMENT INDICATING THE STATUS OF ELIGIBLE
HABITATIONS, HABITATIONS CONNECTED AND BALANCE
HABITATIONS TO BE COVERED UNDER PMGSY
Sl.No. States No. of eligible No. of habitations     Balance
habitations covered connected
under PMGSY
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh 980 889 91
2. Arunachal Pradesh 415 121 294
3. Assam 13144 1846 11298
4. Bihar 17920 440 17480
5. Chhattisgarh 12561 2803 10558
6. Goa 55 2 53
7. Gujarat 4253 1214 3039
8. Haryana 2 0 2
9. Himachal Pradesh 3494 948 2546
10. Jammu and Kashmir 2792 41 2751
11. Jharkhand 10696 898 9798
12. Karnataka 876 302 574
13. Kerala 438 193 245
14. Madhya Pradesh 18192 3768 14724
15. Maharashtra 1751 1459 292
16. Manipur 598 100 498
17. Meghalaya 756 297 459
18. Mizoram 285 53 232
19. Nagaland 94 32 62

117
12 3 4 5
20. Orissa 14393 2512 11881
21. Punjab 536 434 102
22. Rajasthan 11015 5497 5518
23. Sikkim 318 55 263
24. Tamil Nadu 2640 1590 1043
25. Tripura 2091 196 1895
26. Uttar Pradesh 24284 6854 17430
27. Uttaranchal 2605 91 2514
28. West Bengal 25288 2849 22439
Total States 172772 34691 138081

118
APPENDIX XIII
THE STATE-WISE ALLOCATION FOR NEW CONNECTIVITY AND
UPGRADATION UNDER PMGSY
(Rupees in crore)
Sl.No. Name of the States New Connectivity Upgradation
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 0 472
2. Arunachal Pradesh 678 0
3. Assam 3321 910
4. Bihar 3776 708
5. Chhattisgarh 4263 485
6. Goa 0 20
7. Gujarat 206 125
8. Haryana 0 410
9. Himachal Pradesh 626 370
10. Jammu and Kashmir 1559 271
11. Jharkhand 1442 413
12. Karnataka 0 420
13. Kerala 0 105
14. Madhya Pradesh 5450 1425
15. Maharashtra 0 560
16. Manipur 478 0
17. Meghalaya 142 166
18. Mizoram 249 71
19. Nagaland 91 35
20. Orissa 2200 1073

119
12 3 4
21. Punjab 0 359
22. Rajasthan 1522 472
23. Sikkim 111 22
24. Tamil Nadu 0 728
25. Tripura 353 116
26. Uttar Pradesh 1764 2530
27. Uttaranchal 557 271
28. West Bengal 3055 807

120
APPENDIX XIV
STATE-WISE INFORMATION ON THE NUMBER OF POOR
PERFORMING BANK BRANCHES UNDER SGSY
DURING 2005-06
Sl.No. Name of the State Number of Bank Branches Total
Commercial RRBs/Coop.
Banks Banks
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh 126 81 207
2. Arunachal Pradesh
3. Assam 88 57 145
4. Bihar 208 160 368
5. Chhattisgarh 21 219 240
6. Gujarat 90 18 108
7. Goa
8. Haryana 26 0 26
9. Himachal Pradesh 95 54 149
10. Jammu and Kashmir 4 13 17
11. Jharkhand 20 10 30
12. Karnataka Nil Nil Nil
13. Kerala Nil Nil Nil
14. Madhya Pradesh 80 161 241
15. Maharashtra 36 20 56
16. Manipur
17. Meghalaya
18. Mizoram 10 20 30
19. Nagaland

121
20. Orissa 35 22 57
21. Punjab 33 1 34
22. Rajasthan 132 201 333
23. Sikkim 3 3
24. Tamil Nadu 20 33 53
25. Tripura Nil Nil Nil
26. Uttar Pradesh 158 223 381
27. Uttaranchal 16 18 34
28. West Bengal 96 35 131
Total 1297 1346 2643
12 3 4 5

122
APPENDIX XV
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 28 MARCH, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah— In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Zora Singh Mann
5. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
6. Shri D. Narbula
7. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
8. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
9. Shri Sita Ram Singh
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
11. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari
13. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
14. Dr. Chandan Mitra
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II
5. Shri Sundar Prasad — Under Secretary

123
Representatives of Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development)
1. Dr. Subas Pani, Secretary (RD)
2. Shri Atul Chaturvedi, AS & FA
3. Shri J.K. Mohapatra, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Amar Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shrimati Smita Chugh, Joint Secretary
6. Shrimati Nilam Sawhney, Joint Secretary
7. Shri S.C. Gautam, Chief Economic Adviser
8. Shrimati Veena Sreeram Rao, DG, CAPART
9. Shri V .S. Sampat, DG, NIRD
10. Shri R.P . Meena, CVO, CAPART
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Hannan Mollah, M.P . to act as the Chairman for the sitting under
Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives
of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) on their Demands for Grants (2007-2008).
[The representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department
of Rural Development) were then called in.]
4. The Chairman thereafter welcomed the representatives of the
Department of Rural Development and drew their attention to the
provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok
Sabha’. He in his welcome address raised the main issues which
included adequate enhancement in budget outlay of the Department
of Rural Development, unspent balances lying with various State
Governments under different schemes, the need for proportionate
enhancement in allocation in NREG Scheme in view of additional 130
districts proposed to be covered during 2007-2008.
5. The Secretary , Department of Rural Development first addressed
to the concerns raised by Hon’ble Chairman in his welcome speech.
Thereafter, the member raised several queries pertaining to effective
monitoring and implementation of NREG Scheme, spreading of
awareness of NREG Scheme, issue of job cards and maintenance of

124
the assets created under the scheme. Members also raised queries
pertaining to other rural development schemes viz. Sampoorna Grameen
Rozgar Yojana (SGRY), DRDA Administration etc. The representatives
of the Ministry of Rural Development replied to the queries raised by
the members.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned for lunch to meet again at 1400 hrs.

125
APPENDIX XVI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 28 MARCH, 2007
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah— In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Zora Singh Mann
5. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
6. Shri D. Narbula
7. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
8. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
9. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Balihari
14. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
15. Dr. Chandan Mitra
16. Shri P .R. Rajan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II
5. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary

126
Representatives of Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development)
1. Dr. Subas Pani, Secretary (RD)
2. Shri Atul Chaturvedi, AS & FA
3. Shri J.K. Mohapatra, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Amar Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shrimati Smita Chugh, Joint Secretary
6. Shrimati Nilam Sawhney, Joint Secretary
7. Shri S.C. Gautam, Chief Economic Adviser
8. Shrimati Veena Sreeram Rao, DG, CAPART
9. Shri V .S. Sampat, DG, NIRD
10. Shri R.P . Meena, CVO, CAPART
2. The Committee resumed after lunch to take the oral evidence of
the representatives of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry
of Rural Development). The various issues related to implementation
of schemes viz. Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), Indira
Awaas Yojana (IAY) and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY).
The Secretary also briefed the Committee on other vital issues like
Gender Budgeting training programmes under NIRD and raising of
infrastructure for NIRD and SIRDs, improving the performance of
CAPART, strengthening of DRDAs etc. The members then raised several
queries on the above subjects which were replied by the representatives
of the Ministry of Rural Development.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

127
APPENDIX XVII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF
THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDA Y, THE 13 APRIL, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo— In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Zora Singh Mann
4. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
7. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
8. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari
13. Shri Jayantilal Barot
14. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
15. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh

128
SECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade II
3. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Under Secretary
2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo, MP to act as Chairman for the sitting
under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha.
3. *** *** ***
4. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the draft
report on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Department of Rural
Development (Ministry of Rural Development) and adopted the report
with a slight modification.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Reports on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Departments and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

129
APPENDIX XVIII
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.9 The Committee note that Indian economy has
been in a robust condition for the last couple
of years and has been acknowledged as the
booming economy world-wide. The Approach
paper for the Eleventh Plan aims at a
sustainable growth with a growth rate of ten
per cent by the end of the Tenth Plan. To
achieve the growth in real terms it is imperative
that the poorest of the poor share the benefit
of growing economy. In this regard, the
Department of Rural Development has
launched various Centrally sponsored
programmes which aim at alleviating poverty
by providing guarantee of employment and self
employment. Various schemes SGRY, SGSY and
particularly NREGA aim to achieve the
aforesaid objective. Besides, the other schemes
of the Department like PMGSY and IA Y aim
to improve objectives quality of life for the rural
population. The objectives of the various
schemes can be achieved only with the
adequate allocation during different Plans.
2. 2.10 The Committee find that the percentage hike
in allocation of outlay has declined after 2005-
2006. As against the hike of 37.62 per cent
during 2005-2006 and 23.69 per cent during
2006-2007, the hike is just 13.28 per cent during
the year 2007-2008. Besides, the outlay allocated
is 33 per cent less than the projected outlay of
the Department. Not only that, there is
reduction of outlay under some of the schemes
like SGRY, CAPART and DRDA Administration.

130
12 3
3. 2.11 Another trend noticed by the Committee is that
whereas during the year 2006-2007, the
percentage growth in tax revenue is 28.01 per
cent, the additional resources being made
available through favourable tax collection have
not been shared correspondingly in the social
sector. The hike of just 13.28 per cent in the
outlay of the Department of Rural Development
substantiates the aforesaid observation. The
aforesaid hike of the outlay of the Department
of Rural Development is not adequate
particularly when NREGA would be applicable
in additional 130 districts thereby increasing the
number of districts from 200 to 330.
4. 2.12 The scheme-wise analysis of the position of
outlay has been made in the subsequent
Chapters of the report. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to enhance the
outlay under different schemes so as to achieve
the set objectives.
5. 2.13 The Committee further find that the total outlay
of the Department has been indicated as
Rs. 43,347.86 crore in Demands for Grants
2007-2008. However, after deducting the
recoveries to the tune of Rs. 15,825 crore
expected during the year, the net Budget of
the Department during BE 2007-2008 has been
indicated as Rs. 27,522.86 crore for Plan and
Non-Plan. The Committee urge the Department
to furnish the details of the recoveries so as to
enable the Committee to understand the
purpose of recoveries and to comment further
in this regard.
6. 2.19 The Committee note that the BPL list based on
2002 census has been delayed for a long time.
The Committee in their various reports of
previous years have been repeatedly
emphasizing on the expeditious finalisation of

131
12 3
BPL list. But even after so many years, the
Committee find that the results of the BPL
survey have not been finalised. Initially the
results were delayed due to the imposition of
stay by Hon’ble Supreme Court. Now when
the stay has been vacated by the Supreme
Court w.e.f. 14 February 2006, the results are
further being delayed by various State and
Union territory Administrations. The Committee
find that the BPL list so far has been approved
only in six States by the Gram Sabhas viz.
Arunachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and
Uttarakhand. In other States, the process of
getting the mandatory approval from Gram
Sabhas is still going on. In some States like
Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar, Rajasthan, large
number of objections were filed with the
appellate authorities to resolve the objections
filed by people in connection with the BPL list
which means that there would be further delay
in finalisation of BPL list. On the part of the
Ministry, they have reportedly discussed the
issue in every Performance Review Committee
(PRC) besides taking up the matter with the
Chief Secretaries of the defaulting States. The
Committee further note that a lot of efforts are
being made by the Department to put pressure
on the State Governments to finalize the BPL
list. The issue has been discussed in each
Performance Review Committee meeting held
during the current year. The matter was
particularly discussed in the meeting held on
20-21 December, 2006. States have also been
informed that release of funds can be tied up
with finalisation of BPL list. A meeting of the
Performance Review Committee is scheduled
to be held in April, 2007 where the issue would
be discussed with the State Secretaries and the
timeframe finalized.

132
12 3
7. 2.20 The Committee find that crores of rupees are
being allocated by the Union Government
through various welfare schemes meant for the
poorest of the poor. Unless, the BPL list is
finalized, the benefit envisaged under these
schemes can not reach to the intended
beneficiaries. Inspite of best of efforts made by
the Department, the results are not forthcoming
and the fate of the genuine poor is hanging
and thus they are being deprived of the benefits
of the various developmental schemes. The
Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to take up this matter at the
highest level. The State Governments should
be strictly told to finalise the BPL lists without
further delay through meetings with State
Secretaries/Chief Secretaries / Ministers of State
Governments etc. Besides, the matter needs to
be deliberated at the Chief Ministers level.
There is an urgent need to fix a deadline. The
Committee strongly recommend the Department
to take all the desired steps so that the BPL
list is finalized and displayed at Gram
Panchayat Headquarters so that every
household knows its status in the survey list
and feels secured that he would get the benefits
envisaged under the various programmes.
8. 2.21 Further, the Committee do not understand the
logic of the mandatory cut imposed on the
number of households to be identified under
the BPL Census 2002 in accordance with the
mandatory cut off limit imposed by Planning
Commission according to which the number of
BPL families cannot exceed the limit of 10 per
cent of BPL families identified in 1999-2000 BPL
survey. The Department has stated that since
the resources of the country are limited and
thinly distributed, the intention of imposing the
mandatory cut off is to ensure that the poorest
of the poor in the rural areas are able to avail

133
12 3
the benefit of the schemes. The Committee have
repeatedly been emphasizing in the various
reports that such a cut off limit can be a source
of corruption and other malpractices. The
Committee had strongly recommended that
such cut off limit should not be applicable
while finalizing the BPL list for Eleventh Plan.
The Department has stated that the ranking of
the poorest of the poor as decided by the Gram
Sabha would address to the concerns of the
Committee. The Committee fail to understand
the logic of putting unnecessary limitation on
BPL persons specifically when the benefit of
the schemes has to be provided on the basis of
the scores, a BPL family gets in the BPL list.
In such a situation the logic of available
resources being thinly distributed cannot be
understood. Further, the Committee are of the
firm opinion that any restriction on the number
of BPL families would provide unnecessary
discretion to the agencies involved in
finalisation of BPL lists and can invite
corruption and malpractices. The Committee do
not accept all the logic put forth by the
Department and strongly recommend to the
Government not to impose unnecessary
limitations on the number of BPL persons for
the purpose of the Eleventh Plan.
9. 2.22 The Committee further find that on the
direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court, a provision
has been made in the guidelines to allow new
names to be added and ineligible names deleted
from the BPL list on a continuous basis during
the period to which the BPL list applies. The
Committee welcome the aforesaid move of the
Government. The Committee would like to be
apprized of the modalities of exclusion/
inclusion of BPL families in the BPL list so as
to understand the entire process of revision of
BPL list and comment further in this regard.

134
12 3
10. 2.35 The Committee find that there is an elaborate
system of monitoring introduced at various
levels which includes periodical progress
reports, on line monitoring mechanism, District
level and National level monitors, utilizaiton
certificates, audit reports etc. In addition to it
the officials of the Ministry under area officers
scheme and the State level officials undertake
field visits to know the ground situation with
regard to various schemes. There are District
and State level Vigilance Committees
constituted by the Union Ministry of Rural
Development. Besides, Union and State
Ministers of Rural Development also monitor
the implementation of the programmes through
field visits and meetings. A new initiative of
holding a meeting of State Nodal Officers has
been introduced by the Department. The
Committee find that inspite of having such an
elaborate system of monitoring, Rs. 10,277.97
crore which comes to 43.01 per cent of the
allocated outlay during 2006-07 are lying
unspent with various implementing agencies.
Besides, 151 Utilization certificates amounting
to Rs. 744.45 crore are still pending under
different schemes of the Department.
11. 2.36 As r egards the position of the meetings of
District and State level, Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees held during 2006-07
(upto 10 January, 2007), 531 district level
meetings were held in only 389 districts. There
are 597 districts in the country which means
208 districts did not hold even a single meeting.
Similarly, 12 meetings of State level Vigilance
and Monitoring Committees, were held by
8 States and one Union territory which means
that most of the States did not hold even a
single meeting. As per the guidelines district
and State level Vigilance Committees shall hold
at least one sitting in each quarter during the

135
12 3
year. The aforesaid data indicates the failure of
the above system of monitoring. With regard
to the Area Officers scheme, when the
Committee enquired about the shortcomings
noticed by different area officers, the
Department has replied that the Area Officers
undertake field visits not with the fault finding
mission rather with the constructive approach
which strengthens the relationship between the
State Governments and the Union Ministry. The
Committee strongly disapprove the way various
systems of monitoring are working. The
Committee feel that perhaps more than
introducing various systems, it is essential that
the system works properly with the given
objective. The purpose of monitoring by the
Area Officers should be to know the various
bottlenecks and difficulties being faced by the
implementing agencies as well as the
beneficiaries. Besides, interacting with the
implementing agencies/district level officials,
said officers should try to know the ground
situation from the beneficiaries and physically
check the quality of the various assets created
under the scheme. Meeting with the district
level officials alone can not provide the desired
results. The findings of the area officers should
be indicated in the Outcome Budget document.
12. 2.37 With regard to the system of Vigilance and
Monitoring Committee the Standing Committee
in their 25th Report (refer Para No. 22) while
reviewing the position of these Committees has
recommended that Member/Secretary should be
held responsible for not conducting the
meetings at the regular intervals as per the
guidelines. The Committee has also
recommended that reporting format of
utilization certificate should include the number
of meetings of Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees held in each quarter of the year.

136
12 3
The Committee emphasize that crores of rupees
every year are being allocated under different
schemes of the Department and there is a
genuine concern on the part of the exchequer
that the taxes deducted from their income/
revenue are purposefully utilised and the
outlays allocated in the social sector projects
actually reach to the intended beneficiaries.
13. 2.38 The Committee further feel that none of the
aforesaid monitoring mechanisms involve
general public to act as catalyst in effective
monitoring. At least, one issue i.e. checking the
quality of projects and permanent assets created
can be done effectively by active participation
of the general public. This could be done by
developing effective mechanism for receiving
feed back. There is a need to strengthen the
complaint mechanism. The minimum standards
prescribed for a project, durability of assets
created etc. should be publicized by way of
prominently displaying at notice board at the
site of the project. Besides, there is an urgent
need to fix time limit for disposal of each
nature of complaint alongwith the name,
telephone number and contact address of the
authority who can be contacted in the event of
deficiency. In addition to what has been stated
above, the Committee recommend to the
Department to strengthen the monitoring
mechanism on the aforesaid levels. Perhaps,
there is a need to fix accountability for each
specific work.
14. 2.39 The Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to act on the suggested lines by
the Committee and take all possible measures
to strengthen the Monitoring Mechanism
without any further delay. The Committee
should also be kept apprised.

137
12 3
15. 2.42 The Committee note the various measures taken
by the Ministry to display information on the
website. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should disclose as much information as possible
to the public on their official website so that
people need not resort to the provisions of
Information Act for getting even small
information. The Ministry should also display
vital documents such as the Outcome Budget,
Annual Report of the Ministry, physical and
financial performance of various schemes,
minutes of various meetings, highlights of
various research studies on rural development
etc. on their official website. Besides, there is a
need to develop an on-line complaint
mechanism with unique complaint ID number
under each scheme so as to draw attention of
senior officers who should dispose the
complaints in a time bound manner and inform
the complainant about the action taken.
16. 2.43 The Committee appreciate the efforts of the
Department in providing various tools to the
public to lodge as well as redressal of
complaints through the user friendly
technological interventions. People can lodge
their complaint through user-friendly websites.
The Committee however feel that innocent and
illiterate people living in rural areas, at present
need the help of NGOs to invoke the various
provisions of Right to Information Act. Perhaps
there is an urgent need to first of all, enlighten
the rural masses about their rights provided
through Right to Information Act. In this regard
there is an urgent need to empower the
Panchayati Raj Institutions in tune with the
provisions made under Part IX of the
Constitution. The Panchayats equipped with the
latest technology and trained manpower can
help the public to lodge the complaints. The
Committee would like the comments of the

138
12 3
Department on the aforesaid observation.
Besides the Committee would like to be
apprised of the status of data with regard to
the number of complaints registered and
addressed so far under the Right to Information
Act so as to analyze the position and comment
further in this regard.
17. 2.46 The Committee are perturbed to note that huge
amount of funds are lying with DRDAs as
miscellaneous receipts. Miscellaneous receipts
essentially include the interest earned by
DRDAs while the funds lie with the Banks.
The amount of subsidy sanctioned by the Banks
which could not be availed of by the
beneficiaries and whatever remains, is refunded
to DRDAs that gets into a Miscellaneous receipt
and form part of the opening balances and get
expanded. In this regard the interest income
has been shown against some of the States. For
example the State of Jharkhand has shown an
interest income of Rs. 70.92 lakh when Punjab
has shown an amount of Rs. 32.40 lakh as
interest. The Committee fail to understand the
concept of miscellaneous receipts and funds
lying with DRDAs which are being deposited
in Banks to earn interest.
18. 2.47 The Committee observe that this is a very
serious issue as funds are not given to the
States to earn interest but to carry out various
rural development programmes. This trend
must be discontinued and the concerned
DRDAs may be instructed accordingly. Financial
performance may be reviewed periodically so
that expenditure is actually incurred and do
not lie with Banks as unspent balance. The
problems faced by Government in disbursement
of credit should also be discussed with all the
concerned Banks at the highest level.

139
12 3
19. 2.48 The Committee also find that inadequate or
ineffective participation of the programme
implementing agencies such as the DRDAs and
the Banks is found to be responsible for the
slightly indifferent performance of the
Programme as indicated in the study conducted
by NIRD. DRDAs do not have the required
professional competence to provide training to
the Swarozgaris and develop their
entrepreneurship skills. Besides, the study point
out that the DRDAs have not been able to
ensure effective participation of the Line
Departments. The Committee observe that there
is a need to have a relook into the functioning
of DRDAs which is main agency responsible
for carrying out various rural development
programmes. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Department to analyze the
performance of DRDAs in the light of the
aforesaid observation of the Committee. All the
required steps should be taken to make DRDAs
professionally competent. All the areas
concerned with the capacity building of DRDAs
should be addressed to and the Committee be
apprised accordingly.
20. 2.54 A specific allocation under the employment
schemes of the Department where targets of
mandays are fixed, keeping in view the
specified targets i.e. 30 per cent has been
separately made for women. Besides the impact
of various other schemes some of the schemes
like PMGSY, help women indirectly. The impact
of such schemes on the women is being studied
through a study commissioned by the
Department. The Committee note that whereas
under SGSY, the performance of women is
remarkable where 63.37 per cent of the
swarozgaris during the year 2006-07 are
women. However, the employment schemes, the
stipulated targets are not being achieved.

140
12 3
During the year 2006-07 the percentage of
mandays of employment for women under
SGRY scheme during 2006-07 was 22.85 per
cent which is below the set targets of 30 per
cent. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the position of mandays generated for
women during the year 2006-07 under NREGA
so as to know the evaluation of Gender
Budgeting under one of the important
programmes. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Department to take all the
desired steps so that the targets fixed under
different schemes for women are achieved.
21. 2.55 The Committee note that w.e.f.  2007-08
Performance Budget has been merged with the
Outcome Budget. The Outcome Budget 2007-
08 of the Department indicates the consolidated
position of the quarter-wise targets fixed during
the year 2007-08. As regards the performance
during the previous two years i.e. 2005-06 and
2006-07, the position has been indicated while
reflecting the achievement of different schemes.
The consolidated data with regard to the
physical and financial targets and achievements
of the previous two years alongwith the
physical and financial targets of the current year
has not been mentioned at one place. In the
absence of the aforesaid data at one place,
which used to be part of the earlier exercise of
Performance Budget, it is difficult to have a
comparative position of the targets and
achievements in three years i.e. the current and
the previous two years. The Committee
recommend to the Department to ensure that
the consolidated position of the quarter-wise
targets and achievements of the three years is
reflected in the Outcome Budget.
22. 2.56 The Committee further find that 15 per cent of
financial and physical targets at the National

141
12 3
level have been earmarked for minority
community and State-wise/district-wise
earmarking is done on the basis of their BPL
population. The identified minority
communities are Muslims, Sikhs, Buddhists,
Christians and Parsis. However, these
communities would not be treated as minority
in the States where their population is in
majority. The Ministry of Minority Affairs in
consultation with the Planning Commission has
given a State-wise ratio as to how this 15 per
cent should be divided among the States. The
Committee would like to be apprised on the
action taken in this regard by the Department
of Rural Development and about the response
received from various State Governments. The
Committee also desire that adequate publicity
in this regard be given in all the States so that
the minority population are aware of their
rights and are able to avail of the benefits
provided under the scheme. Further, the
Department should maintain a separate data
on minority community so that an assessment
can be made on whether the minority
community is actually benefiting from the rural
development schemes.
23. 3.25 The Committee note from the position of outlay
provided under NREGA, that Rs. 11,300 crore
was provided during the year 2006-07 when
200 districts were to be covered in the first
phase. Including the Opening Balance, the
Department has roughly Rs. 12,000 crore during
2006-07. Out of this 8,000 crore could actually
be spent while the balance Rs. 4,000 crore
which should have been deposited in Central
Employment Guarantee Fund (CEGF), have
actually been diverted to liquidate the FCI bills.
During 2007-08 an additional 130 districts have
been proposed to be added thus making the
total number to 330 districts. The allocation

142
12 3
during 2007-08 has been made for Rs. 12,000
crore which is equal to the total available funds
during 2006-07, although 130 additional districts
are proposed to be covered during 2007-08.
24. 3.26 The Committee strongly object to the aforesaid
diversion of funds of NREGA. The Committee
find that the year 2006-07 was the first year of
implementation of NREGA and the total
available funds could not be utilised fully. Since
the scheme might pick up during 2007-08
providing of outlay equal to the allocation
made during 2006-2007 is not justified
particularly when 130 additional districts are
proposed to be covered during 2007-2008. In
view of the aforesaid position, the Committee
strongly recommend the Government to provide
adequate allocation under NREGA. Ministry of
Finance/Planning Commission may be apprised
of the concerns of the Committee in this regard.
Besides the transaction of funds should be make
strictly as per rules and savings under NREGA
should be deposited in National Employment
Guarantee Fund and not diverted elsewhere.
25. 3.27 The Committee further note that, out of 1.47
crore households who have been provided
employment, only 10,89,017 i.e. 7.41 percent
households could complete 100 days of
employment, which is the main objective of the
Act. The State-wise performance indicates that
in Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram and Nagaland, none of the families
could get 100 days of employment. In the
progressive State of Kerala, only 66 families
could get 100 days of employment. The
Committee also note that an amount of
Rs. 4,75,386 was paid as unemployment
allowance in Barwani District of Madhya
Pradesh. The Committee feel that the aforesaid
data need to be analysed carefully by the

143
12 3
Department so as to understand the peculiar
State-wise problems in the implementation of
NREGA. Such an analysis would provide the
Government necessary input to take the desired
State specific action so as to achieve the
objectives of ambitious legislation of NREGA.
26. 3.28 The Committee further note that one of the
aspect that need to be addressed is to generate
works in different districts that can provide 100
days of employment to the families who
demand employment particularly when it is a
statutory requirement. With the existing works
being undertaken under NREGA like deepening
of water bodies, water harvesting, drought
proofing etc. the Committee have their
apprehension that these works may not provide
100 days employment to a family in a year.
The Department has to study the
implementation of the programme in various
States and analyse the position in view of the
aforesaid observation of the Committee and also
to take decision on allowing certain other works
which are at present not permissible under
NREGA.
27. 3.29 The Committee during the Study visit to
various backward districts of the country have
found that the payment of wages to
beneficiaries is being made by different
methods. In Uttar Pradesh, the payment is
being made in cash. In Andhra Pradesh it is
being done through Post Offices. In Karnataka,
payment is being made through Bank and Post
Offices. The Committee have also noted that
2 per cent service expenses were being charged
by Post Offices and the representatives of the
Banks requested the Committee that similar two
percent transaction charges, should be allowed
to Banks also. The Committee have selected the
subject implementation of NREGA and the

144
12 3
issues will be dealt with, in detail, during the
course of examination.
28. 3.30 Here the Committee find that the matter
regarding charging of service expenses is being
taken up with the Department of Posts. The
Committee recommend that the matter should
be settled between the Department of Rural
Development and Department of Posts by
sitting across the table. The representatives of
the Department of Posts should be persuaded
not to deduct any service charges since this is
a social sector scheme meant for the poorest of
the poor and every section of the Government
has the responsibility to ensure that maximum
benefit reaches to the beneficiaries . Charging
of 2 per cent as service expenses would
ultimately result in reduction of 2 per cent of
the allocation meant for the poorest of the poor.
29. 3.31 The Committee feel that there is not enough
awareness about the scheme among people. In
most of the districts in which the Committee
visited during the study tours, the Committee
found that people mistook the ration card for
job card. The Committee have noted that in
many places even the local Panchayat is not
educated enough to carry out the scheme. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Rural Development in consultation with the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj draw a module
covering all rural development schemes for the
training of PRIs so that PRIs can effectively
discharge their responsibility in carrying out the
schemes. The role of NIRD and SIRDs may also
be strengthened to organize training
programmes for PRIs and District and Block
level officials.
30. 3.32 The Committee further note that the guidelines
have been slightly amended to allow work on

145
12 3
the individual land holdings and the number
of persons required to start a work has been
reduced to 10 from the existing 50 persons. The
Committee only hope that with this amendment
more and more people will be benefited by
the scheme.
31. 3.33 The Committee note that 130 new districts have
been added to the scheme from 2007-2008.
During the launching of the scheme in its initial
phase, the Committee had observed that the
States were not equipped and needed some
preparatory time for transfer of work from
NFFWP to NREGA. The Committee desire that
the concerned State and District Administrations
be ready with the plan for the transition by
making a list of works which are on-going and
try to complete it as starting of the NREGA
will require some minimum preparatory time.
The machinery for wide publicity of the NREG
scheme, issue of job cards, preparation of
muster rolls may be geared up so that the
problems experienced in the implementation of
scheme in its initial phases does not recur.
32. 3.57 The Committee find that during the year
2006-07, the releases made under SGRY against
the Revised Estimate allocation is almost 100
per cent. Further, during the year 2006-07, out
of Rs. 3,000 crore, Rs. 2439 crore have actually
been released as on 28 February, 2007. As
regards State-wise performance during the year
2005-06 the percentage expenditure of total
available fund is 83.79 per cent. Further, in
some of the States like Arunachal Pradesh,
Manipur, Andaman & Nicobar Islands,
Lakshadweep the expenditure is less than
50 per cent and in Daman & Diu the
expenditure is nil. During the year 2006-07, the
percentage expenditure of the total available
fund is 43.86 per cent. As regards State-wise

146
12 3
performance, almost all the States barring
Assam, Gujarat, Orissa and Sikkim have
utilized less than 60 per cent of the outlay. With
regard to physical performance in different
States, the information given by the Department
indicates that no work has been completed in
Manipur, Daman & Diu, Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Lakshadweep while in Goa only 12
works, in Andaman & Nicobar Islands 37
works and in Pondicherry 81 works have been
completed during the year 2006-07. In Dadra
and Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and
Lakshadweep during the entire Tenth Plan, not
even a single work was completed. From the
aforesaid scenario, the Committee conclude that
whereas the releases from the Union
Government are almost 100 per cent, there are
problems in certain States as indicated in the
financial and physical performance of various
States. The Committee would like the
Department to analyze the position in various
States/UTs and take the necessary action. The
Committee may also be kept apprised.
33. 3.58 As regards allocation made under SGRY during
the year 2007-08, the Committee note that
Rs. 400 crore lesser than the previous year have
been allocated. The Committee also note that
during the year 2006-07 an additional 130
districts would be covered under NREGA and
as such SGRY would be implemented in 130
lesser districts. As per the information provided
by the Department, the allocation of cash
component for the year 2007-08 has not been
reduced in respect of remaining districts
covered under SGRY during the year. The
Committee also find that the allocation made
under SGRY is lesser by Rs. 684 crore if
compared to the proposed allocation. The
Committee find that the districts where SGRY
is being implemented have actually not been

147
12 3
covered under NREGA. In view of the aforesaid
position, the Department should ensure that
adequate outlay to each of the districts is
provided by the Department.
34. 3.59 The Committee have repeatedly been
recommending to the Government to indicate
the outlay required for foodgrains component
under SGRY and special component of SGRY,
the payment for which has to be paid to FCI/
Ministry of Food in the Budget documents and
allocate adequate outlay at BE Stage. In spite
of this, the position of indicating outlay at
supplementary Grants stage continue with the
Department. During the years 2005-06 and 2006-
07, no allocation for food component was made
at BE Stage. However, at the Revised Estimates
stage Rs. 2,998 crore (including SGRY special
component) and Rs. 3,000 crore respectively
were allocated. During the year 2007-08, only
Rs. 200 crore have been earmarked at the
Budget Estimates stage. The Committee further
note that to clear the outstanding dues to FCI,
the Government of India has allowed FCI to
raise special securities to the tune of Rs. 16,200
crore. This special security has been given by
the Reserve Bank of India on behalf of the
Central Government. The Department has
further stated that the proposed amount during
the year 2007-08 excluded Rs. 14989.64 crore
towards settlement of FCI bills. It means that
against the requirement of 14989.64 crore, only
200 crore have been provided during the year
2007-08 for foodgrains component. The
Committee observe from the aforesaid
information that there is utter confusion with
regard to the settlement of dues to FCI on
account of foodgrains component under SGRY
and the erstwhile scheme ‘National Food for
Work Programme’. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to settle all the

148
12 3
dues to FCI. Besides sufficient allocation should
be made at the Budget Estimates stage for
foodgrains component under SGRY as has
repeatedly been recommended by the
Committee. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the clear position of the
outstanding dues to FCI as on date.
35. 3.60 The Committee further find that the
Department has no monitoring mechanism to
ensure the quality of foodgrains being provided
to the beneficiaries under SGRY. The Ministry
has never procured the information regarding
the number of samples being checked by the
officials of DPs/DRDAs. The Department has
mentioned that they settle the FCI bills for
foodgrains after the bills are authenticated by
the respective DP/DRDA. It has further been
mentioned that it would not be advisable to
interfere into the powers delegated to the States
for smooth implementation of the programme.
The Committee are concerned to note the
position with regard to the monitoring of
quality of foodgrains provided under the
aforesaid schemes. Although the allocation is
being made by the Union Government, The
Department has no concern with regard to the
quality of foodgrains. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Department to monitor the
data with regard to the samples checked by
the officials of DPs/DRDAs and take the
necessary action to ensure that the foodgrains
supplied to the beneficiaries are of at least
minimum standard.
36. 3.61 As r egards the cost of foodgrains provided
under SGRY, the Committee find that there is
variation in various States/UTs. Whereas the
cost of rice has been fixed at BPL rates, in case
of wheat in Chattisgarh and Karnataka the cost
of wheat has been fixed above APL rates. In

149
12 3
all other States for which information has been
provided, the rate is below BPL rates. The
information with regard to 11 different States/
UTs has not been indicated in the information
given by the Department. The Committee
further find that the equal rate of foodgrains
calculated at BPL/APL rate is actually deducted
from the wages payable to a labourer under
SGRY and thus affects the interest of the
poorest of the poor. In view of the aforesaid
position, the Committee feel that the position
of fixing the rate of foodgrains at BPL and APL
rates needs to be reviewed. The Committee
would like to be informed about the position
of rates of foodgrains in the States in case of
which the information has not been furnished
so as to analyze the position and comment
further in this regard.
37. 3.62 The Committee further find that out of 8,16,813
number of works undertaken under SGRY, as
many as 3,74,905 works are still under progress.
The Committee would like to strongly
recommend to the Department to ensure that
the issue of committed liabilities for these
ongoing works is handled carefully while
switching on from the erstwhile NFFWP and
SGRY to NREGA specially when the type of
projects allowed under SGRY are not allowed
under NREGA. The Committee would also like
to be apprised about how the Department has
handled the committed liabilities for projects
under implementation under SGRY in the 200
districts earlier merged with NREGA and the
additional 130 districts which have now been
merged with NREGA.
38. 3.73 The Committee find that rural housing is one
of the six components of Bharat Nirman, the
ambitious programme of the Government. The
Government plan to construct 60 lakh houses

150
12 3
under Indira Awaas Yojana during the Bharat
Nirman period  i.e. 2005-06 to 2008-09. Besides
as per the Approach Paper to Eleventh Plan
the Planning Commission have set monitorable
Socio-Economic Targets under which houses
have to be provided to all rural poor by
2016-17. The Secretary during the course of oral
evidence has informed the requirement of
200 lakh housing units to end shelterlessness
in rural areas. However, if upgradation of
kutcha houses is also included, the number
comes to 400 lakhs. The data indicated by the
Department show that during the year 2005-06
i.e. first year of Bharat Nirman period, the
Department has achieved more than the
physical targets of 15 lakh houses. However,
during the year 2006-07, the achievement is just
58.23 per cent. The Department has indicated
that the aforesaid shortfall in achievement of
target was due to the fact that there was delay
in the release of first instalment of funds under
Indira Awaas Yojana because of non-preparation
of permanent Indira Awaas Yojana waitlist by
the States. Subsequently, the funds were
released with the stipulation that the
beneficiaries will be selected only out of the
permanent Indira Awaas Yojana waitlist. This
resulted in delayed implementation of the
programme during the year 2006-07. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the
State-wise status of the preparation of
permanent Indira Awaas Yojana waitlist. The
Committee also emphasize to take the desired
steps so that the targets set under Bharat
Nirman period are fully achieved.
39. 3.74 The Standing Committee in the earlier report
(refer para 2.69 of 22nd Report) had
recommended to enhance the existing per unit
assistance for construction of IAY house from
Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 50,000 in plain areas and from

151
12 3
Rs. 27,500 to Rs. 60,000 in hilly difficult areas.
The Department has informed that the matter
regarding enhancement in per unit cost of
construction of IAY house is under
consideration and the Department is actively
pursuing it. The Committee note that the
aforesaid scale of assistance under IAY was
fixed way back during 2004. Since then there
has been no revision in per unit assistance.
Since the prices of construction material have
increased considerably specifically during the
last couple of years, the Committee strongly
recommend that the per unit assistance under
IAY should be enhanced as recommended
earlier by the Committee. While recommending
for enhancement of per unit cost of IAY house,
the Committee also recommend that the annual
allocation made under IAY needs to be
enhanced considerably so that there is no
reduction in the set targets under Bharat
Nirman period and Eleventh Five Year Plan.
40. 3.76 The Committee find from the data indicated in
the Outcome Budget that there is gross mis-
match between the physical and financial
achievement during different years. During the
year 2005-06 whereas the financial achievement
was to the tune of 107.68 per cent, the physical
achievement was 79.67 per cent. To this
anomaly, the Secretary during the course of oral
evidence has stated that the mis-match may be
due to huge opening balances, achievement of
targets under special component and the
combined data of new construction and
upgradation, (the assistance provided for
upgradation is around half of the assistance
provided for construction). The Committee note
that whereas the Department has separate data
for shelterlessness and upgradation the
achievement is not monitored separately for
upgradation and shelterlessness. The Committee

152
feel that it is difficult to know the position of
shelterlessness in the absence of the aforesaid
data. The Committee therefore recommend that
the targets and achievement for upgradation,
new construction as well as special component
should be maintained separately so as to know
the exact position and do the proper planning.
41. 3.82 The Committee find that Rs. 400 crore were
sanctioned and released to the State
Government of Bihar, during the year 2004-05
in order to re-construct IAY houses damaged
by flood in 20 districts. At one place, the
Department has stated that out of Rs. 400 crore,
Rs. 270.74 crore were lying unspent thereby
indicating that only Rs. 129.26 crore i.e. a little
over 30 per cent could be utilized. At another
place it has been mentioned that only 51.27
per cent of the total available funds could be
utilized. As regards the physical targets it has
been mentioned that 43.03 per cent of the target
could be achieved. At another place it has been
mentioned that the utilization certificates for the
amount of Rs. 337.95 crore actually utilized out
of the special package had already been
received. The Secretary during the course of
oral evidence further stated that State releases
corresponding to the amount utilized is also
yet to be made. The Committee find from the
aforesaid data that there is utter confusion
about the releases made and physical and
financial targets achieved for the outlay released
to Bihar under natural calamities.
42. 3.83 The Committee further observe from the
information provided by the Department that
the funds allocated for calamity relief to 20
districts of Bihar could not be utilized inspite
of the linkage of releases of funds to normal
IAY. In the same para it has been stated that
the State Government officers had requested to
12 3

153
12 3
allow them to transfer the unspent balance
under the calamity head to the normal IAY.
Again it has been stated that a case on these
lines will be processed after receipt of formal
request from the State Government. Three
contradictory positions have been indicated in
the same para. The Committee disapprove the
way the IAY funds for natural calamities are
being handled by the Department. The
Committee would like clarifications from the
Department on the aforesaid observations. They
would like to be apprised about the visit of
National Level Monitors, Area Officers to these
flood affected districts where rehabilitation
programme was going on along with their
findings so as to know the ground reality in
this regard.
43. 3.101 Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
was launched w.e.f. 24 December, 2000 with the
objective to connect all habitations in rural areas
with a population of 1000 or above by 2003
and all habitations having population of 500
and above by the year 2007. The targets were
further spilled over and the Government
projected to cover all habitations having the
population of 1000 and above by the end of
Tenth Plan. The Tenth Plan is now over and as
stated by the Secretary, it is difficult to achieve
the aforesaid target of connectivity of
habitations having 1000 population even by
Twelfth Plan. The Committee deplore the way
huge pronouncements of unachievable targets
without doing the proper planning are being
made by the Government during different
plans.
44. 3.102 The Committee would like to be apprised of
the details of the initial projections of the outlay
required and the present situation of the
requirement of funds to achieve the targets of

154
connectivity of habitations of 1000 or above
population. The Committee would also like to
be apprised of the details of the States in which
all the habitations having 1000 plus population
have already been covered to know the exact
status of implementation of the programme.
45. 3.103 The Committee while examining the Demands
for Grants 2004-05 (refer para no. 3.114 of 3rd
Report - Fourteenth Lok Sabha) had been
apprised that there are 6,34,321 villages as per
2001 census and the number of habitations
having population of 1000 and above are
2,31,331. The number of habitations below 1000
are as under:
500-1001 205276
250-501 187591
Below 250 285044
Total 909242
46. 3.104 The Department has informed that 1,72,772
habitations having 1000 and above population
are eligible to be covered under PMGSY. Out
of which 34,691 habitations could be connected.
Thus, the balance number of unconnected
habitations are 1,38,581. State-wise position
indicates that in Andhra Pradesh out of 980
eligible habitations, 889 habitations could
actually be connected. Other States where
almost 50 per cent or above eligible habitations
could be covered are Maharashtra, Punjab,
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. In other States, the
number of habitations covered as compared to
eligible habitations are less than 50 per cent.
Further, analysis of the data indicates that in
Bihar, Goa, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Tripura and Uttranchal, the performance is
worse. In these States less than 10 per cent of
12 3

155
12 3
the eligible habitations could actually be
covered. In Haryana, out of 2 such habitations,
none of the habitations could be covered. The
Committee conclude from the aforesaid that the
apprehension of the Secretary that it is difficult
to achieve the targets of connecting 1,000
population and above by the end of Twelfth
Plan seems to be correct. The Committee
observe that a laudable initiative has been taken
to provide the connectivity in rural areas under
PMGSY. The connectivity is the basic
infrastructure which can further lead to the
economic progress of the rural areas. In this
scenario, the Committee would recommend to
the Government to take all the desired steps in
consultation with the State Governments so that
the connectivity to habitation of 1,000 and
above population can be provided at least by
the end of Eleventh Plan. The issue of
providing connectivity to 9,09,242 habitations
having less than 1,000 population can be taken
subsequently. Besides, the Committee would
also like to be apprised of the reasons for very
slow progress in the aforesaid States. The
Committee would also like to be apprised as
to why only 2 eligible habitations in Haryana
could not be covered under PMGSY.
47. 3.105 The Department has informed that tendering
of works under PMGSY takes around three to
four months. Thereafter, the expected time
period for completion of projects is twelve
months. The data indicated by the Department
show 10,514 incomplete roads under Phase-I to
Phase-IV during the period 2000-2001 to 2004-
05. The Committee fail to understand as to why
such a large number of roads remain
incomplete even for the projects taken up
during 2004-05. Some of the road works taken
up during Phase I and Phase II i.e. 2000-2001
and 2002-03 are also lying incomplete, even

156
12 3
when six and seven complete years respectively
have been passed. The Committee are unable
to comprehend the position of such a large
number of incomplete works in a programme
which contains provisions of penalties for delay
of work. The Committee would like the
Department to explain the specific reasons for
such a large number of incomplete works.
48. 3.106 The Committee find that as per the guidelines
of PMGSY, whenever a road involves a bridge
upto 25 metres, the funds are provided under
PMGSY. However, beyond 25 metres the State
has to provide funds. The Department has also
stated that NABARD has been contacted to
provide funds for State share through RIDF
without any further technical examination of
DPR. The Department has also mentioned that
road work is not tendered unless the DPR for
the bridge is approved with provision of funds.
The Committee note that although the adequate
provisions have been made in the guidelines
to ensure that the road constructed under
PMGSY do not remain unutilized due to the
missing link and the problem of access, yet
there may be cases where roads may have been
constructed without making provision for the
bridges over rivers. The Committee would like
to be informed whether the Department has
received any complaints through various levels
of monitoring mechanism as well as through
Area Officers Scheme etc. to know the ground
situation in this regard.
49. 3.113 Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana is one of
the six components of Bharat Nirman
programme. Bharat Nirman is the ambitious
programme of the Government to achieve
monitorable targets under different existing
schemes. The Committee find that under Bharat
Nirman component of PMGSY, 60 per cent

157
12 3
allocation is being provided for upgradation
and 40 per cent for new connectivity in
different States. The State-wise details of
allocation of funds for new connectivity and
upgradation indicate that the aforesaid ratio of
60:40 has not been maintained in either of the
States. No pattern of new connectivity and
upgradation emerges from the State-wise data.
In Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur, no outlay
has been allocated for upgradation. In
Meghalaya and Uttar Pradesh, the allocation
of upgradation is more than the new
connectivity and in the remaining States
expenditure is more on new connectivity. The
Committee observe that during the Bharat
Nirman Period perhaps more emphasis is being
given to upgradation as per the criteria of 60
per cent for upgradation and 40 per cent for
renewal whereas the foremost objective of the
PMGSY was to provide new connectivity to
unconnected habitations. However, 20 per cent
of the outlay could be used for upgradation as
per the guidelines of PMGSY. In view of the
aforesaid position under Bharat Nirman perhaps
the objective of connectivity has got the
backseat. That may be the reason for not
achieving the targets of connectivity in different
States, the analysis of which has been given in
the preceding para of the report.
50. 3.114 The Committee further find that there is a lot
of confusion with regard to targets fixed under
Bharat Nirman and PMGSY. The Secretary has
explained that there is no separate funding or
guidelines for Bharat Nirman whereas the
Department has given separate data for Bharat
Nirman and PMGSY works which indicates that
perhaps there are separate targets and
achievements under PMGSY and Bharat
Nirman component whereas the Department
has indicated the separate information in the

158
12 3
written replies, no such data has been indicated
in the Outcome Budget. However, the
Department has assured that during the next
year separate targets versus achievements
would be indicated for Bharat Nirman and
PMGSY in the Outcome Budget also. In view
of the aforesaid scenario, there is utter
confusion between the position of Bharat
Nirman and PMGSY. As regards the guidelines,
on the one hand it has been stated that the
guidelines for PMGSY and Bharat Nirman are
same, on the other hand the allocation for
upgradation indicates that thrust under Bharat
Nirman is more on upgradation whereas
PMGSY guidelines give more emphasis on new
connectivity. The Committee would like the
clarification from the Department on the
aforesaid observations so as to analyze the
position and comment further in this regard.
51. 3.115 The Committee further observe that under
PMGSY the maintenance after completion of
contract work of road has to be taken care of
for five years by the contractor as per the
contractual clause entered in the agreement. The
area of concern is maintenance of roads after
five years. The Department has informed that
there are State Rural Road Development
Agencies in each State, which have the overall
responsibility for construction and maintenance
of rural roads. The Department is making
efforts to transfer the responsibility of
maintenance of rural roads to this agency. The
Committee find that for adequate maintenance
of PMGSY roads after the contract, adequate
funding and capacity building of State level
agencies is required. The Committee would like
that the Department should take the decision
expeditiously to transfer the roads constructed
under PMGSY to State Rural Road
Development agencies after the contractual

159
12 3
period of five years is over so that the roads
constructed after spending crores of money are
not damaged after a certain period of time.
Besides taking decision to transfer the PMGSY
roads to State Rural Road Development
agencies, the Union Government has to take
decision to partially fund these agencies so that
PMGSY roads are maintained properly .
52. 3.135 From the data provided by the Department
regarding performance of SGSY, the Committee
find that the percentage of credit disbursed by
seven States and one Union territory viz.
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, West Bengal
and Pondicherry is dismal and well below 50
per cent during 2005-2006. Even though the
Government has furnished the reasons behind
the poor disbursement credit in these States,
the Committee feel, corrective steps taken are
inadequate to have a better result as during
2006-2007, these States have again not
performed well. As SGSY is one of the oldest
and important Schemes of the Department, the
Committee feel that the Government has to
critically analyse the performance of SGSY after
interacting with the Banks, respective State
Governments, PRIs and all other stake holders.
Besides, they feel, steps to provide both forward
and backward linkages to SHGs and individual
swarozgaries be taken to maintain the viability
of the Scheme.
53. 3.136 The Committee have repeatedly been
emphasizing on the need to address the issue
of poor performance of Bankers which has
resulted in poor credit off-take under SGSY at
the various levels. Inspite of this, there is no
considerabe improvement in the performance
of various Banks. The information furnished by
the Department indicates that as many as

160
12 3
2643 Bank Branches have been marked as poor
performing Bank Branches. Out of these 2643
poor performing Bank Branches, 1,297 are
Commercial Bank Branches and the remaining
1,346 are Regional Rural Banks and Cooperative
Bank Branches. The poor performing Branches
are more in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat,
Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee
further note that the details of poor performing
Bank Branches have been furnished to Reserve
Bank of India and Ministry of Finance for
further necessary action and special monitoring
during the current year. Inspite of the various
directions issued by the Ministry of Finance and
Reserve Bank of India through various
meetings, there is no considerable change in
the attitude of Bankers. The Committee feel that
Bankers are required to be sensitized about the
need to shoulder responsibility with regard to
making credit available at affordable rate of
interest to the Self Help Groups under SGSY.
Since the present efforts being made by way
of meetings and directions are not resulting in
considerable improvement, perhaps there is a
need to have the system of incentives and
disincentives for various Bank Branches.
Besides, more rural Bank Branches need to be
opened by Commercial Banks. It should be
ensured that each Panchayat Headquarter has
a branch of Commercial Bank within a
stipulated period of time. To have proper
monitoring by RBI and Ministry of Finance a
separate window for making available credit
under SGSY needs to be opened. The
Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to convey aforesaid observations to
the Ministry of Finance and the Heads of
various Commercial Banks for taking the
desired initiative. The follow up action in this
regard may be communicated to the Committee.

161
12 3
54. 3.142 The Committee find that most of the
Swarozgaris have to sell their products in the
market on their own because there is lack of
institutional arrangements being made for the
aforesaid schemes. The Committee feel that the
profits of Swarozgaris are considerably reduced
if they resort to self marketing. Another area
of concern is the competitiveness in the market.
The Government has to think of all these
aspects seriously and provide the protection to
the self help groups. Besides, to enable the self
help groups to face the competition in the
market stress need to be given to training
aspect so that the products produced by the
beneficiaries are competitive in the market.
More and more Gramshree Melas, like SARAS,
organized during the India International Trade
Fair in Delhi and Delhi Haat, should be
organized in other States of the country so as
to enable Swarozagirs to sell their products in
such Melas.
55. 3.143 The Committee further find that the
Department has taken certain initiatives for
creation of permanent infrastructure for
marketing of SGSY products in various cities.
For creation of aforesaid marketing structure,
the State Governments have to help by
providing the land free of cost for these
projects. However, the entire expenditure on
construction has to be borne by the Union
Government. The Committee also find that the
Department is facing technical problems for
addressing to the need of creating marketing
structures in different cities. The Department
has informed that the current marketing sub-
head under the SGSY broad head of account
does not permit any capital expenditure it being
a revenue head. The creation of such a capital
expenditure sub-head will help in creating
marketing infrastructure for SGSY products. The

162
12 3
Committee recommend to consider creation of
a head under the marketing sub-head under
SGSY major head so that the technical problem
being faced by the Department can be
addressed. The Committee also recommend that
initially all State Headquarters should have one
dedicated marketing complex for rural products
particularly of artisans which can be extended
to cover all the districts in a time bound
manner. The Committee find that at the
National level, there is no agency that can
exclusively handle the marketing aspects of the
rural products in a systematic and sustainable
basis connecting all Self Help Groups with
domestic and international markets is a task
that is not being addressed institutionally by
the Department at present. There is an urgent
need for creating a dedicated National
Marketing Agency for providing professional
marketing support to products of Self Help
Groups and act as a facilitator. The Committee
recommend to the Government to consider
setting up of the aforesaid National Marketing
Agency.
56. 3.154 The Committee are concerned to note the
under-spending by CAPART during 2006-2007.
Rs. 70 crore were allocated to CAPART during
2006-2007 against which Rs. 35 crore were
released in February 2007. However, during
2006-2007, CAPART had an opening balance of
Rs. 27.51 crore. Thus, the total available funds
with CAPART during 2006-2007 was Rs. 62.51
crore. The actual expenditure of CAPART upto
February, 2007 is Rs. 44.96 crore which means
that about Rs. 17.55 crore are still lying unspent
with CAPART. The Committee feel that
spending of such large amount of funds at the
fag end of the year is not a healthy practice.
The Committee desire that suitable corrective
measures be taken from the year 2007-2008

163
12 3
onwards, so that expenditure is evenly spread
throughout the year and heavy expenditure at
the fag end of the year is avoided.
57. 3.155 The Committee also note the recent changes
like streamlining the procedure and taking new
initiatives which focus on the holistic
development of the most backward districts in
the States. CAPART has also signed a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with
Centre for Sustainable Technologies (SCT) of
Indian Institute of Science (IISc), for technology
upgradation, adaptation, standardization of
currently available technologies developed at
Indian Institute of Science to different regions
as well as develop new designs in response to
demand on water, sanitation, housing, rural
energy, field testing and networking
developmental agencies and nodal NGOs. In
addition, CAPART is also focusing on four or
five research areas in improvement of health
of rural women with the help of NGOs.
CAPART has also set up about eight model
programmes including biogas model for
excellent, cheap and smoke free chullah. The
Committee recommend that CAPART should
step up the exposure of NGOs and other
implementing agencies to such activities so that
certain problem areas of rural development
sector like water, sanitation, housing, rural
energy, field testing etc. are addressed. The
Committee also hope that with the restructuring
of CAPART their functioning would be more
effective and help in coordinating the activities
of the NGOs and other implementing agencies.
The Committee would like to be apprised
further in this regard.
58. 3.169 The Committee note that NIRD at the Central
level, SIRD at the State level and ETCs at the
district/block level are the premier institutions

164
12 3
involved for imparting training and capacity
building of Panchayats and other functionaries
involved with the implementation of various
programmes meant for the upliftment of rural
masses. However, during 2006-2007, NIRD
could conduct only 199 programmes as against
the target of conducting 230 programmes.
Further, no research activity has been completed
in 2006-2007. The shortfall in achievement of
targets is a matter of great concern. The
Committee feel that with the added
responsibilities, the challenge of imparting
training to Panchayats and other implementing
agencies cannot be met only by NIRD, SIRD
and ETCs. While NIRD has designed training
modules for some rural development schemes
like NREGA, SGSY, Swajaldhara, IAY and
IWDP . Further, NIRD has identified 26
institutions like IRMA and Xavier Institute of
Management, Bhubaneswar for the purpose of
imparting training. The Committee desire that
to meet the huge demand of training and
research activities, some Universities and
Institutions that are doing good work in the
field of rural development may be roped in
and measures may be taken to support such
institutions. Besides, more training modules
may be designed by NIRD to cover other rural
development schemes which should be revised
suitably as and when the rural development
schemes are restructured. The Committee would
like to be apprised further in this regard.