19
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
NINETEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

NINETEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.5.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.5.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2006/Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 25
Price : Rs. 106.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory.................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Analysis of the overall allocation of the
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of
Rural Development) ................................................... 4
CHAPTER III Major issues related to wastelands development
in the country ............................................................. 14
CHAPTER IV Analysis of schemes under Wastelands
Development Division ............................................... 31
CHAPTER V Analysis of schemes under Land Reforms
Division ......................................................................... 44
APPENDICES
I. Statement showing Budget Estimates, Revised
Estimates and Actual Expenditure during
9th Plan by the Department of Land Resources .. 54
II. Statement showing proposed outlay, outlay
agreed to, Budget Estimate, Revised Estimate
and Actual Expenditure, during 10th Plan
by the Department of Land Resources ................ 56
III. Recommendation para no. 28, 16th Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ............................................ 58
IV. Statement showing State-wise and Year-wise
IWDP Projects sanctioned during 9th Plan ......... 60
V. Statement showing State-wise and Year-wise
IWDP Projects sanctioned during 10th Plan ....... 61
(i)

PAGE
VI. Statement showing details of District/Tehsil/sub-
Division in which CLR Programme has been
sanctioned and completed........................................ 63
VII. Extracts of the Minutes of the Sitting of the
Committee held on 21 March, 2006 ...................... 66
VIII. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 12 April, 2006 ....................................................... 69
IX. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
8 May , 2006.................................................................. 72
X. Statement of recommendations and observations .. 74
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Pallani Shamy
*12. Shri Prabodh Panda
@13. Vacant
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri Prabodh Panda, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural Development
vide para no. 1580, Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II dated 23 August, 2005.
@Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil, MP (LS) and member of the Committee ceased to be
member of the Lok Sabha vide Notification No. 21/5/2005/T w.e.f. 23.12.2005 (AN).

Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
$#23. Vacant
#24. Vacant
25. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
26. Shri Penumalli Madhu
#27. Vacant
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
#30. Vacant
#31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
(iv)
$Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has changed the nomination of Shrimati Vanga Geetha,
MP (RS) from Standing Committee on Industry to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 23 August, 2005 vide Committee Branch-I note dated 25.8.2005.
#Shrimati Vanga Geetha, MP (RS), Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar, MP(RS),
Shri Kalraj Mishra, MP(RS), Dr. Faguni Ram MP(RS) and Prof. R.B.S. Varma, MP (RS)
and members of the Committee on Rural Development ceased to be members of the
Rajya Sabha due to completion of the tenure of the members of Rajya Sabha w.e.f.
2.4.2006 vide Coordination Cell note dated 23.3.2006.

ABBREVIATIONS
BE — Budget Estimates
BPL — Below Poverty Line
CLR — Computerisation of Land Records
CSIR — Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
DDP — Desert Development Programme
DFID — Department for International Development
DOAC — Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
DoLR — Department of Land Resources
DoWD — Department of Wastelands Development
DPAP — Drought Prone Areas Programme
DRDA — District Rural Development Agency
EAS — Employment Assurance  Scheme
EFC — Expenditure Finance Committee
IAY — Indira Awaas Yojana
ICAR — Indian Council for Agricultural Research
IWDP — Integrated Wastelands Development Programme
LBSNAA — Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration
NABARD — National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development
NALRM — National Agency on Land Resources Management
NIC — National Informatics  Centre
NIRD — National Institute of Rural Development
NGO — Non-Governmental Organisation
NREGS — National Rural Employment Guarantee  Scheme
NRSA — National Remote Sensing Agency
NWDB — National Wastelands Development Board
PLA — Project Implementation Agency
PMGJSY — Pradhan Mantri Grameen Jal Samvardhan Yojana
PRIs — Panchayati Raj Institutions
RE — Revised Estimates
RoR — Record of Rights
SAUs — State Agriculture Universities
SGSY — Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
SHGs — Self-Help Groups
SRA&ULR — Str engthening of Revenue Administration and
Updating of Land Records
TDET — Technology Development Extension and Training
TERI — The Energy and Resources Institute
UGs _ User Groups
UT — Union Territory
WA —W atershed Association
WC — Watershed Committee
WDF — Watershed Development Fund
ZP — Zilla Parishad
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Nineteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of
Rural Development).
2. The Committee examined the Demands for Grants pertaining to
the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
for the year 2006-2007 which were laid on the Table of the House on
11 March, 2006.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) on
12 April, 2006.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 8 May, 2006.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
for placing before them the requisite material and their considered
views in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. They would also like to place on record their deep sense of
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
17 May, 2006 Chairman,
27 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(vii)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The Ministry of Rural Development consists of three Departments
(i) Department of Rural Development (ii) Department of Land Resources
and (iii) Department of Drinking Water Supply.
1.2 The Department of Land Resources implements schemes for
development of non-forest wastelands and degraded lands and other
area development programmes such as Desert Development Programme
and Drought Prone Areas Programme to increase bio-mass production
as also to create opportunities for providing rural employment. It also
implements scheme for Technology Development Extension and
Training. Besides, the Department also monitors implementation of land
reform measures and implement the scheme of Modernisation of
Revenue and Land Administration.
1.3 The following functions have been assigned to the Department
of Land Resources as per the Allocation of Business Rules:
(i) National Land Use and Wasteland Development Council;
(ii) Pr omotion of Rural Employment through Wastelands
Development;
(iii) Promotion of production of fuel-wood, fodder and timber
on non-forest lands, including private wastelands;
(iv) Research and development of appropriate low cost
technologies for increasing productivity of wastelands in
sustainable ways;
(v) Inter-departmental and inter-disciplinary coordination in
programme planning and implementation of the Wastelands
Development Programme including training;
(vi) Promotion of people’s participation and public cooperation
and co-ordination of efforts of Panchayats and other
voluntary and non-Government agencies for Wastelands
Development;
(vii) Area specific development programmes to counter endemic
problems due to adverse climatic conditions and
degeneration of the eco-system (DPAP , DDP);

2
(viii) Administration of Land Acquisition Act, 1894; and matters
relating to acquisition of land for the purpose of the Union.
(ix) Land reforms, land tenures, land records, consolidation of
holding and other related matters.
(x) Recovery of claims in a State in respect of taxes and other
public demands, including arrears of land revenue and sums
recoverable as such arrears, arising outside that State.
(xi) Land that is to say, collection of rents, transfer and alienation
of land, land improvement and agricultural loans excluding
acquisition of non-agricultural land or buildings, town
planning improvements;
(xii) Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of
revenue, survey of revenue purposes, alienation of revenues;
and
(xiii) Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land.
1.4 With a view to carry out the assigned functions, the department
of Land Resources implements the following Schemes:
1. Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP);
2. Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP);
3. Desert Development Programme (DDP);
4. Modernisation of Revenue and Land Administration;
(a) Computerisation of Land Records (CLR); and
(b) Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating
of Land Records (SRA & ULR).
5. Technology Development, Extension and Training Scheme
(TDET).
1.5 The Department of Land Resources comprises of two divisions
namely Wastelands Development Division and Land Reforms Division.
1.6 The overall Demands for Grants of the Department for the
year 2006-2007 are Rs. 1,421.70 crore both for plan and non-plan.
1.7 The Demands for Grants of the Department were presented to
Lok Sabha under Demand No. 79.
1.8 The detailed Demands for Grants of the Department were laid
in Lok Sabha on 11 March, 2006.

3
1.9 In the present Report, the Committee have restricted their
examination only to the major issues concerning the overall analysis
of the Department with regard to programmes/schemes being
implemented by the Department in the context of the Demands for
Grants (2006-2007).

4
CHAPTER II
ANALYSIS OF THE OVERALL ALLOCATION OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES (MINISTRY
OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
Status of Implementation of the recommendations made by the
Committee in their Second and Tenth Reports under direction 73A
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
As per direction 73A of the Directions of the Speaker, Lok Sabha,
the Minister concerned shall make once in six months a statement in
the House regarding the status of implementation of recommendations
contained in the Reports of Departmentally Related Standing
Committees of Lok Sabha with regard to his Ministry.
2.2 Second Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development on Demands for Grants (2004-05) was presented to
Parliament on 18 August, 2004. Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development
made a statement in the House in pursuance of direction 73A on
6 May, 2005. On examination of the statement it was found that the
status of action taken on each of the 41 recommendations was not
indicated in the statement. The general remarks on the action taken
by the Government on few recommendations was made. As such the
statement was found to be deficient of the set procedure. Further the
Committee presented Tenth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Department of Land Resources to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005.
The statement with regard to this Report has fallen due on 19 October,
2005.
2.3 The Department of Land Resources was requested to take
necessary action for tabling the revised statement with regard to Second
Report and making a statement by Hon’ble Minister in respect of
Tenth Report vide Lok Sabha Secretariat OM dated 20 January, 2006
and subsequent reminders dated 24 February, 2006 and 14 March, 2006.
Besides the format in which the statement has to be made was also
sent to the Department for their use. In spite of this revised statement
in respect of Second Report and the statement in respect of Tenth
Report is yet to be made by the Hon’ble Minister.

5
2.4 When asked about the reasons for delay in making the
statements on the status of implementation of recommendations of the
Committee made in Second and Tenth Reports, it has been submitted
that after receipt of O.M. dated 20 January , 2006 from Lok Sabha
Secretariat, Department is preparing revised statement. The revised
statement regarding status of implementation of recommendations
contained in the Second Report and statement regarding status of
implementation of recommendations contained in the Tenth Report shall
be tabled in the ensuing sitting of the Parliament.
2.5 The Committee note that the primary objective of inserting
direction 73A in the Directions by the Speaker was to make the
Government more accountable for implementation of the various
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee are concerned
to note that even after elapse of around six months when the
statement on Tenth Report has fallen due and about three months
when the Ministry was requested for making the revised statement
in respect of Second Report, the statements are yet to be made by
the Hon’ble Minister. The Committee find that the Department is
taking the desired action to make the statements in the Second part
of the Seventh Session. The Committee recommend to the
Department to ensure that the statements are made at the earliest
during the Second part of the Seventh Session. The Committee
further strongly recommend to the Department to ensure that the
statements on each of the reports are made within the specified
period i.e., six months after the presentation of the Report to
Parliament as per direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker, in
future.
Ninth Plan (1997-2002) and Tenth Plan (2002-2007)
(Allocations, Releases and Unspent Balances)
2.6 The information regarding 9th Plan (1997-2002) outlay and
expenditure, 10th Plan (2002-2007) outlay as proposed by the
Department and as agreed to by Planning Commission, BE, RE and
expenditure as on 31.3.2006 and BE 2006-2007 overall as well as scheme-
wise has been indicated in Appendices-I & II.
2.7 The following is the analysis of comparative proposed/agreed
to outlay and shortfall between the two and underspending during

6
9th Plan (1997-2002) and during first four years of the 10th Plan
(2002-2007):
(Rs. in crore)
9th Plan 10th Plan
(i) Proposed outlay 6545.46 5965.00
(ii) Agreed Outlay 2767.30 6526.00
(iii) Difference between proposed 3778.16 +561.00
and agreed outlay
(iv) Expenditure 2479.11 4289.97
(upto 31.3.2006)
(v) Likely allocation during Rs. 4289.97
10th Plan (exp. upto 31.3.06)+
Rs. 1421.70 (BE 2006-07)
=5711.67
2.8 The following conclusions can be drawn by analyzing the
aforesaid data:
(i) The proposed outlay during 10th Plan is Rs. 580.46 crore
lesser than proposed outlay during 9th Plan;
(ii) The agreed outlay during 10th Plan is more than double of
9th Plan agreed outlay;
(iii) During 9th Plan, the agreed allocation is Rs. 3,778.16 crore
lesser than the proposed outlay. However, during 10th Plan,
Rs. 561 crore more have been allocated than the proposed
outlay.
2.9 With regard to getting almost 40 per cent of the proposed
allocation during 9th Plan, the representative of Department of Land
Resources during the course of oral evidence submitted as under:
“In the Ninth Plan, there has been a slow utilisation especially
in the first two years. That is one of the reasons why new
guidelines were formulated. It took quite sometime for the field
agencies to adapt to these new guidelines. That is one of the
reasons for this. This took off in the subsequent years.”

7
2.10 When asked the reasons for lesser projections during
10th Plan as compared to 9th Plan, the representative further stated as
under:
“It is finalized in the Planning Commission after some interaction
thereafter, it is learnt from the Planning Commission which areas
are to be prioritized Rs. 1,000 crore were provided for ‘New
Initiatives’ during the Tenth Plan period. I have some information
with me regarding Tenth Plan and that is around to Rs. 5,500
crore. We have planned a new programme on Bio-fuel. It is still
in formative stage and is not fully operational.”
2.11 At this the Committee further wanted to know whether the
Department of Land Resources are not sending proposals to the
Planning Commission and in other words the Planning Commission is
doing the work of the Department of Land Resources or somewhere
the mistake has been on the part of the Department in not sending
proper proposals to Planning Commission, the Secretary, Land
Resources admitting candidly informed as under:
“Mistakes can be committed.……”
2.12 As reported in the Mid-Term Appraisal of 10th Plan,
availability of land per person has decreased from 0.44 hectares in
1991 to 0.20 hectares in 2001 due to increase in population. The other
issues which need to be examined are poor participation of women,
satisfactory level of people’s participation, lack of coordination between
different Ministries/Organisations involved in watershed schemes lack
of direct flow of benefits to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and
other landless poor masses.
The Report of the Technical Committee on watershed programmes
in India
2.13 The Technical Committee on Watershed Programmes in India’
was constituted by the Department of Land Resources on 14 February,
2005. The Committee was required to submit its report by 31 October,
2005 but with a spill over beyond that date and two months extension
granted, the report was finally approved on 16 January , 2006. In
Chapter I of the report, it has been stated that it is the rainfed parts
of Indian agriculture that have the weakest, and the one that contain
the greatest unutilized potential for growth. Further it has been stated
that the production of dryland agriculture needs to be developed if
food security demands of the year 2020 are to have a realistic chance
of being met.

8
2.14 Another issue that came up for examination was huge unspent
balances available with Department of Land Resources. The Committee
during the course of evidence pointed out that although good utilisation
position has been shown by the Department in the Budget Document,
yet there has been an unspent balance to the tune of Rs. 1,405.20 crore
in different schemes.
Priorities fixed for 11th Five Year Plan
2.15 The Department has informed that the Planning Commission
constitutes working groups to prepare approach paper and action plan
in respect of each Department. The approach paper and action plan
for the total plan period are discussed and finalized in the Steering
Committee. Planning Commission has constituted two working groups
on ‘Land Relations’ and ‘Rainfed Areas’ for 11th Five Year Plan which
include activities related to DoLR.
2.16 The Secretary during the course of briefing before the
Committee on the Demands for Grants 2006-07 has informed that some
private corporates have evidenced interest in the field of development
of wastelands. She also informed that the participation of private sector
in the field of wastelands development was at a discussion state and
it will have a new strategy for Eleventh Plan. Further she informed
that in some of the Western States there is an interest shown by the
corporate bodies in wastelands development. The strategy with regard
to the private sector participation is not finalised. It need not be a
corporate body, it can be other kinds of private-public participation.
2.17 The Committee find from the data indicated for 9th and
10th Plan that there is huge mismatch between the proposed
allocation and agreed to allocation. Whereas during 9th Plan, the
allocation as agreed to is around 40 per cent of the proposed outlay,
the agreed to allocation during 10th Plan is Rs. 561 crore more than
the proposed outlay. The department has submitted new guidelines
as a reason for slow utilisation and getting lesser allocation during
9th Plan. The reasons put forth by the Department for getting around
40 per cent of the proposed allocation during 9th Plan are not
convincing. The plea accorded by the Department for getting more
than the proposed allocation during Tenth Plan is that Rs. 1,000
crore was provided for ‘New Initiatives’ and thus the outlay agreed
for Tenth Plan would come up to Rs. 5,526 crore which is Rs. 439
crore lesser than the proposed outlay. Even if it is accepted, the
projected outlay during 10th Plan was Rs. 580.46 crore lesser than
proposed outlay during 9th Plan.

9
The Committee are surprised to find that the proposed allocation
during 9th Plan was higher when the guidelines were new but during
10th Plan, the projections were reduced, even when the field agencies
had adapted themselves to the new guidelines. The Committee
conclude that the projections are not properly presented to the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for different plans. Even
the Secretary during the course of the oral evidence has admitted
that somewhere the mistake is there. The Committee strongly
recommend that the Department should take utmost care while
making projections for 11th Plan. The perspective plans for
wastelands development should be prepared by the various State
Governments after due consultations with the Implementing
Agencies. Not only that district level plans should be prepared after
taking into consideration the total work to be undertaken keeping
in view the area of wastelands in that area, the capacity of the
implementing agencies etc., while holding key consultation at the
grass-root level and at the Panchayat level. With regard to other
schemes for land records also the projections should be made keeping
in view the work completed and the pending work. The projections
should be realistic to the extent possible. Besides, the outlay, strategy
and priorities during 11th Plan should be chalked out well before
the start of the 11th Plan i.e. the year 2007-2008, so as to ensure
meaningful utilisation of outlay. The early finalisation of outlay for
the 11th Plan would further enable the State Governments/
implementing agencies to make timely allocations under different
schemes/programmes.
2.18 The Committee further find from the data of allocation of
outlay that whatever may be the case of placing projections for
different schemes of the Department, it is certain that adequate
priority has been accorded by the Government while finalising the
outlay for 10th Plan. It is very rare when any Ministry/Department
has been allocated resources more than the projections. The
Committee also observe that the focused and balanced development
of wastelands is imperative keeping in view the decline in the
availability of land per person over the years. Further, the facts
revealed by the Parthasarthy Committee establish that there is
concentration of poverty in the dry lands of the country. From the
position as indicated above, the Committee find that more attention
needs to be given for the development of wastelands in the country.
The wastelands when developed can be a major source for fulfilling
the need for food and water security. Not only that it can be a
major source for providing employment to the poorest of poor in
the country. The detailed scheme-wise position of outlay, expenditure

10
and physical achievement has been analysed in the succeeding
chapter of the report. Here the Committee would like to recommend
for adequate outlay for different schemes of wastelands in the
country. Besides recommending for higher outlay, there is an urgent
need for successful implementation of the schemes/programmes
which has been reviewed by the Committee in detail in the
succeeding chapter of the report.
2.19 The Committee observe that Parthasarthy Committee has
analysed the watershed programmes in detail and given detailed
valuable recommendations. The recommendations of the said
Committee should be carefully examined while holding wide-ranging
consultations with all concerned and the Department should take
the desired action to implement the accepted recommendations of
the Committee. The Standing Committee should also be kept
apprised of the status of the implementation of the major
recommendations of the Parthasarthy Committee.
2.20 The Committee further find from the information provided
by the Department that Rs. 1,000 crore was earmarked for new
initiatives during 10th Plan. Even when the 10th Plan is coming to
an end, no new initiative could be finalised. The new programme
‘Bio-fuel’ proposed by the Department is still at a nascent stage.
The Committee in their earlier reports on Demands for Grants had
repeatedly been expressing concern over the way new schemes are
proposed. The Committee express strong concern over the way the
scarce resources are being blocked for the new schemes, which are
not implemented. The blocking of resources in this way clearly means
depriving the other schemes/programmes of their due share. The
Committee hold the strong view that the new schemes should be
properly planned and the allocation should be earmarked only when
the spadework has been done and all the paraphernalia to implement
the scheme is ready.
2.21 The Committee note that the Planning Commission has
constituted two working groups on Land Relations and Rainfed Areas
for Eleventh Five Year Plan to finalise the strategy for the
development of wastelands. The expected role of private sector in
the task of development of wastelands is also being discussed while
chalking out the strategy for Eleventh Plan. The Committee note
that the major apprehension in involving private sector is that the
interests of the local people may not be harmed. They feel that the
Government should carefully consider the issue of involvement of
private sector in consultation with the State Governments and local
bodies. The Committee further recommend that strategy for the
Eleventh Plan should be finalised expeditiously.

11
2.22 The comparative position of outlay proposed, earmarked and
expenditure met during the years 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07.
(Rs. in crore)
(both for the plan and non-plan)
2004-05
Proposed outlay 1361.00
Agreed to/BE 1264.48
RE 1053.43
Actual expenditure 1013.61
2005-06
Proposed outlay 1488.00
Agreed to/BE 1399.44
Actual expenditure 1399.21
2006-07
Proposed outlay 2110.00
Agreed to/BE 1421.70
2.23 The following status with regard to the unspent balances as
on 31 December, 2005 under different schemes of the Department has
been indicated in the Budget document.
Sl.No. Name of the Unspent Balance
Scheme (Rs. in crore)
1. DPAP 447.52
2. IWDP 405.28
3. DDP 314.22
4. CLR 132.40
5. SRA&ULR 105.78
Total 1405.20
2.24 Justifying the position of unspent balances, the Department
has informed as under:
“The next instalment of the project is due after utilisation of
50 per cent of the previous instalment. Data under unspent
balances furnishes information about the fund available under

12
watershed projects at DRDA level as on the date of reporting.
The total project cost is Rs. 4,708 crore under IWDP for 1,382
projects under implementation for treatment of an area of 84.56
lakh hectares. Similarly, the total project cost is Rs. 6,469.20 crore
and Rs. 3,817.68 crore under DPAP and DDP respectively for
24,363 and 13,476 projects under implementation for treatment of
an area of 121.82 lakh ha. and 67.38 lakh ha. Under DPAP and
DDP respectively. As such unspent balance usually does not
exceed 10 per cent of the project cost at any point of time. This
much balance is necessitated to maintain availability of funds at
the implementation level to avoid eventuality of non-payment of
wages as these are labour intensive projects.”
2.25 During the course of evidence on the issue of the mechanism
available to persuade the slow performing States to complete different
schemes in time, the Secretary , Land Resources stated as under:
“xxx they (State Governments) will come back asking for further
money and we will release further money on the basis of mid-
term evaluation etc. We have given seven instalments over a five
year period. This mechanism is adopted for knowing the amount
of money unspent. The wasteland projects being implemented
by DRDAs/ZPs are to be completed in a period of five years.
Only after a minimum of 50 per cent expenditure of the previous
instalment released, again they may claim for the next instalment.
But there is a continuing dialogue. Whatever expenditure is lying
unspent it is reviewed at District level Watershed Committee and
State level Watershed Committee.”
2.26 The Committee note from the trends of allocation of outlay
during the years 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 that the agreed
allocation is lesser than the proposed allocation. During the year
2006-07, the agreed allocation is Rs. 689 crore lesser than the proposed
outlay. The Committee find it interesting that whereas the overall
allocation for 10th Plan is more than the projections, the allocations
under Annual Plans are lesser than the projection. It is difficult to
understand the way the budgeting exercise is being undertaken where
there seems to be no planning. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the basis of making projections under each of the Annual
Plan.
2.27 Whereas the releases form the Centre have been stated to
be almost cent per cent of the allocated outlay, the unspent balances
to the tune of Rs. 1,405 crore with the implementing agencies is

13
really a matter of concern to the Committee. They are not convinced
with the plea given by the Department whereby the Department
has tried to justify the unspent amount by stating that the unspent
balance do not exceed 10 per cent of the project cost at any point of
time. The Department holds the view that the balance is necessitated
to maintain availability of funds at the implementation level to avoid
eventualities of non-payment of wages as wastelands development
projects are labour intensive projects. However, the Committee wish
to point out that Rs. 1,405 crore is almost equal to the overall
allocation of the Department during the year 2006-07. The Committee
feel that the unspent balances should be seen with reference to the
allocation made during a particular year and not with reference to
the total project cost under different schemes. The projects may
continue even after five to seven years. Roll-on money to the tune
of 10 to 20 per cent of the allocation under a scheme during a year
can be justified on the grounds stated by the Department. The
justification of unspent balance corresponding to the total project
cost can not be understood. The Committee find that instead of
taking stringent measures for keeping the unspent balances to the
minimum, the Department has tried to justify it which the Committee
really disapprove. The Department should take all the corrective
measures and inform the Committee accordingly.

14
CHAPTER III
MAJOR ISSUES RELATED TO WASTELANDS
DEVELOPMENT IN THE COUNTRY
Brief regarding the schemes of the Department related to wastelands
development.
(a) Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP)
Integrated Wastelands Development Programme is an on-going
scheme under which major projects are undertaken on micro watershed
basis. The projects are being funded on sharing basis in the ratio of
11:1 between the Centre and the States w.e.f. 1 April, 2000. Prior to
this the projects were being funded on 100 per cent basis by the
Central Government. The projects under this Programme are generally
sanctioned in non-DPAP/non-DDP Blocks.
(b) Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP)
3.2 Drought Prone Areas Programme is an area development
programme designed to tackle the problem of drought with a long
term perspective based on strategy of optimum utilisation of land,
water and human resources. This is a Centrally sponsored scheme,
which used to be funded on a matching basis by the Centre and
States. However, with effect from 1 April, 1999 the funds are released
for projects under the programme on 75 : 25 sharing basis between
the Centre and State Governments. At present, the Programme is in
operation in 972 blocks in 183 districts of 16 States.
(c) Desert Development Programme (DDP)
3.3 Desert Development Programme aims at controlling
desertification and to conserve, develop and harness land, water and
other natural resources for restoration of ecological balance in the long
run and also to raise the level of production, income and employment
through irrigation, afforestation, dryland farming etc. Funds are released
for projects under the programme on 75 : 25 sharing basis between
the Centre and the States. The Programme is in operation in 235 blocks
in 40 districts of 7 States.

15
(d) Technology Development, Extension and Training Scheme (TDET)
3.4 Under Technology Development, Extension and Training Scheme
100 per cent financial assistance is given for projects which are on
Government and community land. The cost of the projects on private
land is shared in the ratio of 60:40 between the Centre and the
Farmers/Corporate Body.
Work done on wastelands development under the different schemes
of the Department of Land Resources during 9th Plan and so far
during 10th Plan period
3.5 The targets and achievements under different schemes for the
development of wastelands in the country viz., IWDP , DPAP and DDP
during 9th and 10th Plan alongwith the investment made are as under:—
                Wastelands Development
Target Actual
Five Year Plan                    (in million hectares)
9th Plan 5.00 8.02
(1997-2002)
10th Plan 18.00 12.47*
(2002-2007)
*Includes 8.02 million hectares already achieved during first three years of the current
plan plus 3.85 million hectares likely to be achieved during 2005-2006.
3.6 When asked for a little mismatch between the physical and
financial allocation during 9th and 10th Plan, the Department has
informed as under:—
“18 million hectares target is to be achieved with an investment
of Rs. 4,700 crore. A target of treating 4.13 million hectares has
been fixed for 2006-2007, totaling to 16.61 million hectares. The
short fall is on account of the EAS liability of Rs. 1,500 crore
against which Rs. 151.87 crore were spent form the Budget of
Tenth Plan, thereby reducing the achievement to 16.61 million
hectares.”
3.7 Targets and achievement during the year 2005-06 and 2006-07
are as under:
(In lakh hectares)
Year Targets Achievement
2005-2006 38 47.62
2006-2007 41.30 The targets are most likely
to be exceeded.

16
Need for convergence of all watershed development programmes
under one umbrella
3.8 The Committee in their respective reports have been consistently
recommending to bring the programmes/schemes under one umbrella.
The issue could not be resolved even though it has been in principle
agreed by the Government. In the Mid-Term Appraisal document of
the Planning Commission the formula for bringing the watershed
activities under one umbrella has been suggested. According to this
formula, the Himalayan and other hilly areas may be entrusted to the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation; the arid, semi-arid and
sub-humid regions may be the responsibility of Department of Land
Resources and Conservation and Protection of national bio-diversity
resources and implementation of Hill Area Development Programme
and Western Ghat Development Programme may be transferred to the
Ministry of Environment and Forests.
3.9 When asked for the comments on the aforesaid formula the
Department has informed that DoLR is concerned with development
of non-forest wastelands, drought prone areas and desert areas. These
areas, particularly the wastelands and other problem areas, do not
follow a specific agro-climatic pattern but occur in almost all districts
of the country including Himalayan and other hilly areas and high
rainfall regions. Therefore, dividing the responsibilities of Department
of Land Resources, Department of Agriculture and Co-operation and
Ministry of Environment & Forest on the basis of distinct areas
proposed in the mid-term appraisal of the Planning Commission would
not be feasible. Recently, during Agriculture Coordination Committee
meeting chaired by the Prime Minister, Agriculture Ministry has moved
a concept paper for formation of a Rainfed Areas Authority under the
aegis of Ministry of Agriculture. A decision has been taken for Ministry
of Agriculture to move a Cabinet note with the incorporated views of
other ministries. We have written to Cabinet Secretary for formation
of a National Authority in Department of Land Resources instead of
Ministry of Agriculture in view of the designated responsibility assigned
to the Department and as suggested by the Technical Committee.
3.10 The Department of Land Resources was represented in the
meeting of the Planning Commission on 15 February, 2004 to discuss
the modalities of setting up of the National Rainfed Areas Authority .
In the meeting, it was agreed that the Authority would be best located
under the umbrella of the PMO.

17
3.11 Agriculture Coordination Committee, chaired by the
Prime Minister, which is handling the subject of Rainfed Areas
Authority has also Minister of Rural Development as member. Secretary
(RD) also attends the Committee meetings. This enables coordination
of activities related to rainfed areas and watershed projects at the
highest level.
3.12 The Parthasarthy Committee in its report has dealt with the
issue of multiplicity of programmes for rehabilitation of degraded lands
through wastelands development run by different Ministries in detail
and further emphasised the need for unification of programmes and
bringing the same under a single nodal authority. It has further been
mentioned that the need for unification has also been expressed by
many State Governments. The said Committee has endorsed the view
of the Government for setting up a National Authority for sustainable
development of rainfed areas and stressed that the authority needs to
be set up as a quasi-independent authority to manage the entire
primarily Central Government funded watershed programme.
3.13 The Committee in their earlier reports have repeatedly been
expressing their concern over the multiplicity of programmes/schemes
to tackle the problem of wastelands in the country and have been
emphasising on the need for convergence of the programme. While
examining the Demands for Grants, it has repeatedly been brought
to the notice of Government but the issue although agreed to in
principle lacks unanimity among the various Ministries involved in
handling the issue of wastelands development. The Technical
Committee in Chapter three of the report has expressed similar
concerns. It has been stated that serious differences persist among
different Ministries regarding the ownership of the unified
programme.
The Committee also note that in the Mid-Term Appraisal
document of the Planning commission, the formula for bringing the
watershed activities under one umbrella has been suggested which
seems to be not agreeable to the concerned Ministries due to their
reluctance to leave the area of activities related to watershed
management being undertaken by them. The Committee also note
that the proposal has been mooted by the Ministry of Agriculture
for a nodal centralised agency i.e. Rainfed Area Authority. Again
the issue of conflict is the ownership of the aforesaid authority.
Further the Committee also find that finally it has been agreed that
the said authority would be best located under the umbrella of the
PMO. The Committee feel that sufficient time has been lost over
the issue of taking decision on the issue of convergence. It is high
time to resolve the issue of convergence at the earliest.

18
3.14 The Committee further note the claim of the Department
that the extent of wastelands has come down from 63.85 million
hectares to 55.27 million hectares between the period 2000 and 2005.
The Committee find that even with the efforts of the Department of
Land Resources the target for development of wastelands during
five years of 10th Plan are 18 million hectares. Out of this target,
12.47 hectares of wastelands have already been developed. The other
Ministries/Departments of the Union Government as well as State
Governments involved with the task of development of wastelands
may also be contributing substantially towards the development of
major areas of wastelands in the country. In this scenario, the
Committee find that there is some mismatch between the achievement
proclaimed by the Department and the actual area developed.
Although the Department seems very optimistic by finding that the
wastelands area has declined as found by the updated Atlas, the
achievements reflected by the updated Atlas i.e. development of only
8.58 million hectares of land during five years period is too meagre
even when compared with the targets of five years i.e. 18 millions
hectares only of the Department of Land Resources. If the targets
fixed and proclaimed by different Ministries of Union as well as
State Governments are added together, the whole wastelands area
would have been developed by now. In view of this scenario, the
Committee feel that the achievements reflected under schemes may
not be true at the ground level. The Committee would like a
clarification of the Department in this regard so as to enable them
to understand the position in proper perspective.
Foreclosure of projects under IWDP , DDP , DPAP and TDET
3.15 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants
(2005-06) (10th report and action taken report 16th report) had
noted that many projects taken up under different schemes were
being foreclosed. The data furnished in this regard last  year was as
under:
Scheme         No. of projects foreclosed
IWDP 74 (67 projects were foreclosed
prior to 1995 and 7 projects
since 1995)
DPAP 1764
DDP 300
TDET 22

19
3.16 While examining Demands for Grants (2006-07), the
Department in the replies at page 28 has stated that out of 800 projects
sanctioned under IWDP upto 2005-06 during 10th Plan, none of the
projects have been foreclosed. At another place (at page 21), it has
been stated that out of 398 projects sanctioned during 9th Plan, seven
projects have been foreclosed.
3.17 The number of projects sanctioned under different schemes of
wastelands development since 9th Plan and the projects completed so
far is as under:
(in numbers)
IWDP
9th Plan
Total number of projects sanctioned 398
Number of projects completed 75
10th Plan
Total number of projects sanctioned 800
Number of projects completed/foreclosed no pr oject has
so far been
completed
DPAP
9th Plan
total number of projects sanctioned from 24363
1995-96 to 31 March, 2006 i.e. during
9th and 10th Plan
Number of ongoing projects 16882
Number of projects for which funding has been stopped
Since 1 April, 2003 1605
Since 1 October, 2003 32
Since 1 April, 2005 127
DDP
Number of projects sanctioned from 1995-96 to 13476
2005-06
Number of projects completed 2583
Number of ongoing projects 10593
Number of projects for which funding has been stopped
Since 1  April, 2003 65
Since 1 March, 2004 85
Since 1  April, 2005 150

20
TDET
Total projects taken 161
Number of projects completed 55
Number of projects foreclosed 22
Number of projects ongoing 84
3.18 As regards the system of foreclosure of projects, the
Department has informed that the Revised  Guidelines of 2001 have
aprovision for keeping the projects on probation for a period of one
year after sanctioning. The Guidelines state:—
“Under the Wasteland Development Programme a watershed
project is taken up for a period of five years, which includes an
initial phase of 9-12 months for establishing the necessary
institutional mechanism for execution of the project. While this
process by and large, has been working satisfactorily, there seems
to be instances where the PIA is not in a position to ground the
required village level institutions due to conflicting interest groups
in the project area. It is, therefore, desirable to put a project on
probation for a period of one year. During one year, if it is
considered that the project cannot be implemented successfully
for certain unavoidable circumstances and reasons, the ZP/DRDA
shall recommend for its foreclustre to the State Government which
will consider such request on merits and send its
recommendations to Department of Land Resources. Before
considering any such request, the State Government shall ensure
that the amount already spent in the project area has been duly
accounted for. The projects will be formally closed only after
approval by the Department of Land Resources. In such cases,
the unspent amount should be refunded to the Department of
Land Resources. This review may take into account the
sustainability of the project, equity and other related issues.
However, such requests shall not cover the cases of financial
embezzlement, defalcation and other deliberate irregularities, for
which responsibility is to be fixed”.
Committed liability under EAS
3.19 During the year 1999-2000 watershed projects being undertaken
under Employment Assurance Scheme were transferred to the
Department of Land Resources. The committed liability in case of
watershed projects at that time was Rs. 1500 crore. As per the

21
information furnished by the Department, EAS watershed releases from
1999-2000 to 2003-04 is as indicated below:—
EAS Watershed releases from 1999-2000 to 2003-04
Total Area Funds Central Funds released (Rs. in lakhs)
(in ha) required share
for (Rs. in 1999 2000- 2001- 2002- 2003- Total
completion lakhs) 2000 01 02 03 04* funds
(Rs. in released
lakhs)
6356468 148526.53 111920.33 30154.75 25711.5 19015.4 14552.28 634.91 90068.88
*approved during 2002-03.
3.20 When asked whether the committed liability in case of EAS
projects has been completed the Department has informed that the
funds required have been met to the extent claims were made by the
States for eligible projects within the stipulated period i.e. 2001-02 and
the extended period i.e. 2002-03. Further when asked about the data
with regard to the projects foreclosed, the Department has stated that
the request for foreclosure of projects has not been received form States.
It has further been mentioned that the details of physical and financial
achievements since the merger of watershed component of EAS in
IWDP is as given in the table above.
Monitoring with regard to physical performance of various schemes
related to wastelands development
3.21 The Committee while examining Demands for Grants
(2005-06) (refer para 2.16 of 10th Report) had expressed concern over
the lack of mechanism to analyse the performance of projects being
undertaken under different schemes due to long gestation period. The
Committee had even suggested a mechanism to evaluate the
performance of different projects. It was suggested that some sort of
grading indicating poor, satisfactory or very good may be indicated
against the number of projects being undertaken in various States.
Another mechanism suggested by the Committee was to indicate the
projects at various stages like first stage, second stage and third stage
etc. The said recommendation of the Committee was reiterated in paras
10 and 28 in 16th Report (14th Lok Sabha).
3.22 Similar views have been expressed by Hon’ble Prime Minister
in his address to the nation on 15 August, 2005 as indicated in the
report of Parthasarathy Committee. Hon’ble Prime Minister had
emphasized that there has been a lack of focus on outcomes and merely

22
utilising outlays has been the norms under different schemes. Further,
the Technical Committee has also expressed the similar views and
emphasised to divide the total gestation period in three phases.
3.23 As regards the status of project i.e. the stage at which these
projects are being closed, the Committee in action taken report on
Demands for Grants (2005-06) (16th Report) had observed from the
data made available that some of the projects were being foreclosed at
the last stage when major portion of allocated outlay had already
been sanctioned. Para 28 of the said Report has been given at
Appendix III .
3.24 Even when pointed out by the Standing Committee and the
issue emphasised by Hon’ble Prime Minister and also highlighted in
Parthasarathy Committee report, the different Budget documents
presented by the Department indicate the same scenario. At page 22
of the Performance Budget, while presenting the physical performance
of DDP , it has been stated that the projects are deemed to have been
completed as the entire Central share for these projects has been
released. Further the replies furnished by the Department on the list
of points for evidence expressed the similar point of view with regard
to evaluating the physical performance of the projects. At page 25 of
the replies, it has been mentioned that the details of physical and
financial achievements seem merger of watershed component of EAS
in IWDP . Further at page 35 it has been stated that with the release
of seven instalments under DDP projects are deemed to be completed.
When the aforesaid issue was highlighted during the course of
evidence, the Secretary informed the Committee as under:
“The Parthasarathy Committee has also made certain comments.
They have certain suggestions regarding better monitoring. They
are saying that monitors must be seen not as inspectors but as
facilitators. They must ensure that the impact assessment and
research is an integral part of watershed programme and at the
end of the project, a physical and financial completion report
will have to be submitted to the District Watershed Development
Authority, and post-project evaluation and impact assessment
study will be commissioned by the DWDA. These are some of
the suggestions they have made. This suggestion and other
suggestions which are there right now will be definitely used for
further modifying out programme, but the programme itself is
under modification at the moment.”

23
3.25 The Committee is their 10th and 16th Reports had expressed
serious concerns over the issue of foreclosure of projects under the
schemes related to wastelands development i.e. Integrated Wastelands
Development Programme (IWDP), Drought Prone Areas Programme
(DPAP), Desert Development Programme (DDP) and Technology
Development, Extension and Training (TDET). While examining the
action taken replies, the Committee had observed that some of the
projects were foreclosed at the last stage when substantial allocation
had been released for the project thereby wasting national resources.
Detailed analysis of the issue indicate that the system of foreclosure
has been given in detail in the watershed guidelines. It has been
stated that at the initial phase of a project i.e. the first nine to
twelve months, if it is considered that the project cannot be
implemented successfully for certain unavoidable circumstances and
reasons the ZP/DRDA shall recommend for its foreclosure to the
State Governments which will consider such requests on merits and
send its recommendations to the Department of Land Resources. As
reported in 16th Report of the Committee, most of the projects are
being foreclosed even at the last stage. The Committee observe that
the guidelines do not seem to have been followed while foreclosing
projects under different schemes.
The Committee further find from the data furnished by the
Department that for a large number of projects under DPAP and
DDP funding has been stopped. The committee would like to be
informed about the difference between the funding stopped and
foreclosure of the projects since two different data have been
indicated in the Budget documents. The Committee would also like
the Department to furnish information with regard to the date of
sanction, funds earmarked and date of foreclosure/when funds were
stopped in each of the foreclosed project scheme-wise so as to enable
the Committee to analyse the position in detail. The Committee
would also like to recommend that such information about the
foreclosure/funding stopped should regularly be maintained and
indicated in the Budget documents.
3.26 As regards the projects transferred from erstwhile
Employment Assurance Scheme of the Department of Rural
Development to the Department of Land Resources during the year
1999-2000, the Committee note that the initial committed liability in
case of these projects was Rs. 1500 crore. As regards the total funds
released to these projects, Rs. 900.68 crore have been released so far
for these projects. The Committee further find that the Department
has no information with regard to the status of projects and the

24
physical achievements for these projects. Not only that, simply
releasing the outlay with regard to claims made by States is
considered as completion of the project. It has further been stated
that the details of physical and financial achievements for these
projects seem the merger of watershed component of EAS in IWDP .
The Committee deplore the way the monitoring of the project is
being undertaken by the Department. To analyse the position with
regard to EAS projects transferred from the Department of Rural
Development to the Department of Land Resources, the Committee
would like to be apprised about the number of projects transferred,
outlay earmarked, the area developed in each of the project district-
wise so as to enable the  Committee to have a proper analysis.
3.27 The Committee have repeatedly been expressing the concern
over lack of mechanism to analyse the performance of projects being
undertaken under different schemes in their respective reports. The
Committee in their 10th Report had even suggested a mechanism to
evaluate the performance of different projects. While noting that
there is a long gestation period the Committee had suggested to
evaluate the project sat various stages like first stage, second stage
and third stage etc. and benchmarking the projects by indicating
poor, satisfactory or very good. The Committee further find that
Hon’ble Prime Minister has expressed similar concerns over the lack
of focus on outcomes. He in his address to the nation on 15 August,
2005 has expressed the view that merely utilising outlays has been
the norms under different schemes. Not only that the Technical
Committee has also expressed similar views and suggested a similar
mechanism as suggested by this Standing Committee to evaluate the
performance of projects. Even when the Standing Committee, Hon’ble
Prime Minister and the Technical Committee of the Department of
Rural Development have been expressing their concerns over the
sorry state of affairs of monitoring of projects, it seems from the
various Budget documents that least attention is paid towards the
serious concerns expressed from various quarters. From the replies
at various places it appears the number of instalments released has
been deemed to be the mechanism to know that the project has
been completed.
The Committee deplore the way the monitoring of the projects
is being undertaken by the Department under the various schemes
of wastelands development. The Committee would like the
Department to pay serious attention to the observations of the
Committee as reported above and furnish a detailed note for the
information of the Committee indicating thereby the steps proposed
to be initiated by the Department to address the concerns as
expressed by this Committee and from various other quarters.

25
Total area of Wastelands and Outlay required for Treatment of
Wastelands
3.28 As per the initial Atlas brought by the  Department of Land
Resources in the year 2000, 63.85 million hectares is the estimated
wastelands area in the country. Further, as per the latest estimates
indicated in revised Atlas launched in the year 2005, the total
wastelands in the country stated to be 55.27 million hectares.
3.29 The Technical Committee in its Report has stated that 45.58
million hectares have been treated so far, since 8th Plan by the
initiatives of the Union Government with the total investment of Rs.
17,037.42 crore made under different schemes of the Ministries of
Agriculture, Forests & Environment and Department of Land Resources.
3.30 Further, it has been stated in the said Technical Committee
report that excluding the nearly 46 million hectares taken as already
treated, the areas remaining to be treated are 125 million hectares. The
total requirement of funds would be for Rs. 1,50,000 crore. As per the
existing norms, the per hectare cost of development of wastelands as
provided under different schemes is Rs. 6,000. The Technical Committee
in its report has suggested to increase per hectare existing cost from
Rs. 6,000 to Rs. 1,2000 per hectare and the estimates of expenditure
required has been calculated with the proposed per hectare cost of
treatment.
3.31 The sources for generating of the huge outlay as reported in
the report of the Technical Committee are as under:
(i) doubling of current programme outlays that would yield
about Rs. 5,000 crore.
(ii) an allocation of around Rs. 5,000 crore from the National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) specially
earmarked for watershed programmes. This makes perfect
sense since the NREGS is already primarily focused on
watershed-related activities.
Perspective Plan by the State  Governments on the issue of
Development of Wastelands in the Country
3.32 The Committee in their Tenth Report (Para 2.42) have
recommended that in view of large areas of wastelands in the country ,
there is an urgent need to allocate more funds to complete the
development of wastelands in a stipulated time frame and

26
recommended that the Department of Land Resources should ask the
State Governments to prepare a  Five Year Perspective Plan for each
district clearly indicating the wastelands covered so far under various
Programmes of the Government and during next Five Year Plan. The
Committee had also recommended that such plans be drawn up in
consultation with local bodies in respective Districts/States (Para Nos.
13 & 19 of Sixteenth Report).
3.33 When asked whether the Department has consulted different
State Governments on the issue of preparation of Perspective Plan at
district level, the Department has informed that the matter has been
discussed with the State representatives during the review meetings.
States have committed to submit the perspective plans for a period of
five years at the earliest. States of Andhra Pradesh and Orissa have
submitted the abridged plans/details of watersheds/area to be taken
up delineating watersheds for immediate use, as the detailed plans
are under formulation. Tamil Nadu has submitted the perspective plans
in respect of three districts and plan in respect of one district has been
submitted by Kerala. Perspective Plans in respect of North Eastern
States and Sikkim are under formulation and will be submitted during
2006-07. Similarly, plans in respect of other States are at various stages
of formulation.
National Policy on Land Resources Management and Amendment of
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
3.34 As per Mid-Term Appraisal to the Tenth Plan factors like soil
erosion is one of the major factors for land degradation in the country.
According to the said appraisal soil erosion removes roughly 14 million
tonnes of major nutrients in soil such as nitrogen, phosphorous and
potassium, resulting in loss of agriculture output from 11 per cent to
26 per cent. Keeping in view all these factors into account, the said
appraisal ahs stated that during the 10th Plan period a National Policy
on Land Resources Management will be formulated for optimum
management of land resources.
3.35 When asked about the status of said policy, the Department
has informed that the National policy on Land Resources Management
has not been formulated as yet by the Department. Wasteland Atlas is
available and various programmes are being undertaken on the basis
of Wasteland Atlas data.
3.36 Further, during the course of evidence the Secretary submitted
as under:
“This is the crux of the issue in Land Resource management, in
the preparation of a perspective plan at the National level and

27
at the State level. We have written tot he States to prepare their
plans and the States are at different stages of preparing it and
we have reported it to you; but the larger policy is under debate
and that is exactly what is going on today. The National Rainfed
Area Authority has been announced and there is a policy paper
which has been prepared by the Agriculture Ministry. It was
discussed the other day in the Agriculture Coordination
Committee of the Prime Minister. Side by side, the Planning
Commission has also done a very large scale brainstorming
session; they have prepared a paper. We have also from our side
done one. We are doing on some lands which are under our
control and responsibility. We have got the Parthasarathy
Committee Report prepared. There are three expert committee
papers which are now available. The whole matter has been
referred to the Committee of Secretaries; there is an attempt being
made to work out a process by which a national perspective
plan can be prepared.”
3.37 On the question of review of outdated Land Acquisition Act,
1894 which is more than hundred years old, the Secretary stated as
under:
“You have really raised a very important matter which concerns
us. It has become very critical at the moment. It is regarding the
policy for land use. There is a proposal for the amendment of
the Land Acquisition Act which has been pending. It is under
discussion. Now, there are a lot of fresh concerns which are being
expressed. As you are aware, the Rehabilitation Policy of the
Government of India has also been formulated and announced
but that is an attempt to give some kind of a minimum
rehabilitation package. That should be implemented by everybody.
Land, as a subject, is a State subject. So, the question is that no
matter what we do, even if we amend the main Act, the Land
Acquisition Act, which is an Act of 1894, that Act will not become
effective unless the State accepts it. In its own Assembly, it has
actually to be adopted. Even if the Government of India passes
and modifies the Land Acquisition Act, it will have to be adopted
by the States. We have to have an interaction with the States. So
this is an issue which, in a big way, comes up.”
3.38 The Secretary, Land Resources further added that:
“The other one is the Land Revenue Act……. There has been a
mention of the Land Revenue Act, its modification. Though that

28
is not developed too much yet the Land Acquisition Act is
certainly a major concern. I am expecting that we will be getting
some guidelines. We are the nodal Ministry here. A lot of
interested Ministries are there which are acquiring land, which
are affected by acquisition. The Tribal Welfare and the Social
Justice Ministries are big players on the affected side. Those who
are acquiring land on the other side are the Ministries like Power,
Water Resources, Coal, Railways, Defence, Transport etc. All of
them are on the other side. So, all the players have to come
together.”
3.39 When asked whether the wastelands can be used for
construction of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) houses and Agriculture
Universities, the Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated
that the State Governments can use the wastelands there is no such
bar.
3.40 The Committee note that different data with regard to total
wastelands in the country which need to be developed has been
indicated in the different documents. As per the initial Atlas brought
out by the Department in the year 2000, total wastelands has been
indicated as 63.85 million hectares. The latest data launched in 2005
indicate the wastelands as 55.27 million hectares. Further the
Technical Committee in its report has stated that 45.58 million
hectares have been treated so far since 8th Plan by the initiatives of
the Union Government. It has further been stated that excluding the
46 million hectares as already treated, the areas remaining to be
treated are 125 million hectares. While appreciating the fact that
there are various estimates with regard to wastelands development
and it is difficult to find out the exact data in this regard, the
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to have some data
indicating the minimum wastelands area that needs to be developed
so as to enable the Government to prepare an action plan. The answer
to this issue is the perspective plans by the different State
Governments.
3.41 The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to the
Department to get the perspective plans finalised from various State
Governments on the issue of development of wastelands. They find
from the replies that none of the States is ready with the perspective
plan. Only two States i.e. Tamil Nadu and Kerala have submitted
the perspective plans in respect of few districts. The Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to have a fair idea of the task in hand
and the task to be handled in future with regard to wastelands

29
development in the country. Further as observed in the preceding
paras of the report there are varying estimates with regard to the
area falling under wastelands as well as the task of development of
wastelands handled by the Government initiatives. The exact idea
of the wastelands area, work involved can be known when the
perspective plans are ready. Besides perspective plans as submitted
by the State Governments can be a better input to formulate the
national plan. In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend
to pursue further with the State Governments to finalise the
perspective plans so that the same can be used while deciding the
strategy for the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
3.42 The Committee further note that as indicated by Technical
Committee Rs. 1,50,000 crore would be required to treat the estimated
land of 125 million hectares. The Technical Committee has suggested
to double the current programme outlay. Further it has also been
stated that the allocation made under National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme would supplement the outlay provided by
different Government schemes for the development of wastelands.
The Committee find that the outlay for National Rural Employment
Guarantee  Scheme has been separately allocated by the Department
of Rural Development. Rs. 11,300 crore during 2006-2007 have been
earmarked for 200 districts which have been covered by the
Guarantee Scheme. Till the scheme is not made applicable
nationwide, it is difficult to know how far the outlay provided for
NREGS could supplement the Government initiatives taken under
different wastelands programmes. Besides there is an urgent need to
have some sort of coordinating mechanism for the schemes being
undertaken under NREGS related to watershed activities and the
schemes taken under the Department of Rural Development or some
other Ministries of Union Government or State Governments. The
Committee feel that Gram Sabha is the best mechanism to coordinate
the activities related to wastelands development. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in
this regard.
3.43 The Committee find that some initiatives are being taken
for formulating the National Land Resource Management Policy. The
Committee would like the Government to pursue the matter further
so that there is proper direction in land management.
3.44 The Committee wish to point out that Land Acquisition Act
1894 is an old and outdated enactment which needs considerable
amendments keeping in view the changed circumstances. The

30
Committee have repeatedly been stressing for bringing amendments
to this Act. The Committee understand that proposal for the
amendment of Land Acquisition Act is under consideration with the
Department for a long time. They find from the submission made
by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence that much
emphasis is not being given to finalise the proposals for the
amendment of the said Act. The Committee are not convinced by
the statement made by the Secretary that land is a State subject and
the Central Act will not become effective unless the State accepts it.
The Committee note that Central Acts are the model for the State
Governments on which they draft their policies and laws. State
Governments are waiting for the amendments in Land Acquisition
Act. The old and outdated Act has been a hinderance for
implementation of various projects where acquisition of land is
required. In view of this, the Committee strongly recommend to the
Department to finalise the proposals for amendment to the aforesaid
Act and bring the same before the Parliament at the earliest.
3.45 The Committee further note that some initiatives are being
taken to amend the Land Revenue Act. Consultations are being held
with the interested Ministries. The Committee stress that the
proposals for amendment of the Land Revenue Act should be
finalised at the earliest.
3.46 The Committee find that land is the basic constraint in
implementation of some of the major schemes of the Department
specifically Indira Awaas Yojana where it is difficult to extend the
benefits to the landless persons. The possibility of using wastelands
for setting up agricultural universities and for constructing houses
under Government schemes for the landless persons should be
discussed with the various State  Governments and the Committee
apprised about the feedback received in this regard.

31
CHAPTER IV
WASTELANDS DEVELOPMENT DIVISION
Analysis of the Major Schemes related to Wastelands Development
Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP)
The allocations, releases and shortfall for IWDP projects during
9th Plan are as shown below:
(Rs. in crore)
Outlay             Allocation Actual/Releases Shortfall
proposed by BE RE between
Department BE and
actuals
3360.00 1148.60 986.00 962.00 186.33
4.2 Year-wise and State-wise details of the projects sanctioned
during the Ninth Plan has been given at Appendix IV .
The following conclusions can be drawn form the data as indicated
at Appendix IV :
(i) during the first two years i.e., 1997-98, 1998-99 of the 9th
Plan less numbers of projects i.e., 45 and 48 projects were
sanctioned as compared to the projects sanctioned during
the remaining three years of the 9th Plan.
(ii) majority of the IWDP projects were sanctioned in the States
of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh etc.
(iii) very less number of IWDP Projects were sanctioned in the
States of Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Punjab and
West Bengal.
4.3 When asked reasons for lesser number of projects sanctioned
during first two years of the 9th Plan particularly when the guidelines
for sanctioning watershed projects were in operation way back in April
1995, the Department has informed that the new guidelines for
watershed development programmes were launched in 1995. Only a
few project proposals were received from the States in the initial years.

32
The projects satisfying the criteria for selection of watersheds were
sanctioned. Even after a lapse of two years, the demand was still low
due to the implementation on people’s participatory approach as
envisaged in the 1995 guidelines. As a result, less projects were
sanctioned in the first two years of the 9th Plan.
4.4 Further analysis of the projects undertaken during Ninth Plan
under IWDP is as under:
(In numbers)
Total Projects undertaken — 398
Projects completed — 75
Projects foreclosed — 7
Ongoing Projects — 316
Ongoing projects with time run over — 191
Physical and Financial Performance of IWDP projects during 9th
Plan
4.5 The following statement shows the achievement of plan targets
both in the physical and financial terms during the 9th Plan:
Ninth Plan period Physical (in hq.) Financial (Rs. in crore)
Target Achievement Outlay Release/Exp.
1997-98 1,27,000 90,000 74.50 53.86
(70.87%) (72.30%)
1998-99 1,37,000 1,03,000 82.10 62.00
(75.18%) (75.51%)
1999-2000 1,36,750 1,38,500 82.00 83.07
(101.28%) (101.30%)
2000-2001 3,25,000 3,24,450 128.00 127.78
(100%)
2001-2002 4,55,000 4,10,000 210.00 169.61
(90.11% ) (80.77%)
4.6 It may be seen that during first two years i.e., 1997-98 and
1998-99 the achievement rate in physical terms is as low as 70.87 per
cent and 75.18 per cent. In financial terms, it is 72.30 per cent and

33
75.51 per cent during the same period. Lack of community participation
for projects and a time consuming process has been attributed a reason
for slow performance in 1997-98. Whereas 1998-99 cut by Ministry of
finance of over Rs. 20 crore has been attributed as reason for low
performance.
Performance of IWDP during Tenth Plan
4.7 The year-wise physical and financial performance of IWDP
during 10th Plan Period is as follows:
Tenth Plan    Physical (in ha.)   Financial (Rs. in crore)
Period
Target Achievement Outlay Release/Exp.
2002-07 68,00,000
2002-03 5,17,000 3,35,521 450.00* 413.45
(64.89%) (91.87%)
2003-04 11,00,000 10,06,500 402.00** 368.17
(91.5%) (91.58%)
2004-05 10,00,000 11,17,705 448.00## 414.42
(111.77%) (90.88%)***
2005-06 15,00,000 16,31,806 565.00## 471.15
(108.79%) (83.39%)#
2006-07 15,00,000 565.00##
* This includes Rs. 150.00 crore for EAS watershed programme and Rs. 63.00 crore
for DFID projects in Andhra Pradesh and Orissa.
** It includes Rs. 66.00 crore for DFID Projects in Andhra Pradesh and Orissa.
*** Poor absorption of funds in the North-Eastern States.
# As on 28.2.2006.
## Includes Rs. 80.00 crore for DFID projects in Andhra Pradesh and Orissa.
4.8  The data with regard to the projects sanctioned during each
year of Tenth Plan has been given at Appendix V .
The following conclusions can be drawn from the data as indicated
at Appendix V:
(i) 800 projects have been sanctioned during Tenth Plan.
(ii) only 49 projects were sanctioned during the 2002-2003, the
first year of 10th Plan.

34
(iii) majority of IWDP projects were sanctioned in the States of
Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and
Karnataka.
(iv) very less number of IWDP projects have been sanctioned in
the States of Goa, Punjab and West Bengal.
Recovery of funds
4.9 Last year during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Land Resources, it came out
that funds for IWDP Projects are to be recovered from some States.
The following are the details of States and funds outstanding against
them:
Sl.No. Name of the State Amount (Rs. in Crore)
1. Kerala 5.0
2. Gujarat 2.0
3. Tamil Nadu 1.5
4. Jharkhand 1.5
5. Punjab 1.6
4.10 When asked about the reasons on what account this recovery
was being made/due from certain States/UTs, the recovery of dues is
on account of unspent balances, non-submission of Utilization Certificate
and misutilization of funds in respect of old projects sanctioned prior
to 1995 as pointed out in the C&AG Report No. 2 of 2002.
4.11 The Department has further informed that all due amount
has been recovered except following:
Sl.No. State/Distt. Amount On account of Remarks
(Rs. in
Lakhs)
12 3 4 5
1. Punjab 0.20 Recovery of Yet to be
(Hoshiyarpur) amount received
2. Sikkim (South 4.01 Non submission of -do-
Sikkim) UC

35
12 3 4 5
3. Orissa 33.00 Non submission UC for
(Kalahandi-I) of UC Rs. 23.83285
lakhs is yet to
be received.
4. Kerala 502.73 Non submission of Yet to be
(Palakkad UC received
I&II and
Wayanad-I)
4.12 Concerned States are consistently being reminded to either
refund the amount or submit Utilisation Certificate along with other
relevant documents at the earliest.
4.13 The Technical Committee on Wastelands Development in its
report has proposed that the duration of the projects taken under
different schemes of watershed development should be increased from
five years to eight years. Reasons for proposing the enhanced time
limit has been stated to be that durable village—level institutions have
not been set up and the crucial participatory processes have not had
sufficient time as per the existing gestation period of five years. As a
result the qualitative dimensions of the programme have suffered and
it has not been possible to realise the livelihoods potential of the
programme.
4.14 The Committee note that IWDP is the most important
programme of the Department for the development of wastelands in
the country. The status of financial achievement during 9th and 10th
Plan as given above indicate that there has not been major
enhancement in the outlay under the Scheme. The outlay for Rs. 450
crore during the year 2002-03 has been enhanced to Rs. 565 crore
during 2006-07. But the allocation earmarked has not been fully
utilised during each year of 9th and 10th Plan. Under-spending is
the recurring feature of this programme. As regards the physical
achievement the data indicate that almost half of the projects
sanctioned are still continuing. The number of projects taken up
during 10th Plan are almost double the projects undertaken during
9th Plan. Further, there are problems like unspent balances, non-
submission of Utilisation Certificate and misutilisation of funds as
pointed out in C&AG Report for which certain recoveries were to
be made. The Committee conclude that there are serious problems
in implementation of IWDP programme which need to be addressed

36
urgently. Taking into consideration the gigantic task of development
of wastelands in the country the Committee strongly recommend to
enhance the allocation under IWDP which is one of the major
schemes of the Department. While recommending for higher outlay
the Committee would also like the Department to ensure that the
allocation earmarked in a year is utilised fully.
4.15 As regards the monitoring of the physical status of the
projects the Committee in the preceding paras of the report have
noted that the common problems with regard to the projects
undertaken for wastelands under different schemes of the Department
are foreclosure of projects, stopping payment to projects etc. The
issue has been dealt with in detail and suggestions made in the
preceding part of the report. As regards the issue of time overrun of
the projects being undertaken under IWDP , the Committee find that
the gestation period of projects is five years whereas almost half of
the projects taken upduring 9 th Plan are still to be completed. The
committee also note that the Technical Committee has suggested to
increase the gestation period of projects from five years to eight
years. The Committee also observe that in case the gestation period
is increased the average cost of the projects may also increase. The
Committee would further like the Department to examine the
suggestion of the Technical Committee and furnish their comments
so as to enable the Committee to review the position further.
Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP)
4.16 Status of projects sanctioned under DPAP:
(In numbers)
Total Project Sanctioned in Ninth and Tenth Plan — 19560
Projects completed — 5717
Projects for which funding stopped:
Since—1 April, 2003 — 1605
Since—1 October, 2003 — 32
Since—1 April, 2005 — 127
Ongoing projects — 16882
4.17 The Standing Committee on Rural Development in their Tenth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) had observed that though

37
utilisation position of DPAP projects had been satisfactory during the
9th Plan and three years of current Plan, yet a lot more was required
to be done in some States with vast drought prone areas like Rajasthan,
J&K, Gujarat. The Committee had therefore, recommended suitable
enhancement of funds for DPAP Programme for this purpose.
4.18 When enquired about the status of follow up of the aforesaid
recommendation of the Committee, the Department has informed that
the Ministry has taken efforts to increase the fund release to the
States of Gujarat, Rajasthan and J&K as the details are tabulated as
under:
State Fund Releases Fund Releases in 10th Plan
in 9th Plan (from 2002-03 to 2005-06
(In Rs. Lakh) i.e. 4 years) (In Rs. Lakh)
Gujarat 4776.89 12084.55
J&K 1037.82 1127.57
Rajasthan 3154.13 6696.45
However, Department of Land Resources is continuously pursuing
with Planning Commission for enhancement of funds.
Foreclosure of DPAP projects
4.19 The Committee in their aforesaid Report had also observed
that like other area development programmes of IWDP and DDP in
DPAP programme the major area of concern was foreclosure of projects.
The Committee had observed that as many as 1,764 DPAP projects
were foreclosed. The Department in the action taken replies has
informed that a total of Rs. 123.36 crore were released for such
foreclosed projects. The Committee in their 16th Action Taken Report
had then sought details of funds recovered from State Governments
for such foreclosed projects and urged proper system of monitoring
for such projects.
4.20 When asked about the update on the aforesaid issue, the
Department has stated that even in respect of 1,764 projects for which
the Central funds have been stopped (projects belonging to years
1995-96 to 1998-99), the activities have reportedly been taken up by
the district implementing agencies corresponding to the funds released
and proportionate benefits accrued to the watershed community. So,
the action for recovery of funds does not arise.

38
4.21 The allocation during Ninth and Tenth Plan:
(Rs. in crore)
Period Allocations Allocations Amount Project sanctioned
9th Plan B.E. R.E. Releases (in numbers)
(1997-2002)
1997-1998 115.00 110.75 90.95 406
1998-1999 95.00 73.00 73.00 880
1999-2000 95.00 95.00 94.99 2278
2000-2001 190.00 190.00 189.58 3371
2001-2002 210.00 210.00 208.99 2052
10th Plan (2002-2007)
2002-2003 250.00 250.00 250.00 2478
2003-2004 295.00 295.00 295.00 2535
2004-2005 300.00 300.00 300.19# 2550
2005-06 353.00 353.00 353.18# 3000
2006-2007 360.00
#Amount increased due to re-appropriation of funds.
Desert Development Programme (DDP)
4.22 The status of project sanctioned:
(In numbers)
Total projects sanctioned for 1995-96 to 2005-06 — 13476
Projects completed — 2583
Projects for which further funds have been stopped:
Since 1 April, 2003 — 65
Since 1 March, 2004 — 85
Since 1 April, 2005 — 150
Ongoing projects — 10593

39
The allocation during Ninth and Tenth Plan:
(Rs. in Crore)
Period Allocations Allocations Amount Project sanctioned
9th Plan B.E. R.E. Releases (in numbers)
(1997-2002)
1997-1998 70.00 70.00 70.01 36
1998-1999 90.00 80.00 79.80 400
1999-2000 85.00 85.00 84.99 1500
2000-2001 135.00 135.00 134.99 1659
2001-2002 160.00 150.00 149.88 1359
10th Plan
(2002-2007)
2002-2003 185.00 185.00 185.00 1602
2003-2004 265.00* 215.00 215.00 1562
2004-2005 215.00 215.00 215.19# 1600
2005-2006 268.00 268.00 240.85** 2000
2006-2007 270.00
* Include Rs. 50 crore for Maru Gochar Yojana, later on transferred to Ministry of
Finance.
** As on 28.2.2006. Total allocated amount will be utilised in full by the end of current
financial year.
# Amount increase by re-appropriation.
4.23 DPAP programme is being implemented in 972 blocks as
identified in the report submitted by Prof. Hanumantha Rao ex-Member
of Planning Commission. Further the Committee while examining
Demands for Grants (2005-06) had been informed that States like
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh
have made requests for coverage of additional blocks. As regards Desert
Development Programme it is being implemented in 235 DDP blocks
in the country in 40 districts of seven States. States like Gujarat have
requested to include some more blocks. While examining the Demands
for Grants of the previous year, the Committee have been informed
that the term and reference of a Committee under the Chairmanship
of Shri S. Parthasarthy include identification of blocks afresh and the

40
inclusion/exclusion of the blocks from the existing blocks would be
considered by the Committee. The said Committee has already
submitted its report to the Department of Rural Development.
4.24 The Committee find from the information furnished above
that foreclosure and stopping of funds to the projects is a major
problem under DDP and DPAP blocks. The issue has been dealt
with in detail in the preceding paras of the report. Here the
Committee may highlight that the number of projects foreclosed and
for which funds have been stopped is more than in the case of
IWDP schemes. As recommended in the earlier part of the report,
the Committee would like the information about the year of
foreclosure, funds allocated at the time of foreclosure of each project
so as to enable the Committee to make proper analysis.
4.25 The Committee further find that DDP and DPAP blocks
were identified more than a decade back. The situation in these
blocks may have changed. Many blocks would have turned greener
and need no assistance under these programmes whereas some other
additional blocks may need assistance. Further, requests from some
of the States are being received by the Department for coverage of
additional blocks. The Committee also note that the Parthasarthy
Committee was supposed to look into the issue of exclusion/inclusion
of DDP and DPAP blocks. Since the said Committee has already
submitted the report, the committee would like to be informed
whether the said issue has been addressed in the report and if so,
the details thereof.
Technology Development, Extension and Training (TDET) Scheme
Objectives of the Schemes
4.26 The objective of the Scheme inter-alia include:
(i) Development of database for wastelands.
(ii) Operationalisation of cost effective and proven technologies
for development of various categories of wastelands.
(iii) Dissemination of research findings and appropriate
technologies for promoting wastelands developments.
4.27 The Scheme is being implemented through ICAR Institutes,
State Agriculture Universities (SAUs), DRDAs and Government
institutions having adequate institutional framework and organization
back up. Under this Scheme, 100 per cent Central Grant is admissible

41
to implement the projects on wastelands owned by the Government,
Public Sector Undertakings including Universities, Panchayats etc. In
case of the projects on wastelands of private farmers/corporate bodies,
the cost of the project is required to be shared on the basis of 60 : 40
between the Department of Land Resources and the beneficiary.
4.28 The allocation and expenditure during Tenth Plan is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Outlay Expenditure
2002-2003 17.00 13.70
2003-2004 17.00 15.08
2004-2005 15.00 14.99
2005-2006 17.00 10.18 (as on 28.2.2006)
2006-2007 20.00
Total 86.00
4.29 When asked about the reasons for the lower utilisation in
each year of the current Plan, the Department has stated that the
TDET Scheme is being implemented in a project mode on the basis of
proposals received from Implementing Agencies and sanctioned by
the Project  Sanctioning Committee (PSC). The reasons for the lower
utilization during 2002-03 and 2003-04 are due to non receipt of
appropriate fresh proposals and timely progress report, utilisation
certificate, beneficiaries contribution and audited statement of accounts
under ongoing projects from various implementing agencies.
Nevertheless, efforts had been made during 2004-05 and 2005-06 to
monitor and pursue the progress of the projects and completely utilise
the funds allocated to the programme.
Project Planning and Implementation
4.30 As regards project planning and implementation, it came out
during the course of examination that till the end of March, 2005 as
many as 161 projects were sanctioned with an outlay of Rs. 168.16
crore. In the written replies, the Department has informed that out of
161 projects only 55 projects are completed, 22 projects are foreclosed
and 84 projects are ongoing.

42
4.31 When asked whether the number of completed projects were
as per schedule, the Department has stated that most of the projects
have been completed as per schedule. However, some of the projects
that could not be completed as per schedule because of specific field
level problems were given suitable time extension for completion.
4.32 Further clarifying on the field level problems being faced by
the TDET Projects resulting in time over runs in such projects in
different States, the Department has submitted the following reasons:
(i) TDET guidelines require beneficiary contribution to the
extent of 40 per cent cost of works undertaken on private
lands. Fulfilling this requirement, most of the times, is time
consuming.
(ii) sometimes, there is undue delay in the release of State share.
(iii) implementing Agencies being State Agriculture Universities/
Research Institutions, etc., there have been delay in
submissions of progress reports by them due to procedural
delays inherent in their internal organizational structure.
(iv) in many cases, particularly in case of research organizations
and Universities, financial control lies with a third party
like the Comptroller, invariably leading to delay in timely
release of funds to the implementing department.
4.33 The Technology Development, Extension and Training
(TDET) Scheme is an important scheme, the foremost objective of
which is operationalisation of cost effective and proven technologies
and dissemination of research findings and appropriate technologies
for the development of various categories of wastelands. From the
data furnished by the Department with regard to financial
achievement the Committee find that even the meagre outlay i.e.
Rs. 15 crore during 2004-05 and Rs. 17 crore during 2005-06 could
not be utilised fully. Various reasons like beneficiaries contribution,
delay in the release of State share, delay in submission of progress
reports and non-receipt of fresh proposals have been cited as the
reasons for shortfall in utilisation of funds. The Committee also
note that even the few number of projects undertaken are not being
successfully implemented. Out of 161 projects, as many as 22 projects
were foreclosed. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need
for detailed interaction with the various research institutes like ICAR,
State Agricultural Universities which are basically involved with the
research in this field. Besides there is an urgent need to motivate
these institutions to initiative more and more projects. There is an

43
urgent need to study the international experience with regard to
wastelands development. The Committee desire some concrete action
in this regard to be taken by Government.
4.34 Besides initiating research studies one of the objectives of
the programme is dissemination of research findings and appropriate
technologies. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
number of demonstration projects undertaken under the aforesaid
schemes. Besides, the initiatives taken for dissemination of research
findings and technologies by the Department should also be
intimated to the Committee to enable them to analyse the
performance of the scheme.

44
CHAPTER V
LAND REFORMS DIVISION
The Land Reforms Division implements following two Centrally
Sponsored Schemes:
(a) Computerisation of Land Records (CLR); and
(b) Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of
Land Records.
Brief regarding the Schemes of the Department related to Land
Reforms Division
(a) Computerisation of Land Records (CLR)
5.2 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Computerisation of Land
Records (CLR) was started in 1988-89 with 100 per cent financial
assistance as a pilot project in eight districts each in the States of
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Orissa and Rajasthan with a view to remove the problems and inherent
flows of the existing land records system and to bring transparency
and easy accessibility of the land records to the land holders. Keeping
in view the encouraging results, this scheme was made separate
Centrally Sponsored Scheme during the Eighth Plan (1992-1997) period
and by the end of Plan period 327 districts in the country were brought
under CLR.  During Ninth Plan (1997-2002) 259 more districts were
covered. So far 582 districts, 3514 Tehsils/Taluks/Blocks/Anchals and
879 Sub-Divisions have been covered under the scheme. A sum of
Rs. 416.06 crore upto 28 February, 2006 provided to States/UTs since
inception, whereas the utilisation of funds as on 31 January, 2006
reported by the States/UTs was Rs. 256.71 crore, representing 65 per
cent of the total funds released. Statement showing districts/Tehsils/
Sub-Divisions sanctioned and work completed under CLR programmes
as on 31 March, 2006 in different States/UTs is placed at
Appendix VI .
(b) Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records (SRA&ULR)
5.3 With a view to assist the States/UTs in the task of updating
of land records, a Centrally sponsored Scheme for Strengthening of

45
Revenue Administration and Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR)
was started in 1987. Initially, the scheme was approved for the States
of Bihar and Orissa in 1987-88 and extended to other States/UTs, during
1989-90. The scheme is being implemented by the State Governments
through their Revenue/Land Reforms Departments. It is financed by
the Centre and the State on 50:50 funds sharing basis. However,
Union Territories are provided full Central assistance. All the States/
UTs have been covered under the scheme and funds to the tune of
Rs. 311.77 crore were provided to the States/UTs as Central Share up
to 31 January, 2006. The utilisation of funds reported by the States/UTs
is Rs. 228.01 crore, representing 73 per cent of the total funds released.
Analysis of the Schemes of the Department related to Land Reforms
Division
(a) Computerisation of Land Records (CLR)
Allocation and releases so far during the Tenth Plan (2002-2007)
5.4  The year-wise Budget Estimates, revised Estimates and actual
expenditure during first four years of the current plan and B.E. for
the terminal year of the Plan under the scheme are as  under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE Expenditure
2002-2003 35.00 35.00 31.18
2003-2004 40.00 40.00 35.77
2004-2005 50.00 50.00 45.62
2005-2006 100.00 100.00 69.93 (As on 28.2.2006)
2006-2007 100.00 —
5.5 The Department has informed that the reasons for variation
between Budget Estimate, Revised Estimate vis-a-vis actual expenditure
during the first four years of the current Plan are that the Scheme is
a demand driven and the funds earmarked for the N.E States could
not be released as these States have not requested for additional funds
due to non-utilisation of funds release earlier.
Progress of Scheme in States other than North Eastern States
5.6 The Department has informed that States of Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Goa and Gujarat have fully operationalized the system and

46
made online updation through computerized system. Many other States
such as Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal,
Sikkim, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh have also taken necessary steps in
this direction by effecting regular mutation/updation of land records.
Few other States have also completed the basic data entry work and
started regular updation of land records.
5.7 As per the information furnished by the Ministry there is no
coverage in State like Meghalaya and in some Union Territories like
Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep.
Explaining the process of computerization of land records, the
Secretary during the course of oral evidence submitted as under:
“The village records consist of 10-12 various records, and they
are all interconnected in various ways. In the first stage of
computerisation we are talking about a very simple process, and
it is not really connecting of all the records. It is a simple question
of RoR, which we call Pani in our area. The RoR must be
available to the villagers with their latest picture. I am saying
his because it is the basic document that a person would require
for taking crop loan, and for all his other transaction/needs.
Therefore, the first stage was basically to make Pani available—
in the form available on the hard copy—on the computer itself,
so that any person can come there and ask for it. There is usually
a small fee, which is levied for it and he can get it straight from
the computer and use it for all his needs. This is all that the first
stage of computerisation involves.…… In the next stage we are
planning something, which is a bigger job. We are working out
a scheme for it, that is, to incorporate the mutations, the
ownership and other changes in the document directly online
from the place where the mutations take place.”
5.8 On the issue of decentralization of land records, the Secretary
during the course of oral evidence stated as under:
“We are certainly very keen to support the availability of the
document at a lower level…….”
The Secretary further informed as under:
“I have one idea which I am wondering whether we can make
operational, that is, if we can link up the Bhoomi information
with the computers of the lending bankers, then the farmer does
not even have to go and get a copy every time. The bankers an

47
access the Bhoomi record directly without any charge and check
out whatever is the record directly and use that. That will reduce
the transaction cost which you very rightly were mentioning that
they spend three to four days at a Taluk office and all that. He
would not even have to ask for the record, if we can do a
linkage. Mostly, they are all assisted by cooperative banks. This
is something which I am hoping that we can try to work on. If
we can get the cooperative banks to actually directly access the
Bhoomi record, them we should be in a position to avoid this
hardship to the farmers.”
Progress in North Eastern States
5.9 The Department has informed that with the concerted efforts
of the Ministry as also of the State Governments, the basic data entry
work in the States of Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal
Pradesh, and Tripura have already been started and expected to be
completed by March, 2007. The State of Sikkim has already completed
the basic data entry work and operationalized the scheme in 2 sub-
divisions. In the State of Meghalaya, the scheme has not yet started
due to non-availability of proper land records. The State Government
of Meghalaya has been requested to undertake survey settlement work
with the use of modern technology so that updated land records could
be computerized.
5.10 The Department has informed that one of the step which has
been taken by the Department for improvement in the implementation
of the CLR scheme is not give emphasis on to stop issue of manual
copies of Record of Rights (RoR) and to provide legal sanctity to
computerised copies of RoR by amending the necessary Revenue Rules/
Regulations etc.
5.11 On being asked whether the amendments have been made in
the necessary Revenue Rules/Regulations to provide legal sanctity to
computerised copies of RoR, the Department has stated that the States
of Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, U.P . and West Bengal have
already amended the necessary revenue Rules/Regulations to provide
legal sanctity to computerized copies of RoR. Other State shave also
been requested to amend necessary rules/Regulations to provide legal
sanctity to RoR but these States are facing following problems:
(i) Waiting for complete implementation and stabilization of
computerized system.

48
(ii) Lack of administrative and political will at State level.
(iii) In few States namely MP , Rajasthan etc., Panchayats have
been given powers to handle undisputed cases of mutation,
which has resulted in manuals as well as computerized
distribution of RoR.
Computer Training to Revenue Officials
5.12 On the issue of imparting of computer application training to
Revenue Officers, the Department has informed that 15 States namely
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Nagaland, Orissa, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,
West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Delhi and Pondicherry have been provided
funds for imparting computer awareness training to revenue officials.
5.13 The Department has informed that the LBSNNA has conducted
an evaluation study on Computerisation of Land Records in the States
of Karnataka, West Bengal and Rajasthan. The evaluation study of
Tamil Nadu is under progress. The Department has further stated that
NIRD was also requested to undertake evaluation study in the States
of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Kerala. However,
no progress report has so far been received from NIRD and they have
not submitted any evaluation report of any State.
5.14 Maintenance and updating of land records is an important
area which needs to be addressed urgently. Land records are the
basic document of the property owned by an individual as well as
by the group of people and Government at various levels. The
importance of land records is immense not only for an individual
but also for Government for the future planning. Once the land
records are properly maintained, it will bring transparency and a
mechanism to have an idea of Benami landholdings. The Committee
find that a laudable scheme Computerisation of Land Records has
been initiated by the Union Government with 100 per cent Central
assistance since 1988-89. The outlay provided so far  i.e. Rs. 416.06
crore could not be utilised fully by the State Governments. The
utilisation upto 31 January, 2006 is Rs. 256.71 crore. The Committee
feel that under-spending of around 40 per cent of the outlay is a
major area of concern. Further the Committee note that the allocation
during the year 2005-06 was double as compared to previous year.
The Committee also find from the replies that sincere efforts have
not been made to find out the reasons for huge under-spending. It
has simply been stated that the scheme is demand driven. The
Committee while expressing their concern over the under-utilisation

49
of funds would like the Department to find out specific reasons for
under-spending State-wise and inform the Committee accordingly.
5.15 The Committee further note that States of Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Goa and Gujarat have fully operationalised the system and
made online updation through computerized system. Besides many
other States such as Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, West
Bengal, Sikkim, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh have also taken necessary
steps in this direction by affecting regular mutation/updation of land
records. Few other States have also completed the basic data entry
work and started regular updation of land records. The worst
performing State is Meghalaya and some Union Territories viz.,
Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep. The Committee
appreciate the efforts made by some of the States like Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu, Goa and Gujarat who could not only fully computerize
the land records but also could make updation possible through
computerized system. The Committee would like the Department to
pursue the matter with other States so that the objectives of the
programme can be achieved in these States.
5.16 The Committee further note that some progress has been
made with regard to maintenance of land records in North Eastern
States. As informed by the Department the basic data entry work in
the States of Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh
and Tripura have already been started. The work is likely to be
completed in March 2007. The State of Sikkim has already completed
the data entry work. In the case of Meghalaya, the scheme has not
yet been started due to non-availability of proper land records. The
Committee would like the Department to further pursue with these
North Eastern States so that the work relating to computerization of
land records is completed.
5.17 The Committee further note from the replies furnished by
the Department that one of the important tasks for the successful
implementation of programme is to stop issue of manual copies of
Record of Rights and to provide legal sanctity to computerized copies
of RoR by amending the necessary revenue rules/regulations. Whereas
the States of Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh
and West Bengal have already amended the necessary revenue rules/
regulations in his regard, the action is pending in other States.
Various reasons like lack of administrative and political will at State
level, waiting for complete stabilization of computerized system etc.
have been indicated as the reasons for not providing legal sanctity
to computerized copies of RoR in these States. The Committee feel

50
that more interaction through various seminars, conferences is
required with the State  Governments to persuade them to amend
the revenue rules/regulations so that the computerized system of
land records may be given legal sanctity. Besides the Committee
feel that once the land records are computerized and the people are
made aware of the system, the other issues related to giving legal
sanctity to computerized copies of RoR would automatically be
demanded by the public at large. As such there is an urgent need
to first complete the system of computerization by the initiatives of
the Centrally Sponsored Schemes and make maintenance as well as
updation of land records a reality. The Committee hope that the
Department would take the desired action in this regard.
5.18 The Committee further note the laudable idea given by the
Secretary, Department of Land Resources whereby a thought is being
given to link up the land record information with the computers of
the lending bankers so that the farmer does not even need to procure
the copy of land records every time. The bankers can access the
land record directly without any charge. The Committee appreciate
the idea and feel that if it is made possible, it will help the general
public specifically farmers. Not only it will reduce the transaction
cost, but also would be a great relief for the poor persons whose
applications are rejected by the banks due to non-availability of
proper copy of land records. Besides, the assistance under various
Centrally Sponsored Schemes provided through banks like
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) can easily be made
available.
5.19 The Committee find that 15 States have been provided funds
for imparting computer awareness training to revenue officials. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the funds
earmarked for training to these States. The Committee would also
like to be informed about the module of training and the agencies
involved for imparting training. They would like to suggest that
similar initiatives should be taken in other States also.
5.20 The Committee further find that Lal Bahadur Shastri
National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA) has conducted an
evaluation study on Computerisation of Land Records in the States
of Karnataka, West Bengal and Rajasthan. The evaluation study of
Tamil Nadu is under progress. Further NIRD was also requested to
undertake evaluation study in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa,
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Kerala. The Committee express their
unhappiness that no progress report has been received from NIRD

51
which is a premier institution for research and is under the
administrative control of the Ministry of Rural Development. The
Committee would like to be apprised when these studies were
initiated. They would also like to be apprised about the details of
the studies completed by LBSNAA.
(b) Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records (SRA & ULR)
5.21 The following are the details of B.E., R.E. and actual
expenditure during each year of Tenth Plan:
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE Expenditure
2002-2003 20.00 20.00 20.73
2003-2004 25.00 25.00 24.46
2004-2005 20.00 20.00 19.43
2005-2006 40.00 40.00 26.93
(as on 28.2.2006)
2006-2007 49.00 — —
Total 154.00
One of the reasons for underspending in the SRA & ULR scheme
as reported in the replies in inability to arrange matching share of
50 per cent by State Governments. The Department has informed that
the matter of reviewing the funding pattern from existing 50:50 to
90:10 for North-Eastern  states and 75:25 in case of other than NE
states was taken up by the Department with the Planning Commission.
Panning Commission has stated that the Twelfth Finance Commission
Report has provided more resources. However, there is no specific
mention about additional amount for the purpose of land records has
been made.
5.22 When asked as to how in the absence of clear cut mention
about additional funds for the purpose of land records in the Twelfth
Finance Commission Report the Department plan to arrange funds for
implementation of the scheme, the Department has stated that during
the Conferences of Revenue Ministries/Secretaries organized by this
Ministry from time-to-time, States are being requested to make
provision in their State Budget so as to provide matching share for
the purpose of land records.

52
5.23 During the course of examination the Department has informed
that the system of land records and land administration prevalent in
the rest of the country does not exist in the hilly and tribal areas of
the North-Eastern States, because cadastral survey has not been done
thereby no land records exist. In some of these States, there is no
legislation regarding land and land related matters. Though individual
ownership of land has been developed in some areas, a good deal of
land is still owned communally. Arunachal Pradesh has some land
records and Manipur has land records for 5 valley districts. Therefore,
these States have started data entry work under the Scheme of CLR.
The State of Meghalaya has no proper land records. The State
Government has been requested to carry out survey and settlement
with the use of Modern survey equipments so that proper land records
could be established. State Governments of Mizoram and Nagaland
have already started survey and settlement with the financial support
form Govt. of India under the scheme of SRA & ULR.
5.24 When asked about the difficulties being faced in conducting
the aforesaid cadastral survey of North-Eastern States and whether
local tribal laws/customs are coming in the way for undertaking such
surveys in these States, the Department has stated that in the areas,
proper survey have not been carried out. States have to create the
land records first in the hilly areas then they can go for cadastral
surveys and further they stated that this Department has no information
because land and its management is exclusively under the jurisdiction
of the State Government as provided in Entry No. 18 of List II (State
List) to the Seventh schedule to the Constitution of India. However,
this Ministry has been playing an advisory and coordinating role in
the field of land reforms. Therefore, State Governments have to take
action for undertaking survey in these areas.
5.25 The Committee find from the data with regard to allocation
under the scheme Strengthening of Revenue Administration and
Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR) that out of Rs. 311.77 crore
provided to the States/UTs as Central share upto 31 January, 2006,
the utilisation position is Rs. 228.01 crore. Thus around 27 per cent
of the funds could not be utilised. The Committee also note that the
inability of State Governments to provide 50 per cent matching share
is the basic concern for implementation of the programme. The
Committee also note that the matter of reviewing the financial pattern
from existing 50:50 to 90:10 for North-Eastern states and 75:25 in
case of other than NE states was taken up by the Department with
the Planning Commission who have stated that the 12th Finance
Commission Report has provided more resources. The said issue

53
was addressed in detail by the Committee in their 10th and 16th
Reports. The Committee had also observed that there is no specific
mention about additional amount for the purpose of land records in
the 12th Finance Commission Report. In view of this, the Committee
would like the Government to take up the matter again with the
Planning Commission in the light of the observations made by the
Committee and impress upon them to change the funding pattern.
5.26 The Committee further note that two schemes SRA & ULR
and Computerisation of Land Records are inter-related. The land
records can be computerized only when the land records are properly
available. Thus availability of land records is the basic issue. In
view of this, the Committee would like to be apprised by the
Department how the coordination between these two schemes is
being maintained.
5.27 The Committee find that the system of land records and
land administration prevalent in the rest of the country does not
exist in the hilly and tribal areas of North Eastern States. In most
of the areas even the cadastral survey has not been done and so no
land records exist. With regard to the programme ‘Computerisation
of Land Records’, the Committee have been informed that the basic
data entry work in the States of Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura has already started. The Committee
observe that Computerization of Land Records is not possible when
the basic data of land records is not available in an area. In this
situation the Committee wonder how the programme of
Computerisation of Land Records is progressing when even the
cadastral survey in these  States has not been done and no land
records exist. The clarification in this regard may be furnished to
enable the Committee to review the position of Computerization of
Land Records and SRA & ULR schemes in North Eastern States.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
17 May, 2006 Chairman,
27 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

54
APPENDIX I
STATEMENT SHOWING BUDGET ESTIMATES, REVISED ESTIMATES AND ACTUAL EXPENDITURE
DURING 9TH PLAN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES
(Rs. in Crore)
9th Plan Outlay and Expenditure
Sl.No. Name of Scheme 9th Plan 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-2001 2001-2002 9th Plan (1997-2002)
As Agreed/ BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual
propo- Actual Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp.
sed
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 51 6 1 7 1 81 9 2 02 1 2 2
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 700.00 705.00 115.00 100.75 100.75 95.00 73.00 73.00 95.00 95.00 94.99 190.00 190.00 190.00 210.00 210.00 209.62 705.00 668.75 668.26
2. Desert Development Programme 1430.00 540.00 70.00 70.00 70.00 90.00 80.00 79.80 85.00 85.00 85.00 135.00 135.00 135.00 160.00 150.00 150.00 540 .00 520.00 519.80
3. I.W.D.P . 3360.00 1148.60 74.50 50.00 53.95 82.10 62.10 62.00 82.00 82.00 83.07 480.00 387.00 386.90 430.00 405.00 376.35 1148.50 986.10 962.27
4. Computerisation of Land Records 332.46 178.00 20.00 20.00 20.19 30.00 25.00 24.75 33.00 33.00 32.69 50.00 48.00 47.85 45.00 45.00 44.36 178.00 1 71.00 169.84
5. SRA & ULR 326.00 92.60 18.80 18.80 18.97 8.80 8.80 9.05 10.00 10.00 10.25 25.00 25.00 24.99 30.00 25.00 23.94 92.60 87.60 87.20
6. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 106.00 51.00 8.00 7.50 5.60 8.00 8.00 8.05 8.00 8.00 8.70 12.00 10.87 10.98 15.00 12.00 9.93 51.00 46.37 43.2 6

55
12 3 4 56 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 21 3 1 4 1 51 6 1 7 1 81 92 0 2 1 2 2
 7. Consolidation of Land Holdings 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 0.00
 8. Support to NGOs/VAs Scheme 4.00 4.00 2.60 2.00 2.00 2.02 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.00 0.40 0.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.00 8.40 7.02
 9. Wasteland Development Task Force 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.98 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 2.98
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 291.00 52.10 1.00 0.20 0.00 1.60 0.60 0.04 2.00 2.00 0.23 0.50 0.10 0.10 0.50 0.20 0.12 5.60 3.10 0.49
11. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation 1.00 0.30 0.04 1.00 0.25 0.16 1.00 1.00 0.99 1.00 0.26 0.20 5.00 0.20 0.05 9.00 2.01 1.44
12. Communication 4.00 1.50 1.42 3.00 0.75 0.37 3.00 3.00 2.99 2.00 2.92 0.86 0.50 0.50 0.26 12.50 6.67 5.90
13. Board Secretariat 1.50 1.50 1.27 2.00 2.00 1.42 2.00 2.00 1.71 2.50 2.45 2.38 3.00 2.10 1.68 11.00 10.05 8.46
Total Plan
6545.46 2767.30 318.80 275.55 275.79 324.50 263.50 261.66 324.00 324.00 323.60 900.00 800.00 799.66 900.00 850.00 816.21 2767.30 2513.05 2476.92
Non-Plan
Secretariat Economic Services 0.20 0.19 0.14 0.25 0.24 0.20 0.26 0.25 0.17 0.90 0.89 0.84 0.99 0.97 0.84 2.60 2.54 2.19
Total Plan & Non-Plan
319.00 275.74 275.93 324.75 263.74 261.86 324.26 324.25 323.77 900.90 800.89 800.50 900.99 850.97 817.05 2769.90 2515.59 2479.11




56
APPENDIX II
DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES
STATEMENT SHOWING OUTLAY AND CORRESPONDING EXPENDITURE DURING
TENTH PLAN (FROM 2002-03 TO 2005-06)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme 10th Plan 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
As As Exp. as As Agreed RE Actual As Agreed RE Actual As Agreed RE Actual As Agreed Actual As Agreed
Propo- agreed  by on Propo- to Exp. Propo- to Exp. Propo- to Exp. Propo- to Expen- Propo- to
sed Planning 31.3. sed BE sed BE sed B.E. sed BE diture sed BE
Commi- 2006
ssion
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 51 6 1 7 1 81 9 2 02 1 2 2
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 1600 1500 1198.37 270.00 250.00 250.00 250.00 310.00 295.00 295.00 295.00 330.00 300.00 300.00 300.19 375.00 353 .00 353.18 400.00 380.00
2. Desert Development Programme 1200 1100 883.36 210.00 185.00 185.00 185.00 230.00 265.00 195.00 215.00 240.00 215.00 215.00 215.19 285.00 268.0 0 268.17 300.00 270.00
3. IWDP 1900 1800 1488.51 440.00 387.00 380.00 354.45 350.00 335.00 329.00 312.90 380.00 368.00 368.00 334.42 415.00 485.00 486.74 550.00 485.00
Total Watershed Programme 4700.00 4400.00 3570.24 920.00 822.00 815.00 789.45 890.00 895.00 819.00 822.90 950.00 883.00 883.00 849.00 1075.00 11 06.50 1108.89 1250.00 1115.00
4. Computerisation of Land Records 500 400.00 212.31 100.00 55.00 35.00 31.18 55.00 40.00 40.00 35.77 65.00 50.00 50.00 45.62 125.00 100.00 99.74 1 75.00 100.00
5. SRA&ULR 200 200.00 104.84 40.00 35.00 20.00 20.73 35.00 25.00 25.00 24.46 35.00 20.00 20.00 19.66 65.00 40.00 39.99 95.00 49.00
6. Comprehensive Modernization of 0.00 280.00 1.00
Land Records (CMLR)
7. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 365 365.00 275.27 63.00 63.00 60.00 59.00 66.00 66.00 51.00 55.28 80.00 80.00 80.00 80.00 80.00 80.00 80.99 85.0 0 80.00
8. Tech. Dev . Ext. and Training Scheme 100 90.00 60.77 20.00 17.00 16.00 13.70 20.00 17.00 14.00 15.08 15.00 15.00 15.00 14.99 20.00 17.00 17.00 20 .00 20.00

57
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 51 6 1 7 1 81 9 2 02 1 2 2
9. Investment Promotional Scheme 5.81 1.00 0.10 3.13 10.00 0.10 0.10 0.96 6.00 0.10 0.10 0.54 3.00 0.10 1.18 5.00 3.00
10. Appraisal Monitoring and Evaluation 100 71.00 0.00 20.00 5.95 2.95 4.85 0.54 1.20 0.50 1.20
11. Communication 0.00 1.05 0.95 1.05 0.36 1.70 1.20 1.70
New Initiatives 1000 0.00 100.00 1.00 0.00 0.00
12. Pradhan Mantri Grameen Jal 0.00 200.00 200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Sanvardhan Yojana
13. Bio Fuel 49.00 10.00 10.00 0.20 0.00 120.00 50.00 49.00 200.00 50.00
Total Plan 5965.00 6526.00 4278.24 1163.00 1000.00 950.00 917.19 1176.00 1050.00 950.00 954.45 1361.00 1261.00 1050.00 1010.61 1488.00 1396.00 13 95.99 2110.00 1418.00
Non Plan 0.00
Secretariat Economic Services 11.73 3.81 3.62 2.83 3.66 2.83 3.48 3.43 3.00 3.44* 3.22 3.70
Total Plan & Non Plan 5965.00 6526.00 4289.97 1163.00 1003.81 953.62 919.87 1176.00 1053.86 950.00 957.28 1361.00 1264.48 1053.43 1013.61 1488. 00 1399.44 1399.21 2110.00 1421.70
*BE of Rs. 3.44 Crore was reduced to Rs. 3.29 Crore at RE stage.







58
APPENDIX III
RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 28 (16TH REPORT,
14TH LOK SABHA)
The Committee in their earlier recommendations had expressed
serious concerns over the foreclosure of projects under different
watershed schemes of the Department viz. IWDP , DDP , DPAP and
TDET.
The Committee find from the information furnished by the
department that some projects were foreclosed at the last stage when
major portion of the allocated outlay was already released. For example
under IWDP , in Firozabad Rs. 403.70 lakh out of the total cost of
Rs. 459.16 lakh were released and in case of Dhenkanal II (Orissa) out
of the total cost of Rs. 100.60 lakh Rs. 89.08 lakh were already released.
As regards the observation of the Committee with regard to waste of
national resources, the Department has responded that the investment
made in these projects is not wasted. It is utilized in implementing
various activities of some conservation, water harvesting, aforestation,
pasture development, creation of livelihood opportunities, training of
stake holders etc.
The Committee deplore the way their recommendation on such a
serious issue like foreclosure of projects has been responded to by the
Department. Instead of taking certain corrective measures, the
foreclosure has been justified by the department. On the one hand it
has been stated that the foreclosure does not amount to national
wastage, on the other hand it is stated that the reason for foreclosure
(in case of TDET projects) was non-achievement of the intended
purpose. Further, regarding recoveries the Department has clarified on
the one hand that recoveries are effected if funds released are not
properly utilised and on the other hand the reply is silent on the
recommendation of the Committee to furnish the details of the
recoveries effected from States (refer recommendation para no. 3.23 of
10th Report—14th Lok Sabha). Further, the reason of foreclosure of TDET
projects has been stated as pendency of refund of unspent balances.
The Committee express serious concern at the casual manner, in
which the Department has addressed such a serious issue of foreclosure
of projects. The Committee feel that foreclosure indicates some problems
in implementing the projects. As such, there is no question of

59
achievement of the objective of the projects. Foreclosure certainly
amounts to wastage of huge national resources of the starved economy.
The Committee while strongly reiterating their earlier recommendation
would like that the reasons for foreclosure, the stage at which the
project was foreclosed, the total cost of the project and the funds
released at the stage of foreclosure, recovery, if any, made, etc. should
invariably be analysed periodically and indicated in the Budget
documents like Performance Budget. A proper system of monitoring
should be evolved as suggested by the Committee in the earlier para
of the report.

60
APPENDIX IV
STATEMENT SHOWING STATE-WISE AND YEAR-WISE IWDP
PROJECTS SANCTIONED DURING 9TH PLAN
(in numbers)
Sl.No. State Year
1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 Total
1. Andhra Pradesh 5647 1 0 3 2
2. Bihar 000011
3. Chhattisgarh 00046 1 0
4. Gujarat 16676 2 6
5. Haryana 200135
6. Himachal Pradesh 22587 2 4
7. Jammu & Kashmir 120047
8. Jharkhand 001214
9. Karnataka 45508 2 2
10. Kerala 000202
11. Maharashtra 13574 2 0
12. Madhya Pradesh 5 2 11 9 10 37
13. Orissa 66169 2 8
14. Punjab 000033
15. Rajasthan 21897 2 7
16. Tamil Nadu 11894 2 3
17. Uttar Pradesh 77937 3 3
18. Uttaranchal 10046 1 1
19. West Bengal 000011
Total 38 41 63 78 97 317
North Eastern States 7 7 10 29 28 61
Grand Total 45 48 73 107 125 398

61
APPENDIX V
STATEMENT SHOWING STATE-WISE AND YEAR-WISE IWDP
PROJECTS SANCTIONED DURING TENTH PLAN
Sl.No. State 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 Total
No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of
projects projects projects projects projects
sanctioned sanctioned sanctioned sanctioned sanctioned
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Andhra Pradesh 2 10 10 16 38
2. Bihar 0 9 9 17 35
3. Chhattisgarh 0 8 9 15 32
4. Goa 0 2 024
5. Gujarat 0 11 9 15 35
6. Haryana 0 4 6 5 13
7. Himachal Pradesh 0 8 2 13 23
8. Jammu & Kashmir 0 1 4 10 15
9. Jharkhand 0 6 4 6 16
10. Karnataka 1 9 10 17 37
11. Kerala 0 3 0 12 15
12. Maharashtra 0 9 10 13 32
13. Madhya Pradesh 1 16 14 19 50
14. Orissa 0 7 9 15 31
15. Punjab 0 0 4 5 9
16. Rajasthan 0 9 9 15 33
17. Tamil Nadu 0 11 10 19 40
18. Uttar Pradesh 0 13 13 16 42
19. Uttaranchal 4 3 6 12 25
20. West Bengal 0 2 4 7 13
Total 8 141 140 249 538

62
12 3 4 5 6 7
North Eastern States
21. Arunachal Pradesh 8 10 11 22 51
22. Assam 15 14 35 23 87
23. Manipur 6 5 7 8 26
24. Meghalaya 0 7 7 7 21
25. Mizoram 5 5 5 17 32
26. Nagaland 7 5 5 5 22
27. Sikkim 0 3 4 4 11
28. Tripura 0 0 7 5 12
Total of NE 41 49 81 91 262
Total of IWDP 49 190 221 340 800

63
APPENDIX VI
DISTRICT/TEHSILS/SUB-DIVISION SANCTIONED AND WORK COMPLETED UNDER CLR PROGRAMME AS ON 31.3.2006
Sl. Name of Total No. Districts District Monitoring Total Number of Total number of Number of Number of Tehsils/ Tehsil/district centre fu lly
No. the State/ of Districts covered Data Cell at State number sub-division Tehsils/Talukas Tehsils/Talukas Talukas/Blocks operational (in terms of
UTs. Centre Head of Sub- covered Blocks Blocks where computer on demand distribution RoR
Quarters division sanctioned centre set up & mutation updation)
 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2
1. Andhra Pradesh 23 23 23 1 79 79 308 Tehsils 308 308 308
2. Arunachal Pradesh 14 14 149 Circles
3. Assam 23 23 1 12 155 Circles 83
4. Bihar 37 37 101 515 Anchals
5. Gujarat 25 25 25 1 54 35 226 Taluks 226 226 226
6. Goa 1 1 11 Taluks 11 11 11
7. Haryana 19 19 20 1 47 47 112  Tehsils 115 67 7
8. Himachal Pradesh 12 12 12 1 51 51 110 Tehsils 110 104 50
9. Jammu & kashmir 14 14 59 Tehsils 59 59
10. Jharkhand 22 22 210 Anchals 210 210
11. Karnataka 27 27 27 1 52 52 177 Taluks 177 177 177

64
 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2
12. Kerala 14 14 63 Taluks 63 63 1
13. Madhya Pradesh 45 45 45 1 185 182 273 Tehsils 273 257 257
14. Maharashtra 35 35 35 1 109 109 358 Taluks 358 312 312
15. Manipur 9 8 5 38 Sub-division 5
16. Meghalaya 7 32 Blocks
17. Mizoram 9 9 23 Sub-division 23 23
18. Nagaland 8 8 93 Circles
19. Orissa 30 30 30 1 58 58 171 Tehsils 171 151 151
20. Punjab 17 17 72 72 Tehsils
21. Rajasthan 32 32 1 188 188 246 Tehsils 246 241 241
22. Sikkim 4 4 9 Sub-division 9 4 2
23. Tamil Nadu 29 29 29 1 73 73 206 Taluks 206 206 206
24. Tripura 4 4 15 38 C.D. Blocks 37
25. Uttar Pradesh 70 70 70 1 305 Tehsils 300 305 305

65
 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2
26. Uttaranchal 13 13 13 1 84 84 Tehsils 84 55 55
27. West Bengal 18 18 18 1 65 65 341 Blocks 341 341 341
28. Chhattisgarh 16 16 16 1 63 63 98 Tehsils 98 98 98
29. D&N Haveli 1 1 1 Taluk
30. Delhi 9 9 27 Tehsils 5 5
31. Pondicherry 1 1 2 1 8 Taluks 5 2 2
32. Chandigarh 1 1 1 Tehsil
33. A&N Islands 1 7 Tehsils
34. Daman & Diu 2 1 2 Taluks 1
35. Lakshadweep 1 4 Sub-division
Total 593 582 365 16 1212 1019 4532 3519 3225 2755

66
APPENDIX VII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH
SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY,
THE 21 MARCH, 2006
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mohan Jena
3. Shri Dawa Narbula
4. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
5. Shri Prabodh Panda
6. Shri Mohan Singh
7. Shri Sita Ram Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
9. Shri Penumalli Madhu
10. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
** ** **

67
Representatives of Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Dr. Renuka Viswanathan, Secretary (LR)
2. Shri L. Rynjah, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Atul Chaturvedi, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
4. Shri Rakesh Behari, Joint Secretary
5. Shri D.P . Roy, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened for briefing by the representatives of
(i) Department of Rural Development and (ii) Department of Land
Resources on Demands for Grants (2006-2007). He informed the
Committee that the sittings of the Committee for the purpose of
examination of Demands for Grants (2006-2007) (as intimated to the
members of the Committee vide Lok Sabha Secretariat Notice dated
23 March, 2006) had to be rescheduled due to rescheduling of Seventh
Session of Lok Sabha. The detailed revised programme for oral evidence
and consideration and adoption of the Reports was then circulated to
the members of the Committee. Chairman solicited cooperation of the
members of the Committee to finalise the reports on Demands for
Grants (2006-2007).
** ** **
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Departments
of Rural Development and Land Resources and drew their attention
to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker.
He in his welcome address raised the main issues which included
underspending of outlay, huge opening balances with various State
Governments, underachievement of targets, mismatch of physical and
financial achievement as indicated in the various Budget documents
of the respective Departments.
4. ** ** **
[The representatives of the Department of Rural Development then
withdrew at 1625 hrs. Since the Secretary , Department of Rural
Development is also looking after the Department of Land Resources,
she along with the common officers of both the Departments
(Department of Rural Development and Department of Land Resources)
stayed back and officers dealing with the Department of Land
Resources joined them.]
**Not related to the Report.

68
5. The Secretary briefed the Committee about the various activities
and the highlights of the Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the
Department of Land Resources. The main issues that came up during
the course of briefing were lack of effective mechanism for evaluating
the physical and financial performance of the projects under different
schemes/programmes, need for people’s participation especially that
of women in implementation of projects, lack of coordination between
different Ministries/Organisations in watershed development projects
etc. The members raised various queries and the witnesses responded
to the queries of the members.
6. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on
22 March, 2006 at 1500 hrs.

69
APPENDIX VIII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 12 APRIL, 2006
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room
G-074, Parliament Library Building (PLB), New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mohan Jena
3. Shri Subhash Maharia
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri Dawa Narbula
6. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
7. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
8. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
9. Shri Mohan Singh
10. Shri Sita  Ram Singh
11. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
13. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
15. Shri Penumalli Madhu
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania

70
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Dr. Renuka Viswanathan, Secretary (LR)
2. Shri L. Rynjah, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Atul Chaturvedi, AS & FA
4. Shri Rakesh Bihari, Joint Secretary
5. Shri D.P . Roy, Joint Secretary
6. Shrimati Smita Chugh, Joint Secretary
2. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department
of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) and drew their
attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the Directions by the
Speaker. He thereafter made certain crucial remarks on the
implementation of major schemes of the Department. The major area
of concern in the schemes related to wastelands development such as
Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP), Desert
Development Programme (DDP) and Drought Prone Areas Programme
(DPAP), the lack of mechanism to evaluate the physical achievement
of the projects, foreclosure of many projects thereby wasting the national
resources, huge under-spending under different schemes. He also
referred to landmark achievements made by some of the States under
the schemes related to land records i.e., Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and Updating of Land Records (SRA & ULR) and
Computerization of Land Records (CLR) which needed to be replicated
by the other States. He also referred to the poor position of land
records in North-Eastern States which needed more attention under
the schemes of the Department.
3. The Secretary of the Department responded to the major issues
raised by Hon’ble Chairman. Thereafter members of the Committee
raised several queries supplementing the issues raised by the Hon’ble
Chairman. The Committee observed that wastelands if reclaimed, could
be a major source of employment to the unemployed in the country.
The role of private sector in the field of wastelands development was

71
also deliberated during the discussion. A suggestion was also made to
find out if the wastelands could be used for construction of houses
under Indira Awaas Yojana. The representatives of the Department
responded to the various queries of the members of the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

72
APPENDIX IX
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 8TH MAY, 2006
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
4. Shri Prabodh Panda
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
6. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
7. Shri Sita Ram Singh
8. Shri Bagun  Sumbrai
9. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
11. Shri Penumalli Madhu
12. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary

73
2. In the absence of Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Hannan
Mollah, M.P . to act as Chairman for the sitting under Rule 258(3) of
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the draft Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department
of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) and adopted the
draft Report with slight modifications.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Report on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on
9 May, 2006 at 1100 hrs.

74
APPENDIX X
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.5 The Committee note that the primary objective
of inserting direction 73A in the Directions by
the Speaker was to make the Government more
accountable for implementation of the various
recommendations of the Committee. The
Committee are concerned to note that even after
elapse of around six months when the
statement on Tenth Report has fallen due and
about three months when the Ministry was
requested for making the revised statement in
respect of Second Report, the statements are
yet to be made by the Hon’ble Minister. The
Committee find that the Department is taking
the desired action to make the statements in
the Second part of the Seventh Session. The
Committee recommend tot he Department to
ensure that the statements are made at the
earliest during the Second part of the Seventh
Session. The Committee further strongly
recommend to the Department to ensure that
the statements on each of the reports are made
within the specified period  i.e., six months after
the presentation of the Report to Parliament as
per direction 73A of the Directions by the
Speaker, in future.
2. 2.17 The Committee find from the data indicated
for 9th and 10th Plan that there is huge
mismatch between the proposed allocation and
agreed to allocation. Whereas during 9th Plan,
the allocation as agreed to is around 40 per
cent of the proposed outlay, the agreed to
allocation during 10th Plan is Rs. 561 crore

75
12 3
more than the proposed outlay. The department
has submitted new guidelines as a reason for
slow utilisation and getting lesser allocation
during 9th Plan. The reasons put forth by the
Department for getting around 40 per cent of
the proposed allocation during 9th Plan are not
convincing. The plea accorded by the
Department for getting more than the proposed
allocation during Tenth Plan is that Rs. 1,000
crore was provided for ‘New Initiatives’ and
thus te outlay agreed for Tenth Plan would
come up to Rs. 5,526 crore which is Rs. 439
crore lesser than the proposed outlay. Even if
it is accepted, the projected outlay during 10th
Plan was Rs. 580.46 crore lesser than proposed
outlay during 9th Plan.
The Committee are surprised to find that the
proposed allocation during 9th Plan was higher
when the guidelines were new but during 10th
Plan, the projections were reduced, even when
the field agencies had adapted themselves to
the new guidelines. The Committee conclude
that the projections are not properly presented
to the Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance for different plans. Even the Secretary
during the course of the oral evidence has
admitted that somewhere the mistake is there.
The Committee strongly recommend that the
Department should take utmost care while
making projections for 11th Plan. The
perspective plans for wastelands development
should be prepared by the various State
Governments after due consultations with the
Implementing Agencies. Not only that district
level plans should be prepared after taking into
consideration the total work to be undertaken
keeping in view the area of wastelands in that
area, the capacity of the implementing agencies
etc., while holding key consultation at the grass-
root level and at the Panchayat level. With

76
12 3
regard to other schemes for land records also
the projections should be made keeping in view
the work completed and the pending work. The
projections should be realistic to the extent
possible. Besides, the outlay, strategy and
priorities during 11th Plan should be chalked
out well before the start of the 11th Plan i.e.
the year 2007-2008, so as to ensure meaningful
utilisation of outlay. The early finalisation of
outlay for the 11th Plan would further enable
the State Governments/implementing agencies
to make timely allocations under different
schemes/programmes.
3. 2.18 The Committee further find from the data of
allocation of outlay that whatever may be the
case of placing projections for different schemes
of the Department, it is certain that adequate
priority has been accorded by the Government
while finalising the outlay for 10th Plan. It is
very rare when any Ministry/Department has
been allocated resources more than the
projections. The Committee also observe that
the focused and balanced development of
wastelands is imperative keeping in view the
decline in the availability of land per person
over the years. Further, the facts revealed by
the Parthasarthy Committee establish that there
is concentration of poverty in the dry lands of
the country. From the position as indicated
above, the Committee find that more attention
needs to be given for the development of
wastelands in the country. The wastelands
when developed can be a major source for
fulfilling the need for food and water security.
Not only that it can be a major source for
providing employment to the poorest of poor
in the country. The detailed scheme-wise
position of outlay, expenditure and physical
achievement has been analysed in the
succeeding chapter of the report. Here the

77
12 3
Committee would like to recommend for
adequate outlay for different schemes of
wastelands in the country. Besides
recommending for higher outlay, there is an
urgent need for successful implementation of
the schemes/programmes which has been
reviewed by the Committee in detail in the
succeeding chapter of the report.
4. 2.19 The Committee observe that Parthasarthy
Committee has analysed the watershed
programmes in detail and given detailed
valuable recommendations. The
recommendations of the said Committee should
be carefully examined while holding wide-
ranging consultations with all concerned and
the Department should take the desired action
to implement the accepted recommendations of
the Committee. The Sanding Committee should
also be kept apprised of the status of the
implementation of the major recommendations
of the Parthsarthy Committee.
5. 2.20 The Committee further find from the
information provided by the Department that
Rs. 1,000 crore was earmarked for new
initiatives during 10th Plan. Even when the 10th
Plan is coming to an end, no new initiative
could be finalised. The new programme ‘Bio-
fuel’ proposed by the Department is still at a
nescient stage. The Committee in their earlier
reports on Demands for Grants had repeatedly
been expressing concern over the way new
schemes are proposed. The Committee express
strong concern over the way the scarce
resources are being blocked for the new
schemes, which are not implemented. The
blocking of resources in this way clearly means
depriving the other schemes/programmes of
their due share. The Committee hold the strong
view that the new schemes should be properly

78
12 3
planned and the allocation should be
earmarked only when the spadework has been
done and all the paraphernalia to implement
the scheme is ready.
6. 2.21 The Committee note that the Planning
Commission has constituted two working
groups on Land Relations and Rainfed Areas
for Eleventh Five Year Plan to finalise the
strategy for the development of wastelands. The
expected role of private sector in the task of
development of wastelands is also being
discussed while chalking out the strategy for
Eleventh Plan. The Committee note that the
major apprehension in involving private sector
is that the interests of the local people may
not be harmed. They feel that the Government
should carefully consider the issue of
involvement of private sector in consultation
with the State Governments and local bodies.
The Committee further recommend that strategy
for the Eleventh Plan should be finalised
expeditiously.
7. 2.26 The Committee note from the trends of
allocation of outlay during the years 2004-05,
2005-06 and 2006-07 that the agreed allocation
is lesser than the proposed allocation. During
the year 2006-07, the agreed allocation is
Rs. 689 crore lesser than the proposed outlay.
The Committee find it interesting that whereas
the overall allocation for 10th Plan is more than
the projections, the allocations under Annual
Plans are lesser than the projection. It is difficult
to understand the way the budgeting exercise
is being undertaken where there seems to be
no planning. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the basis of making projections
under each of the Annual Plan.
8. 2.27 Whereas the releases form the Centre have been
stated to be almost cent per cent of the

79
12 3
allocated outlay, the unspent balances to the
tune of Rs. 1,405 crore with the implementing
agencies is really a matter of concern to the
Committee. They are not convinced with the
plea given by the Department whereby the
Department has tried to justify the unspent
amount by stating that the unspent balance do
not exceed 10 per cent of the project cost at
any point of time. The Department holds the
view that the balance is necessitated to maintain
availability of funds at the implementation level
to avoid eventualities of non-payment of wages
as wastelands development projects are labour
intensive projects. However, the Committee
wish to point out that Rs. 1,405 crore is almost
equal to the overall allocation of the
Department during the year 2006-07. The
Committee feel that the unspent balances
should be seen with reference to the allocation
made during a particular year and not with
reference to the total project cost under different
schemes. The projects may continue even after
five to seven years. Roll-on money to the tune
of 10 to 20 per cent of the allocation under a
scheme during a year can be justified on the
grounds stated by the Department. The
justification of unspent balance corresponding
to the total project cost can not be understood.
The Committee find that instead of taking
stringent measures for keeping the unspent
balances to the minimum, the Department has
tried to justify it which the Committee really
disapprove. The Department should take all the
corrective measures and inform the Committee
accordingly.
9. 3.13 The Committee in their earlier reports have
repeatedly been expressing their concern over
the multiplicity of programmes/schemes to
tackle the problem of wastelands in the country
and have been emphasising on the need for

80
12 3
convergence of the programme. While
examining the Demands for Grants, it has
repeatedly been brought to the notice of
Government but the issue although agreed to
in principle lacks unanimity among the various
Ministries involved in handling the issue of
wastelands development. The Technical
Committee in Chapter three of the report has
expressed similar concerns. It has been stated
that serious differences persist among different
Ministries regarding the ownership of the
unified programme.
The Committee also note that in the Mid-Term
Appraisal document of the Planning
Commission, the formula for bringing the
watershed activities under one umbrella has
been suggested which seems to be not agreeable
to the concerned Ministries due to their
reluctance to lease the area of activities related
to watershed management being undertaken by
them. The Committee also note that the
proposal has been mooted by the Ministry of
Agriculture for a nodal centralised agency i.e.
Rainfed Area Authority. Again the issue of
conflict is the ownership of the aforesaid
authority. Further the Committee also find that
finally it has been agreed that the said authority
would be best located under the umbrella of
the PMO. The Committee feel that sufficient
time has been lost over the issue of taking
decision on the issue of convergence. It is high
time to resolve the issue of convergence at the
earliest.
10. 3.14 The Committee further note the claim of the
Department that the extent of wastelands has
come down from 63.85 million hectares to 55.27
million hectares between the period 2000 and
2005. The Committee find that even with the
efforts of the Department of Land Resources

81
12 3
the target for development of wastelands
during five years of 10th Plan are 18 million
hectares. Out of this target, 12.47 hectares of
wastelands have already been developed. The
other Ministries/Departments of the Union
Government as well as State Governments
involved with the task of development of
wastelands may also be contributing
substantially towards the development of major
areas of wastelands in the country. In this
scenario, the Committee find that there is some
mismatch between the achievement proclaimed
by the Department and the actual area
developed. Although the Department seems
very optimistic by finding that the wastelands
area has declined as found by the updated
Atlas, the achievements reflected by the
updated Atlas i.e. development of only 8.58
million hectares of land during five years
period is too meagre even when compared with
the targets of five years i.e. 18 millions hectares
only of the Department of Land Resources. If
the targets fixed and proclaimed by different
Ministries of Union as well as State
Governments are added together, the whole
wastelands area would have been developed
by now. In view of this scenario, the Committee
feel that the achievements reflected under
schemes may not be true at the ground level.
The Committee would like a clarification of the
Department in this regard so as to enable them
to understand the position in proper
perspective.
11. 3.25 The Committee in their 10th and 16th Reports
had expressed serious concerns over the issue
of foreclosure of projects under the schemes
related to wastelands development i.e.
Integrated Wastelands Development Programme
(IWDP), Drought Prone Areas Programme
(DPAP), Desert Development Programme (DDP)

82
12 3
and Technology Development, Extension and
Training (TDET). While examining the action
taken replies, the Committee had observed that
some of the projects were foreclosed at the last
stage when substantial allocation had been
released for the project thereby wasting national
resources. Detailed analysis of the issue indicate
that the system of foreclosure has been given
in detail in the watershed guidelines. It has
been stated that at the initial phase of a project
i.e. the first nine to twelve months, if it is
considered that the project cannot be
implemented successfully for certain
unavoidable circumstances and reasons the
ZPO/DRDA shall recommend for its foreclosure
to the State Governments which will consider
such requests on merits and send its
recommendations to the Department of Land
Resources. As reported in 16th Report of the
Committee, most of the projects are being
foreclosed even at the last stage. The Committee
observe that the guidelines do not seem to have
been followed while foreclosing projects under
different schemes.
The Committee further find from the data
furnished by the department that for a large
number of projects under DPAP and DDP
funding has been stopped. The Committee
would like to be informed about the difference
between the funding stopped and foreclosure
of the projects since two different data have
been indicated in the Budget documents. The
Committee would also like the Department to
furnish information with regard to the date of
sanction, funds earmarked and date of
foreclosure/when funds were stopped in each
of the foreclosed project scheme-wise so as to
enable the Committee to analyse the position
in detail. The Committee would also like to
recommend that such information about the

83
12 3
foreclosure/funding stopped should regularly
be maintained and indicated in the Budget
documents.
12. 3.26 As r egards the projects transferred from
erstwhile Employment Assurance Scheme of the
Department of Rural development to the
Department of Land Resources during the year
1999-2000, the Committee note that the initial
committed liability in case of these projects was
Rs. 1500 crore. As regards the total funds
released to these projects, Rs. 900.68 crore have
been released so far for these projects. The
Committee further find that the Department has
no information with regard to the status of
projects and the physical achievements for these
projects. Not only that, simply releasing the
outlay with regard to claims made by States is
considered as completion of the project. It has
further been stated that the details of physical
and financial achievements for these projects
seem the merger of watershed component of
EAS in IWDP . The Committee deplore the way
the monitoring of the project is being
undertaken by the Department. To analyse the
position with regard to EAS projects transferred
from the Department of Rural Development to
the Department of Land Resources, the
Committee would like to be apprised about the
number of projects transferred, outlay
earmarked, the area developed in each of the
project district-wise so as to enable the
Committee to have a proper analysis.
13. 3.27 The Committee have repeatedly been expressing
the concern over lack of mechanism to analyse
the performance of projects being undertaken
under different schemes in their respective
reports. The Committee in their 10th Repot had
even suggested a mechanism to evaluate the
performance of different projects. While noting

84
12 3
that there is a long gestation period the
Committee had suggested to evaluate the
projects at various stages like first stage, second
stage and third stage etc. and benchmarking
the projects by indicating poor, satisfactory or
very good. The Committee further find that
Hon’ble Prime Minister has expressed similar
concerns over the lack of focus on outcomes.
He in his address to the nation on 15 August,
2005 has expressed the view that merely
utilising outlays has been the norms under
different schemes. Not only that the Technical
Committee has also expressed similar views
and suggested a similar mechanism as
suggested by this Standing Committee to
evaluate the performance of projects. Even
when the Standing Committee, Hon’ble Prime
Minister and the Technical Committee of the
Department of Rural Development have been
expressing their concerns over the sorry state
of affairs of monitoring of projects, it seems
from the various Budget documents that least
attention is paid towards the serious concerns
expressed from various quarters. From the
replies at various places it appears the number
of installments released has been deemed to be
the mechanism to now that the project has been
completed.
The Committee deplore the way the monitoring
of the projects is being undertaken by the
Department under the various schemes of
wastelands development. The Committee would
like the Department to pay serious attention to
the observations of the Committee as reported
above and furnish a detailed note for the
information of the Committee indicating thereby
the steps proposed to be initiated by the
Department to address the concerns as
expressed by this Committee and from various
other quarters.

85
12 3
14. 3.40 The Committee note that different data with
regard to total wastelands in the country which
need to be developed has been indicated in
the different documents. As per the initial Atlas
brought out by the Department in the year
2000, total wastelands has been indicated as
63.85 million hectares. The latest data launched
in 2005 indicate the wastelands as 55.27 million
hectares. Further the Technical Committee in
its report has stated that 45.58 million hectares
have been treated so far since 8th Plan by the
initiatives of the Union Government. It has
further been stated that excluding the 46 million
hectares as already treated, the areas remaining
to be treated are 125 million hectares. While
appreciating the fact that there are various
estimates with regard to wastelands
development and it is difficult to find out the
exact data in this regard, the Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to have some data
indicating the minimum wastelands area that
needs to be developed so as to enable the
Government to prepare an action plan. The
answer to this issue is the perspective plans
by the different State Governments.
15. 3.41 The Committee have repeatedly been
recommending to the Department to get the
perspective plans finalised from various State
Governments on the issue of development of
wastelands. They find from the replies that
none of the States is ready with the perspective
plan. Only two States i.e. Tamil Nadu and
Kerala have submitted the perspective plans in
respect of few districts. The Committee feel that
there is an urgent need to have a fair idea of
the task in hand and the task to be handled in
future with regard to wastelands development
in the country. Further as observed in the
preceding paras of the report there are varying
estimates with regard to the area falling under

86
12 3
wastelands as well as the task of development
of wastelands handled by the Government
initiatives. The exact idea of the wastelands
area, work involved can be known when the
perspective plans are ready. Besides perspective
plans as submitted by the State Governments
can be a better input to formulate the national
plan. In view of this, the Committee strongly
recommend to pursue further with the State
Governments to finalise the perspective plans
so that the same can be used while deciding
the strategy for the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
16. 3.42 The Committee further note that as indicated
by Technical Committee Rs. 1,50,000 crore
would be required to treat the estimated land
of 125 million hectares. The Technical
Committee has suggested to double the current
programme outlay. Further it has also been
stated that the allocation made under National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme would
supplement the outlay provided by different
Government schemes for the development of
wastelands. The Committee find that the outlay
for National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme has been separately allocated by the
Department of Rural Development. Rs. 11,300
crore during 2006-2007 have been earmarked
for 200 districts which have been covered by
the Guarantee Scheme. Till the scheme is not
made applicable nationwide, it is difficult to
know how far the outlay provided for NREGS
could supplement the Government initiatives
taken under different wastelands programmes.
Besides there is an urgent need to have some
sort of coordinating mechanism for the schemes
being undertaken under NREGS related to
watershed activities and the schemes taken
under the Department of Rural Development
or some other Ministries of Union Government
or State Governments. The Committee feel that

87
12 3
Gram Sabha is the best mechanism to
coordinate the activities related to wastelands
development. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken by the Department
in this regard.
17. 3.43 The Committee find that some initiatives are
being taken for formulating the National Land
Resource Management Policy. The Committee
would like the Government to pursue the
matter further so that there is proper direction
in land management.
18. 3.44 The Committee wish to point out that Land
Acquisition Act 1894 is an old and outdated
enactment which needs considerable
amendments keeping in view the changed
circumstances. The Committee have repeatedly
been stressing for bringing amendments to this
Act. The Committee understand that proposal
for the amendment of Land Acquisition Act is
under consideration with the Department for a
long time. They find from the submission made
by the Secretary during the course of oral
evidence that much emphasis is not being given
to finalise the proposals for the amendment of
the said Act. The Committee are not convinced
by the statement made by the Secretary that
land is a State subject and the Central Act will
not become effective unless the State accepts
it.  The Committee note that Central Acts are
the model for the State Governments on which
they draft their policies and laws. State
Governments are waiting for the amendments
in Land Acquisition Act. The old and outdated
Act has been a hinderance for implementation
of various projects where acquisition of land is
required. In view of this, the Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to
finalise the proposals for amendment to the
aforesaid Act and bring the same before the
Parliament at the earliest.

88
12 3
19. 3.45 The Committee further note that some
initiatives are being taken to amend the Land
Revenue Act. Consultations are being held with
the interested Ministries. The Committee stress
that the proposals for amendment of the Land
Revenue Act should be finalised at the earliest.
20. 3.46 The Committee find that land is the basic
constraint in implementation of some of the
major schemes of the Department specifically
Indira Awaas Yojana where it is difficult to
extend the benefits to the landless persons. The
possibility of using wastelands for setting up
agricultural universities and for constructing
houses under Government schemes for the
landless persons should be discussed with the
various State  Governments and the Committee
apprised about the feedback received in this
regard.
21. 4.14 The Committee note that IWDP is the most
important programme of the Department for
the development of wastelands in the country.
The status of financial achievement during
9th and 10th Plan as given above indicate that
there has not been major enhancement in the
outlay under the Scheme. The outlay for
Rs. 450 crore during the year 2002-03 has been
enhanced to Rs. 565 crore during 2006-07. But
the allocation earmarked has not been fully
utilised during each year of 9th and 10th Plan.
Under-spending is the recurring feature of this
programme. As regards the physical
achievement the data indicate that almost half
of the projects sanctioned are still continuing.
The number of projects taken up during 10th
Plan are almost double the projects undertaken
during 9th Plan. Further, there are problems
like unspent balances, non-submission of
Utilisation Certificate and misutilisation of
funds as pointed out in C&AG Report for

89
12 3
which certain recoveries were to be made. The
Committee conclude that there are serious
problems in implementation of IWDP
programme which need to be addressed
urgently. Taking into consideration the gigantic
task of development of wastelands in the
country, the Committee strongly recommend to
enhance the allocation under IWDP which is
one of the major schemes of the Department.
While recommending for higher outlay the
Committee would also like the Department to
ensure that the allocation earmarked in a year
is utilised fully.
22. 4.15 As r egards the monitoring of the physical status
of the projects the Committee in the preceding
paras of the report have noted that the common
problems with regard to the projects undertaken
for wastelands under different schemes of the
Department are foreclosure of projects, stopping
payment to projects etc. The issue has been
dealt with in detail and suggestions made in
the preceding part of the report. As regards
the issue of time overrun of the projects being
undertaken under IWDP , the Committee find
that the gestation period of projects is five years
whereas almost half of the projects taken
upduring 9th Plan are still to be completed.
The committee also note that the Technical
Committee has suggested to increase the
gestation period of projects from five years to
eight years. The Committee also observe that
in case the gestation period is increased the
average cost of the projects may also increase.
The Committee would further like the
Department to examine the suggestion of the
Technical Committee and furnish their
comments so as to enable the Committee to
review the position further.

90
12 3
23. 4.24 The Committee find from the information
furnished above that foreclosure and stopping
of funds to the projects is a major problem
under DDP and DPAP blocks. The issue has
been dealt with in detail in the preceding paras
of the report. Here the Committee may
highlight that the number of projects foreclosed
and for which funds have been stopped is more
than in the case of IWDP schemes. As
recommended in the earlier part of the report,
the Committee would like the information
about the year of foreclosure, funds allocated
at the time of foreclosure of each project so as
to enable the Committee to make proper
analysis.
24. 4.25 The Committee further find that DDP and
DPAP blocks were identified more than a
decade back. The situation in these blocks may
have changed. Many blocks would have turned
greener and need no assistance under these
programmes whereas some other additional
blocks may need assistance. Further, requests
from some of the States are being received by
the Department for coverage of additional
blocks. The Committee also note that the
Parthasarthy Committee was supposed to look
into the issue of exclusion/inclusion of DDP
and DPAP blocks. Since the said Committee
has already submitted the report, the committee
would like to be informed whether the said
issue has been addressed in the report and if
so, the details thereof.
25. 4.33 The Technology Development, Extension and
Training (TDET) Scheme is an important
scheme, the foremost objective of which is
operationalisation of cost effective and proven
technologies and dissemination of research
findings and appropriate technologies for the
development of various categories of

91
12 3
wastelands. From the data furnished by the
Department with regard to financial
achievement the Committee find that even the
meagre outlay i.e. Rs. 15 crore during 2004-05
and Rs. 17 crore during 2005-06 could not be
utilised fully. Various reasons like beneficiaries
contribution, delay in the release of State share,
delay in submission of progress reports and
non-receipt of fresh proposals have been cited
as the reasons for shortfall in utilisation of
funds. The Committee also note that even the
few number of projects undertaken are not
being successfully implemented. Out of 161
projects, as many as 22 projects ere foreclosed.
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need
for detailed interaction with the various
research institutes like ICAR, State Agricultural
Universities which are basically involved with
the research in this field. Besides there is an
urgent need to motivate these institutions to
initiate more and more projects. There is an
urgent need to study the international
experience with regard to wastelands
development. The Committee desire some
concrete action in this regard to be taken by
Government.
26. 4.34 Besides initiating research studies one of the
objectives of the programme is dissemination
of research findings and appropriate
technologies. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the number of demonstration
projects undertaken under the aforesaid
schemes. Besides, the initiatives taken for
dissemination of research findings and
technologies by the Department should also be
intimated to the Committee to enable them to
analyse the performance of the scheme.
27. 5.14 Maintenance and updating of land records is
an important area which needs to be addressed

92
12 3
urgently. Land records are the basic document
of the property owned by an individual as well
as by the group of people and Government at
various levels. The importance of land records
is immense not only for an individual but also
for Government for the future planning. Once
the land records are properly maintained, it will
bring transparency and a mechanism to have
an idea of Benami landholdings. The Committee
find that a laudable scheme Computerisation
of Land Records has been initiated by the
Union Government with 100 per cent Central
assistance since 1988-89. The outlay provided
so far i.e. Rs. 416.06 crore could not be utilised
fully by the State Governments. The utilisation
upto 31 January, 2006 is Rs. 256.71 crore. The
Committee feel that under-spending of around
40 per cent of the outlay is a major area of
concern. Further the Committee note that the
allocation during the year 2005-06 was double
as compared to previous year. The Committee
also find from the replies that sincere efforts
have not been made to find out the reasons
for huge under-spending. It has simply been
stated that the scheme is demand driven. The
Committee while expressing their concern over
the under-utilisation of funds would like the
Department to find out specific reasons for
under-spending State-wise and inform the
Committee accordingly.
28. 5.15 The Committee further note that States of
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Goa and Gujarat have
fully operationalised the system and made
online updation through computerized system.
Besides many other States such as Madhya
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal,
Sikkim, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh have also
taken necessary steps in this direction by
affecting regular mutation/updation of land
records. Few other States have also completed

93
12 3
the basic data entry work and started regular
updation of land records. The worst performing
State is Meghalaya and some Union Territories
viz. , Andaman & Nicobar Islands and
Lakshadweep. The Committee appreciate the
efforts made by some of the States like
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Goa and Gujarat who
could not only fully computerize the land
records but also could make updation possible
through computerized system. The Committee
would like the Department to pursue the matter
with other States so that the objectives of the
programme can be achieved in these States.
29. 5.16 The Committee further note that some progress
has been made with regard to maintenance of
land records in North Eastern states. As
informed by the Department the basic data
entry work in the States of Assam, Manipur,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and
Tripura have already been started. The work is
likely to be completed in March 2007. The State
of Sikkim has already completed the data entry
work. In the case of Meghalaya, the scheme
has not yet been started due to non-availability
of proper land records. The committee would
like the Department to further pursue with
these North eastern States so that the work
relating to computerization of land records is
completed.
30. 5.17 The Committee further note from the replies
furnished by the Department that one of the
important tasks for the successful
implementation of programme is to stop issue
of manual copies of Record of Rights and to
provide legal sanctity to computerized copies
of RoR by amending the necessary revenue
rules/regulations. Whereas the States of Goa,
Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh
and West Bengal have already amended the

94
12 3
necessary revenue rules/regulations in this
regard, the action is pending in other States.
Various reasons like lack of administrative and
political will at State level, waiting for complete
stabilization of computerized system etc. have
been indicated as the reasons for not providing
legal sanctity to computerized copies of RoR
in these States. The Committee feel that more
interaction through various seminars,
conferences is required with the State
Governments to persuade them to amend the
revenue rules/regulations so that the
computerized system of land records may be
given legal sanctity. Besides the Committee feel
that once the land records are computerized
and the people are made aware of the system,
the other issues related to giving legal sanctity
to computerized copies of RoR would
automatically be demanded by the public at
large. As such there is an urgent need to first
complete the system of computerization by the
initiatives of the Centrally sponsored schemes
and make maintenance as well as updation of
land records a reality. The Committee hope that
the Department would take the desired action
in this regard.
31. 5.18 The Committee further note the laudable idea
given by the Secretary, Department of Land
Resources whereby a thought is being given to
link up the land record information with the
computers of the lending bankers so that the
farmer does not even need to procure the copy
of land records every time. The bankers can
access the land record directly without any
charge. The Committee appreciate the idea and
feel that if it is made possible, it will help the
general public specifically farmers. Not only it
will reduce the transaction cost, but also would
be a great relief for the poor persons whose
applications are rejected by the banks due to

95
12 3
non-availability of proper copy of land records.
Besides, the assistance under various Centrally
sponsored schemes provided through banks like
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)
can easily be made available.
32. 5.19 The Committee find that 15 States have been
provided funds for imparting computer
awareness training to revenue officials. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the
details of the funds earmarked for training to
these States. The Committee would also like to
be informed about the module of training and
the agencies involved for imparting training.
They would like to suggest that similar
initiatives should be taken in other States also.
33. 5.20 The Committed further find that Lal Bhadur
Shastri National Academy of Administration
(LBSNAA) has conducted an evaluation study
on Computerisation of Land Records in the
States of Karnataka, West Bengal and Rajasthan.
The evaluation study of Tamil Nadu is under
progress. Further NIRD was also requested to
undertake evaluation study in the States of
Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat, Maharashtra
and Kerala. The Committee express their
unhappiness that no progress report has been
received from NIRD which is a premier
institution for research and is under the
administrative control of the Ministry of Rural
Development. The Committee would like to be
apprised when these studies were initiated.
They would also like to be apprised about the
details of the studies completed by LBSNAA.
34. 5.25 The Committee find from the data with regard
to allocation under the scheme Strengthening
of Revenue Administration and Updating of
Land Records (SRA & ULR) that out of
Rs. 311.77 crore provided to the States/UTs as

96
12 3
Central share upto 31 January, 2006, the
utilisation position is Rs. 228.01 crore. Thus
around 27 per cent of the funds could not be
utilised. The Committee also note that the
inability of State Governments to provide
50 per cent matching share is the basic concern
for implementation of the programme. The
Committee also note that the matter of
reviewing the financial pattern from existing
50:50 to 90:10 for North-Eastern states and 75:25
in case of other then NE states was taken up
by the Department with the Planning
Commission who have stated that the 12th
finance Commission Report has provided more
resources. The said issue was addressed in
detail by the Committee in their 10th and 16th
Reports. The Committee had also observed that
there is no specific mention about additional
amount for the purpose of land records in the
12th Finance Commission Report. In view of
this, the Committee would like the Government
to take up the matter again with the Planning
Commission in the light of the observations
made by the Committee and impress upon
them to change the funding pattern.
35. 5.26 The Committee further note that two schemes
SRA & ULR and Computerisation of Land
Records are inter-related. The land records can
be computerized only when the land records
are properly available. Thus availability of land
records is the basic issue. In view of this, the
Committee would like to be apprised by the
Department how the coordination between
these two schemes is being maintained.
36. 5.27 The Committee find that the system of land
records and land administration prevalent in
the rest of the country does not exist in the
hilly and tribal areas of North Eastern States.
In most of the areas even the cadastral survey

97
12 3
has not been done and so no land records
exist. With regard to the programme
‘Computerisation of Land Records’, the
Committee have been informed that the basic
data entry work in the States of Assam,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal
Pradesh and Tripura has already started. The
Committee observe that Computerization of
Land Records is not possible when the basic
data of land records is not available in an area.
In this situation, the Committee wonder how
the programme of Computerisation of Land
Records is progressing when even the cadastral
survey in these  States has not been done and
no land records exist. The clarification in this
regard may be furnished to enable the
Committee to review the position of
Computerization of Land Records and SRA &
ULR schemes in North Eastern States.