1
REPORT
CHAPTER I
Background of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007
1.1 The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 ( Appendix-I) was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2007 and was referred to the
Standing Committee on Rural Development on 7 December, 2007 by
Hon’ble Speaker for examination and report to the Parliament as per
rule 331E (1)(b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha.
1.2 Land is one of the biggest resources of any country. The
Government have to acquire land from the private individuals for
setting up various infrastructure and other public purpose projects as
well as developmental activities. Whereas the sovereign power of every
State has the authority to appropriate land for the public purpose,
every subject has the right to be heard before he is deprived of his
property by the State. This is recognized as a legal right as per article
300A of the Constitution which provides as under:
“No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority
of law.”
1.3 While recognizing the need for a holistic effort aimed at
improving the all-round living standards of the affected people and
families, the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the R&R Bill, 2007
states as under:—
“There is an imperative need to recognise rehabilitation and
resettlement issues as intrinsic to the development process
formulated with the active participation of affected persons and
families. Additional benefits beyond monetary compensation have
to be provided to families affected adversely by involuntary
displacement. The plight of those who do not have rights over
the land on which they are critically dependent for their
subsistence is even worse. This calls for a broader concerted effort
on the part of the planners to include in the displacement,
rehabilitation and resettlement process framework, not only those
who directly lose land and other assets but also all those who
are affected by such acquisition of assets. The displacement

2
process often poses problems that make it difficult for the affected
persons to continue their old livelihood activities after
resettlement. This requires a careful assessment of the economic
disadvantages and the social impact of displacement. There must
also be a holistic effort aimed at improving the all-round living
standards of the affected people and families.”
1.4 The National Policy on Rehabilitation and Resettlement for
project affected families was formulated in 2003 which came into force
w.e.f. February, 2004. The experience of implementation of this policy
indicated that there are many issues addressed by the policy which
need to be reviewed. As such the National Policy on Rehabilitation
and Resettlement, 2007 was formulated to replace the National Policy
on Rehabilitation and Resettlement for project affected families 2003
and was notified in the Official Gazette and came into force w.e.f.
31 October, 2007.
1.5 The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 has been
formulated on the lines of Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007
for giving a statutory backing to the provisions of the policy as
indicated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons:
“The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 will be primarily
applicable to the rehabilitation and resettlement of persons
adversely affected by the acquisition of lands for projects.
However, involuntary displacement of people may be caused by
other factors also, and the provisions of the Bill may apply to
the rehabilitation and resettlement of persons involuntarily
displaced permanently due to any reasons.
Many State Governments have their own rehabilitation and
resettlement policies. Many Public Sector Undertakings or agencies
also have their own policies in this regard. The Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Bill, 2007 provides for the basic minimum
requirements that all projects leading to involuntary displacement
must address. The Bill contains a saving clause to enable the
State Governments, Public Sector Undertakings or agencies, or
other requiring bodies to continue to provide or put in place
greater benefit levels than those prescribed under the Bill.”
1.6 The highlights of the R&R Bills as enumerated in the Statement
of Objects and Reasons of the Bill are as under:—
(i) The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 will provide
for the basic minimum to address the grievances of the

3
affected persons due to involuntary displacement for various
projects.
(ii) A social impact assessment of proposals leading to
displacement of large populations through a participatory,
informed and transparent process involving all stakeholders,
including the affected persons will be necessary before these
are acted upon.
(iii) The r ehabilitation process would augment income levels and
enrich quality of life of displaced persons, covering
rebuilding socio-cultural relationships, capacity building and
provision of public health and community services.
(iv) Adequate safeguards have been proposed for protecting
rights of vulnerable sections of the displaced persons.

4
CHAPTER II
FORMULATION OF THE BILL BY THE GOVERNMENT AND ITS
EXAMINATION BY THE COMMITTEE
2.1  The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 was formulated
by the Government to give a statutory backing to the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007 which had replaced the
erstwhile policy of 2003. Prior to the year 2003, there was no
rehabilitation and resettlement policy formulated by the Government
of India. States/UTs were following their own policies/rules/guidelines
in respect of rehabilitation and resettlement.
2.2  In an effort to know about the feedback of the provisions of
the earlier two policies the Department has stated that States/UTs
have been requested to inform the status of implementation of the
National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007 in their respective
States/UTs. During the Regional Review Conferences held in different
parts of the country by the Department, the implementation of
Rehabilitation and Resettlement policy was also reviewed.
2.3  As regards the details of the consultations held with the
various State Governments/Union Territory Administrations and other
stakeholders before bringing the legislation to the Parliament, the
Department has informed that the comments from the States and the
concerned Ministries/Departments of the Central Government were
sought on the draft Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy and the
Bill under reference flow from the new Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Policy.
2.4  The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 was referred to
the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2007-2008) for
examination and report. The Committee (2007-2008), accordingly
obtained written information on various issues which might have a
direct bearing on the Bill from the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of
Rural Development (Department of Land Resources). The preliminary
meeting of the Committee was held on 24 December, 2007 whereby
the Committee were briefed about the various provisions of the Bill
by the nodal Department. The Committee at the aforesaid sitting
decided to invite the views of experts, organizations, individuals and
other stakeholders through print and electronic media. Accordingly,
approximately 190 related memoranda were received. 15 selected

5
experts/representatives of association and individuals (the list indicated
at Appendix-II ) which include top researchers, social workers,
representatives of various organizations, legal persons, representatives
from child organizations deposed before the Committee at their sittings
held on 17 and 18 June, 2008. The aforesaid experts and other
stakeholders raised serious reservations on some of the provisions made
in the Bill and suggested some modifications. The most debated
provisions of the proposed Bill included the rehabilitation/compensation
packages to displaced persons envisaged under the Bill, and the issue
of Social Impact Assessment Study.
2.5  Since the State Governments acquire land and decide on
optimum rehabilitation and resettlement benefits to be provided to the
displaced persons, the primary responsibility of the implementation of
the provisions made under the Bill lies with the respective State
Governments/Union Territory Administrations. All State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations were requested to give their views on
the aforesaid Bill, after seeking permission of Hon’ble Speaker as per
direction 60 of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. Nine State
Governments/UTs viz. Chandigarh, Puducherry, Jharkhand, Goa,
Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Arunachal
Pradesh, Nagaland and Himachal Pradesh have furnished their views
in this regard.
2.6 The various Union Ministries of the Government of India like
Railways, Defence, Home Affairs, Information Technology and
Communications (Department of Posts and Department of
Telecommunications), Road Transport and Highways and Shipping,
(Department of Road Transport and Highways) and Power acquire
land for various infrastructure projects. Besides some of the Ministries
like Tribal Affairs and Social Justice and Empowerment play a key
role in protecting the interests of various vulnerable sections of society
like tribals, women and children. The Ministries of Panchayati Raj and
Tribal Affairs play a key role in implementation of Part IX of the
Constitution and PESA and also to ensure that the various legislations
brought by the Government are in tune with the true spirit of Part IX
of the Constitution and PESA. In addition, the Ministry of Agriculture
has the major role in issues related to food security which always get
affected due to excessive acquisition of agricultural land. The issues
related to acquisition of land for setting up of Special Economic Zones
(SEZs) are under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Commerce (Department
of Commerce). The Department of Industrial Promotion and Policy is
the other Department, which have an important role with regard to
various issues involved with the acquisition of land by companies.

6
The Ministry of Environment and Forests is the Ministry which plays
a major role in ensuring the rights of the tribals as well as environment
concerns related with the acquisition of land. Above all, the Ministry
of Urban Development is the key Ministry to look after the various
issues relating to acquisition of land from the urban perspective. The
Committee held detailed deliberations with the aforesaid Ministries at
their sittings held on 18 January, 2008, 2 and 3 July, 2008 and 18 July,
2008.
2.7  Besides various sets of written documents containing the
responses on the various issues raised in large number of sets of list
of points were submitted by the aforesaid Ministries, which helped
the Committee in arriving at meaningful conclusions.
2.8  The term of the Committee (2007-08) expired on 4 August,
2008 and the Committee (2008-09) was constituted w.e.f. 5 August,
2008. The Committee (2008-09) at the first sitting held on 11 August,
2008 decided to continue the examination of the Bill from the stage
the earlier Committee had left. Thereafter, the Committee took evidence
of the representatives of the nodal administrative Department i.e.
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) at
their sitting held on 25 August, 2008. The nodal Department furnished
replies to the issues raised in a number of sets of list of points and
submitted the desired documents to the Committee. The representatives
of the nodal Ministry were also present at the various sittings of the
Committee where the Committee took evidence of the various
concerned Ministries/Departments and assisted the Committee. The
representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal
Affairs and Legislative Department) also assisted the Committee by
clarifying the various legal matters.
2.9  Subsequently the Committee undertook clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill at the sittings held on 22 September 2008.
2.10 The Committee note that the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill 2007 is a historical and path-breaking piece of legislation brought
forward by the Government of India. The Bill seeks to give statutory
backing to the various provisions contained in the Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Policy 2007. With the enactment of the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement legislation, the persons affected due
to land acquisition would get the legal right to various Rehabilitation
and Resettlement benefits envisaged under the proposed Bill. Various
landmark provisions made in the Bill include:—
(i)  R&R benefits have also been proposed to be provided to
the affected persons who are dislocated from their place
of residence by reasons other than the acquisition which
may be natural calamities, war etc.;

7
(ii) a saving Clause has been contained in the Bill to enable
the State Governments, public undertakings or agencies,
or other requiring bodies to continue to provide or put in
place greater benefit levels than those prescribed under
the Bill; and
(iii) the legislation seeks to provide that the compensation
award, full payment of compensation etc. shall precede
actual displacement of affected families.
2.11 While giving due importance to the aforesaid legislation
which concerns the general masses, the Committee deliberated at
length each and every provision after detailed consultations with
the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations, various
Union Ministries, experts and other stakeholders through the written
views as well as interaction in 16 sittings (the details of which are
at Appendix-III) held for the purpose.
After exhaustive deliberations, the Committee arrived at
conclusions, which have been given in the subsequent chapters of
the Report.
2.12 The recommendations of the Committee have been given
issue/clause-wise. The Committee urge that while bringing
amendments as suggested by them, the Department should ensure
that all the consequential amendments are appropriately made in
the ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 as well as the
other related Bill i.e. The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007.

8
CHAPTER III
ISSUES COMMON IN ‘THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2007’ AND ‘THE REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
BILL, 2007’
3.1 The detailed examination of the aforesaid two Bills has revealed
that there is duplication of various issues in the two legislations viz
‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Bill, 2007’. Some of the issues raised in the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement legislation which were also included
the LA legislation have already been dealt with in the report on ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and desired recommendations
made in the report. Some of the common issues raised in both the Bill
includes the following:—
(i) Limit of number of families for Social Impact Assessment
Study.
(ii) Part payment of compensation by shares/debentures etc.
(iii) Declaring the area where tribals from Scheduled Areas are
rehabilitated as the Scheduled Area.
(iv) Overriding authority of Panchayats, Extention to Scheduled
Areas (PESA).
3.2 It has further come out during the detailed examination that
there are certain contradictions in the clauses contained in the two Bill
viz , ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ where the issues are
common. For example, there is contradiction in Clause 11(c) of ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and Clause 42 of the ‘The
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ on the issue of offering
shares and debentures to the affected persons. The reading of the ‘The
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ indicates that the issue of
shares upto 50 per cent but not less than 20 per cent of the
rehabilitation grant amount is optional. However, as per ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ allotment of shares and debentures
is compulsory.
3.3  The Committee note that ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement

9
Bill, 2007’ are interlinked legislations and as such there are various
common clauses in the aforesaid Bills. The conclusions arrived at
after the detailed deliberations with regard to such common Clauses
have been contained in the report on ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’. The extracts of such observations/
recommendations made by the Committee in the report on ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ have been given at
Appendix IV . The Committee strongly recommend that the desired
modifications in the Rehabilitation and Resettlement legislation
should be made as desired by the Committee in the recommendations
contained at the aforesaid Appendix.
3.4 The Committee have further noted during the deliberations
that there are certain contradictions in the common clauses as given
in both the aforesaid Bills. The Committee strongly recommend that
the common Clauses contained in both the Bills should be studied
in detail and it should be ensured that wherever the issues have
been duplicated, the language is the same so as to avoid
contradictions and legal complications.

10
CHAPTER IV
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE ANALYSIS OF THE VARIOUS PROVISIONS
MADE IN DIFFERENT CLAUSES OF THE BILL
A. To whom the provisions made under the aforesaid legislation
will apply
4.1 As per the long title of the Bill, the provisions of the
‘Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ seeks to provide for the
rehabilitation and resettlement of persons affected by the acquisition
of land for the projects of public purpose or involuntary displacement
due to any other reason and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
4.2  When the Department was asked what they meant by ‘any
other reason’, they have stated that the expression refers to causes of
involuntary displacement other than land acquisition, for example,
natural calamities like floods, tsunami, earthquake etc. and other causes
like war, when leading to involuntary displacement of a permanent
nature.
4.3 Further, in case of eviction of families from illegal occupation
of Government land a case of involuntary displacement can be made.
When asked whether such cases would be covered under the R&R
legislation, the Department has clarified that the illegal occupation of
Government land has not been defined in the proposed Bill. The
provision regarding this needs to be clarified in the proposed Bill as
eviction from such places can be made a case of involuntary
displacement by unscrupulous elements. Further, the Secretary (Ministry
of Urban Development) during the course of oral evidence has
submitted as under:
“Some of the provisions of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill, 2007 in the existing form can indirectly encourage
encroachment and illegal occupation on public land which may
not be the intent of the proposed Bill at all. For example,
Section 35 of the Bill provides that affected families residing in
an affected area continuously for a period of not less than
5 years, if involuntarily displaced, will be eligible for rehabilitation
and resettlement. This will make encroachment removal difficult
and to that extent rehabilitation and resettlement of encroachers

11
may be perpetual. The land available for genuine public purposes
may in the process gets further reduced because of encroachment
and requirement of rehabilitation and resettlement.”
4.4 The nodal Department i.e., the Department of Land Resources
has also submitted that the illegal occupation of Government land has
not been defined in the proposed Bill. The provision regarding this
needs to be incorporated in the proposed Bill.
4.5 The Government have listed natural calamities and causes like
war etc. When asked how the Government expect the people to fulfil
various conditions related to residence, occupation etc. for getting the
R&R benefits, particularly in the cases of natural calamities and war
when all the documentary proofs would have been destroyed, the
Department has stated that in such extreme circumstances, the
appropriate Government should take necessary measures according to
the situation.
4.6  The proposed ‘Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007
intends to provide rehabilitation and resettlement benefits to the
persons affected by the land acquisition as well as involuntary
displacement of people due to any other reason as indicated in the
long title of the Bill. The Committee feel that the term ‘involuntary
displacement due to any other reason’ is quite vague and fraught
with varied legal interpretations and complications. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the nature of involuntary
displacement that the Government intend to cover for the purpose
of providing Rehabilitation and Resettlement benefits through this
legislation should be clearly indicated in the legislation itself.
4.7  As informed by the Department, the Government intend to
cover natural calamities and war in this regard. Besides the aforesaid
reasons, large-scale population is being uprooted from some areas
due to insurgency like conditions. As such the Committee recommend
that the involuntary displacement due to such reasons should also
be included for providing rehabilitation and resettlement benefits
through the proposed legislation.
4.8  The Secretary during the course of oral evidence has
admitted that some of the provisions of the ‘The Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ in the existing form can indirectly encourage
encroachment and illegal occupation on public land which may not
be the intent of the proposed Bill at all. The Secretary has also
acknowledged that there is a need for amendment in the definition
of ‘any other reason’ to prevent its misuse. The Committee appreciate

12
the fact that illegal encroachers on the land cannot be rewarded. At
the same time, there is an urgent need to identify the Government
land in clear terms. The area identified as Government land should
be available in the public domain. Besides, it should be the
accountability of the appropriate Government/concerned Department
under whose jurisdiction the respective Government land falls, to
protect the land by proper fencing and providing security to prevent
such encroachments.
4.9  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the long title of
the Bill should be modified to cover the suggestions made above.
The Department should take up the issue of protecting Government
land with the State Governments/UT Administrations and other
Union Ministries/ Departments at appropriate level in the light of
the concerns expressed above.
4.10 The Committee further note that during natural calamities
like earthquakes and floods or war, all the documentary proofs
usually get destroyed. It would be really difficult to provide
rehabilitation and resettlement benefits as proposed to be provided
by the R&R legislation to the genuine affected persons. The
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to have centralized data
of land records as well as data base of families in each village/city
at taluka and district level. Such data would address the aforesaid
problem to some extent and help the affected families in claiming
compensations when the individual documents would have been lost.
As such, the Department should take up appropriate action for
making some provisions in the legislation after consultations with
the Ministry of Law & Justice. In case, the provisions in this regard
are felt not desirable to be included in the legislation, the desired
guidelines/directions should be issued to the State Governments/UT
Administrations.
B. Definition of ‘affected family’
4.11. Clause 3(b)(iii) of the Bill states as under:—
“affected family” means:—
xxxxxx
‘(iii) any agricultural or non-agricultural labourer, landless person
(not having homestead land, agricultural land, or either homestead
or agricultural land), rural artisan, small trader or self-employed
person; who has been residing or engaged in any trade, business,

13
occupation or vocation continuously for a period of not less than
five years in the affected area preceding the date of declaration
of the affected area, and who has been deprived of earning his
livelihood or alienated wholly or substantially from the main
source of his trade, business, occupation or vocation because of
the acquisition of land in the affected area or being involuntarily
displaced for any other reason;’
4.12 Further as per Para 3.1(b)(iii) of the National Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Policy, 2007, the aforesaid period of continuous
residence in the affected area to make a family entitled for R&R benefits
has been stated to be three years. The Secretary, during the course of
oral evidence, has agreed that the period of continuous residence in
the affected area should be made three years in the R&R legislation to
make the provision in line with the R&R Policy being implemented.
The experts in this regard have suggested to reduce this period even
to one year.
4.13 Clause 3(b)(iii) of the proposed ‘The Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ provides the condition of residence or
engagement in any trade, business, occupation or vocation
continuously for a period of not less than five years in the affected
areas preceding the date of declaration of the affected area for making
a person eligible for rehabilitation and resettlement benefits, whereas
the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy which is the
existing guiding document for providing rehabilitation and
resettlement benefits provides the said period as three years. The
Committee strongly recommend that the aforesaid period of five years
should be reduced to three years to make the provisions proposed
in the ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ in line with
the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy being implemented. The
necessary amendment in this regard as acknowledged by the
Secretary should be made in the Bill.
4.14 Clause 3 (j) of the Bill defines family as under:—
“family” includes a person, his or her spouse, minor sons,
unmarried daughters, minor brothers, unmarried sisters, father,
mother and other relatives residing with him or her and
dependent on him or her for their livelihood; and includes
“nuclear family” consisting of a person, his or her spouse and
minor children;
4.15 Various experts who appeared before the Committee/submitted
memoranda were of the view that some of the provisions made under

14
the legislation had gender bias. In this regard, it has been stated that
whereas minor sons have been included in the definition of family,
minor daughters have not been considered. When asked the comments
of the Department, it has stated that the words ‘minor sons, unmarried
daughters, minor brothers, unmarried sisters’ may be replaced with
the words ‘minor children and dependent minor siblings’.
4.16 Further as per the definition of family, the relatives residing
with a person and dependent on him for their livelihood are also
included. When asked how it will be established that a relative residing
with a person is actually dependent on him, the Department has stated
that the procedural details may be spelt when framing the rules/
guidelines for the implementation of the relevant provisions.
4.17 Again when the attention of the Department was drawn to
the fact that the definition is too vague and in the absence of any set
procedure for proving a person residing with the affected person and
dependent on him for his livelihood, it may invite legal complications
and court cases, the Department reviewed its position and stated that
the words ‘and other relatives’ may be dropped.
4.18 The Committee find that whereas minor sons have been
included in the definition of family, minor daughters have been
excluded for reasons best known to the Government. The Committee
strongly recommend that minor daughters should also be included
in the definition of family to address the gender concerns.
4.19 Further, the aforesaid definition of family also includes
relatives residing with the affected person and dependant on him/
her. The Committee feel that the word ‘relative’ is very vague.
Further, it is very difficult to establish that a relative was residing
with the affected family/person and was dependant on him for the
purpose of giving rehabilitation and resettlement benefits. In view
of this, the Committee recommend that the words ‘other relatives
residing with him or her and dependant on him or her for their
livelihood’ should be dropped from the definition. While
recommending for this, the Committee also desire that widowed/
divorced/abandoned/separated sisters/sister-in-law, daughter/daughter-
in-law and the physically handicapped family members need to be
covered by the definition of family. As such, the definition of family
should be modified in view of the suggested amendments above.

15
C. Definition of ‘agricultural labourer’
4.20 Clause 3 (b) (iii) defines agricultural and non-agricultural
labourer as under:—
“Any agricultural or non-agricultural labourer, landless person
(not having homestead land, agricultural land, or either homestead
or agricultural land), rural artisan, small trader or self-employed
person; who has been residing or engaged in any trade, business,
occupation or vocation continuously for a period of not less than
five years in the affected area preceding the date of declaration
of the affected area, and who has been deprived of earning his
livelihood or alienated wholly or substantially from the main
source of his trade, business, occupation or vocation because of
the acquisition of land in the affected area or being involuntarily
displaced for any other reason”
4.21 Further Clause 3 (d) defines agricultural labourer as under:—
“agricultural labourer” means a person primarily resident in the
affected area for a period of not less than five years immediately
before the declaration of the affected area, who does not hold
any land in the affected area but who earns his livelihood mainly
by manual labour on agricultural land therein immediately before
such declaration and who has been deprived of his livelihood.”
4.22 Then Clause 3 (n) defines non-agricultural labourer as
under:—
“non-agricultural labourer” means a person who is not an
agricultural labourer but is primarily residing in the affected area
for a period of not less than five years immediately before the
declaration of the affected area and who does not hold any land
under the affected area but who earns his livelihood mainly by
manual labour or as a rural artisan immediately before such
declaration and who has been deprived of earning his livelihood
mainly by manual labour or as such artisan in the affected area.”
4.23 There are the following contradictions in the definition of
agricultural and non-agricultural labourer as given in Clause 3 (b) (iii)
and the definitions of agricultural labourer and non-agricultural
labourer given separately under Clause 3 (d) and Clause 3 (n) of the
legislation:—
(i) Whereas under Clause 3 (b) (iii) any agricultural or non-
agricultural labourer who has been residing or engaged in

16
any trade, business, occupation or vocation continuously for
a period of not less than five years in the affected area
preceding the date of declaration of the affected area, has
been stated to be the condition for eligibility of the various
benefits given under the legislation in the other two clauses,
the words immediately before the declaration of the affected
area has been used instead of preceding the date of
declaration of the affected area.;
(ii) Whereas Clause 3 (b) (iii) entitles agricultural or non-
agricultural labourer who has been residing or engaged in
any trade, business, occupation or vocation to make him
entitled for the R&R benefits the other two aforesaid clauses,
which define agricultural or non-agricultural labourer, the
person has to be primarily resident in the affected area.
However, if he has been working in that area for the
prescribed period and not resident in that area, he is not
eligible for R&R benefits.
4.24 One of the experts has suggested to change the word resident
by working. When the attention of the Department was drawn towards
this, it has stated that the word resident as provided in the proposed
Bill is more appropriate than the word working because this will help
in preventing misuse of the provisions of R&R Bill.
4.25 It could be seen from the aforesaid analysis that the
Department itself is not clear about the entitlement of the agricultural
or non-agricultural labourer who has been working for a prescribed
period to be entitled for the various R&R benefits whereas Clause
3 (b) (iii) specifically provides that such agricultural or non-
agricultural labourer who has been residing or engaged in any trade,
business, occupation or vocation continuously for the given period
becomes eligible for the rehabilitation and resettlement benefits. The
Committee feel that much confusion has been created in defining
the agricultural and non-agricultural labourers under Clause 3 (b)
(iii) as part of the affected family and clauses 3 (e) and 3 (n) which
separately define agricultural and non-agricultural labourers. The
Committee strongly recommend that the language of the aforesaid
clauses should be re-examined thoroughly and brought in consonance
so as to avoid any confusion and misinterpretation.
4.26 The Committee further feel that the use of the word
‘engaged in any trade, business, occupation or vocation’ is rather a
broader term and includes working agricultural or non-agricultural
labourers. However, the Committee would like the Department to

17
consult the Ministry of Law & Justice and ensure that the agricultural
or non-agricultural labourer who are residing or working in that
area are ensured rehabilitation and resettlement benefits under the
proposed legislation.
4.27  The Committee further find that whereas under Clause 3(b)(iii)
any agricultural or non-agricultural labourer who has been residing
or engaged in any trade, business, occupation or vocation
continuously for a period of not less than five years in the affected
area preceding the date of declaration of the affected area, has been
stated to be the condition for eligibility of the various benefits given
under the legislation in the other two clauses, the words immediately
before the declaration of the affected area has been used instead of
preceding the date of declaration of the affected area. The Committee
feel that the words ‘preceding the date of declaration of the affected
area’ may be changed by the words ‘immediately before the
declaration of the affected area’ so as to avoid any confusion or
misinterpretation.
4.28 The Committee desire that suitable amendments as
suggested above may be made accordingly. Besides, the aforesaid
recommendations should be read along with recommendation at Para
No. 4.13 whereby the Committee have recommended to change the
provision of the five year continuous residence to three years.
D. Whether rehabilitation benefits provided under R&R legislation
are applicable when the number of involuntarily displaced
families is less than 400 or more  en masse in plain areas or 200
or more families en masse in tribal or hilly areas etc.
4.29 There is utter confusion on the issue of entitlement of R&R
benefits in case the number of families who have been involuntarily
displaced is less than 400 en masse in plain areas or 200 or more
families en masse  in tribal or hilly areas etc. Some clauses of the Bill
make them entitled for R&R benefits whereas the other clauses of the
Bill indicate that such benefits may be applicable only when the
prescribed number of families is 400 or more in plain areas or 200 or
more in hilly or tribal areas. Various provisions of the Bill are
reproduced below:—
4.30 Clause 3 (c) defines ‘affected area’ as under:—
‘(c) “affected area” means area of village or locality notified by
the appropriate Government under sub-section (1) of section 20;’

18
4.31 Sub-Clause (1) of Section 20 states as under:—
‘Where the appropriate Government is of the opinion that there
is likely to be involuntary displacement of four hundred or more
families en masse in plain areas, or two hundred or more families
en masse in tribal or hilly areas, DDP blocks or areas mentioned
in the Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, due
to acquisition of land for any project or due to any other reason,
it shall, declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, area of
villages or lands as an affected area.’
4.32 Clause 34 provides as under:—
‘The rehabilitation and resettlement benefits shall be extended to
the affected families who are eligible as affected families on the
date of publication of the declaration under subsection (1) of
section 20, and any division of assets in the family after the said
date shall not be taken into account.’
4.33 Further, Clause 9 (1) states as under:—
‘(1) Where the appropriate Government is satisfied that there is
likely to be involuntary displacement of large number of persons
due to acquisition of land for any project or due to any other
reason, and where there is likely to be displacement of—
(a) four hundred or more families en masse in plain areas; or
(b) two hundred or more families en masse in tribal or hilly
areas, DDP blocks or areas mentioned in the Fifth Schedule
or Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, then the State
Government shall, by notification, appoint in respect of that
project, an officer not below the rank of District Collector
to be the Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement:
Provided that if the appropriate Government in respect of
such project is the Central Government, the appointment
shall be made in consultation with the Central Government:
Provided further that in case of projects involving
displacement of less than four hundred families en masse in
plain areas, or less than two hundred families en masse in
tribal or hilly areas, DDP blocks or areas mentioned in the
Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, the
State Government may, by notification, appoint in respect
of that project, an officer not below the rank of Deputy
Collector or Sub-Divisional Officer to be the Administrator
for Rehabilitation and Resettlement.’

19
4.34 Clause 3(c) defines the affected area as area of village or
locality notified by the appropriate Government under sub-section (1)
of Clause 20. Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 20 read with Clause 34 of the
Bill provides that declaration by notification in the official gazette of
villages or lands as affected area would be made where there is likely
to be involuntary displacement of 400 or more families en masse in
plain areas or 200 or more families en masse  in tribal or hilly areas etc.
Clause 34 of the Bill again provides that R&R benefits would be
applicable in those cases where declaration under Section 20(1) of the
Bill has been made. Thus, Clause 3(c) read with clauses 21 and 34
indicates that R&R benefits would be applicable to only those families
who are above the stipulated number of families i.e. more than 400 in
plain and more than 200 in hilly and tribal areas, in which case SIA
study would be undertaken, whereas Clause 9 (1) of the Bill provides
for appointment of Administrator for R&R. The aforesaid Clause
provides for appointment of an officer not below the rank of District
Collector to be the Administrator for R&R where the number of families
likely to be displaced is the stipulated 400/200. Where the displacement
is less than 400/200 an officer not below the rank of Deputy Collector
or sub-divisional Officer has been stated to be appointed as the
Administrator. Thus for the purpose of appointment of Administrator,
every affected family has been covered.
4.35 The aforesaid contradiction with regard to the applicability of
R&R benefits where the number of affected families are less than the
stipulated number of 400 and 200 families have been brought in the
knowledge of the Committee by various experts through their
memoranda as well as during the course of their deposition before the
Committee.
4.36 The Committee find that Clause 3 (c) read with Clauses
20(1) and 34 indicates that rehabilitation and resettlement benefits
would be applicable only when the number of displaced families is
more than 400 in plains and more than 200 in hilly, tribal areas etc.
whereas Clause 9 (1) of the Bill provides for the appointment of
Administrator in both cases viz, (i) where the number of displaced
families is more than the stipulated number of 400 and 200 and
(ii) where the number is less than the aforesaid threshold of
400 and 200. Further, the long title and definition of family as per
Clause 3 (b) of the Bill provides no limit of numbers for the purpose
of rehabilitation and resettlement benefits. The Committee strongly
recommend that suitable modifications should be made in
Clauses 20 (1) and 34 so that it is absolutely clear that rehabilitation
and resettlement benefits would be applicable to each and every
affected family irrespective of the total number of families affected.

20
4.37 Further, the Committee note that where the appropriate
Government is of the opinion that there is likely to be involuntary
displacement of four hundred or more families en masse in plain
areas, or two hundred or more families en masse in tribal or hilly
areas, DDP blocks or areas mentioned in the Fifth Schedule or Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution, due to acquisition of land for any
project or due to any other reason, it shall, declare, by notification
in the Official Gazette, area of villages or lands as an affected area.
The Committee feel that besides Desert Development Programme
Blocks (DDP), Drought Prone Area Programme Blocks (DPAP) should
also be included in the legislation for the aforesaid purpose. Desired
amendments in the aforesaid Clauses should accordingly be made.
E. Social Impact Assessment and Environment Impact Assessment
Studies
4.38 As stated in the earlier part of the Report various common
provisions have been made in the two Bills viz.,  ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’. With regard to Social Impact Assessment
Study, various such issues viz., the number of displaced families
where the Social Impact Assessment Study would be required, the
agency which will undertake the Social Impact Assessment Study or
time period within which the study would be completed, the issue
of undertaking Social Impact Assessment Study in cases where
70 per cent land has been acquired by the acquiring body and
30 per cent by the appropriate Government have been commented
upon in the various observations/recommendations made in the
Report on ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’, the details
of which have been given in the statement at Appendix IV . The
Committee would like that the suggested modifications in this regard
may be made in the R&R Bill wherever required.
4.39 The analysis of the remaining issues has been done below:—
Undertaking Social Impact Assessment Study and Environment
Impact Assessment Study simultaneously
4.40 The relevant provisions in this regard are reproduced
below:—
“Clause 6. (1) Wherever it is required, as per the provisions of
any law, rules and guidelines issued thereunder, to undertake
environmental impact assessment, the social impact assessment
study shall be carried out simultaneously with the Environmental
Impact Assessment study.

21
(2) The public hearing undertaken in the project-affected area for
the environmental impact assessment shall also cover issues
relating to social impact assessment.
(3) A copy of the social impact assessment report shall be made
available to the Impact Assessment Agency authorised in respect
of environmental impact assessment by the Central Government
in the Ministry of Environment and Forests, and a copy of the
environmental impact assessment report shall be shared with the
expert group notified under section 5.”
4.41 The Ministry of Urban Development has suggested that Social
Impact Assessment Study and Environment Impact Assessment Study
should be attached equal importance and conducted simultaneously as
urban areas are more densely populated than the rural areas.
4.42 The Committee tend to endorse the views expressed by the
Ministry of Urban Development that Social Impact Assessment Study
and Environment Impact Assessment Study should be attached equal
importance. As such the Committee would like to recommend that
Environment Impact Assessment Study should be undertaken in
every case where Social Impact Assessment Study is being done. In
view of this, necessary modifications should be made at appropriate
places in the proposed ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007’.
F. Child Rights
4.43 The Chairperson, National Commission for Protection of Child
Rights, during the course of oral evidence has suggested that many
issues from the child rights perspective have to be dealt with when
the people would be displaced from one place to another and suitable
provisions incorporated in the legislation. In case of displacement, the
nutritional, health care, medical care and survival rights of children
need to be protected. Further, it has been submitted that in case of
rehabilitation there is a lot of problem in integrating schooling of the
affected children. When asked how the interest of the children would
be protected, particularly when the displacement is on a larger scale
and whether the provisions made in the legislation take care of the
rights of the children in this regard, particularly providing schools,
parks, health care centres, anganwadis etc. in the area where the
affected families would be rehabilitated, the Department has replied
that the concept of Social Impact Assessment (SIA) as provided in
Chapter II of the proposed R&R Bill takes care of public utilities,
health care facilities, school, educational or training facilities etc.

22
4.44 In this regard Clause 4(2) of the Bill is reproduced below:
“While undertaking a social impact assessment under sub-section
(1), the appropriate Government shall, inter alia , take into
consideration the impact that the project will have on public and
community properties, assets and infrastructure; particularly,
roads, public transport, drainage, sanitation, sources of drinking
water, sources of water for cattle, community ponds, grazing land,
plantations, public utilities, such as post offices, fair price shops,
food storage godowns, electricity supply, health care facilities,
schools and educational or training facilities, places of worship,
land for traditional tribal institutions, burial and cremation
grounds.”
4.45 It could be seen from above that Clause 4(2) of the Bill
provides certain common facilities/infrastructure that the appropriate
Government shall take into consideration while undertaking a Social
Impact Assessment Study. In this regard, the Committee would
recommend that anganwadis, children parks and school hostels
should be included in the list of items given in the aforesaid Clause.
The Committee further note that the process of displacement/
rehabilitation results in the break in the education of child. In this
context, the Committee feel that discontinuation of the education of
children of the affected families can be avoided if the period of
rehabilitation is planned in such a way that it falls within the long
vacations like summer/winter vacations. As such, there is an urgent
need to make the appropriate provisions whereby it can be ensured
that there is no break in the education of a child and there is
continuation of his/her education at the rehabilitated places.
Including school children as a category in the proposed Survey and
Census of affected families
4.46 Clause 21(2) of the Bill provides for the survey and census of
affected families. As per Clause 21(1) of the Bill, the Administrator for
rehabilitation and resettlement shall undertake a baseline survey and
census for identification of the persons and families likely to be affected.
Further, Clause 21(2) of the Bill provides that the aforesaid survey
shall contain village-wise information of the affected families. Further,
a number of details viz members of the family who are permanently
residing, engaged in any trade, agricultural or non-agricultural
labourers, families belonging to SC/ST etc. have particularly been
indicated.

23
4.47 The Committee recommend to add school-going children as
a category in respect of which information shall be contained in the
baseline survey and census for the identification of persons and
families likely to be affected. As such, Clause 21(2) of the Bill should
be suitably amended.
G. Including Secretaries concerned with the welfare of Women and
Child as well as representatives of the Local Self Government in
the composition of the multi-disciplinary expert group
4.48 Clause 5(1) of the Bill provides that the Social Impact
Assessment Report shall be submitted to the appropriate Government
for its examination by an independent multi-disciplinary expert group,
as may be notified by the appropriate Government.
4.49 Further, Clause 5(2) of the Bill provides the composition of
the expert group. The composition shall be as under: -
“The expert group shall consist of the following persons,
namely—
(a) two non-official social scientist and rehabilitation experts, to
be nominated by the appropriate Government;
(b) the Secretary of the departments of the appropriate
Government concerned with the welfare of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes or his nominee, ex officio ;
and
(c) a representative of the requiring body, to be nominated by
the appropriate Government.”
4.50 The Committee recommend that the Secretary of the
Department of the appropriate Government concerned with the
welfare of Women and Child should also be added alongwith the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Clause 5(b) of the
legislation, so that the interests of women and children are protected
in a more effective way.
4.51 The composition of the expert group also includes a
representative of the requiring body to be nominated by the
Appropriate Government. To give justice to the persons whose land
is being acquired, a representative of the local self-Government
should also be considered to be a member of the expert group.
Suitable amendments in this regard should be made in the respective
Clauses of the Bill.

24
H. Authorities for Rehabilitation & Resettlement
4.52 Chapter III provides for various authorities for rehabilitation
and resettlement. Clause 9 (1) of the Bill provides for the appointment
of Administrator for rehabilitation and resettlement. Where the
displacement is of 400 or more families in plain and 200 or more
families in tribal or hilly areas, the officer not below the rank of District
Collector shall be appointed to be the Administrator for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement by the State Government. Where the displacement is
less than the stipulated number of families, the officer not below the
rank of Deputy Collector or Sub-Divisional Officer will be appointed
Administrator for R&R. Further, as per the Clause 10 of the Bill, the
Administrator for rehabilitation and resettlement shall take all measures
for the rehabilitation and resettlement of the affected families and the
formulation, execution and monitoring of the rehabilitation and
resettlement plan shall vest in the Administrator for rehabilitation and
resettlement. Clause 12 of the Bill provides for Committee of the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement at project level where the number of
displacement of family is 400 in case of plain areas and 200 in case
of hilly /tribal areas to monitor and review the progress of
implementation of schemes or plans of Rehabilitation and Resettlement
of the affected families and to carry out post implementation social
audits. The aforesaid Committee would again be chaired by the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement who will be the
Collector or Deputy Collector, as the case may be.
4.53 Further, there will be Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee at district level to monitor and review the progress of
Rehabilitation and Resettlement of the affected families in the district
excluding those covered by the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee at the project level as per Clause 12 of the Bill. The aforesaid
Committee would be chaired by the District Collector/ Deputy
Commissioner. When asked how the authority/person who is
accountable for implementation of all the provision with regard to
Rehabilitation and Resettlement can monitor and review the
performance of work in this regard, the Department has responded as
under:
“The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee, which will
monitor and review the progress of implementation of the scheme
or plan for Rehabilitation and Resettlement of the affected families,
will also have representatives of the affected families including
women, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes residing in the
affected area, voluntary organization working in the area,

25
nationalized bank, Land Acquisition Officer, Chairpersons of the
Panchayats or municipalities located in the affected area, the local
M.P ./M.L.A., and a representative of the requiring body.
However, the Commissioner for Rehabilitation and Resettlement
could be as the chairperson of this Committee while the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement could be its
member convener. The Standing Committee may take a view on
this.”
4.54 Further, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee at project
level to be constituted as per Clause12 (1) of the Bill shall monitor
and review the progress of implementation of scheme or plan of
Rehabilitation and Resettlement of the affected families and to carry
out post implementation social audits where the displacement is more
than 400 in plain and 200 in tribal and hilly areas, the Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Committee at district level to be set up to take care
of the cases not covered by the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee at project level has not been given the responsibility of
post implementation of social audits.
4.55 The proposed Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007
provides for the constitution of various authorities for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement. As explained above, the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement would be of Collector/Deputy
Collector level. Besides, the Committee to monitor and review the
progress of implementation of schemes or plans of rehabilitation
and resettlement is also proposed to be chaired by the Administrator
i.e., Collector/Deputy Collector. Again District level Rehabilitation
and resettlement Committee would also be chaired by Collector/
Deputy Collector. The aforesaid provisions clearly indicate that the
Collector/Deputy Collector would be the most powerful person and
all responsibility of implementation and supervisation of
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Plans/Schemes would be vested in
one authority i.e. Collector/Deputy Collector which the Committee
find not judicious. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Commissioner of Rehabilitation and Resettlement should be
appointed as the Chairperson of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee at project level as well as Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee at district level while the Administrator for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement i.e. District Collector/Deputy Collector could be its
Member Convener, as agreed to by the Department.
4.56 The Committee would also like to recommend that the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee at District level which

26
may take care of cases not covered by the project level Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Committee should also be entrusted with the
responsibilities of post implementation social audit on the lines of
the responsibility given to project level Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Committee. The Committee further would like to
recommend that post implementation social audit by the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Project as well as District Level
Committee should be done in consultation with the concerned Gram
Sabha.
I. Qualification of Ombudsman and Administrator to be appointed
for Inter-State projects
4.57 Clause 14(1) of the R&R Bill provides for the appointment of
an Ombudsman for time bound disposal of the grievances arising out
of the matters covered under the Act. The Ombudsman shall have the
powers to consider and dispose of all petitions relating to Rehabilitation
and Resettlement against the decision of the Administrator or the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee and issue such directions
to the requiring body as he may deem proper for the redressal of
such grievances.
4.58 No qualification for ombudsman has been provided in the
legislation. When asked about this, the Department has stated that the
appointment of ombudsman shall be decided by the Appropriate
Government. The details will be prescribed in the rules to be made.
Further, when asked about the position with regard to the qualification
to ombudsman and the administrative Officer in other legislation where
such agencies are to be appointed, the Department has side tracked
the issue and chosen not to respond.
4.59 Further, for the inter-State projects, Clause 15 of the Bill
prescribes that the Administrator will be appointed by the Central
Government. However, no qualification/level of officer who could be
appointed the Administrator has been specified, whereas in case of
the Administrator for the State Government, the level of officer ( i.e. an
officer not below the rank of District Collector) who can be appointed
has been clearly specified in Clause 9 of the Bill. When asked the
comments of the Department, it has responded that the details will be
prescribed in the rules to be made. Further, the Standing Committee
may like to take a view in this regard.
4.60 The Committee find that R&R Bill provides for the
appointment of an Ombudsman for time-bound disposal of the
grievances arising out of the matters covered under the legislation.

27
Besides, a provision has been made for the appointment of an
Administrator by the Central Government for inter-State projects.
No qualification for Ombudsmen as well as Administrator has been
provided in the legislation. The Department in this regard has stated
that the details would be prescribed in the rules to be made. The
Committee would like that the rules should expeditiously be framed
after the enactment of the legislation and may specifically mention
about the qualification of the Ombudsmen as well as Administrator.
Besides, the Committee also recommend that provisions should be
made in the legislation for the appointment of Ombudsman at
project/district level. The necessary amendment in the legislation may
accordingly be made.
J. Appeals in proceedings before Court
4.61 Clause 54 of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill provides
as under:
“No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or
proceeding in respect of any matter which the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the Commissioner for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, or the Ombudsman is
empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction
shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of
any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.”
4.62 The Committee note that Section 54 of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 provides for appeals before High court and Supreme Court.
The provisions in this regard are reproduced below:
“Appeals in proceedings before Court—Subject to the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),
applicable to appeals from original decrees, and notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in any enactment for the time being
in force, an appeal shall only lie in any proceedings under this
Act to the High Court from the award, or from any part of the
award, of the Court and from any decree of the High Court
passed on such appeal as aforesaid an appeal shall lie to the
Supreme Court subject to the provisions contained in section
110 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and in Order XLV
thereof.”
No such provision to appeal in the High Court/Supreme Court
has been made in the Rehabilitation and Resettlement legislation.

28
The Committee recommend for making similar provision in
Rehabilitation and Resettlement legislation for appeal in the High
Court/ Supreme Court against the orders made by the Ombudsman.
K. Multiplicity of Committees
4.63 At the national level, many Committees have been proposed,
the details of which are given below:—
(i) Clause 15 (1) —For inter-State groups, the Administrator for
rehabilitation and resettlement will be appointed by the
Union Government;
(ii) Clause 16 (1) —Central Government shall constitute the
National Monitoring Committee to review and monitor the
implementation of rehabilitation and resettlement;
(iii) Clause 18 (1) —There will be Oversight Committee in the
Ministry or the Department of the appropriate Government;
(iv) Clause 19 (1) —There will be National Rehabilitation
Commission to supervise and exercise general oversight over
rehabilitation and resettlement.
4.64 When asked about the comments of the Department about
the multiplicity of authorities at the central level for monitoring, it has
stated as under:
“Although it seems that too many bodies have been created for
the purpose, particularly so because they are most covered in
the same chapter of the Bill, these bodies neither have
contradictory scope nor truly overlapping jurisdictions and
functions. For example, the administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement will be working in the field, not in the Ministry.
Similarly, the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committees will
be working in the field only. The national Monitoring Committee
will be a Secretary level Committee in the Government of India,
located in the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development) to monitor the implementation of the Act. Oversight
Committees will be based in the Ministry/Departments of the
Central/State Governments having major projects for internal
monitoring purposes. The National Rehabilitation Commission will
be an independent body with its defined role in the Rehabilitation
and Resettlement process. However, the Standing Committee may
take a view on this.”

29
4.65 Further, while reviewing the position, the Secretary during
the course of oral evidence submitted as under:
“In Clause 18 (1), it has been provided that for every major
project, there shall be an oversight Committee for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement in the Ministry or Department concerned. Some
Departments have expressed difficulty in forming several
Oversight Committees. Hence, we may provide for one Oversight
Committee for all Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation and
Resettlement projects for each Department of the Appropriate
Government.”
4.66 The Committee after deliberations decided to approve the
provision of the three sets of Committees i.e., (i) National Monitoring
Committee, (ii) Oversight Committee, (iii) National Rehabilitation
Commission. Further the Committee note that a provision has been
made for the constitution of an Oversight Committee for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement in each of the Ministry or
Department concerned. The Committee also note that different
Departments have expressed difficulty in forming several Oversight
Committees. In view of this, the Committee recommend that instead
of Oversight Committee in each Department, provision should be
made for the constitution of one Oversight Committee for
rehabilitation and resettlement projects at the Central level. The
desired modifications in the Bill should accordingly be made.
L. Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions and Municipalities
4.67 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has made the following
suggestions with regard to the involvement of Panchayati Raj
Institutions in Scheduled Areas.
(i) No social impact survey will be conducted unless the
modalities, content and the agency conducting the survey
have been approved by the Gram Sabha;
(ii) There should be representative of the Panchayat associated
with the survey;
(iii) The results of the survey should be placed before the Gram
Sabha and approved by it before implementation.
4.68 Further the Ministry of Urban Development has commented
as under with regard to involvement of urban local bodies:—
“In cities the role of the Municipal Commissioner/CEO of
Municipality ought to be central to devising the R&R package as
all the steps involved may not be in the domain of the Collector.”

30
4.69 In this regard, the provisions made in R&R Bill are reproduced
below:—
“The draft rehabilitation and resettlement scheme or plan shall
be made known locally by wide publicity in the affected area
and the resettlement area in such manner as may be prescribed
by the appropriate Government which shall also be discussed in
the concerned gram sabhas and in public hearings in urban and
rural areas where gram sabhas do not exist: Provided that the
consultation with the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the
appropriate level in Scheduled Areas under the V Schedule shall
be in accordance with the provisions of the Provisions of the
Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996: Provided
further that, in cases of involuntary displacement of two hundred
or more Scheduled Tribes families from the Scheduled Areas, the
concerned Tribes Advisory Councils shall also be consulted.”
4.70 It could be seen from the above that whereas it has been
prescribed that the draft rehabilitation and resettlement scheme or
plan shall be discussed in the Gram Sabha and in public hearings
in urban and rural areas where Gram Sabhas do not exist.
Consultation with the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the
appropriate level in scheduled areas in accordance with PESA also
has been prescribed. However, nothing has been mentioned as to
what will happen if the public do not approve the aforesaid
rehabilitation and resettlement scheme or plan. After deliberations
the Committee decided that suitable provisions in the proposed
legislation should be made whereby the rehabilitation plan and the
modalities, content and the agency-conducting SIA studies are
approved by the Gram Sabha in rural areas and the equivalent local
body in the urban areas.
M. Fate of Social Impact Assessment Study when people refuse to
cooperate
4.71 On the issue of the fate of the acquisition/Social Impact
Assessment study where the people refused to cooperate the
Department has clarified as under:—
 “Clause 4(1) of the proposed Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill states the manner in which Social Impact Assessment Study
will be carried out. Clause 7(1) of the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill provides for the manner in which Social
Impact Assessment Study clearance shall be granted. So, the
rules to be framed under the above clauses will prescribe the

31
detailed procedure to be followed in case of refusal of people to
cooperate.
The intent of noting non cooperation in Social Impact Assessment
Study Report is to bring this to the notice of the appropriate
Government and it can take appropriate action in the matter.
The refusal to cooperate in the Social Impact Assessment Study
will not affect the acquisition of land as per LA Act 1894. But,
here, attention is drawn to Clause 29 of the proposed
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, which provides that full
payment of compensation and adequate progress in Rehabilitation
and Resettlement shall precede the actual displacement of the
affected families. For determination of adequate Rehabilitation
and Resettlement, besides Social Impact Assessment Study,
baseline survey according to Clause 21 of Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill is also essential. This cannot be done without
the cooperation of the affected families. If the compensation
cannot be paid to the people, they cannot be displaced according
to Clause 29 of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill. This
may have a bearing on section 16 of LA Act, 1894.”
4.72 The Committee find that the Government intends to
prescribe the detailed procedure to be followed in case of refusal of
people to cooperate on the issue of Social Impact Assessment Study.
The Committee also find that the refusal to cooperate in the Social
Impact Assessment Study will not affect the acquisition of land as
per the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. While agreeing to the intention
of the Government in this regard the Committee would like that
consultations with the local bodies should not be a mere formality.
Some sort of provisions should be made in the proposed legislation
whereby the quality of consultations can be ensured. The desired
modification in the legislation should accordingly be made.
N. Rehabilitation and Resettlement benefits for the affected family
4.73 This chapter deals with Rehabilitation and Resettlement
packages to be provided to the affected persons. The analysis of various
Rehabilitation and Resettlement packages has been done in the
succeeding part of the report.
Housing benefits
4.74 As per Clause 35 (1) of the Bill, any affected family owning
house and whose house has been acquired or lost shall be allotted
land for house without paying any money to the extent of 250 square

32
metres of land in rural area or 150 square metres of land or
100 sq. mtr. carpet area in urban area, subject to the actual area acquired
or lost.
4.75 The aforesaid provision indicates that the maximum land that
can be provided to an affected family is 250 square metres of land in
rural area and 150 square metres of land or 100 sq. mtr carpet area in
urban area.
4.76 Clause 32 of the Bill provides as under :—
“If land is acquired in cases of urgency, under the Land
Acquisition Act, as amended from time to time, or any other Act
of the Union or a State for the time being in force, each affected
family shall be provided with transit and temporary
accommodation, pending rehabilitation and resettlement scheme
or plan, in addition to the payment of monthly subsistence
allowance and other rehabilitation and resettlement benefits due
to them under this Act.”
4.77 V arious experts who appeared before the Committee/
submitted memoranda before the Committee were of the view that
the land provided should commensurate to the actual area acquired.
In this regard, the Department in the written replies has submitted
that it may not always be possible to give a house or house site of the
same area as that of the one lost or acquired.
4.78 The Department has further clarified that the person whose
house property is acquired will receive due compensation for the house
and the land on which the house is situated, as per the provisions of
the LA Act, 1894. In addition, this person will also get, free of cost,
the housing benefit proposed under Clause 35 of the R&R Bill.
4.79 The person whose house property is lost due to other causes
of involuntary displacement, will get the R&R benefit as proposed
under Clause 35 of the R&R Bill as an ex-gratia benefit, free of cost.
4.80 Since the housing benefit proposed under the Clause 35 of
the R&R Bill is to be provided free of cost – in addition to the due
compensation for the property acquired, or as ex-gratia for the property
lost due to other causes of involuntary displacement – it was felt
prudent to put certain limits on the extent of such R&R benefit, hence
the 250/150 sq.mt. limit proposed for rural/urban areas as a legally
guaranteed R&R benefit, while as per Clause 59 of the Bill the requiring
body will be free to give higher benefits.

33
4.81 The Ministry of Urban Development while stating that both
the Bills viz., ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ have a distinct rural bias
has stated that in cities displacement due to land acquisition may also
be a non-residential structure/activities. Both the Bills do not take into
account this aspect.
4.82 When asked how the commercial structures viz., small/big
shops or any other commercial activity being undertaken on that land
by hawkers etc. would be compensated by the legislation, the
Department has informed that all these categories would be eligible
for compensation as per Clause 3(b)(iii) of the R&R Bill.
4.83 The aforesaid Clause defines affected family and in the
definition although commercial establishment to some extent are
covered. While prescribing the R&R package, nothing has been said
about the allotment of sites for commercial activities. The land is
proposed to be provided only for house as per Clause 35(1) of the
Bill.
4.84 When asked how a category defined in the definition Clause
can become eligible for compensation without prescribing any package
in the main legislation, the Department in a vague manner has stated
that the definition of affected family as proposed in Clause 3(b) of the
proposed R&R Bill is exhaustive and covers commercial structures also.
4.85 The Ministry of Urban Development has submitted that Clause
35(1) is relevant mainly to rural areas, where affected persons are
being provided with only residential structures, (and as stated
elsewhere), urban areas have non-residential displacements also.
However, allotment of flat of the size of LIG/MIG/HIG may be
justified in Delhi and other big cities. Therefore, for urban areas, it
may be left to the discretion of the appropriate Government to allot
plots/flats of the appropriate size.
4.86 Further, experts are of the view that in urban areas special
care must be taken for the distance between the location of housing
and place of work and as such, the rehabilitation site should not be
more than 3 kms away from the site from they have been displaced.
In urban areas, rehabilitation invariably leads to ghettoisation of
communities, with poor being shifted on the periphery of the city.
NRR should ensure that this practice is halted.
4.87 When asked whether the cost of construction of the house
would be borne by the affected person himself, the Department has

34
stated that Clause 35(2) of the proposed R&R Bill provides for
constructed houses to the BPL category affected families. However, for
the non-BPL category, Clause 35(1) proposes only land for house
construction, and the Committee may consider provision for giving
the discretion to the appropriate Government for offering loans or
house construction assistance also to this category of affected families.
4.88 The Committee find that a provision has been made in the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement legislation whereby the maximum
land that can be provided to an affected family is 250 sq. metres of
land in rural areas or 150 sq. mtrs/100 sq. metres carpet area in
urban areas. The Committee note that the issue of land and its
management falls under the State List and as such it may be better
to leave the issue of deciding the maximum area of land to be
provided to the affected family to the appropriate Government. In
view of this, the Committee would like that suitable amendments in
the existing provision may be made.
4.89 The Committee feel that in case of involuntary displacement
due to natural calamities/war or any other such reason where the
dwelling places of the affected persons would have been destroyed,
there might be an urgent need to rehabilitate the affected persons
immediately. In view of this, the Committee would like to
recommend to the Government to make a provision of transit and
temporary accommodation pending the rehabilitation and resettlement
scheme or plan on the same lines as provided under urgency
acquisition under Clause 32 of the Bill.
4.90 The Committee note that the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill, 2007 seeks to provide R&R benefits to two categories of
involuntary displaced persons (a) affected persons whose land has
been acquired as per Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and (b) affected
persons whose land has been lost due to war, natural calamity etc.
The Committee feel that in the case of land acquisition, the affected
person loses land due to the acquisition by the appropriate
Government for public good whereas in the ‘b’ category, the situation
is beyond the control of human beings. Further in this category,
there may be cases where the affected person may have been
displaced temporarily as in the case of natural calamities like flood
and war. Such a person would return to his place after the situation
is normal. The proposed Bill provides for the common rehabilitation
and resettlement package for category ‘a’ and ‘b’. The Committee
feel that such cases where a person loses his house/land temporarily
need to be dealt in a different way. In view of this, the Committee

35
recommend that in the category ‘b’ cases, land should not be allotted
in case of temporary dislocation. Suitable clarification in the
legislation should accordingly be made in the legislation.
4.91 Further the Committee note that no provision has been made
for allotment of commercial structure to the affected person whose
shop or any other commercial activity being undertaken on land is
acquired or lost. The Committee agree with the views of the Ministry
of Urban Development in this regard and would like that suitable
provision in the legislation should be made to allot commercial land/
structure. The size of the commercial land in this regard should be
left to the appropriate Government. Further in case of temporary
dislocation of the commercial structure no land should be allocated.
Suitable provision should be made in the legislation.
4.92 The Committee further find that sometimes the rehabilitation
site is far away from the affected area. The Committee would like
that State Governments should be advised to allot the rehabilitation
site at the nearest possible place.
Benefits for BPL Families
4.93 Clause 35(2) states that each below poverty line affected family
which is without homestead land and which has been residing in the
affected area continuously for a period of not less than five years
preceding the date of declaration of the affected area and which has
been involuntarily displaced from such area, shall be provided with a
house having at least fifty square metre carpet area in rural areas or,
as the case may be, twenty-five square metre carpet area in urban
areas, in the resettlement area.
4.94 Provided that any such family which opts not to take the
house offered, shall get a one-time financial assistance for house
construction, and the amount shall not be less than what is given
under any programme of house construction by the Government of
India.
4.95 When asked about the legal problems involved in providing
some R&R benefits to a category of persons i.e. BPL persons particularly
when the criteria of determining a person as BPL is itself contradictory
and being debated, the representative of the Legislative Department of
the Ministry of Law and Justice clarified as under:—
“As per the law laid down by the Supreme Court while
interpreting Right to Equality enshrined in Article 14 of the
Constitution, the Supreme Court has evolved a doctrine of

36
reasonable classification. The reasonable classification means that
for different categories of people, there can be different set of
rules. Now, what classification will be reasonable and what will
not be reasonable, the test has also been laid down. In calling a
classification reasonable, the Supreme Court has evolved that you
must see the object of the law; and the reasonable classification
which you have adopted by the law should have a nexus with
the object of the law. Now, here looking at the problem we have,
a person who is very rich may not need Rehabilitation but a
person who is very poor may have to be rehabilitated because
you are uprooting his livelihood, his house and everything. So,
BPL can be, in my opinion, treated as a class and I think the
Supreme Court will justify it.
4.96 The Committee note that the proposed legislation provides
for allotment of a house having at least 50 sq. metres carpet area in
rural areas or 25 sq. metres carpet area in urban areas in the
resettlement area to BPL family, which is without homestead land.
The Committee consider that criteria of BPL person is contradictory
and is being debated recently in the country. In view of this, the
Committee would like that R&R benefit of a house of the specified
area should be provided to a family without homestead land
irrespective of BPL or APL status. In view of this, suitable
modifications should be made in Clause 35 (2) of the Bill.
4.97 The Committee would further like to recommend that the
specified period of five years of continuous residence for making an
affected family without homestead eligible for a house of a
prescribed area should be reduced to three years in line with the
recommendation made at Para 4.13. Besides, the words ‘preceding
the date of declaration of the affected area’ should be changed to
‘immediately before the declaration of the affected area’ in line with
the recommendation made at Para 4.27.
4.98  Proviso to Clause 35 (2) of the Bill provides as under:—
“Provided that any such family which opts not to take the house
offered, shall get a one-time financial assistance for house
construction, and the amount shall not be less than what is given
under any programme of house construction by the Government
of India.”
4.99 When asked what will happen when there is no Government
of India programme, the Department has clarified that in such case,
the appropriate Government shall have to specify a suitable amount.

37
4.100  The Committee find that provision has been made in
Clause 35 (2) of the Bill whereby the affected family which opts not
to accept the house offered shall get a one-time financial assistance
for house construction. The amount in this regard has been linked
with Government of India scheme. In this regard, it has been
provided that the amount allocated shall not be less than what is
given under any programme of house construction by the
Government of India. The Committee feel that there may be cases
when there will not be any Government of India scheme. In such
cases it should be left to the appropriate Government to decide
about the amount. Suitable modifications in Clause 35 (2) of the Bill
may accordingly be made.
Acquisition of agricultural land
4.101 For cases where agricultural land is being acquired, Clause
36 (1) of the Bill provides that agricultural land or cultivable wasteland
to the extent of actual land lost by the affected family, subject to a
ceiling of one hectare of irrigated land or two hectares of unirrigated
land or cultivable wasteland, if Government land is available in the
resettlement area would be provided to the affected person.
4.102  Further, the Ministry of Urban Development has stated that
in the context of urban areas, it is not possible to provide for alternate
land to the affected persons. However, it is possible to provide them
with multi-storied tenements/flats. However, allotment of flat of the
size of LIG/MIG/HIG may be justified in Delhi and other big cities.
Therefore, for urban areas it may be left to the discretion of the
appropriate Government to allot plots/flats of the appropriate size.
The Governments of Puducherry and Dadra and Nagar Haveli have
expressed that in view of the paucity of land, it may always not be
possible to provide land for land as compensation. They have suggested
that additional cash benefits may be provided to the affected families
so that they are able to purchase land elsewhere.
4.103  When asked for the comments of the Department on the
aforesaid reservations expressed by the Ministry of UD and the
aforesaid State Governments, the Department has stated that Clause
36(1) of the proposed Bill provides land for agricultural land only if
land is available.
4.104  Since farmers are dependent on agricultural land for their
livelihood, not providing them with land in lieu of land would not
only dispossess them from their lands but also rob them of their
livelihood. Most of the experts are of the view that land acquisition

38
should not result in loss of livelihood and there should be some
safeguards to ensure that the largely illiterate population is not
adversely affected.
4.105 Various experts who deposed before the Committee/submitted
memoranda have expressed strong reservations on the use of the word
‘if Government land is available’. In this regard the Standing Committee
in the 27th Report had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that there are various issues in this regard
which need to be addressed strongly in the legislations, the
foremost of which is the policy of giving land for land. The
Committee note that land besides being the source of livelihood
for a person is also a symbol of social status in the society where
a person lives. Besides, with the land, various emotional issues
are also attached. In this scenario, it is of utmost importance to
address all these concerns and compensate the persons whose
land is acquired not only with land but with the land of the
same quality. “
4.106 When asked about the justification of restricting the area of
land for housing/agricultural land without considering the actual land
acquired by the Government/acquiring body, the Department has stated
that it may not always be possible to give a house or house site of the
same area as that of the one lost or acquired. The Department has
also stated that the Committee may take a view on this aspect.
4.107 The Committee feel that restricting the area of agricultural
land to a ceiling of one hectare of irrigated land or two hectares of
unirrigated land or cultivable wasteland irrespective of the size of
the land acquired is not appropriate. After detailed deliberations,
the Committee decided that it should be left to the appropriate
Government to decide about the size of the agricultural land/
cultivable wasteland.
4.108 Further, the Committee may also like to recommend that a
plot of agricultural land/cultivable wasteland as decided by the
appropriate Government should be allotted only in cases where the
affected person/family has permanently lost his land due to natural
calamities, war etc. In cases where the dislocation is of temporary
nature, no such land should be allocated. Suitable clarification in
this regard should be made in the legislation. However, the provision
of allotment of such land should invariably be applicable in case of
involuntary displacement due to the land acquisition.

39
Rehabilitation in case of families affected by irrigation or hydel
projects.
4.109 Clause 36 (2) of the Bill provides as under:—
“In the case of irrigation or hydel projects, the affected families
shall be given preference in allotment of land-for-land in the
command area of the project:
Provided that such lands may be consolidated and plots of
suitable sizes allotted to the affected families, who could be settled
there in groups;
Provided further that, in case an affected family cannot be given
land in the command area of the project or the family opts not
to take land there, such a family may be given monetary
compensation on replacement cost basis for the lands lost, for
purchase of suitable land elsewhere.”
4.110 When asked what the Department mean by the words “such
a family may be given monetary compensation on replacement cost
basis for the lands lost, for purchase of suitable land elsewhere” as
given in the above Clause, the Department has stated that the Clause
36(2) of the proposed Bill provides for land-for-land in the command
area of the project. If such land can’t be made available, or the affected
family opts not to take land there, then such a family may be given
adequate monetary compensation so that they will be able to buy the
land in another area, and such compensation amount may be calculated
on the basis of the provisions proposed under the LA (Amendment)
Bill, and not on replacement cost basis for the lands lost.
4.111 From the reply of the Department, it seems that the
Department itself is not clear about the impact of the replacement
cost basis and reviewed its position and suggested that such
compensation amount may be calculated on the basis of the
provisions proposed under ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill,
2007’ and not on replacement cost basis for the land lost. The
Committee accordingly recommend to the Government to calculate
the compensation amount on the basis of suggestions given by the
Committee in the LA legislation with regard to the market rate of
land, the details of which have been given in the statement at
Appendix IV .
4.112 Further, the aforesaid Clause provides that in case, the
affected family cannot be given land in the command area of the

40
project; such a family may be given monetary compensation. The
Committee would like to recommend that land should be given in
the nearby area of the project. However, if the family opts not to
take land there, such family can be compensated on the basis of
market value of land as stated above.
Financial Assistance provided under the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill
4.113  The following Clauses prescribe financial assistance for
displaced families:—
(a) Financial Assistance for Land Development
Clause 36 (3): “In case of allotment of agricultural land in lieu of
the acquired land, each person whose name is included in the
records of rights with regard to the affected family shall be given
a one-time financial assistance of such amount as may be prescribed
by the appropriate Government subject to a minimum of ten
thousand rupees.”
Clause 36 (4) : “In case of allotment of wasteland in lieu of the
acquired land, each person whose name is included in the records
of rights with regard to the affected family shall be given a one-
time financial assistance of such amount as may be prescribed by
the appropriate Government subject to a minimum of fifteen
thousand rupees per hectare of land allotted.”
 (b) Financial assistance for construction of Cattle-shed
Clause 38:  “Each displaced affected family having cattle shall get
one-time financial assistance of such amount as the appropriate
Government may prescribe subject to a minimum of fifteen
thousand rupees for construction of cattle shed.”
(c) Financial assistance for transportation of family, building
materials, belongings and cattle
Clause 39 : “Each affected family which is displaced shall get
one-time financial assistance of such amount as the appropriate
Government may prescribe subject to a minimum of ten thousand
rupees as transportation cost for shifting of the family, building
materials, belongings and cattle.”

41
(d)  Financial assistance for construction of working shed or shop
Clause 40:  “Each affected person who is a rural artisan, small
trader or self-employed person and who has been displaced shall
get one-time financial assistance of such amount as the
appropriate Government may prescribe subject to a minimum of
twenty-five thousand rupees for construction of working shed or
shop.”
4.114 The Committee find that the aforesaid Clauses of the Bill
provide for one time financial assistance by way of financial
assistance for land development, for construction of cattle-shed,
transportation cost for shifting of families, building materials,
belongings & cattle and for construction of working shed or shop.
Certain minimum amount in this regard has been provided in the
aforesaid Clauses. The Committee feel that it would be better to
leave the specified amount to the appropriate Government. The
desired amendments in this regard should be made in the legislation.
Employment and Skill Development
4.115 Clause 41 provides as under:—
“In case of a project involving land acquisition on behalf of a
requiring body—
(i) the requiring body shall give preference to the affected
families in providing employment in the project, at least
one person per family, subject to the availability of vacancies
and suitability of the affected person for the employment;
(ii) wherever necessary, the requiring body shall arrange for
training of the affected persons, so as to enable such persons
to take on suitable jobs;
(iii) the requiring body shall give preference to the affected
persons or their groups or cooperatives in the allotment of
outsourced contracts, shops or other economic opportunities
coming up in or around the project site;
(iv) the requiring body shall give preference to willing landless
labourers and unemployed affected persons while engaging
labour in the project during the construction phase;
(v) the requiring body shall offer the affected persons the
necessary training facilities for development of
entrepreneurship, technical and professional skills for self-
employment;

42
(vi) the requiring body shall offer scholarships and other skill
development opportunities to eligible persons from the
affected families, as per such criteria as may be fixed by
the appropriate Government.”
4.116 Various experts who deposed before the Committee or
submitted memoranda have expressed strong reservations over the use
of words ‘preference’, ‘subject to availability of vacancies and suitability
of the affected person for the employment’ etc. When the attention of
the Department was drawn towards this, it has commented as
below:—
“For the smooth functioning and viability of the project coming
on the acquired land, the use of words ‘preference’ and ‘subject
to the availability of vacancies and suitability of the affected
person for the employment’ in the Clause 41 are appropriate.
The Standing Committee on R&R at project and district level,
Ombudsman and National Resettlement Commission will take
care of any irregularity committed by the requiring body.”
4.117 The Committee after detailed deliberations tend to agree
with the views expressed by the Department whereby it has been
stated that the use of words ‘preference’, ‘subject to the availability
of vacancies’ etc. as appearing in the aforesaid Clause 41(1) is
appropriate. The Committee also take note of the view expressed by
the nodal Department that the Standing Committee on R&R at project
and district level, Ombudsman and National Resettlement
Commission will take care of any irregularity committed by the
requiring body. The Committee feel that the position as
acknowledged by the Department whereby the Standing Committee
on Rehabilitation and Resettlement at Project and District level,
Ombudsman and the National Resettlement Commission would take
note of any irregularity committed by the requiring body should
appropriately be inserted in the legislation itself so as to make the
provisions unambiguous.
Rehabilitation Grant
4.118 Clause 42 of the Bill provides as under:—
“In case of a project involving land acquisition on behalf of a
requiring body, the affected families which have not been
provided agricultural land or employment shall be entitled to a
rehabilitation grant equivalent to seven hundred and fifty days
minimum agricultural wages.”

43
4.119 Further, when asked whether this Clause applies to urban
areas as well, the Department has clarified that the figure of 750 days
agricultural wages, i.e. wages for approximately two years, was thought
the minimum required for sustaining an affected family till the family
could look for alternative means of livelihood. In the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007, Para 7.14 mentions, after
the above provisions, the phrase “or such other higher amount as
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government” and the Committee
may like to consider adding this phrase to Clause 42 of the R&R Bill.
4.120 The Committee find that the Rehabilitation Grant and
subsistence allowance as proposed to be provided under Clauses 42
and 45 of the Bill have been linked with minimum agricultural
wages. The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) is
now being implemented in every district of the country. The
Committee feel that it would be better to link the aforesaid
allowances to the rate of wages being provided under NREGA. In
view of this suitable amendments should be made in the legislation.
Special provisions for rehabilitation and resettlement of members
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
4.121 Clause 49 (3) of the Bill provides as under:—
“The concerned Grams Sabhas or the Panchayats at the
appropriate level in the Scheduled Areas under the Fifth Schedule
or, as the case may be, Councils in the Sixth Schedule Areas
shall be consulted in all cases of land acquisition in such areas,
including acquisition under the urgency clause, before issue of a
notification under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as amended
from time to time, or any other Act of the Union or a State for
the time being in force as per the Provision of the Panchayats
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 and other relevant
laws.”
4.122 Various experts who appeared before the Committee/
submitted memoranda were of the view that the concerned Gram
Sabhas or the Panchayats at the appropriate level in the scheduled
areas under the Fifth Schedule or as the case may be councilors in the
Sixth scheduled area should be consulted not only under the urgency
clause but for all the cases where the rehabilitation and resettlement
is being provided either in the case of land acquisition or the
involuntary displacement due to some other reasons like war, natural
calamities etc.

44
4.123  The Committee agree with the views expressed by the
experts and would like to recommend to the Government to make
suitable amendments in the aforesaid Clause whereby it should be
provided that the concerned Gram Sabhas or the Panchayats at the
appropriate level in the scheduled areas under the Fifth Schedule
or, as the case may be, Councils in the Sixth scheduled areas should
be consulted not only under the urgency clause but for all the cases
where the rehabilitation and resettlement is being provided either
in the case of land acquisition or involuntary displacement due to
some other reasons like war, natural calamities etc.
4.124  Clause 29 of the Bill states as under :—
“In case of a project involving land acquisition on behalf of a
requiring body, the compensation award, full payment of
compensation, and adequate progress in rehabilitation and
resettlement shall precede the actual displacement of the affected
families.”
4.125  Further Clause 49 (5) of the Bill provides as under :—
“In case of land being acquired from members of the Scheduled
Tribes, at least one third of the compensation amount due shall
be paid to the affected families at the outset as first installment
and the rest at the time of taking over the possession of the
land.”
4.126 The Committee find that whereas as per Clause 29 of the
Bill compensation of award, full payment of compensation and
adequate progress in rehabilitation and resettlement shall precede
the actual displacement of the affected families, Clause 49 (5)
provides that at least one third of the compensation amount shall be
paid to the affected families at the outset as first instalment and the
rest at the time of taking over the possession of the land. The
Committee would like to recommend to the Government to substitute
the words ‘at the time’ by ‘shall precede’ in the Clause 49(5) of the
Bill in line with the provisions made in Clause 29.
O. Indexation of rehabilitation grant and other monetary benefits
4.127 Clause 51 of the Bill provides that rehabilitation grant and
other benefits expressed in monetary terms in this Act shall be indexed
to the Consumer Price Index with reference to the date to be notified,
and the same shall also be revised by the appropriate Government
from time to time. There are various indices of Consumer Price Index.

45
When asked which of the Consumer Price Index will be referred in
the said cases, the Department has informed that the details will be
worked out while framing the rules under the legislation.
4.128  In the aforesaid clause, it has been mentioned that the
rehabilitation grant and other benefits would be revised by the
Government from time to time.
4.129 The Committee appreciate that the rehabilitation grant and
other benefits expressed in monetary terms as per the various
provisions made in the legislation have been indexed to the
Consumer Price Index. It has also been provided that the benefits
given in monetary terms would be revised by the appropriate
Government from time to time. The Committee feel that the aforesaid
benefits should be revised after two years. The specific provisions
in this regard should be made in the legislation.
P. Punishment for false information and bar of jurisdiction of Civil
courts
4.130 Clause 52, 54 and 56 of the Bill provides as under:—
“52. If a person, in connection with a requirement or direction
under this Act, provides any information or produces any
document that the person knows is false or misleading, he shall
be liable to the punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
“54. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or
proceeding in respect of any matter which the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the Commissioner for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, or the Ombudsman is
empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injuction
shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of
any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.
“56. No Suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against the appropriate Government, local body or authority or
any officer of the appropriate Government or local body or
authority acting under this Act for anything which is in good
faith done or purported to be done under this Act or the rules,
scheme or plan made thereunder.

46
4.131 When asked whether the Ministry of Law and Justice was
consulted for making such provision, the Department has informed
that the Bill was drafted by the Law Ministry with input from the
Department/Ministry, when asked what will happen if a public interest
litigation is filed by someone, the Department has informed as
under:—
“As proposed in the Bill, no civil court shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of matter which the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the
Commissioner for Rehabilitation and Resettlement, or the
Ombudsman is empowered by or under this Act to determine,
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority
in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by on under this Act. However, these neither
apply to the jurisdiction of High Courts and above, nor to the
PILs.”
4.132 Various experts who deposed before the Committee/submitted
memoranda were of the view that whereas provisions have been made
for penalising persons for giving false information to the affected
person, no penalties have been provided for the implementing
authorities if they don’t comply with the various provisions made in
the Bill. Further even the Civil Courts have been debarred to entertain
any suit or proceedings in respect of any matter which the
administrator for rehabilitation and resettlement the Commissioner for
rehabilitation and resettlement or the Ombudsmen is empowered by
or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by
any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.
4.133 When asked about fixing the accountability of the officers,
the Department has responded as under:—
“At the time of framing the rules governing the functioning of
ombudsman under Clause 14 and the National Rehabilitation
Commission under rule 19, provisions can be made for punitive
recourse to ensure compliance of the provisions of the R&R Bill.
The Committee may like to consider incorporating this provision
in the Act itself.”
4.134 Clause 52 of the Bill provides for punishment in the form
of imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees,
or with both to the affected person for providing any false or

47
misleading information, in connection with providing any document
to fulfil the requirement or direction under the Act. The Committee
deliberated the aforesaid provisions at length and felt that the
penalties prescribed are very harsh. The Committee would like to
recommend that the concerned person for the aforesaid offence
should be penalized as per the provisions made in the Indian Penal
Code. Accordingly, suitable amendments should be made in the
legislation.

48
CHAPTER V
BRINGING ONE LEGISLATION INSTEAD OF TWO
LEGISLATIONS RELATING TO LAND ACQUISITION
AND REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
5.1 The Standing Committee in the report on Demands for Grants
(2007-2008) had recommended to bring only one legislation which may
cover the issues related to acquisition and rehabilitation together. In
the action taken replies, the Department had stated that the
Law Ministry and Attorney General had strongly advised to have two
legislations. The Committee had desired to furnish the details of the
interactions held with the Ministry of Law and Attorney General so as
to understand the matter and comment further. In the action taken
replies, the Department did not address to the aforesaid matter and
the issue was reiterated in the Thirty-first Action Taken Report of the
Committee. Some of the experts who appeared before the Committee
were of the strong opinion that there should be only one legislation
for the purpose of land acquisition and rehabilitation. Besides, the
Ministry of Power is also of the view that there should be a single
legislation. The reasons for bringing the single legislation in this regard
have been stated to be overlapping provisions like social impact
assessment study, issue of shares and debentures by the requiring body
etc. in the two Bills. Not only that, the Rehabilitation Policy also
addresses the issues related to rehabilitation and the various matters
have been reiterated in the policy also. The Ministry in the replies has
commented that the new policy of 2007 goes beyond project-affected
families displaced due to land acquisition and covers all cases of
involuntary displacement irrespective of causes, which may include
natural calamities etc. Thus the scope of the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill which is based on the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Policy of 2007 is much larger than the land acquisition cases.
5.2 The Ministry in the replies had admitted that the provisions
for social impact assessment and Chapters II, IV , V and VI of the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill have been duplicated in the Land
Acquisition Bill. The detailed reading of the two legislations indicates
that the provisions have not been duplicated word by word. There are
certain contradictions in the provisions made in the Bills where it has
been stated that the duplication has been made. For example, in
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, Clause 8 of the Bill exempts the

49
projects involving emergency acquisition of minimum area of land by
the Central Government from social impact assessment. However, such
provision has not been made in the Land Acquisition Legislation, which
may be the main legislation for the purpose of acquisition of land
under emergency clause.
5.3 Further, the following provisions of the land acquisition and
Rehabilitation legislations are reproduced here:—
“11C. ( 1) When land is acquired for the purpose of item ( iii) of
clause ( f) of section 3 and the person for whom the land is
acquired is a company authorised to issue shares and debentures,
such company shall, with the previous approval of the appropriate
Government, offer its shares or debentures to the extent of fifty
per cent. but in any case not less than twenty per cent. of the
compensation amount to be paid to the person whose land has
been acquired.”
“42 xxxx Provided that if the requiring body is a company
authorized to issue shares and debentures, then, it shall give
an option to the affected families of taking up to fifty per cent,
but in any case not less than twenty per cent, of their
rehabilitation grant amount in the form of shares or debentures,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
5.4 It would be seen from the above that in case of R&R Bill, it
seems that the issue of shares up to fifty per cent but not less than
twenty per cent of the rehabilitation grant amount is optional. However,
in case of LA Bill, it seems that the issue of shares and debentures is
compulsory.
5.5 In the LA legislation, in place of Civil Court, it has been
proposed to establish Land Acquisition Compensation Dispute
Settlement Authority whereas under the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill a provision has been made to appoint ombudsman to consider
and dispose of all petitions relating to R&R against the position of
Administrator. Whereas provisions made under LA and R&R are inter-
related, the constitution of different authorities for implementation of
the provisions as given in two Bills may create utter confusion.
5.6 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants
2007-2008 had been apprised of the intention of the Government for
bringing two legislations, one for Land Acquisition and the other
for Rehabilitation and Resettlement. The Committee after exhaustive
deliberations had strongly recommended in their Twenty-Seventh

50
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) to bring only one legislation which
may cover the issues related to acquisition and rehabilitation together.
The aforesaid issue has widely been debated during the course of
examination of the two Bills by the Committee. Divergent views in
this regard have been expressed by experts as well as different
Union Ministries consulted by the Committee.
5.7 During the course of deliberations, one strong point which
substantiates the need for bringing two separate legislations, one for
Land Acquisition and the other for Rehabilitation and Resettlement
has been made by the nodal Department. The Department has
contended that the scope of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill, 2007 is much larger than the land acquisition cases. The aforesaid
legislation goes beyond project affected families displaced due to
land acquisition and covers all cases of involuntary displacement
irrespective of causes, which may include natural calamities etc.
5.8 In view of the aforesaid clarification given by the nodal
Department, the Committee approve the existing position whereby
two Bills viz., ‘’The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007' and
‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ have been brought
before Parliament.

51
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
A. Providing solatium to the person who voluntarily offers his land
to Government for acquisition
6.1 Under LAA Legislation as well as R&R Legislation, there is no
provision to give any benefit or solatium to the person who voluntarily
offers his land to Government for acquisition for public purpose. In
this regard, the erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development in their Eighth Report had recommended as under:—
“In this connection, the Committee fail to understand that the
provision for giving solatium is not applicable in those cases
where a person voluntarily offers his land to the Government for
acquisition. Since more and more land is required by the
Government in order to meet the tasks of socio-economic
development, the Committee would like to recommend that the
provision under Section 23 (2) should also be applicable in case
of consent award as an incentive to the concerned person.”
6.2 The Committee note that there is an urgent need to provide
some sort of incentive to the person who voluntarily offers his land
to the Government for acquisition for public purpose projects. In
view of this, the Committee while endorsing the views expressed by
the erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development
would like to strongly recommend that some benefits/solatium should
be provided to the person who voluntarily offers his land to the
Government for acquisition for public purpose projects. Suitable
provisions in the legislation should accordingly be made.
B. Awareness Campaign
6.3 The ultimate beneficiaries of the various provisions made in
the legislation are the general masses. A major portion of the population
of the country comprises of the poorest of the poor who are not even
literate.
6.4 On the issue of ‘awareness campaign’, the Department has
stated as under:—
“taking up awareness campaigns about the rights and benefits
proposed to be conferred upon the people by the two Bills is

52
under active consideration of the Ministry. The preparatory work
is underway, and the advertisements, etc. would be released soon,
so as to generate public awareness about the provisions of the
new R&R Policy and associated legislative measures.
Also, the District Collector could be given the responsibility of
making the people aware of the rights and benefits conferred
under the two proposed legislations, on an ongoing basis. The
Committee could take a view on this.”
6.5 The Committee would like to recommend to the Government
to take all the steps for wide publicity of various provisions made
in the Bill, particularly through print and electronic media. Further,
District Collector should be given the responsibility of making the
people aware of the rights and benefits conferred under the two
proposed legislations, on an ongoing basis and suitable provisions
in the rules may be made in this regard.
C. Expeditious enactment of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Legislation
6.6 The Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Government that the said legislation should be enacted expeditiously
so that the relief measures envisaged under the legislation are
expeditiously implemented which may provide benefits to the
affected persons/families whose land is acquired for ‘public purpose’.
The Committee have arrived at various conclusions made in the
Report after exhaustive deliberations with various Union Ministries,
State Governments and other stakeholders. The Committee strongly
recommend that due consideration should be given to the various
recommendations/observations of the Committee and amendments
as suggested brought before the Parliament when the legislation is
taken up for consideration by the Parliament.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 October, 2008 Chairman,
24 Asvina, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

53
AS I NTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 98 of 2007
THE REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and resettlement of persons affected by
the acquisition of land for projects of public purpose or involuntary
displacement due to any other reason, and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different
dates may be appointed for different States and
any reference in this Act to the commencement
of this Act shall, in relation to a State, be
construed as a reference to the coming into
force of this Act in that State.
2. The provisions of this Act shall apply to
the rehabilitation and resettlement of persons
affected by acquisition of land under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 or any other Act of the
Union or a State for the time being in force; or
involuntary displacement of people due to any
other reason.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Act to
apply
cases of
land
acquisition
or other
involuntary
displacement
of people.

54
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “Administrator for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement” means an officer
appointed for the purpose of rehabilitation
and resettlement of affected persons under
sub-section (1) of section 9.
(b) “affected family” means—
(i) a family whose primary place
of residence or other property or source
of livelihood is adversely affected by
the acquisition of land for a project or
involuntary displacement due to any
other reason;
(ii) any tenure holder, tenant, lessee
or owner of other property, who on
account of acquisition of land (including
plot in the abadi or other property) in
the affected area or otherwise, has been
involuntarily displaced from such land
or other property;
(iii) any agricultural or non-
agricultural labourer, landless person
(not having homestead land,
agricultural land, or either homestead
or agricultural land), rural artisan, small
trader or self-employed person; who
has been residing or engaged in any
trade, business, occupation or vocation
continuously for a period of not less
than five years in the affected area
preceding the date of declaration of the
affected area, and who has been
deprived of earning his livelihood or
alienated wholly or substantially from
the main source of his trade, business,
occupation or vocation because of the
acquisition of land in the affected area
or being involuntarily displaced for any
other reason;
Definitions.

55
(c) “affected area” means area of village
or locality notified by the appropriate
Government under sub-section (1) of section
20;
(d) “agricultural labourer” means a
person primarily resident in the affected
area for a period of not less than five years
immediately before the declaration of the
affected area, who does not hold any land
in the affected area but who earns his
livelihood mainly by manual labour on
agricultural land therein immediately before
such declaration and who has been
deprived of his livelihood;
(e) “agricultural land” means lands
being used for the purpose of—
(i) agriculture or horticulture;
(ii) dairy farming, poultry farming,
pisciculture, sericulture, breeding of
livestock or nursery growing medicinal
herbs;
(iii) raising of crops, grass or
garden produce; and
(iv) land used by an agriculturist
for the grazing of cattle, but does not
include land used for cutting of wood
only;
(f) “appropriate Government” means—
(i) in relation to acquisition of land
for the purposes of the Union, the
Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a project which is
executed by a Central Government
agency or undertaking or by any other
agency on the orders or directions of
the Central Government, the Central
Government;

56
(iii) in relation to acquisition of land
for purposes other than (i) and (ii)
above, the State Government; and
(iv) in relation to rehabilitation of
persons displaced due to any other
reason, the State Government;
(g) “below poverty line or BPL Family”
means below poverty line families as
defined by the Planning Commission of
India, from time to time, and those
included in a BPL list for the time-being in
force;
(h) “Commissioner for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement” means the Commissioner
for Rehabilitation and Resettlement
appointed by the State Government under
sub-section (1) of section II;
(i) “DDP block” means a block
identified under the Desert Development
Programme of the Government of India;
(j) “family” includes a person, his or
her spouse, minor sons, unmarried
daughters, minor brothers, unmarried
sisters, father, mother and other relatives
residing with him or her and dependent
on him or her for their livelihood; and
includes “nuclear family” consisting of a
person, his or her spouse and minor
children;
(k) “holding” means the total land held
by a person as an occupant or tenant or as
both;
(l) “land acquisition” or “acquisition of
land” means acquisition of land under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as amended
from time to time, or any other Act of the
Union or a State for the time being in force;
(m) “marginal farmer” means a
cultivator with an unirrigated land holding
up to one heactare or irrigated land holding
up to half hectare;
1 of 1894.

57
(n) “non-agricultural labourer” means a
person who is not an agricultural labourer
but is primarily residing in the affected area
for a period of not less than five years
immediately before the declaration of the
affected area and who does not hold any
land under the affected area but who earns
his livelihood mainly by manual labour or
as a rural artisan immediately before such
declaration and who has been deprived of
earning his livelihood mainly by manual
labour or as such artisan in the affected
area;
(o) “notification” means a notification
published in the Gazette of India, or as the
case may be, the Gazette of a State;
(p) “occupier” means a member of a
Scheduled Tribes community in possession
of forest land prior to the 13th day of
December, 2005;
(q) “Ombudsman” means the person
appointed under section 14 for redressal of
grievances;
(r) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(s) “project” means a project involving
involuntary displacement of people,
irrespective of the number of persons
affected;
(t) “requiring body” means a company,
a body corporate, an institution, or any
other organisation for whom land is to be
acquired by the appropriate Government,
and includes the appropriate Government,
if the acquisition of land is for such
Government either for its own use or for
subsequent transfer of such land in public
interest to a company, body corporate, an
institution, or any other organisation, as the
case may be, under lease, licence or through
any other mode of transfer of land;

58
(u) “resettlement area” means an area
so declared under section 25 by the
appropriate Government;
(v) “small farmer” means a cultivator
with an un-irrigated land holding up to two
hectares or with an irrigated land holding
up to one hectare, but more than the
holding of a marginal farmer.
CHAPTER II
SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF
PROJECTS
4. (1) Whenever, it is desired to undertake
a new project or expansion of an existing
project, which involves involuntary
displacement of four hundred or more families
en masse in plain areas, or two hundred or
more families en masse in tribal or hilly areas,
DDP blocks or areas mentioned in the Fifth
Schedule or Sixth Schedule to the Constitution,
the appropriate Government shall ensure that
a social impact assessment study is carried out
in the proposed affected areas in the manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) While undertaking a social impact
assessment under sub-section (1), the
appropriate Government shall, inter alia , take
into consideration the impact that the project
will have on public and community properties,
assets and infrastructure; particularly, roads,
public transport, drainage, sanitation, sources
of drinking water, sources of water for cattle,
community ponds, grazing land, plantations,
public utilities, such as post offices, fair price
shops, food storage godowns, electricity supply,
health care facilities, schools and educational
or training facilities, places of worship, land
for traditional tribal institutions, burial and
cremation grounds.
(3) The appropriate Government may
specify that the ameliorative measures, which
Social
impact
assessment
study in
certain
cases.

59
Independent
multi-
disciplinary
expert
group to
examine
the social
impact
assessment
report.
will need to be undertaken for addressing the
said impact for a specific component, may not
be less than what is provided under a scheme
or programme, in operation in that area, of the
Central Government or, as the case may be by
the State Government.
5. (1) The social impact assessment report
shall be submitted to the appropriate
Government for its examination by an
independent multi-disciplinary expert group, as
may be notified by the appropriate
Government.
(2) The expert group shall consist of the
following persons, namely—
(a) two non-official social scientists and
rehabilitation experts, to be nominated by
the appropriate Government;
(b) the Secretary of the departments of
the appropriate Government concerned with
the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes or his nominee,
ex officio ; and
(c) a representative of the requiring
body, to be nominated by the appropriate
Government.
6. (1) Wherever it is required, as per the
provisions of any law, rules and guidelines
issued thereunder, to undertake environmental
impact assessment, the social impact assessment
study shall be carried out simultaneously with
the Environmental Impact Assessment study .
(2) The public hearing undertaken in the
project affected area for the environmental
impact assessment shall also cover issues
relating to social impact assessment.
(3) A copy of the social impact assessment
report shall be made available to the Impact
Assessment Agency authorised in respect of
Concurrent
social
impact
assessment
study in
cases
requiring
environ-
mental
impact
assessment
study.

60
environmental impact assessment by the Central
Government in the Ministry of Environment
and Forests, and a copy of the environmental
impact assessment report shall be shared with
the expert group notified under section 5.
7. (1) The social impact assessment
clearance shall be granted in such manner and
within such time as may be prescribed.
(2) The conditions laid down in the social
impact assessment clearance shall be followed
by all concerned, including the Administrator
for Rehabilitation and Resettlement while
preparing and implementing the rehabilitation
and resettlement plan.
(3) The concealment of any factual data or
submission of false or misleading data or
reports, may lead to the social impact
assessment clearance being rejected and
clearance, if any granted on the basis of data
which subsequently found to be false, may be
revoked.
8. The projects involving emergency
acquisition of minimum area of land by the
Central Government in for the purpose of
defence or national security shall be exempted
from the provisions of this Chapter, subject to
such institutional safeguards as may be
prescribed for protecting the interests of the
affected families.
CHAPTER III
AUTHORITIES FOR REHABILITATION AND
RESETTLEMENT
9. (1) Where the appropriate Government
is satisfied that there is likely to be involuntary
displacement of large number of persons due
to acquisition of land for any project or due to
any other reason, and where there is likely to
be displacement of—
Social
impact
assessment
clearance.
Exemption
from
social
impact
assessment.
Administrator
for
Rehabilitation
and
Resettlement.

61
(a) four hundred or more families
en masse in plain areas; or
(b) two hundred or more families en
masse in tribal or hilly areas, DDP blocks
or areas mentioned in the Fifth Schedule
or Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, then
the State Government shall, by notification,
appoint in respect of that project, an officer
not below the rank of District Collector to
be the Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement:
Provided that if the appropriate
Government in respect of such project is the
Central Government, the appointment shall be
made in consultation with the Central
Government:
Provided further that in case of projects
involving displacement of less than four
hundred families en masse in plain areas, or
less than two hundred families en masse in tribal
or hilly areas, DDP blocks or areas mentioned
in the Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution, the State Government may, by
notification, appoint in respect of that project,
an officer not below the rank of Deputy
Collector or Sub-Divisional Officer to be
the Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement.
(2) The Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall be assisted by such officers
and employees as the State Government may
decide.
10. (1) Subject to the superintendence,
directions and control of the appropriate
Government and the Commissioner for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall take all measures for the
rehabilitation and resettlement of the affected
families.
Powers
and
functions
of
Adminis-
trator.

62
(2) The formulation, execution and
monitoring of the rehabilitation and
resettlement plan shall vest in the Administrator
for Rehabilitation and Resettlement.
(3) Subject to any general or special order
of the appropriate Government, the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall perform the following
functions, namely:—
(i) minimise displacement of persons
and to identify non-displacing or least
displacing alternatives in consultation with
the requiring body;
(ii) hold consultation with the affected
persons while formulating a rehabilitation
and resettlement scheme or plan;
(iii) ensure that the interests of the
adversely affected persons of the Scheduled
Tribes and weaker sections are protected
while formulating the rehabilitation and
resettlement scheme or plan;
(iv) prepare a scheme or plan of
rehabilitation and resettlement as required
under Chapter V;
(v) prepare a budget including
estimated expenditure of various
components of acquisition of land,
rehabilitation and resettlement activities or
programmes in consultation with
representatives of the affected families and
the requiring body;
(vi) arrange land for rehabilitation and
resettlement of the affected families;
(vii) allot land and ensure providing of
benefits to the affected families; and
(viii) perform such other functions as
the appropriate Government may, from time
to time, by order in writing, assign.

63
(4) The Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement may, by order in writing, delegate
such of the functions conferred on him by or
under this Act to any officer not below the
rank of Tehsildar or equivalent as he may
consider appropriate for smooth implementation
of the rehabilitation and resettlement scheme
or plan.
(5) All officers and staff appointed by the
State Government under this Chapter to assist
the Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall be subordinate to him.
11. (1) The State Government shall appoint
an officer of the rank of Commissioner or
Secretary of that Government for rehabilitation
and resettlement of affected families under this
Act, to be called the Commissioner for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement.
(2) The Commissioner shall be responsible
for supervising the formulation of rehabilitation
and resettlement schemes or plans and proper
implementation of such schemes or plans.
12. (1) For each project which involves
involuntary displacement of four hundred or
more families en masse in plain areas, or two
hundred or more families en masse in tribal or
hilly areas, DDP blocks or areas mentioned in
the the Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution, the appropriate Government shall
constitute a Committee under the
Chairpersonship of the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, to be called the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee, to
monitor and review the progress of
implementation of scheme or plan of
rehabilitation and resettlement of the affected
families, and to carry out post-implementation
social audits.
(2) The Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee constituted under sub-section (1)
Commissio-
ner for
Rehabilitation
and
Resettlement.
Rehabilita-
tion and
Resettle-
ment
Committee
at project
level.

64
shall include, apart from officers of the
appropriate Government, the following
members, namely:—
 (i) a representative of women residing
in the affected area;
(ii) a representative each of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
residing in the affected area;
(iii) a representative of a voluntary
organisation working in the area;
(iv) a representative of a nationalised
bank;
(v) the Land Acquisition Officer of the
project;
(vi) the Chairpersons of the panchayats
or municipalities located in the affected
area, or their nominees;
(vii) the Member of Parliament and
Member of the Legislative Assembly of the
concerned area; and
(viii) a representative of the requiring
body.
(3) The procedure regulating the business
of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee, its meetings and other matters
connected thereto shall be such as may be
prescribed.
13. (1) The State Government shall in every
district constitute a standing Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Committee under the
chairpersonship of the District Collector or, as
the case may be, Deputy Commissioner of the
district, to monitor and review the progress of
rehabilitation and resettlement of the affected
families in the district excluding those covered
by the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee at the project level as specified in
section 12.
Rehabilita-
tion and
Resettle-
ment
Committee
at district
level.

65
(2) The composition, powers, functions and
other matters relating to the functioning of the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee at
the district level shall be such as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
14. (1) The appropriate Government shall
appoint, in such manner as may be prescribed,
an ombudsman for time-bound disposal of the
grievances arising out of the matters covered
under this Act.
(2) Any affected person, if aggrieved, for
not being offered the benefits admissible, may
move a petition for redressal of his grievances
to the ombudsman.
(3) The form and manner in which and
the time within which petitions under sub-
section (2) may be made to the ombudsman
and be disposed of in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(4) The ombudsman shall have the power
to consider and dispose of all petitions
relating to resettlement and rehabilitation
against the decision of the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement or
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Committee
and issue such directions to the requiring
body, the Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement, the District Collector or Deputy
Commissioner of the districts, as he may deem
proper for the redressal of such grievances.
15. (1) In case a project covers an area in
more than one State or Union territory where
the project affected families are or had been
residing, or proposed to be resettled, the
Central Government shall, in consultation
with the concerned States and Union
territories, appoint the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the
Commissioner for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement, a common Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Committee, and the Ombudsman
for the purposes of this Act.
Ombudsman
Inter-State
projects.

66
(2) The method of implementation of the
schemes or plans for rehabilitation and
resettlement shall be discussed by the State
Governments and the Union territory
Administrations, and a common scheme or
plan agreed to by them shall be notified by
the Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement in the States or Union territories
in accordance with the procedure laid down
in this Act.
(3) If any difficulty arises in the
implementation of the schemes or plans, the
matter shall be referred to the Central
Government for its decision.
16. (1) The Central Government shall
constitute a National Monitoring Committee
for reviewing and monitoring the
implementation of rehabilitation and
resettlement schemes or plans under this Act.
(2) The Committee may, besides having
representation of the concerned Ministries and
Departments of the Central and State
Governments, associate with it eminent
experts from the relevant fields.
(3) The procedures to be followed by the
Committee and the allowances payable to the
experts shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall provide
officers and other employees to the Committee
necessary for its efficient functioning.
17. The States and Union territories shall
provide all the relevant information on the
matters covered under this Act, to the National
Monitoring Committee in a regular and timely
manner, and also as and when required.
18. (1) For every major project covered
under this Act, there shall be an Oversight
Committee for Rehabilitation and Resettlement
in the Ministry or the Department of the
appropriate Government.
National
Monitoring
Committee.
Disclosure
of
Information.
Oversight
Committee.

67
(2) The composition, functions and
procedures of the Committee referred to in
subsection (1) shall be such as may be
prescribed.
19. (1) A National Rehabilitation
Commission shall be set up by the Central
Government with the power to supervise and
exercise general oversight over rehabilitation
and resettlement of the affected families
covered under this Act.
(2) The terms and conditions of
appointment of the Chairperson and Members
and the composition, powers and the procedure
for transaction of business of the National
Rehabilitation Commission shall be such as may
be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
SCHEMES OR PLANS FOR
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
20. (1) Where the appropriate Government
is of the opinion that there is likely to be
involuntary displacement of four hundred or
more families en masse in plain areas, or two
hundred or more families en masse in tribal or
hilly areas, DDP blocks or areas mentioned in
the Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution, due to acquisition of land for any
project or due to any other reason, it shall,
declare, by notification in the Official Gazette,
area of villages or lands as an affected area.
(2) Every declaration made under sub-
section (1) shall be published in at least three
daily newspapers, two of which shall be in the
local vernacular, having circulation in villages
or areas which are likely to be affected, and
also by affixing a copy of the notification on
the notice board of the concerned gram
panchayats or municipalities and other
prominent place or places in the affected area
as well as the resettlement area, or by any other
National
Rehabilitation
Commission.
Declaration
of affected
areas.

68
method as may be prescribed in this regard by
the appropriate Government.
21. (1) Upon publication of a declaration
under sub-section (1) of Section 20, the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall undertake a baseline survey
and census for identification of the persons and
families likely to be affected.
(2) Every survey under sub-section (1) shall
contain the following village-wise information
of the affected families, namely:—
(i) members of the family who are
permanently residing, engaged in any trade,
business, occupation or vocation in the
affected areas;
(ii) families who are likely to lose, or
have lost, their house, agricultural land,
employment or are alienated wholly or
substantially from the main source of their
trade, business, occupation or vocation;
(iii) agricultural labourers and non-
agricultural labourers;
(iv) families belonging to the Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe categories;
(v) vulnerable persons such as the
disabled, destitute, orphans, widows,
unmarried girls, abandoned women, or
persons above fifty years of age, who are
not provided or cannot immediately be
provided with alternative livelihood, and
who are not otherwise covered as part of a
family;
(vi) families that are landless (not
having homestead land, agricultural land,
or either homestead or agricultural land)
and below poverty line, but residing
continuously for a period of not less than
five years in the affected area preceding the
date of declaration of the affected area; and
Survey
and
census of
affected
families.

69
(vii) the Scheduled Tribes families who
are or were in possession of forest lands in
the affected area prior to the 13th day of
December, 2005.
(3) Every survey undertaken under sub-
section (1) shall be completed within a period
of ninety days from the date of declaration
made under sub-section (1) of Section 20.
(4) On completion of the survey under sub-
section (3) , or on expiry or a period of ninety
days, whichever is earlier, the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement shall, by
notification, publish a draft containing details
of the findings of the survey conducted under
sub-section (1), in such manner as may be
prescribed, and invite objections and
suggestions from all persons likely to be
affected thereby.
(5) On the expiry of a period of thirty days
from the date of publication of the draft
containing details of survey and after
considering the objections and suggestions
received under sub-section (4), the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall submit his recommendations
thereon along with the details of the survey to
the appropriate Government.
(6) Within a period of forty-five days from
the date of receipt of the details of the survey
and recommendations of the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the appropriate
Government shall publish the final details of
survey in the Official Gazette.
22. (1) The Administrator for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement shall draw up a list of lands
that may be available for rehabilitation and
resettlement of the affected families.
Assessment
of land
available
for
rehabilitation
and
resettlement.

70
(2) The list of lands drawn up under sub-
section (1) shall consist of—
(a) land available or acquired for the
project and earmarked for the purpose;
(b) Government wastelands and any
other Government land available for
allotment to the affected families;
(c) lands that may be available for
purchase or acquisition for the purposes of
rehabilitation and resettlement scheme or
plan; or
(d) a combination of one or more of
the above.
23. (1) After completion of baseline survey
and census of the affected families under
section 21, and assessment of the requirement
of land for resettlement under section 22, the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall prepare a draft scheme or
plan for the rehabilitation and resettlement of
the affected families after consultation with the
representatives of the affected families including
women and the representative of the requiring
body.
(2) The draft rehabilitation and resettlement
scheme or plan shall be made known locally
by wide publicity in the affected area and the
resettlement area in such manner as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government
which shall also be discussed in the concerned
gram sabhas and in public hearings in urban
and rural areas where gram sabhas do not exist:
Provided that the consultation with the
Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the
appropriate level in Scheduled Areas under the
Fifth Schedule shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Provisions of the Panchayats
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996:
Provided further that, in cases of
involuntary displacement of two hundred or
more Scheduled Tribes families from the
Draft
schemes
or plans
for
rehabilitation
and
resettlement.
48 of 1996

71
Scheduled Areas, the concerned Tribes Advisory
Councils shall also be consulted.
(3) The draft rehabilitation and resettlement
scheme or plan shall contain the following
particulars, namely:—
(a) the extent of land to be acquired
for the project or lost otherwise and the
names of the affected villages;
(b) a village-wise list of the affected
persons, family-wise, the extent and nature
of land and immovable property owned or
held in their possession in the affected area,
and the extent and nature of such land and
immovable property which they are likely
to lose or have lost, indicating the survey
numbers thereof;
(c) a list of agricultural labourers in
such area and the names of such persons
whose livelihood depends on agricultural
activities;
(d) a list of persons who have lost or
are likely to lose their employment or
livelihood or who have been or likely to
be alienated wholly or substantially from
their main sources of trade, business,
occupation or vocation consequent to the
acquisition of land for the project or
involuntary displacement due to any other
cause;
(e) a list of non-agricultural labourers,
including artisans in such area;
(f) a list of affected landless families,
including those without homestead land
and below poverty line families;
(g) a list of vulnerable affected persons,
as specified in clause (v) of sub-section (2)
of section 21;
(h) a list of occupiers, if any;

72
(i) a list of public utilities and
government buildings which are affected or
likely to be affected;
(j) details of public and community
properties, assets and infrastructure;
(k) a list of benefits and packages which
are to be provided to the affected families;
(l) details of the extent of land available
in the resettlement area for resettling and
for allotment of land to the affected
families;
(m) details of the amenities and
infrastructural facilities which are to be
provided for resettlement;
(n) the time schedule for shifting and
resettling the displaced families in the
resettlement area; and
(o) such other particulars as the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement may consider necessary.
(4) While preparing a draft scheme or plan
in case of a project involving land acquisition
on behalf of a requiring body, the Administrator
for Rehabilitation and Resettlement shall ensure
that the entire estimated cost of rehabilitation
and resettlement scheme or plan is included in
the cost of the project for which the land is
being acquired on behalf of the requiring body;
and the entire expenditure of rehabilitation and
resettlement benefits including the expenditure
incurred on rehabilitation and resettlement of
the affected families are borne by the requiring
body.
(5) The Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall communicate to the requiring
body for incorporation in the project cost, the
entire cost of rehabilitation and resettlement
benefits and other expenditure for rehabilitation
and resettlement of the affected families.

73
24. (1) The Administrator for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement shall submit the draft scheme
or plan for rehabilitation and resettlement to
the appropriate Government for its approval.
(2) In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body, it
shall be the responsibility of the appropriate
Government to obtain the consent of the
requiring body, to ensure that the necessary
approvals as required under this Act have been
obtained, and to make sure that the requiring
body has agreed to bear the entire cost of
rehabilitation and resettlement benefits and other
expenditure for rehabilitation and resettlement of
the affected families as communicated by the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement, before approving it.
(3) The approved scheme or plan for
rehabilitation and resettlement shall be
published in the Official Gazette by the
appropriate Government.
(4) On the final publication of notification
of the rehabilitation and resettlement scheme
or plan, it shall come into force.
CHAPTER V
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
OF AFFECTED FAMILIES
25. The appropriate Government may, by
notification, declare any area or areas as a
resettlement area or areas for the purposes of
rehabilitation and resettlement of the affected
families.
26. (1) The affected families may, wherever
possible, be settled in a group or groups.
(2) In case the entire population of the
village or area to be shifted belongs to a
particular community, such population or the
families may, wherever possible, be resettled
en masse in the resettlement area.
Final
publication
of
schemes
and plans.
Declaration
of
resettlement
areas.
Affected
families to
be settled
in group.

74
(3) In the case of resettlement of the
Scheduled Castes affected families, such families
may, wherever possible, be resettled in the areas
close to the villages.
27. The Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement may, on behalf of the appropriate
Government, and subject to such rules as may
be prescribed, enter into an agreement with any
person for the purchase or exchange of any
land required for the purposes of the
rehabilitation and resettlement scheme or plan.
28. (1) In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body, it
shall be the responsibility of the requiring body
to provide requisite funds to the administrator
for Rehabilitation and Resettlement for proper
implementation of the rehabilitation and
resettlement scheme or plan for the affected
families.
(2) In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body, as
soon as the rehabilitation and resettlement
scheme or plan is finalised, the requiring body
shall deposit one-third cost of the rehabilitation
and resettlement scheme or plan with the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement.
(3) The Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall keep proper books of
accounts and maintain records of the funds
placed at his disposal, in such manner as
may be prescribed, and submit periodical
returns to the appropriate Government in this
behalf.
29. In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body, the
compensation award, full payment of
compensation, and adequate progress in
rehabilitation and resettlement shall precede the
actual displacement of the affected families.
Purchase
of
exchange
of land
for
rehabilitation
and
resettlement.
Funds for
rehabilitation
and
resettlement.
Compen-
sation and
rehabili-
tation and
resettle-
ment
ahead of
displace-
ment.

75
30. (1) In case of involuntary displacement
of four hundred families or more en masse in
plain areas, or two hundred families or
more en masse in tribal or hilly areas, DDP
blocks or areas mentioned in the Fifth
Scheduled or Sixth Schedule to the Constitution,
comprehensive infrastructural facilities and
amenities notified by the appropriate
Government shall be provided in the
resettlement area.
(2) If relocation takes place in an existing
settlement area, the same infrastructure shall
also be extended to the host community.
(3) In case of involuntary displacement of
less than four hundred families en masse in
plain areas, or less than two hundred families
en masse in tribal or hilly areas, DDP blocks or
areas mentioned in the Fifth Schedule or
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, all affected
families shall be provided basic infrastructural
facilities and amenities at the resettlement area
as per the norms specified by the appropriate
Government.
31. The appropriate Government shall
ensure that the resettlement area forms part of
a panchayat or a municipality.
32. If land is acquired in cases of urgency,
under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as
amended from time to time, or any other Act
of the Union or a State for the time being in
force, each affected family shall be provided
with transit and temporary accommodation,
pending rehabilitation and resettlement scheme
or plan, in addition to the payment of monthly
subsistance allowance and other rehabilitation
and resettlement benefits due to them under
this Act.
Infrastructural
facilities
and
amenities
in
resettlement
areas.
Local self-
government
institutions
in
resettlement
areas.
Special
provisions
for
rehabilitation
and
resettlement
in case of
urgency.
1 of 1894.

76
33. In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body—
(i) the requiring body shall contribute
to the socio-economic development of such
geographic area on the periphery of the
project site as may be defined by the
appropriate;
(ii) the requiring body shall earmark a
percentage of its net profit or, in case no
profit is declared by the requiring body in
a particular year, for that year, such
minimum alternative amount as may be
determined by the appropriate Government
after consultation with the requiring body,
to be spent for the purpose and within the
area referred to in sub-section (1); and
(3) the requiring body shall coordinate with
the Commissioner for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement while carrying out the
developmental activity under this section.
CHAPTER VI
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
BENEFITS FOR THE AFFECTED FAMILIES
34. The rehabilitation and resettlement
benefits shall be extended to the affected
families who are eligible as affected families
on the date of publication of the declaration
under sub-section (1) of section 20, and any
division of assets in the family after the said
date shall not be taken into account.
35. (1) Any affected family owning house
and whose house has been acquired or lost,
shall be allotted land for house, without
requiring him to pay the price for such land,
to the extent of two hundred and fifty square
metre of land in rural areas or, as the case
may be, one hundred and fifty square metre of
land in urban areas to each family within the
affected family, subject to the actual area
acquired or lost:
Provided that, in urban areas, a house of
up to one hundred square metre carpet area
may be provided in lieu thereof.
Housing
benefits.
Periphery
develop-
ment.
Rehabilitation
and
resettlement
benefits
available
to eligible
affected
families.

77
(2) Each below poverty line affected family
which is without homestead land and which
has been residing in the affected area
continously for a period of not less than five
years preceding the date of declaration of the
affected area and which has been involuntarily
displaced from such area, shall be provided
with a house having at least fifty square metre
carpet area in rural areas or, as the case may
be, twenty-five square metre carpet area in
urban areas, in the resettlement area:
Provided that any such family which opts
not to take the house offered, shall get a one-
time financial assistance for house construction,
and the amount shall not be less than what is
given under any programme of house
construction by the Government of India.
Explanation.—The houses in urban areas
may, if necessary, be provided in multi-storied
building complexes.
36. (1) Each affected family owning
agricultural land in the affected area and whose
entire land has been acquired or lost, or who
has, as a land consequence of the acquisition
or loss of land, been reduced to the status of
a marginal farmer, shall be allotted, in the name
of each person included in the records of rights
with regard to the affected family, agricultural
land or cultivable wasteland to the extent of
actual land loss by the affected family subject
to a ceiling of one hectare of irrigated land or
two hectares of unirrigated land or cultivable
wasteland, if Government land is available in
the resettlement area.
(2) In the case of irrigation or hydel
projects, the affected families shall be given
preference in allotment of land-for-land in the
command area of the project:
Provided that such lands may be
consolidated and plots of suitable sizes allotted
Allotment
of
agricultural
land.

78
to the affected families, who could be settled
there in groups:
Provided further that, in case an affected
family cannot be given land in the command
area of the project or the family opts not to
take land there, such a family may be given
monetary compensation on replacement cost
basis for the lands lost, for purchase of suitable
land elsewhere.
(3) In case of allotment of agricultural land
in lieu of the acquired land, each person whose
name is included in the records of rights with
regard to the affected family shall be given a
one-time financial assistance of such amount
as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government subject to a minimum of ten
thousand rupees.
(4) In case of allotment of wasteland in lieu
of the acquired land, each person whose name
is included in the records of rights with regard
to the affected family shall be given a one-
time financial assistance of such amount as may
be prescribed by the appropriate Government
subject to a minimum of fifteen thousand
rupees per hectare of land allotted.
37. (1) In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body, the
stamp duty and other fees payable for
registration of the land or house allotted to the
affected families shall be borne by the requiring
body.
(2) The land or house allotted to the
affected families shall be free from all
encumbrances.
(3) The land or house allotted may be in
the joint names of wife and husband of the
affected family.
38. Each displaced affected family having
cattle shall get one-time financial assistance of
such amount as the appropriate Government
may prescribe subject to a minimum of fifteen
thousand rupees for construction of cattle shed.
Registration
etc. of
land of
other
property
allotted.
Financial
assistance
for cattle
shed.

79
39. Each affected family which is displaced
shall get one-time financial assistance of such
amount as the appropriate Government may
prescribe subject to a minimum of ten thousand
rupees as transportation cost for shifting of the
family, building materials, belongings and cattle.
40. Each affected person who is a rural
artisan, small trader or self-employed person
and who has been displaced shall get one-time
financial assistance of such amount as the
appropriate Government may prescribe subject
to a minimum of twenty-five thousand rupees
for construction of working shed or shop.
41. In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body—
(i) the requiring body shall give
preference to the affected families in
providing employment in the project, at
least one person per family, subject to the
availability of vacancies and suitability of
the affected person for the employment;
(ii) wherever necessary, the requiring
body shall arrange for training of the
affected persons, so as to enable such
persons to take on suitable jobs;
(iii) the requiring body shall give
preference to the affected persons or their
groups or cooperatives in the allotment of
outsourced contracts, shops or other
economic opportunities coming up in or
around the project site;
(iv) the requiring body shall give
preference to willing landless labourers and
unemployed affected persons while
engaging labour in the project during the
construction phase;
(v) the requiring body shall offer the
affected persons the necessary training
facilities for development of
Trnasportation
cost.
Financial
assistance
for
working
shed or
shop.
Employment
and skill
development.

80
entrepreneurship, technical and professional
skills for self-employment;
(vi) the requiring body shall offer
scholarships and other skill development
opportunities to eligible persons from the
affected families, as per such criteria as may
be fixed by the appropriate Government.
42. In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body, the
affected families which have not been provided
agricultural land or employment shall be
entitled to a rehabilitation grant equivalent to
seven hundred and fifty days minimum
agricultural wages:
Provided that if the requiring body is a
company authorised to issue shares and
debentures, then, it shall give an option to the
affected families of taking up to fifty per cent.,
but in any case not less than twenty per cent.,
of their rehabilitation grant amount in the form
of shares or debentures, in such manner as may
be prescribed.
43. In cases involving land acquisition for
land development projects, in lieu of land-for-
land or employment, the affected families shall
be given developed land or built-up space
within the development project, in proportion
to the land acquired, but subject to limits as
may be prescribed.
44. In cases of irrigation or hydel projects,
the affected families may be allowed fishing
rights in the reservoirs, in such manner as may
be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
45. In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body, each
affected family which is involuntarily displaced
shall get a monthly subsistence allowance
equivalent to twenty-five days minimum
agricultural wages per month for a period of
one year from the date of displacement.
Rehabilitation
grant and
option for
allotment
of shares.
Land
development
projects.
Fishing
rights.
Subsistence
allowance.

81
46. The project authorities shall, at their
cost, arrange for annuity policies that will pay
a pension for life to the vulnerable affected
persons as specified in clause (v) of sub-section
(2) of section 21, of such amount as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government
subject to a minimum of five hundred rupees
per month.
47. In case of linear acquisitions, in projects
relating to railway lines, highways, transmission
lines, laying of pipelines and such other projects
wherein only a narrow stretch of land is
acquired for the purpose of the project or is
utilised for right of way, each person whose
name is included in the records of rights with
regard to the affected family shall be offered
by the requiring body an ex-gratia grant of such
amount as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government subject to a minimum
of twenty thousand rupees, in addition to the
compensation and any other benefits due under
the Act or programme or scheme under which
the land, house or other property is acquired:
Provided that, if as a result of such land
acquisition, the land-holder becomes landless
or is reduced to the status of a small or
marginal farmer, other rehabilitation and
resettlement benefits available under this Act
shall also be extended to such affected family .
48. The affected families shall have the
option to take a lump-sum amount, in lieu of
one or more of the benefits specified in sections
35 to 47 (both inclusive), as may be determined
by the appropriate Government in consultation
with the requiring body.
49. (1) In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body which
involves involuntary displacement of two
hundred or more Scheduled Tribes families, a
Tribal Development Plan shall be prepared, in
such form as may be prescribed, laying down
the details of procedure for settling land rights
due but not settled and restoring titles of tribals
on alienated land by undertaking a special
drive together with land acquisition.
Monthly
pension to
vulnerable
affected
persons.
Linear
projects.
Option for
a lump-
sum
payment
in lieu of
benefits.
Special
provisions
for
rehabilitation
and
resettlement
of members
of the
Scheduled
Tribes and
the
Scheduled
Castes.

82
(2) The Tribal Development Plan shall also
contain a programme for development of
alternate fuel, fodder and non-timber forest
produce resources on non-forest lands within a
period of five years sufficient to meet the
requirements of tribal communities who are
denied access to forests.
(3) The concerned Gram Sabhas or the
Panchayats at the appropriate level in the
Scheduled Areas under the Fifth Schedule
or, as the case may be, Councils in the
Sixth Schedule Areas shall be consulted in all
cases of land acquisition in such areas,
including acquisition under the urgency clause,
before issue of a notification under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, as amended from time
to time, or any other Act of the Union or a
State for the time being in force as per the
Provision of the Panchayats (Extension to the
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 and other relevent
laws.
(4) Each affected family of Scheduled Tribe
followed by Scheduled Caste categories shall
be given preference in allotment of land-for-
land, if Government land is available in the
resettlement area.
(5) In case of land being acquired from
members of the Scheduled Tribes, at least
one-third of the compensation amount due shall
be paid to the affected families at the outset as
first installment and the rest at the time of
taking over the possession of the land.
(6) In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body, each
Scheduled Tribes affected family shall get an
additional one-time financial assistance
equivalent to five hundred days minimum
agricultural wages for loss of customary rights
or usages of forest produce.
1 of 1894
40 of 1996

83
(7) The Scheduled Tribes affected families
shall be resettled preferably in the same
Schedule Area in a compact block, so that they
can retain their ethnic, linguistic and cultural
identity.
(8) The resettlement areas predominantly
inhabited by the Scheduled Tribes shall get
land, to such extent as may be decided by the
appropriate Government, free of cost for
community and social gatherings.
(9) In case of a project involving land
acquisition on behalf of a requiring body, the
Scheduled Tribes affected families resettled out
of the district will get twenty-five per cent.
higher rehabilitation and resettlement benefits
in monetary terms in respect of the benefits
specified in sub-sections (3) and (4) of section
36, sections 38, 39, and 40.
(10) Any alienation of tribal lands in
disregard of the laws and regulations for the
time being in force shall be treated as null and
void; and in the case of acquisition of such
lands, the rehabilitation and resettlement
benefits shall be available to the original tribal
landowners.
(11) The affected Scheduled Tribes, other
traditional forest dwellers and the Scheduled
Castes families having fishing rights in a river
or pond or dam in the affected area shall be
given fishing rights in the reservoir area of the
irrigation or hydel projects.
(12) All benefits available to the affected
families in the affected areas, shall continue in
the resettlement area.
50. The affected Scheduled Tribes families,
who were in possession of forest lands in the
affected area prior to the 13th day of December,
2005, shall be eligible for the benefits
of rehabilitation and resettlement under this
Act.
Benefits to
occupiers.

84
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
51. The rehabilitation grant and other
benefits expressed in monetary terms in this
Act shall be indexed to the Consumer Price
Index with reference to the date to be notified,
and the same shall also be revised by the
appropriate Government from time to time.
52. If a person, in connection with a
requirement or direction under this Act,
provides any information or produces any
document that the person knows is false or
misleading, he shall be liable to tbe punished
with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or
with both.
53. The officers of the Central Government,
State Governments or Union territory
Administrations and the officers or staff of the
local bodies or other statutory authorities shall
assist the Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement or any other officer duly
authorised under this Act, as and when
required, for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
54. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of
any matter which the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the
Commissioner for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement, or the Ombudsman is empowered
by or under this Act to determine, and no
injunction shall be granted by any court or
other authority in respect of any action taken
or to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.
55. The Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement, the Commissioner for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement and the
Indexation
of
rehabilitation
grnat and
other
monetary
benefits.
Punishment
for false
information.
Duty to
assist
Administrator
for
Rehabilitation
and
Resettlement.
Bar of
juridication
of civil
courts.
Officers to
be public
servants.

85
Ombudsman, appointed under this Act shall
be deemed, when acting or purporting to act
in pursuance of any of the provisions of this
Act, to be public servants within the meaning
of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
56. No Suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against the appropriate
Government, local body or authority or any
officer of the appropriate Government or local
body or authority acting under this Act for
anything which is in good faith done or
purported to be done under this Act or the
rules, scheme or plan made thereunder.
57. The provisions of this Act shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force except the Provision of the
Panchayats [(Extension to the Scheduled Areas)
Act, 1996] or in any instrument having effect
by virtue of any law other than this Act.
58. (1) The appropriate Government may,
after previous publication, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which social impact
assessment study is to be carried out under
sub-section (1) or section (4);
(b) the manner of granting social impact
assessment clearance under sub-section (1)
or section 7;
(c) emergency acquisition of land for
the purpose of defence or national security,
and its institutional safeguards under
section 8;
Indenmnity
for acts
done in
good faith.
Overriding
effects of
act over
all land
related
laws.
Power to
make
rules.
45 of 1860
40 of 1996

86
(d) rules of procedure regulating the
business of the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Committee under sub-section
(3) of section 12; and composition, powers
and functions relating to the Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Committee under
sub-section (2) of section 13;
(e) the manner of appointment of
ombudsman, form and manner in which
complaints may be made and disposed by
the ombudsman under sub-section (1) and
(3) of section 14; and
(f) procedures to be followed by the
National Monitoring Committee under
sub-section (3) of section 16; and
composition powers and procedure of
transaction of business of the National
Rehabilitation Commission under
sub-section (2) of section 19;
(g) the method of notifying affected
areas under sub-section (2) of section 20;
(h) the manner in which the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall publish a draft details
of findings of the survey conducted under
sub-section (4) of section 21; and the
manner of giving publicity to draft
rehabilitation and resettlement scheme or
plan under sub-section (2) of section 23;
(i) the method of entering into an
agreement with any person under
rehabilitation and resettlement scheme or
plan under section 27;
(j) the manner of keeping books of
accounts and records of the funds for
rehabilitation and resettlement by the
Administrator under sub-section (3) of
section 28;
(k) specify assistance to affected family
under sub-section (3) and (4) of section 36;

87
(l) rules for giving financial assistance
to construct cattle shed under section 38;
transportation cost for shifting of the family
under section 39; construction of working
shed for shop under section 40 and the
manner in which rehabilitation grant shall
be provided under section 42;
(m) the manner of providing fishing
rights of the reservoirs to the affected
families under section 44;
(n) the amount of pension payable to
vulnerable persons under section 46; and
the determination of ex-gratia amount under
section 47, the necessary forms for the
purposes specified in section 49; and
(o) any other matter which is to be, or
may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by the
rules.
(3) Every rule made by the Central
Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session for
a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
(4) Every rule made by a State Government
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of the State
Legislature where it consists of two Houses or

88
where such State legislature consists of one
House, before that House.
59. Notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act, a scheme or plan for rehabilitation or
resettlement of affected persons or families
formulated by the requiring body, may provide
for benefits higher than the extent and the
amount of benefit laid down under this Act.
60. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
may appear to be necessary, for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under
this section after the expiry of the period of
three years from the date of commencement of
this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Savings.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

89
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Provision of public facilities or infrastructure often requires the
exercise of powers by the State for acquisition of private property
leading to displacement of people, depriving them of their land,
livelihood and shelter, restricting their access to traditional resource
base and uprooting them from their socio-cultural environment. These
have traumatic, psychological and socio-cultural consequences on the
affected population which call for protecting their rights, in particular
of the weaker sections of the society including members of the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, marginal farmers and their
families.
2. There is an imperative need to recognise rehabilitation and
resettlement issues as intrinsic to the development process formulated
with the active participation of affected persons and families. Additional
benefits beyond monetary compensation have to be provided to families
affected adversely by involuntary displacement. The plight of those
who do not have rights over the land on which they are critically
dependent for their subsistence is even worse. This calls for a broader
concerted effort on the part of the planners to include in the
displacement, rehabilitation and resettlement process framework, not
only those who directly lose land and other assets but also all those
who are affected by such acquisition of assets. The displacement process
often poses problems that make it difficult for the affected persons to
continue their old livelihood activities after resettlement. This requires
a careful assessment of the economic disadvantages and the social
impact of displacement. There must also be a holistic effort aimed at
improving the all-round living standards of the affected people and
families.
3. A National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation for Project
Affected Families was formulated in 2004, which came into force with
effect from February, 2004. Experience gained in implementation of
this policy indicates that there are many issues addressed by the policy
which need to be reviewed. There should be a clear perception, through
a careful quantification of the costs and benefits that will accrue to
society at large, of the desireability and justifiability of each project.
The adverse impact on affected families—economic, environmental,
social and cultural—must be assessed in participatory and transparent
manner. A national rehabilitation and resettlement framework thus
needs to apply to all projects where involuntary displacement takes
place.

90
4. The aim is to minimise large-scale displacement, as far as
possible. However, where large numbers of families are affected, it
must be mandatory to do social impact assessments and provide all
required infrastructural facilities and amenities in the resettlement area.
More particularly , where the Scheduled Tribes people are being
displaced in sizeable numbers, a well thought out Tribal Development
Plan must be put in place. Furthermore, such a policy must specify
clear timeframes within which the implementation of the rehabilitation
package as well as utilisation of the land shall be accomplished. Also,
it should lay down an effective monitoring and grievance redressal
mechanism.
5. The National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007 has
been formulated on these lines to replace the National Policy on
Resettlement and Rehabilitation for Project Affected Families, 2003. The
new policy has been notified in the Official Gazette and has become
operative with effect from the 31st October, 2007. Since the inception
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for the first time a legislation namely,
the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 has been developed on
the lines of the provisions of the new policy , so as to give a statutory
backing to them and provide for Social Impact Assessment, making of
scheme and plans well defined Rehabilitation and Resettlement benefits
for the affected families.
6. Many State Governments have their own rehabilitation and
resettlement policies. Many Public Sector Undertakings or agencies also
have their own policies in this regard. The Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007 provides for the basic minimum requirements
that all projects leading to involuntary displacement must address.
The Bill contains a saving clause to enable the State Governments,
Public Sector Undertakings or agencies, or other requiring bodies to
continue to provide or put in place greater benefit levels than those
prescribed under the Bill.
The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 will be primarily
applicable to the rehabilitation and resettlement of persons adversely
affected by the acquisition of lands for projects. However, involuntary
displacement of people may be caused by other factors also, and the
provisions of the Bill may apply to the rehabilitation and resettlement
of persons involuntarily displaced permanently due to any reasons.
8. In brief, the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 will
provide for the basic minimum that all projects leading to involuntary
displacement must address the grievances of the affected persons. A
social impact assessment of proposals leading to displacement of large

91
populations through a participatory, informed and transparent process
involving all stake-holders, including the affected persons will be
necessary before these are acted upon. The rehabilitation process would
augment income levels and enrich quality of life of the displaced
persons, covering rebuilding socio-cultural relationships, capacity
building and provision of public health and community services.
Adequate safeguards have been proposed for protecting rights of
vulnerable sections of the displaced persons.
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
  N
EW D ELHI; RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH.
Dated the 30th November, 2007.

92
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 4.—seeks to provide for social impact assessment study in
certain cases in the proposed affected areas taking into consideration
the impact that the project will have on public and community
properties etc., and specify the ameliorative measures.
Clause 5.—seeks to provide submission of the SIA Report by an
independent multidisciplinary expert group for examination by the
appropriate Government; it also seeks to provide for constitution of
the expert group.
Clause 6.—seeks to provide for concurrent SIA Studies with
Environmental Impact Assessment Study.
Clause 7.—seeks to provide for the manner of SIA clearance and
conditions laid down in SIA clearance to be followed by all concerned,
etc.
Clause 8.—seeks to exempt, from the provisions of Chapter-II,
projects involving emergency acquisition in for the purpose of defence
or national security.
Clause 9.—seeks to provide for appointment of Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement by the State Government.
Clause 10.—seeks to provide for the functions of administrator in
relation to rehabilitation and resettlement, formulation and execution
and monitoring of rehabilitation and resettlement plan, etc.
Clause 11.—seeks to provide for appointment of a Commissioner
for Rehabilitation and Resettlement for supervising the formulation of
rehabilitation and resettlement schemes/plans and implementation
thereof.
Clause 12.—seeks to provide for constitution of Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Committee for each project involving involuntary
displacement of certain No. of families in plain/tribal or hilly areas,
etc.
Clause 13.—seeks to provide for constitution of a Standing
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee under the Chairmanship
of District Collector/Dy. Commissioner.

93
Clause 14.—provides for appointment by the appropriate
Government of an ombudsman for time bound disposal of grievances,
etc.
Clause 15.—seeks to provide for appointment by the Central
Government of Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement,
Commissioner for Rehabilitation and Resettlement, a Common
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee, and the ombudsman, in a
case where the project covers an area in more than one State or Union
Territory; method of implementation of the schemes/plans to be
discussed by the State Governments and Union Territory
Administrations and a common scheme/plan to be agreed upon; and
in case of any difficulty, the matter to be referred to the Central
Government for decision.
Clause 16.—seeks to provide for constitution by the Central
Government of a National Monitoring Committee for reviewing and
monitoring the implementation of schemes or plans under the Bill.
Clause 17.—seeks to provide that the States and Union Territories
shall provide relevant information on matters covered under the Bill
to the National Monitoring Committee on a regular basis and also as
and when required.
Clause 18.—provides for an Oversight Committee for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement in the Ministry or Department of the appropriate
Government, with the compositions, functions and procedures to be
prescribed.
Clause 19.—seeks to provide for setting up of National
Rehabilitation Commission by the Central Government to exercise
external oversight over rehabilitation and resettlement of affected
persons; the composition, powers and procedure of transaction of
business to be prescribed.
Clause 20.—seeks to provide for declaration of the area of village
or lands as affected areas in cases where involuntary displacement of
more than certain number of families in plain areas or tribal or hilly
areas, DDP blocks or areas mentioned in the Fifth Schedule or sixth
Schedule to the Constitution are to be acquired for any project; such
declaration to be published in newspapers, etc.
Clause 21.—seeks to provide for undertaking, after declaration
under clause 20, a baseline survey and census for identification of
families, etc. by the Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement;

94
provides for village-wise information of affected families in the survey;
completion of the survey within 90 days from the date of declaration,
publication of draft of the details of findings/survey by the
Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement in the prescribed
manner, inviting objections and suggestions; the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement to submit his recommendations along
with details of survey after considering the objections, etc. to the
appropriate Government; and the appropriate Government to publish
the final details of the survey within 45 days of the receipt of the
details of survey and recommendations.
Clause 22—seeks to provide that the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement to draw up the list that may be
available for rehabilitation and resettlement etc., the list to include
land available or acquired, Government wastelands, lands that may be
available for purchase or acquisition, etc.
Clause 23—seeks to provide that the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement shall prepare, after completion of
survey or census and assessment of requirement of land, draft scheme
of plan for rehabilitation of affected families, draft to be given wide
publicity, to be discussed in the concerned Gram Sabhas and publics
hearnings, etc.; the draft rehabilitation and resettlement scheme/plan
to contain the extent of land to be acquired, village-wise list of affected
persons etc., list of agricultural labourers, list of persons who have
lost or are likely to lose employment, list of non-agricultural labourers,
list of affected landless families, list of vulnerable affected persons, list
of occupiers, list of public utilities and Government buildings, details
of public community properties, details of extent of land available in
the resettlement area, amenities and infrastructure facilities, time
schedule for shifting and resettling etc.; the Administrator to ensure
inclusion of the estimated cost of rehabilitation and resettlement; and
the communication to the requiring body for incorporation in the
project cost the entire cost of rehabilitation and resettlement benefits,
etc.
Clause 24.—seeks to provide for submission by the Administrator
for Rehabilitation and Resettlement to the appropriate Government;
the approved scheme or plan for rehabilitation and resettlement to be
published in the Official Gazette by the appropriate Government and
the plan or scheme to come into force on final publication.
Clause 25—seeks to provide for declaration by the appropriate
Government of any area as resettlement area for rehabilitation and
resettlement.

95
Clause 26—seeks to provide for settlement of affected families;
wherever possible, in a group or groups.
Clause 27—seeks to authorize the Administrator for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement to enter into agreement on behalf of appropriate
Government, with any person for purchase or exchange of land
required for rehabilitation and resettlement scheme/plan subject to the
prescribed rules.
Clause 28—seeks to make it the responsibility of the requiring
body to provide requisite funds to the Administrator for Rehabilitation
and Resettlement for implementation of the scheme/plan for affected
families; the requiring body to deposit 1/3rd cost of the scheme or
plan with the Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement on
finalization of the scheme or plan.
Clause 29— seeks to provide that the compensation award, full
payment of compensation etc. shall precede actual displacement of
affected families where land acquisition is on behalf of a requiring
body.
Clause 30—seeks to provide that in case of involuntary
displacement of certain number of families in plain areas/tribal or
hilly areas, DDP blocks etc., comprehensive infrastructure facilities shall
be provided in the resettlement area.
Clause 31—seeks to provide that the resettlement area forms part
of a panchayat or municipality.
Clause 32—seeks to provide that where land is acquired because
of urgency under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 the affected families
to be provided with transit and temporary accommodation pending
rehabilitation and resettlement scheme or plan in addition to monthly
subsistence allowance, etc.
Clause 33—seeks to provide for peripheral development by the
requiring body like socio-economic development, earmarking percentage
of net profit to be spent for the purpose, and coordination with the
Commissioner for Rehabilitation and Resettlement while carrying out
development activities.
Clause 34—seeks to provide for extension of rehabilitation and
resettlement benefits to the affected families.
Clause 35—seeks to provide for housing benefits to an affected
family, owning house and whose house has been acquired, in the
form of land or house.

96
Clause 36—seeks to provide for allotment of agricultural land to
an affected family whose agricultural land has been acquired or who
has been reduced to the status of marginal farmer; each person whose
name is included in the records of rights with regard to the affected
family to be given a one time financial assistance subject to a minimum
of 10,000 rupees; and in case of allotment of wastelands, each such
person to be given one time financial assistance subject to a minimum
of 15,000 rupees, etc.
Clause 37.—seeks to provide that the stamp duty etc. for
registration of land or hosue to be borne by the acquiring body; such
land to be free from all encumbrances land to be in the names of wife
and husband of the affected family.
Clauses 38, 39 and 40—seek to provide that displaced affected
families having cattle to get one time financial assistance; one time
transportation cost for shifting of family etc.; and the affected person
where he is rural artisan, small trader or self employed, to get one
time financial assistance prescribed by the appropriate Government
subject to a minimum of 20,000 rupees for construction of working
shed or shop.
Clause 41.—seeks to provide that the acquiring body shall give
preference to the affected families in providing employment in the
project; where necessary, to arrange for training of affected persons, to
give preference to affected persons or their groups or cooperatives in
the allotment of outsourced contracts, shops etc., give preference to
willing landless labourers while engaging labourers in the project; and
offer scholarships and other skill development opportunities.
Clause 42.— seeks to provide for rehabilitation grant to the affected
families or where the acuiring body is a company authorized to issue
shares etc., such families to be given shares or debentures, as may be
prescribed.
Clauses 43 and 44.—seek to provide that in the case of acquisition
for land development projects, in lieu of land-for-land or employment,
the affected families to be given land or built up space; in case of
irrigation of hydel projects the affected families may be allowed fishing
rights in the reservoirs in the prescribed manner.
Clause 45.—seeks to provide that where the project involves land
acquisition on behalf of acquiring body, the involuntary displaced
affected family shall get a monthly subsistence allowance equivalent
to 25 days minimum agricultural wages per month for one year.

97
Clause 46.—seeks to provide for payment of pension for life by
the project authorities to the affected persons covered under clause (v)
of sub-clause 2 of clause 21 to be prescribed by the appropriate
Government subject to a minimum of 500 rupees per month.
Clause 47.—seeks to provide that in the case of linear acquisitions,
that is, project relating to railway lines, highways laying of pipelines,
etc. each person included in the records of rights with regard to the
affected family to be offered by requiring body ex-gratia grant as may
be prescribed in addition to the compensation and benefits under the
Bill or programme or scheme; where that land holder becomes landless
or reduced to be “small” or “marginal” farmer, other rehabilitation
and resettlement benefits under the Bill shall also be extended to such
affected family.
Clause 48.—seeks to provide for affected families to have the option
to take lump-sum amount in lieu of benefits specified in clauses-35 to
47 to be determined by the appropriate Government in consultation
with the requiring body.
Clause 49.—seeks to make special provisions for rehabilitation and
resettlement of members of the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes,
such as, tribal development plan to be prepared, laying down of
procedure for settling land rights; such affected families to be given
preference in allotment of land for land; at least one-third of
compensation amount to be paid to the affected families at the outset
etc.; where such affected families are re-settled out of district, to get
25% higher rehabilitation and resettlement benefits specified in
subclauses (3) and (4) of clause 36, clauses 38, 39 and 40; and such
affected families if enjoying reservation benefits in the affected areas
shall get such benefits at the resettlement area, etc.
Clause 50.—seeks to provide for the affected Scheduled Tribe
families, who were in possession of forest land prior to 13th December,
2005 to be eligible for benefits of rehabilitation and resettlement under
the Bill.
Clause 51.—provides for indexation of rehabilitation grant and other
monetary benefits.
Clause 52.—provides for punishment for false information.
Clause 53.—seeks to cast a duty on the officers of the Central
Government, State Governments, etc., to assist the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement for carrying out the purposes of the
Bill.

98
Clause 54.—seeks to bar the jurisdiction of civil courts to entertain
suits or proceedings in matters which the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, Commissioner for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement or the Ombudsman is empowered to determine, etc.
Clause 55.—seeks to provide that officers (Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement, Commisioner for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement and Ombudsman) appointed under the Bill, acting in
purusance of the provisions of the Bill, to be deemed to be public
servants.
Clause 56.—seeks to indemnify against any suit, prosecution or
legal proceedings, the appropriate Government, local body or authority
etc. for acts done or purported to be done under the Bill or rules etc.
made thereunder.
Clause 57.—seeks to provide that the Central Government may
remove any difficulty that arises in giving effect to the provisions of
the Bill by an order not in consistent with the provisions of the Bill
up to a period of 3 years from the commencement of the Bill and
such order to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 58.—seeks to provide for over-riding effect of the Bill cover
all land related laws {except the Provisions of the Panchayats (extension
to scheduled areas) Act}, 1996 etc.
Clause 59.—seeks to empower the appropriate Government to make
rules for carrying out the functions and duties etc. under the Bill.
Clause 60.—seeks to provide that a scheme or plan for rehabilitation
may provide for benefits higher than the extent and the amount of
benefit laid down under the Bill.

99
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the appointment of an
Ombudsman by the appropriate Government, in such manner as may
be prescribed for time-bound disposal of grievances arising out of the
matters covered under this Bill; to consider and dispose of all
complaints relating to resettlement and rehabilitation against the
decision of the Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement or
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Committee and issue such directions
to the Administrator for Rehabilitation and Resettlement, the District
Collector or Deputy Commissioner of the district, as he may deem
proper for the redressal of such grievances.
Clause 15 of the Bill provides that in case a project covers an area
in more than one State or Union Territory where the project affected
families are or had been residing, or proposed to be resettled, the
Central Government shall, in consultation with the concerned States
and Union Territories, appoint the Ombudsman for the purpose of the
Bill.
Appointment and functioning of the office of the Ombudsman will
involve both recurring and non-recurring expenditure, which would
be a part of the administrative expenditure of the Ministry.
Clause 16 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National
Monitoring Committee by the Central Government for reviewing and
monitoring the implementation of rehabilitation and resettlement
schemes or plans under the Bill. The Committee may, besides having
representatives of the concerned Ministries and Departments of the
Central and State Governments, associate with it eminent experts from
the relevant fields. The Central Government shall provide officers and
other employees to the Committee as may be necessary for its efficient
functioning. The terms and conditions subject to which the Committee
members and other staff may be appointed and the time, place and
procedure of the meetings shall be as may be prescribed by the Central
Government. The Central Government may also envisage to create a
National Monitoring Cell in the Ministry of Rural Development to
service the National Monitoring Committee. This may involve payment
of allowances to the experts, salary and other expenses for the officers
and staff provided to the committee. These expenditure would be of
a recurring as well as non-recurring in nature.

100
Clause 19 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National
Rehabilitation Commission by the Central Government with the power
to exercise external oversight over rehabilitation and resettlement of
the affected persons coverd under the Bill and the terms and conditions
subject to which the Chairperson and other members of the
Commission may be appointed. This would involve expenditure of a
recurring and non-recurring nature, which would be a part of the
administrative expenditure of the Ministry.
The exact expenditure which will be involved under the proposed
Bill will depend upon the composition/appointment of the above
mentioned Committee, Commission and Ombudsman. Hence, it is not
possible visualise the exact estimate of the recurring and non-recurring
expenditure for the purpose at this stage.

101
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 seeks to prescribe by rules, the manner
in which Social Impact Assessment study is to be carried out in the
proposed affected area. Sub-clause (1) of clause 7 of the Bill seeks to
provide that Social Impact Assessment clearance shall be granted in
such manner and within such time as may be prescribed by rules.
Clause 8 of the Bill provides that projects involving emergency
acquisition of minimum area of land by the Central Government
for the purpose of defence national security may be exempted,
subject to such institutional safeguards as may be prescribed by rules
Sub-clause (3) of clause 12 of the Bill seeks to provide by rules the
procedure regulating the business of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Committee, its meetings and other matters connected thereto.
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 13 of the Bill seeks to provide, by rules,
the composition, powers, functions and other matters relating to the
functioning of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Committee at the
district level by the State Government.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 14 of the Bill seeks to provide, by rules,
the manner of appointment of ombudsman by the appropriate
Government for time-bound disposal of grievances arising out of the
matters covered under the Bill. Sub-clause (3) of said clause provides
for making rules in respect of form and manner in which and the
time in which complaints may be made and disposed of by him.
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 16 of the Bill seeks to empower the
Central Government to prescribe by rules, the procedures to be followed
by the National Monitoring Committee. The composition functions and
procedure of the Oversight Committee under sub-clause (2) clause 18
shall be such as may be prescribed by rules. Sub-clause (2) of
clause 19 of the Bill seeks to provide for the composition, terms and
conditions powers and the procedure of transaction of business of the
National Rehabilitation Commission.
5. Sub-clause (2) of clause 20 of the Bill seeks to empower the
appropriate Government to prescribe by rules, the method in which a
copy of notification of notice of declaration of effected areas may be
affixed. Sub-clause (4) of clause 21 seeks to provide for making rules
in regard to manner in which the Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall, by notification, publish a draft of the details of the

102
findings of the survey conducted. Sub-clause (2) of clause 23 of the
Bill seeks to provide that the draft rehabilitating and resettlement
scheme of plan shall be made known locally by wide publicity in the
affected area and the resettlement area in such manner as may be
prescribed by rules by the appropriate Government.
6. Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Administrator for
Rehabilitation and Resettlement may, on behalf of the appropriate
Government, and subject to such rules as may be prescribed, enter
into an agreement with any person for the purpose of the rehabilitation
and resettlement scheme of plan.
7. Sub-clause (3) of clause 28 seeks to provide the manner to be
prescribed by rules in which the Administrator for Rehabilitation and
Resettlement shall keep proper books of accounts and records of the
funds for rehabilitation and resettlement.
8. Sub-clause (3) and (4) of clause 36 seeks to provide one time
financial assistance to affected family of such amount as the appropriate
Government may prescribe by rules.
9. Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to provide by prescribing rules one-
time financial assistance to the affected family to construct cattle shed.
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to provide by rules, one-time financial
assistance for transportation cost for shifting of the family, etc.
Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to provide by prescribing rules one-time
financial assistance for construction of working shed or shop.
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to prescribe by rules the manner in which
rehabilitation grant shall be provided.
10. Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to provide, by rules, the limits of
land for the purposes of said clause. Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to
provide manner in which fishing rights in the reservoirs shall be given
to the affected families by the appropriate Government by prescribing
rules. Clasue 46 of the Bill seeks to provide, by rules, the amount
which shall be payable as monthly pension for life to the vulnerable
affected persons. Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to provide an ex-gratia
grant of amount as the appropriate Government may prescribe by
rules. Sub-clause (1) of clause 49 seeks to prescribe, by rules, the forms
for the purposes of the said clauses.
11. Sub-clause (2) of clause 58 enumerates the matters on which
rules may be made by the appropriate Government. Sub-clause (2)
and (3) of clause 58 provide that rules made under the Bill are required
to be laid before Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may
be.

103
The aforesaid matters in respect of which rules may be made by
the Central Government or the State Government relate to matters of
procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.

104
LOK SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and resettlement of persons affected
by the acquisition of land for projects of public purpose or
involuntary displacement due to any other reason, and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
——————
(Shri Raghuvansh Prasad Singh, Minister of Rural Development)

105
APPENDIX II
LIST OF EXPERTS/STAKEHOLDERS WHO TENDERED ORAL
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ‘THE
REHABILITATION & RESETTLEMENT BILL, 2007’
Sl.No. Name of Expert/Stakeholder
12
1. (i) Ms. Aruna Roy (ii) Shri Nikhil Dey, Mazdoor Kisan
Shakti Sangathan
2. (i) Shri K.C. Jain, Advocate, Supreme Court;
(ii) Shri Hemant Jain;
(iii) Shri Akash Gupta;
(iv) Shri Kshitiz Sachdeva; and
(v) Shri Rahul Jain
3. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan, Campaign for Survival and
Dignity
4. Dr. Abhijit Guha, Reader & Head, Department of
Anthropology
5. Shri S.R. Pillai, President, All India Kisan Sabha, New Delhi
6. Prof. Sebastin Morris, Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad
7. (i) Smt. Medha Patkar, National Convenor, National
Alliance of People’s Movement
(ii) Shri Sanjay Parikh
8. (i) Shri Ajit Warty, Mumbai, SEZ Limited;
(ii) Shri Sanjay Punkhia;
(iii) Shri Sanjay Radkar;
(iv) Shri Atul Sharma; and
(v) Shri Ashok Shahi

106
12
9. (i) Shri Ashok K. Harnal, Additional Director General,
Defence Estates (Acquisition), Ministry of Defence;
(ii) Shri. S. Majumdar, Deputy Director General, Defence
Estates
10. (i) Ms. Sudha Sundaraman, General Secretary, All India
Democratic Women’s Association (AIDWA);
(ii) Dr. Shakti Kak; and
(iii) Dr. Archana Prasad
11. Shri Avik Saha, Secretary, Land Resources Law Research
Forum, Kolkata
12. (i) Prof. Shantha Sinha, Chairperson, National Commission
for Protection of Child Rights, New Delhi;
(ii) Ms. Sandhya Bajaj, member, NCPCR;
(iii) Ms. Dipa Dixit; and
(iv) Shri S.K. Ravi
13. Shri Suhas Chakma, Convenor, North East Regional
Consultation and Director, Asian Centre for Human Rights
14. Ms. Nandita Haksar, Human Rights Lawyer & Activist
15. Shri Gam A. Shimray, Advisor on Traditional Knowledge,
UN Convention on Bio-deversity (UNCBD), Manipur

107
APPENDIX III
LIST OF STATES/UNION TERRITORY ADMINISTRATIONS
WHOSE VIEWS ON THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2007 AND THE REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
BILL, 2007 WERE RECEIVED
Sl.No. State/Union Territory Administration
1. Chandigarh
2. Pudduchery
3. Jharkhand
4. Goa
5. Chhattisgarh
6. Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu
7. Arunachal Pradesh
8. Nagaland
9. Himachal Pradesh

108
LIST OF MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS FROM WHOM WRITTEN
REPLIES ON LIST OF POINTS WERE OBTAINED AND WITH
WHOM THE COMMITTEE HELD DETAILED DELIBERATIONS
ON VARIOUS PROVISIONS OF THE BILLS
S.No. Name of the Ministry
 1. Ministry of Tribal Affairs
 2. Ministry of Environment and Forests
 3. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
 4. Ministry of Agriculture
 5. Ministry of Commerce
 6. Ministry of Urban Development
 7. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
 8. Ministry of Railways
 9. Ministry of Defence
10. Ministry of Home Affairs
11. Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of Posts)
12. Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of
Telecommunications)
13. Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways
(Department of Road Transport & Highways)
14. Ministry of Power

109
DETAILS OF SITTINGS HELD IN CONNECTION WITH
EXAMINATION OF THE REHABILITATION AND
RESETTLEMENT BILL, 2007
S.No. Date of Sitting Subject/Agenda
12 3
1. 24 December, 2007 Briefing by the representatives of the
nodal Ministry  i.e. Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Land
Resources).
2. 18 January, 2008 Oral evidence of various related
Ministries viz . Ministries of Tribal
Affairs, Environment and Forests,
Panchayati Raj, Agriculture and
Commerce.
3. 17 June, 2008 Evidence of experts and organisations/
(1100 hrs-1330 hrs) stake holders etc.
4. 17 June 2008 -do-
(1430 hrs-1600 hrs)
5. 18 June 2008 -do-
(1100 hrs-1230 hrs)
6. 18 June 2008 -do-
(1400 hrs-1530 hrs)
7. 02 July, 08 Oral evidence of the representatives of
(1100 hrs-1230 hrs) various related Ministries viz. Ministries
of Urban Development, Social Justice
and Empowerment, Defence and
Railways.
8. 02 July, 08 -do-
(1400 hrs-1530 hrs)
9. 03 July, 2008 Oral evidence of the representatives of
(1100 hrs-1300 hrs) various related Ministries viz. Ministries
of Agriculture, Tribal Affairs, Panchayati
Raj, Environment & Forests and
Commerce & Industry.

110
12 3
10. 03 July, 2008 -do-
(1400 hrs-1500 hrs)
11. 18 July 2008 Oral evidence of related Ministries i.e.
(1100 hrs-1300 hrs) Ministries of Urban Development,
Defence and Home Affairs.
12. 18 July 2008 Oral evidence of related Ministries/
(1400 hrs-1530 hrs) Departments i.e. Department of Posts,
Telecom, Road Transport and Highways
and Power.
13. 25 August 2008 Oral evidence of the Department of
(1500 hrs-1630 hrs) Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development) on ‘The Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Bill, 2007.
14. 22 September 2008 Clause-by-clause consideration of the
(1100 hrs-1300 hrs) Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007.
15. 22 September 2008 -do-
(1400 hrs-1530 hrs)
16. 15 October 2008 Consideration and adoption of the draft
Report on ‘the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’.

111
APPENDIX IV
THE EXTRACTS OF OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
MADE BY THE COMMITTEE IN THE REPORT ON ‘THE
LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007 ON
THE ISSUES COMMON IN BOTH THE BILLS VIZ.
‘THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL,
2007 AND ‘THE REHABILITATION
AND RESETTLEMENT BILL, 2007
Implementation of various provisions made in the bill prospectively
or retrospectively
3.34 It seems that the aforesaid clause covers the cases where the
various stages of land acquisition prior to award like preliminary
investigation, declaration of intended acquisition, inquiry into
measurements, value and claims have already been completed and the
award by the Collector is pending on the date when the amending
legislation is being made operational.  There is utter confusion with
regard to providing retrospective benefits to the affected persons in
such cases.  Only Section 11B, which provides for determination of
market value of land has been stated to be applicable retrospectively.
The provision made in the Bill indicates that whereas the affected
person will get the current market value of land, he will be debarred
from the other enhanced benefits like solatium and the rehabilitation
package as provided in R&R legislation.  Another confusion created
by the Ministry by stating that the award being referred to is the
award of the Collector, whereas the language of the legislation clearly
covers all the cases where the award is pending or remains unsettled
at any stage which may include the cases where the award is pending
with the Collector or the aggrieved party has filed the case in the
court due to one or the other reason and the award remains unsettled.
3.35 Keeping in  view the position as explained above, the
Committee would like to recommend that the applicability of the
various other benefits viz. solatium and the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement package provided under the ‘The Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ in cases of land acquisition where the award
is pending or remains unsettled at any stage under the existing Act
should also be provided retrospectively as has been provided in case
of market rate as per clause 20 of the Bill.  The Committee feel that
such a provision would help in early settlement of pending cases.

112
However, it should be explicitly made clear in the legislation that
revised rates would not be applicable in the cases already settled on
the date, the amending legislation would be made operational.
Accordingly, clause 20 of the Bill should be suitably amended.
Rehabilitation and Resettlement benefits in case of multiple
displacements
3.42 The Committee note that the acquisition of land leads to
displacement of people, which result in depriving them of their
livelihood and shelter.  Besides the displacement has traumatic
psychological and socio-cultural consequences for the affected
population. It takes years together for a displaced person/family to
settle at the rehabilitated place.  If the person/family is again uprooted,
it is more painful.  While recognizing the fact that sometimes multiple
displacement becomes necessary due to strategic defence purposes
having national importance or for some crucial infrastructure projects,
the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to compensate the
person/family who are uprooted more than once for the purpose of
public good.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that all the benefits
provided under the Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation and
Resettlement legislation should be doubled at every stage in case of
second and subsequent displacement of a family/person. Suitable
amendments in both the Bills viz., ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ should
accordingly be made.
3.43 The Committee further note that when tribals are rehabilitated
in an area, they face a lot of problems in getting their rights as tribals.
As such the Committee strongly recommend that all rights and
entitlements of such tribals emerging out of the existing documents
should be preserved in perpetuity.  The Department may make suitable
provision in this regard in the legislation.
3.44 The Committee further note that no efforts have been made
to maintain the data with regard to multiple displacement due to land
acquisition.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Union
Government should maintain data in this regard which should further
be posted on the website for transparency.
Declaring the area where tribals from Scheduled Areas are
rehabilitated as the Scheduled Area
3.48 The Committee find that the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution
provides that the Governor of each State having Scheduled Area therein,
shall annually or whenever so required by the President of India,

113
make a report to the President of India and the President of India
may at any time by order declare the area as Scheduled Area in a
State after consultations with the Governor of that State.  The
Committee understand that no such request from any State Government
has been received and addressed by the Union Government which
indicates that perhaps the rehabilitated areas are not being declared as
Scheduled Areas by the State Governments.  The Ministry of Tribal
Affairs has put a clause in this regard in the draft National Tribal
Policy which has not been approved so far.  The Committee, therefore,
recommend that suitable provision in the LA Bill should be made
whereby the State Governments may be asked to take the desired
action to declare the area where the tribals are rehabilitated as
Scheduled Area as per the Constitutional position on the lines of the
proposed provisions in the draft tribal policy.
Clarification with regard to the applicability of the legislation in the
State of Nagaland to be made in the short title of the Act
3.51 The Committee find that as per the Constitutional provision
and clarification given by the Department of Legal Affairs, the LA
legislation would apply to Nagaland only when decided by a resolution
of the Nagaland Legislative Assembly. The LA Act is not applicable in
the state of Jammu & Kashmir in the view of its special status, as per
Article 370 of the Constitution.  As such the short title of the Principal
Act indicates that the Act extends to the whole of India except (the
State of Jammu & Kashmir).  The Committee feel that similar
clarification with regard to Nagaland as per the Constitutional position
should be made in the short title of the LA Act.  As such the
Department should make suitable amendment in the short title of the
amending legislation.
Protecting the interest of tenants whose tenancy is an informal
arrangement
4.11 The Committee appreciate that since most of the times, tenancy
is an informal arrangement between the landlord and the tenant, there
is an urgent need to protect the interest of those tenants.  The
Committee further find that as per the Constitutional position tenancy
falls under the State List and as such State Governments have to
devise the mechanism to cover the informal tenancies for the purpose
of providing benefits under the LA as well as R&R legislation.
Necessary instructions in this regard should be issued to the State
Governments.

114
Protecting the interests of tribals and forest dwellers
4.15 The Committee find that at present there are various laws
which clearly define how community rights can be recognized.  To
protect the interests of the tribals, it is of utmost importance that no
land acquisition in the Scheduled Areas should take place unless the
rights of the tribals are recognized and settled.  The Committee,
therefore, recommend that suitable provisions should be made in the
legislation.
4.16 The aforesaid details indicate that the cut off date of 13th
December, 2005 has indirectly been made applicable.  The Committee
considered the reservations expressed by various experts with regard
to the aforesaid cut off date.  After detailed deliberations, the
Committee are of the view that since the aforesaid cut off date has
been provided in the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 for the purpose of
recognizing the rights of the tribals in Scheduled Areas, providing
some different date for the purpose would contradict the provisions
made in the two legislations.  In view of this, the Committee feel that
the aforesaid cut off date as 13th day of December, 2005 for providing
benefits of R&R Bill in cases where the land of the tribals is acquired
is appropriate.
Making identical provisions, where there is duplication of issues in
the two Bills
4.22 The Committee further note that the Land Acquisition
legislation and R&R legislation are inter-linked legislations.  As such,
there is an urgent need to make identical provisions, where there is
duplication of issues in the two Bills.  In view of this, the Committee
would like to recommend that identical provision with regard to the
number of newspapers through which the publicity of notification
would be given by the appropriate Government should be made in
LA Bill on the lines of the provisions made in R&R Bill.  As such the
notification should be published in at least three newspapers two of
which shall be the local vernacular having circulation in villages or
areas likely to be affected on the lines of the proposed provisions in
this regard in R&R Bill.  The Committee would also like to add that
the newspapers through which publicity would be made should be
widely circulated newspapers in that area.  Suitable amendments in
the respective clauses of the Bill should accordingly be made.

115
Rejecting the concept of  70:30 criteria
4.38 The Committee find that land is acquired either by the private
body or by Government for setting up public purpose projects.
Sometimes the appropriate Government help the private body in
acquisition of land.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that fixing
some percentage of the land to be acquired by the appropriate
Government and private body for a particular project of public purpose
is very contradictory and impractical, the analysis of which has been
given above.  As such the Committee unanimously decided not to
agree to the aforesaid 70:30 criteria.
Further the Committee feel that the definition of public purpose
as given in Section 3 (f) of the Principal Act was much better.  Besides
Part VII of the Principal Act which the amending legislation propose
to delete further tighten the definition of public purpose by putting
some of the conditionalities.  In view of this, the Committee
unanimously decided not to agree to the definition to the proposed
definition of public purpose as per Clause 5 of the amending legislation.
The Committee also decided that the definition of public purpose as
given in the Principal Act of 1894 along with Part VII of the Principal
Act should be retained.
Social Impact Assessment Study
 4.51 Keeping in view the concerns expressed by various quarters
with regard to the limit of number of families for undertaking Social
Impact Assessment Study, the Committee observe that the discretion
should be provided to the Standing Committee of the Rehabilitation
and Resettlement at the district level proposed in R&R Bill, 2007 to
decide about the Social Impact Assessment Study where the number
of families is below the stipulated criteria i.e. four hundred families
en masse   in plain and two hundred in hilly, tribal and scheduled
areas.  However, the Social Impact Assessment study should invariably
be undertaken where the number of families exceeds the aforesaid
threshold.  The desired amendments in Clause 8 of the Bill should
accordingly be made.
4.54 The Committee considered the request of the Ministry of
Defence to exempt their projects from the Social Impact Assessment
study.  In this regard, the Committee decided that the defence projects,
which are for strategic purposes should be exempted from Social Impact
Assessment Study. However, for the projects other than the strategic
purpose like building houses for employees of the Defence, the
provisions of SIA Study should be retained.

116
4.55 As regards the request of the Ministries of Railways, Road
Transport and Highways to exempt their projects from SIA Study, the
Committee recommend that only the linear projects which require
acquisition of only a narrow strip should be exempted from SIA Study.
For other projects of these Ministries, the provision of SIA Study should
be retained.  The desired amendments in this regard should be made
accordingly.
Part payment of compensation by shares/debentures etc.
4.79 The Committee note that the allotment of shares and
debentures involves various technical issues which perhaps have not
been taken into consideration by the nodal Department.  As represented
by various Ministries, it is not clear how the various Government
undertakings would issue the shares and debentures to the affected
persons, particularly when the implementation of the aforesaid
provision would amount to disinvestment decision.  Further, how the
Defence PSUs and Ordnance Factories would issue the shares and
debentures to public is not clear particularly when it would dilute the
ownership pattern in such PSUs and Ordnance Factories.  Other
technical issues involved are how the company, which has no rights
issue would address to the provision of allotment of shares and
debentures to the public.
4.80 The nodal Department has referred to the comments of the
Ministry of Finance according to which if the requiring body is a
company and it  makes a public issue of shares, the affected family
may subscribe to the IPO in the category reserved for retail investors
and such application shall be considered on preferential basis among
the applicants in the category of retail investors. The Committee find
that  the provisions made in the legislation are not of the nature of
preferential shares/debentures.
4.81 In view of the position as explained above, the Committee
conclude that issue of shares and debentures as part of the
compensation is not practical and as such issue of shares and
debentures should be over and above the admissible compensation.
Further, it should be left to the acquiring body to issue shares and
debentures over and above the admissible compensation to the affected
person/family whose land is acquired.
4.82 Above all, the Committee feel that it is not possible for the
illiterate rural poor to understand the technicalities involved in making
transaction in shares/debentures.  Further, if the company involved is
a loss making company the affected person would definitely be a
loser.

117
Contradiction in Clause 11 (c) of LA Bill and Clause 42 of the R&R
Bill on the issue of offering shares and debentures to the affected
persons.
4.85 The detailed reading of the two legislations viz., ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ indicates that provisions relating to some of
the common issues have been made in the two Bills.  However, there
is some difference in the language used, which has created
contradictions as in the present case.  Since the provisions made in
‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ are applicable in every
case where ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ is being
applied by Clause 1A of the ‘The Land Acquisition Bill, 2007, the
Department may consider retaining this provision in only ‘The
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’.  However, if it is decided
that the provision needs to be retained in the two Bills, it should be
ensured that the language in those clauses is identical so as to avoid
such contradictions.
Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
4.119 The Committee would also like to recommend that suitable
provisions should be made for active involvement of the three tiers of
Panchayati Raj Institutions and particularly the Gram Sabhas while
undertaking SIA study.
Overriding authority of PESA
4.125 The Committee find that whereas specific provisions have
been made in Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 to give
overriding authority to PESA, no such provision has been made under
the LA Bill, 2007.  Since each of the Bill is an independent legislation,
the Committee would like to recommend that suitable provisions to
give overriding effect to PESA under the LA legislation on the lines
of Rehabilitation and Resettlement legislation should be made.  Besides,
the Committee would recommend that Forest Conservation Act 1980
should also be given overriding effect as has been done in the case of
PESA in the R&R legislation.  Suitable provisions in this regard should
accordingly be made in the legislation.
The time period prescribed with regard to various provisions in the
Principal Act as well as amending Bill 2007
4.127 Serial No. 1 in the statement—Clause 8 of the Bill proposes
to insert a new Section 3A in the Principal Act which provides for a

118
Social Impact Assessment Study. In this regard, at the end of the
aforesaid clause, it has been stated that Social Impact Assessment Study
shall be carried in such manner and within such time  as may be
prescribed by rules made by the Central Government whereas in the
starting of the clause, it has been stated that the Social Impact
Assessment Study shall be carried out whenever the appropriate
Government intends to acquire land for public purpose. The Committee
feel that the words ‘Central Government’ as appearing in the end of
the clause should be replaced by ‘appropriate Government’.
4.128 Further the Committee note that the limit of number of two
hundred or more families en masse in tribal or hilly areas or Desert
Development Programme blocks or areas specified in Schedule V or
Schedule VI to the Constitution has been provided as per
clause 3A (ii) of the Bill for the purpose of carrying out Social Impact
Assessment Study.  The Committee feel that besides Desert
Development Programme blocks, Drought Prone Area Programme
blocks should also be included for the aforesaid purpose. Desired
amendment in the aforesaid clause should accordingly be made.

119
APPENDIX V
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON MONDAY, THE 24TH DECEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in  Committee
Room ‘E’ Basement Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Shri D. Narbula
5. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
6. Shri Madhusudan Reddy
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Dr. Chandan Mitra
14. Dr. Ram Prakash
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary-II

120
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Department of Land Resources
(Ministry of Rural Development)
1. Shri Bhaskar Chatterjee, Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh, Director
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman informed the
members that the ‘Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and the
‘Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ as introduced in Lok Sabha
on 6 December, 2007 have been referred to the Committee by Hon’ble
Speaker for examination and report within three months to Parliament.
The Chairman informed them that the sitting of the Committee has
been convened to decide the future course of action with regard to
examination of the aforesaid Bills as also for a briefing by the
representatives of the nodal Ministry/Department  i.e. Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) on the aforesaid Bills.
The Chairman also informed the members that the aforesaid Bills are
important legislations concerning the public at large, thus, various
provisions of the Bill need wider consulations with a view to have
detailed examination. In this connection, the Committee decided to
obtain public opinion on the respective Bills through print and
electronic media. The Committee also decided to obtain the views of
State Governments/Union territory (UT) Administrations on the Bills
as implementation of the provisions made under the said Bills is the
responsibility of the State Governments. The Committee also decided
to seek views of experts on the aforesaid Bills based on a list of
experts given by the nodal Ministry.
[The representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of
Rural Development) were then called in]
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the nodal
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Land
Resources to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman
expressed his unhappiness over non-appearance of Secretary of the
nodal Ministry before the Committee. He clarified that since the sitting
was convened for briefing over the aforesaid Bills, exemption was
granted to Secretary. The Chairman, however, pointed out that
Committee  has to present the report thereon within three months to
Parliament and as both the above Bills concern with public at large,
number of sittings of the Committee will be held for examining the
Bills and attendance of Secretary of the Ministry is, therefore, essential.

121
4. Thereafter, the Chairman also informed that the aforesaid Bills
have been brought out by the Government as a result of repeated
pursuance by the Committee in their respective reports. Before asking
the representatives of the nodal Ministry to brief the Committee, the
Chairman made some observations which inter-alia pertained to
acquisition of agricultural land for setting up Special Economic Zones
(SEZs), non-acquisition of agricultural land for setting up a Company
as ruled by Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, balanced use of land for
agriculture, industries etc. for food security, absence of clarity with
regard to preferred use of wasteland development for projects involving
involuntary displacement etc. The Chairman also drew their attention
to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha’.
[Thereafter a power point presentation highlighting various provisions of
both the Bills was done before the Committee]
5. After the aforesaid presentation the members raised various
provisions of each of the two Bills. These include, need for one Bill
for Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation and Resettlement of Project
Affected Persons (PAPs) involving involuntary displacement of land
acquisition, need for comprehensive examination of both the two Bills
as these concern the common man.
6. On Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 the main issues
that came up for discussion were: need for broad based parametres
for land acquisition in the country as Bill amounted to concentration
of land acquisition in the country by a limited big business houses in
the country, need for involving civil society activist in the issue of
land acquisition, need for over all planning for setting up industries
in the country before actual land acquisition, need for higher
compensation as existing provision in the Bill is quite inadequate, need
for revising the provision of compensation in the form of shares in
companies requiring land acquisition as the companies will not register
profit fearing payment of accrued compensation thereon, need for
revising arbitrary limit of four hundred persons or more en masse in
plain areas and two hundred persons or more en mass in hilly areas
for mandatory social impact assessment prior to land acquisition, need
for making some provisions for common man’s interest in the Bill for
whom land acquisition is becoming a distant dream in view of high
price of land being offered by multinational companies etc.
7. On the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007, the points
that emerged out of the discussions include making employment
essential and not preferable in the event of involuntary displacement

122
by land acquisition, uncertainty over funding the rehabilitation and
resettlement package by the requiring bodies particular when it has
been left to State Governments to implement package for rehabilitation
and resettlement, uncertainty over land assessment of cost of land as
land records in the country are largely unauthentic, faulty mechanism
for implementation of rehabilitation and resettlement package etc.
8. The representatives of the nodal Ministry responded to the
queries of the members of the Committee. The representatives were
asked to send written replies to the points on which information was
not readily available.
9. Thereafter, the Committee decided to meet on Friday , the
18th January, 2008 at 1100 hrs.
A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

123
APPENDIX VI
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON FRIDA Y, THE 18 JANUARY 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1345 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
6. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
7. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
8. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shri Jayantilal Barot
14. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
15. Dr. Chandan Mitra
16. Dr. Ram Prakash
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh
19. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

124
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II
Representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs
1. Shri G.B. Mukherjee, Secretary
2. Smt. Ruchira Pant, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture & Cooperation)
1. Shri P .K. Mishra, Secretary (A&C)
2. Dr. S.M. Jharwal, Principal Advisor
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri G.K. Prasad, Additional Director General (Forests)
2. Shri R. Ananda Kumar, Advisor
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Smt. Sushma Singh, Secretary (Panchayati Raj)
2. Shri B.K. Sinha, Additional Secretary (PR)
3. Ms. Susen D. George, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Commerce
1. Shri R. Gopalan, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Anil Mukim, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Shrimati Rita Sinha, Secretary
2. Shri Bhaskar Chatterjee, Additional Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Singh, Director

125
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary
2. Shri P . K. Malhotra, Additional Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee convened for briefing by the representatives
of Ministries of (i) Tribal Affairs (ii) Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation) (iii) Environment and Forests (iv)
Panchayati Raj and (v) Commerce on  ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Resettlement and Rehabilitation Bill,
2007’ as introduced in Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2007 and referred to
the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha for examination
and report.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
aforesaid Ministries.  The representatives were called in Ministry/
Department wise one by one and Hon’ble Chairman drew their
attention to direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ and
invited their views and suggestions on the various provisions made in
the aforesaid Bills.   After a brief presentation by the representatives
of the Ministries, the detailed deliberations were held on some of the
issues related to each Ministry/Department.
4. The various pertinent issues that were raised during the
deliberations included the need to make provision for acquisition of
degraded / wastelands for setting up SEZs, issues related to land use
and balance use of land for particular purposes, need to ensure that
agricultural land is not acquired for other purposes to meet the food
security in the country, impact of the aforesaid legislation on tribal
and Scheduled Tribes living in forests and compatibility between the
provisions made under the aforesaid legislations and Panchayat
Extension to Scheduled Areas Act (PESA)  and Forest Act and effective
role of Panchayati Raj Institutions at every stage of land acquisition
and rehabilitation etc.  Valuable suggestions emerged during the
deliberations.
5. The representatives of the Ministries of Tribal Affairs and
Agriculture explained that they were not consulted by the nodal
Ministry/ Department while drafting the aforesaid legislations.  Since
the Committee had desired their comments, detailed study required
time and they would submit the detailed note in due course.  The
Committee requested them to send the comments expeditiously.

126
6. The witnesses responded to the clarifications sought by the
members of the Committee.  On some of the queries raised by
members, on which the information was not readily available, they
were requested to send the written replies to the Secretariat at the
earliest.
7. The representatives of the nodal Ministry/Department i.e. the
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources) and
the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) also
assisted the Committee by providing the desired clarifications on the
queries raised during the deliberations.
8. The representatives withdrew after the evidence one by one.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

127
APPENDIX VII
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 17 JUNE 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
17. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K.Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

128
WITNESSES
1. Ms. Aruna Roy, Former member of National Advisory Council
2. Shri Nikhil Dey, Mazdoor Kishan Shakti Sangathan
3. Shri K.C. Jain, Advocate, Supreme Court
4. Shri Hemant Jain, Advocate
5. Shri Akash Gupta, Advocate
6. Shri Kshitiz Sachdeva, Advocate
7. Shri Rahul Jain, Advocate
8. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan, Campaign for Survival and
Dignity
9. Dr. Abhijit Guha, Reader & Head, Department of Anthropology ,
Vidyasagar University
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee.  The Committee then welcomed
Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP , Lok Sabha, Shri Prabhat Jha and Smt. T.Ratna
Bai, members of Rajya Sabha on their nomination to serve as members
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter condoled the sad demise of
Kumari Nirmala Deshpande, who was a member of Rajya Sabha and
also a member of the Committee.  The Committee observed two
minute’s silence in memory of the departed soul.
4. The Committee then took evidence of the following experts/
representatives of organizations/individuals on the provisions made
under the ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The
Rehabilitation & Resettlement Bill, 2007’at the time indicated against
each:
Name From To
1. Ms. Aruna Roy 1110 hrs. 1150 hrs.
Shri Nikhil Dey
2. Shri K.C. Jain, Advocate, 1150 hrs. 1240 hrs.
Supreme Court
3. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan 1240 hrs. 1300 hrs.
4. Dr. Abhijit Guha, Reader & 1300 hrs. 1330 hrs.
     Head, Department of
Anthropology

129
5. The aforesaid witnesses were called one by one at the time
indicated above. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the witnesses and
drew their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
6. The experts/representatives of organizations/individuals
deposed before the Committee one by one. The Committee held
detailed deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid
two Bills and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations.
The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the members of the
Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to send
the written replies in respect of the issues on which the information/
clarification was not readily available within ten days.
7. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1400 hrs.

130
APPENDIX VIII
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 17TH JUNE 2008
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’ Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
17. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

131
WITNESSES
1. Shri S.R. Pillai, President, All India Kisan Sabha
2. Prof. Sebastian Morris, Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad
2. The Committee resumed the evidence and the following experts/
representatives of organizations/individuals deposed before the
Committee one by one on the various provisions made under ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and ‘The Rehabilitation &
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ at the time indicated against each:
Name From To
1. Shri S.R. Pillai, 1410 hrs. 1450 hrs.
President,
All India Kisan Sabha,
New Delhi
2. Prof. Sebastian Morris, 1450 hrs. 1530 hrs.
Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad
3. The aforesaid witnesses were called one by one at the time
indicated above. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the witnesses and
drew their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
4. The experts/representatives of organizations/individuals deposed
before the Committee one by one. The Committee held detailed
deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid two Bills
and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations. The
witnesses responded to the queries raised by the members of the
Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to send
the written replies in respect of the issues on which the information/
clarification was not readily available within ten days.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at
1100 hrs. on 18 June, 2008.

132
APPENDIX IX
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 18 JUNE 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
17. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K.Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

133
WITNESSES
1. Smt. Medha Patkar, National Convenor, National Alliance of
People’s Movements
2. Shri Sanjay Parekh, Advocate, Supreme Court
3. Shri Villabh Bhai, Matu Jan Sangathan
4. Shri Vijayan, Sangharsh 2007
5. Ms. Shree Devi, Delhi Forum
6. Shri Bhupendra Rawat, Jansangharsh Vahini
7. Shri Ajit Warty, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
8. Shri Sanjay Punkhia, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
9. Mr. Sanjay Radkar, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
10. Mr. Atul Sharma, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
11.M r. Ashok Shahi, Mumbai, SEZ Limited
12. Shri Ashok K. Harnal, Additional DG DE (Acq), Directorate
General Defence Estates (Ministry of Defence)
13. Shri S. Mazumdar, Dy. DG DE (Acq.), Directorate General
Defence Estates (Ministry of Defence)
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took evidence of
the following experts/representatives of organizations/individuals on
the provisions made under the ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Bill, 2007 and ‘The Rehabilitation & Resettlement Bill, 2007’at the time
indicated against each:
Name From To
1. Smt. Medha Patkar, National 1115 hrs. 1220 hrs.
Convenor, National Alliance
of People’s Movements
2. Shri Ajit Warty, Mumbai, SEZ 1220 hrs. 1305 hrs.
Limited
3. Shri Ashok K. Harnal, Additional  1305 hrs. 1330 hrs.
DG DE (Acq), Directorate General
Defence Estates (Ministry of Defence)
3. Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the
Committee, the Chairman welcomed them and drew the attention of
each of the witnesses to the provisions of direction 55 (1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’

134
4. The experts/representatives of organizations/individuals
deposed before the Committee one by one. The Committee held
detailed deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid
two Bills and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations.
The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the members of the
Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to send
the written replies in respect of the issues on which the information/
clarification was not readily available within ten days.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1430 hrs.

135
APPENDIX X
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 18 JUNE 2008
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri P .R. Rajan
16. Shri Bhagwati Singh
17. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K.Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

136
Name of the experts who tendered evidence
1. Ms. Sudha Sudaraman, General Secretary, All-India Democratic
Women’s Association (AIDWA)
2. Dr. Shakti Kak, All-India Democratic Women’s Association
(AIDWA)
3. Dr. Archana Prasad, All-India Democratic Women’s Association
(AIDWA)
4. Shri Avik Saha, Secretary, Land and Resources Law Research
Forum
5. Ms. Shantha Sinha, Chairperson, National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, New Delhi
6. Smt. Sandhya Bajaj, Member, National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, New Delhi
7. Ms. Dipa Dixit, Member, National Commission for Protection
of Child Rights, New Delhi
2. The Committee resumed the evidence and the following experts/
representatives of organizations/individuals deposed before the
Committee one by one on the various provisions made under ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and ‘The Rehabilitation &
Resettlement Bill, 2007’ at the time indicated against each:
Name From To
1. Ms. Sudha Sudaraman, 1430 hrs. 1500 hrs.
General Secretary ,
All-India Democratic Women’s
Association (AIDWA),
New Delhi
2. Shri Avik Saha, Secretary , 1500 hrs.  1520 hrs.
Land and Resources Law
Research Forum, Kolkata
3. Ms. Shantha Sinha, Chairperson, 1535 hrs. 1600 hrs.
National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights,
New Delhi
3. Before the witnesses were asked to depose before the
Committee, the Chairman welcomed them and drew the attention of
each of the witnesses to the provisions of direction 55 (1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’

137
4. The experts/representatives of organizations/individuals
deposed before the Committee one by one. The Committee held
detailed deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid
two Bills and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations.
The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the members of the
Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to send
the written replies in respect of the issues on which the information/
clarification was not readily available within ten days.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

138
APPENDIX XI
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 2 JULY 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
7. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
13. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
14. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Balihari Babu
17. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
18. Shri Prabhat Jha
19. Dr. Chandan Mitra

139
20. Shri P .R. Rajan
21. Shri Bhagwati Singh
22. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
WITNESSES
(i) Shri Suhas Chakma, Convenor, North-East Regional
Consultation and Director, Asian Centre for Human Rights
(ii) Ms. Nandita Haksar
(iii) Gam A. Shimray, Advisor on Traditional Knowledge, UN
Convention on Bio-Diversity (UNCBD), Manipur
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
(i) Shri M. Ramachandran, Secretary
(ii) Dr. M.M. Kutty, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri P .K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
(iv) Shri A.K. Mehta, Joint Secretary
(v) Shri S.K. Lohia, Director (UT)
(vi) Smt. Veena Ish, Principal Commissioner, DDA
Representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment
(i) Shri K.M. Acharya, Secretary
(ii) Smt. Sangita Gairola, Additional Secretary
(iii) Dr. Vinod Kumar Aggarwal, Joint Secretary
(iv) Shri V .R. Malhotra, Director
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee. The Committee thereafter took evidence
of some of the experts/representatives of organizations from North
Eastern region in connection with the examination of the ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007, and ‘The Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007’. The experts/representatives of organizations

140
from North East presented their views on the aforesaid Bills before
the Committee. The witnesses also responded to the queries raised by
the members of the Committee pertaining to the Bills.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
[Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Urban
Development were called in]
3. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives and drew
their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha’.
4. The representatives presented their views in brief on the
aforesaid two Bills. The representatives requested the Committee to
grant more time to enable them to furnish the detailed response on
the various provisions of the Bill related to their Ministry. The
Committee after deliberations decided to give 10 days’ time to the
representatives of the Ministry to furnish the detailed replies. The
Committee decided to take the evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry after the receipt of the replies.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
[Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment were called in]
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment. He also welcomed the representatives
of the Ministries of Rural Development and Law and Justice who
were called to assist the Committee in examination of the aforesaid
Bills. The Committee held detailed deliberations on the various issues
related to their Ministry in the context of examination of the aforesaid
two Bills and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations.
The representatives responded to the queries raised by the members
of the Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to
send the written replies in respect of the issues on which the
information/clarification was not readily available within ten days.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1400 hrs .

141
APPENDIX XII
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 2ND JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee
Room No. ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Chandan Mitra — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
7. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
13. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
14. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Balihari Babu
17. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
18. Shri Prabhat Jha
19. Shri P .R. Rajan
20. Shri Bhagwati Singh
21. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

142
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
Smt. Neelam Nath, Additional Secretary (N)
Shri Anand Misra, JS (C&W)
Shri Balsharn Singh, DGDE
Shri Ashok Harnal, Additional DGDE
Lt. Gen. Sudhir Sharma, QMG
Brig. G.S. Bindra, DDG PPE
Col. Manish Erry, Dir. Plg. (Lands)
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways
Shri S.K. Vij, Member Engineering, Railway Board
Shri V .K. Gupta, Adviser (Land & Amenities), Railway Board
Shri P .D. Sharma, Executive Director (Land & Amenities)-I,
Railway Board
Shri J.S. Lakra, Director (Land & Amenities), Railway Board
The Committee resumed the deliberations on ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007’ after the lunch-break. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, the
Committee chose Dr. Chandan Mitra, MP to act as Chairman for the
sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
[The representatives of the Ministry of Defence were then called in.]
2. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry to
the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to the provisions
of Direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. The
Ministry of Defence could not furnish the written replies to the list of
points sent by the Secretariat by the stipulated time frame. The
representatives explained that they needed more time to furnish the
detailed replies and requested to grant three weeks’ time for the said

143
purpose. The Committee after detailed deliberations agreed to grant
10 days’ time. However, the representatives insisted on three weeks’
time. To this, the Committee decided to leave the issue to be decided
by the Hon’ble Chairman. The Committee decided to take evidence of
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence after they submit the
detailed replies as well as comments on each clause of the Bill.
[The witnesses then withdrew.]
[Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways were called in.]
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways. He also welcomed the representatives of the Ministries of
Rural Development and Law and Justice who were called to assist the
Committee in examination of the aforesaid Bills. The Committee held
detailed deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid
two Bills and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations.
The representatives responded to the queries raised by the members
of the Committee pertaining to the issues related to their Ministry.
The witnesses were asked to send the written replies in respect of the
issues on which the information/clarification was not readily available
within ten days.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on Thursday,
the 3 July, 2008 at 1100 hrs.

144
APPENDIX XIII
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 3RD JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
4. Shri Zora Singh Mann
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri D. Narbula
7. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
8. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
9. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
10. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
13. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
14. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
15. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Balihari Babu
17. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
18. Shri Prabhat Jha
19. Dr. Chandan Mitra
20. Shri P .R. Rajan
21. Shri Bhagwati Singh
22. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

145
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K.Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation
1. Shri S.K. Mishra, Secretary ,
2. Dr. S.M. Jharwal, Principal Advisor,
3. Dr. C.M. Pandey, Deputy Commissioner,
4. Shri Mukesh Khullar, Joint Secretary (DM)
5. Ms. Upma Srivastava, Joint Secretary (NRM&RFS)
Representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs
1. Shri G.B. Mukherjee, Secretary ,
2. Smt. Ruchira Pant, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Smt. Sushma Singh, Secretary (PR)
2. Shri Sudhir Krishna, Additional Secretary
3. Shri D.K. Jain, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri Vijai Sharma, Secretary (E&F)
2. Shri G.K. Prasad, Additional Director General of Forests, MoEF
3. Shri Ansar Ahmed, Inspector General of Forests, MoEF
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
2. Dr. A.K. Singh, Director

146
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members of
the Committee. He informed the members that the Committee had
heard the views of the aforesaid Ministries viz Ministries of Agriculture,
Tribal Affairs, Panchayati Raj and Environment & Forests at their
sittings held on 18 January 2008. The representatives who were then
asked to furnish the concrete amendments to the various provisions of
the Bills based on the suggestions made by them at the sitting of the
Committee. Accordingly, the representatives of the aforesaid Ministries
had again been called to place before the Committee their concrete
amendments in this regard. The Committee thereafter took evidence
of the aforesaid Ministries on the provisions made under the ‘The
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation &
Resettlement Bill, 2007’at the time indicated against each:
Name of Ministry/Department Time taken
(i) Ministry of Agriculture (Department 1100 hrs. – 1130 hrs.
of Agriculture and Cooperation)
(ii) Ministry of Tribal Affairs 1130 hrs. – 1200 hrs.
(iii) Ministry of Panchayati Raj 1200 hrs. – 1300 hrs.
(iv) Ministry of Environment and 1300 hrs. – 1330 hrs.
Forests
2. The aforesaid representatives were called one by one at the
time indicated above. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the
representatives and drew their attention to the provisions of direction
55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. He also welcomed
the representatives of the Ministries of Rural Development and
Law and Justice who were present at the sitting of the Committee to
assist the Committee in examination of the aforesaid Bills.
3. The representatives deposed before the Committee and furnished
their views on the aforesaid two Bills and suggested concrete
amendments to the various provisions of the Bills. The representatives
were asked to send the written replies in respect of the issues on
which the information/clarification was not readily available within
ten days.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1400 hrs.

147
APPENDIX XIV
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 3RD JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’ Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hannan Mollah — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
4. Shri Zora Singh Mann
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
7. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
13. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
14. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Balihari Babu
16. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
17. Shri Prabhat Jha
18. Dr. Chandan Mitra
19. Shri P .R. Rajan
20. Shri Bhagwati Singh
21. Ms. Sushila Tiriya

148
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A. K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry
(i) Shri G.K. Pillai, Secretary, Commerce
(ii) Shri Ajai Shankar, Secretary (Department of Industrial Policy
& Promotion)
(iii) Shri Gopal Krishan, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice
(i) Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
(ii) Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
(i) Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
(ii) Dr. A.K. Singh, Director
2. The Committee resumed deliberations on ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007’ after the lunch-break. In the absence of the Chairman, the
Committee chose Shri Hannan Mollah, MP to act as the Chairman for
the sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha.
{The representatives of the Department of Commerce and Department of
Industrial Policy and Promotion, (Ministry of Commerce) were then called
in}
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department
of Commerce and Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion,
(Ministry of Commerce) to the sitting of the Committee and drew
their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. The Chairman also welcomed the
representatives of the Ministries of Rural Development and Law and
Justice who were present at the sitting of the Committee to assist the

149
Committee in examination of the aforesaid Bills. The Committee held
detailed deliberations on the various provisions made in the aforesaid
two Bills and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations.
The representatives responded to the queries raised by the members
of the Committee pertaining to the Bills. The witnesses were asked to
send the written replies in respect of the issues on which the
information/clarification was not readily available within ten days.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

150
APPENDIX XV
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 18TH JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building (PLB), New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
6. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
7. Shri Sita Ram Singh
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
10. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh

151
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K.Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri M. Ramachandran, Secretary,
2. Dr. M.M. Kutty, Joint Secretary,
3. Shri P .K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary ,
4. Shri S.K. Lohia, Director (UT)
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Smt. Neelam Nath, A.S. (N),
2. Shri Anand Misra, JS(C&W)
3. Shri Balsharn Singh, DGDE
4. Shri Ashok Harnal, Addl. DGDE
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri M.L. Kumawat, Spl. Secretary (IS)
2. Shri V .N. Gaur, Joint Secretary (Police)
3. Shri D.K. Jain, Joint Secretary
Representative of the Ministry of Law & Justice
(Legislative Department – Legislative I Section)
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
2. Dr. A.K. Singh, Director
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee. He informed the members that the
representatives of the Ministries of Urban Development and Defence

152
had been called for evidence at the sitting of the Committee held on
2 July 2008 in connection with the examination of ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill,
2007’. The representatives could not furnish the written replies to the
various issues raised in the list of points sent to them by the Secretariat
and, therefore, requested the Committee to grant them some more
time. Accordingly, the Committee had agreed to their request. Now,
the representatives had furnished the replies and had been called for
evidence.
2. The representatives of the Ministries of Urban Development,
Defence and Home Affairs were then called in one by one. The Hon’ble
Chairman welcomed the representatives to the sitting of the Committee
and drew their attention to the provisions of direction 55(1) of the
‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. He also welcomed the
representatives of the Ministries of Rural Development and Law &
Justice who were called to assist the Committee in examination of the
aforesaid two Bills. The representatives of the Ministries of Urban
Development, Defence and Home Affairs, thereafter, presented their
views on the various provisions of the Bills. They also furnished the
concrete amendments based on the suggestions made by them. The
representatives were asked to furnish the written replies to the issues
on which clarification/replies were not readily available with them.
The representatives of the Ministries of Rural Development and Law
& Justice assisted the Committee during the course of deliberations.
3. A vertabim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet after
lunch at 1400 hrs. again.

153
APPENDIX XVI
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 18TH JULY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building (PLB), New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
6. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
7. Shri Sita Ram Singh
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
10. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
11. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Balihari Babu
13. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
14. Shri Prabhat Jha
15. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Shri P .R. Rajan
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh

154
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology
(Department of Posts)
1. Ms. Radhika Doraiswamy, Secretary,
2. Ms. Meera Datta, Secretary (O),
3. Shri Ansar Ahmed, Inspector General of Forests, MoEF
4. Shri K.L. Khanna, DDG (Estates)
Representatives of the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology
(Department of Telecommunications)
1. Shri Subodh Kumar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.P . Aggarwal, Wireless Advisor
3. Shri Kirthy Kumar, DDG (C&A)
4. Shri N.K. Yadav, DDG (SU)
5. Shri Kuldeep Goyal, CMD (BSNL)
6. Shri R.S.P . Sinha, CMD (MTNL)
Representatives of the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport &
Highways
(Department of Road) and (Department of Highways)
1. Shri Brahm Dutt, Secretary
2. Shri G. Sharan, DGC (RD), D/o RT&H
3. Shri A.N. Dhodapkar, Chief Engineer,
4. Shri K.S. Money, Member (Admn.), NHAI,
5. Shri V .K. Sharma, G.M., NHAI,
6. Shri V . Rajgopal, DDG (T&P), BRO

155
Representatives of the Ministry of Power
1. Shri Anil Kumar, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Gurdial Singh, Member, CEA and Additional Secretary
3. Shri Jayant Kawale, Joint Secretary
4. Shri A.B.L. Srivastava, Director (F) NHPC
Representative of the Ministry of Law & Justice
(Legislative Department – Legislative-I Section)
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
2. Dr. A.K. Singh, Director
The Committee resumed deliberations after the lunch break. The
representatives of the Departments of Posts and Telecommunications
under the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,
the representatives of the Departments of Road Transport and
Highways under the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and
Highways and the representatives of the Ministry of Power were then
called in one-by-one to depose before the Committee on the provisions
made under ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’. The representatives of the
Ministry of Rural Development and Law & Justice were also called in
to assist the Committee. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed and drew
the attention of each of the witnesses to direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. The representatives, thereafter, deposed
before the Committee and explained their views on the various
provisions made in the two Bills, particularly, related to the respective
representative Ministry/Department.
2. The Committee held detailed deliberations on the various issues
and valuable suggestions emerged during the deliberations. The
representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development and Law & Justice
assisted the Committee during the course of deliberations. The
representatives were asked to send the written replies to the issues on
which information was not readily available.
3. A vertabim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

156
APPENDIX XVII
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE,
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 25TH AUGUST 2008
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee
Room ’E’ Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri D. Narbula
6. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
7. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
8. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
9. Shri Sita Ram Singh
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
11. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
12. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
13. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Balihari Babu
15. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
16. Shri Prabhat Jha
17. Dr. Chandan Mitra
18. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary-II

157
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Department of Land Resources
(Ministry of Rural Development)
(i) Smt. Rita Sinha, Secretary
(ii) Shri Chinmay Basu, Additional Secretary
(iii) Dr. A.K. Singh, Director (Land Reforms)
(iv) Shri Charanjit Singh, Deputy Adviser
(v) Shri S.K. Narula, Consultant (LR)
Representatives of the Legislative Department
(Ministry of Law & Justice)
(i) Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary
(ii) Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
(iii) Shri Diwakar Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel
Representative of the Department of Legal Affairs
(Ministry of Law & Justice)
Shri P .K. Malhotra, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee and solicited their cooperation for early
finalisation of the Reports on the two Bills referred to the Committee
i.e. ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and
‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007'.
[The representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department
of Land Resources) and Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Department
and Department of Legal Affairs) were then called in].
3. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives and drew
their attention to the direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha’. Thereafter, the Committee held detailed discussion on the
different provisions made under ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill, 2007’. The representatives of the Department of Land Resources
responded to the queries of the Committee. The representatives of the
Legislative Department and Department of Legal Affairs clarified the
legal issues with regard to examination of the Bill, which were referred
to them by the nodal Ministry.

158
4. The representatives were asked to send the written replies to
the issues on which the information was not readily available.
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided to hold the next sittings on
the 3rd, 4th and 5th September, 2008 for clause-by-clause consideration
on the aforesaid Bills.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

159
APPENDIX XVIII
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE,
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 22ND SEPTEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shri Hannan Mollah
4. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
5. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
6. Shri Sita Ram Singh
7. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
9. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
10. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
11. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
12. Shri Prabhat Jha
13. Dr. Chandan Mitra
14. Shri Bhagwati Singh
15. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary-II

160
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee. He, thereafter, drew the attention of the
members to direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’
whereby it has been provided that the deliberations of the Committee
are confidential and not to be made public till the report on the subject
is presented to Parliament. He then informed the members that a note
containing the clause-by-clause analysis of ‘The Rehabilitation and
resettlement Bill, 2007’, had already been circulated to the members of
the Committee. The aforesaid note contains the details of the
deliberations clause-wise along with the suggested amendments based
on the deliberations.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took-up clause-by-clause consideration
of the aforesaid Bill. The detailed note was read out and the Bill was
considered clause-by-clause upto paragraph Nos. 1-90 of the aforesaid
note. After exhaustive deliberations, the Committee suggested some
amendmets to the respective clauses of the Bill.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again after lunch at 1400 hrs to
consider the remaining clauses of the Bill.

161
APPENDIX XIX
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE,
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 22ND SEPTEMBER, 2008.
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room
‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shri Hanna Mollah
4. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
5. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
6. Shri Sita Ram Singh
7. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
9. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
10. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
11. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
12. Shri Prabhat Jha
13. Dr. Chandan Mitra
14. Shri Bhagwati Singh
15. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary II
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary II

162
2. The Committee resumed the clause-by-clause consideration of
‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’. The Committee took
up for consideration clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill. The
note containing the analysis clause-by-clause of the amending Bill was
read out from para No. 91 onwards. After detailed deliberations, the
Committee suggested some amendments to the respective clauses of
the Bill.

163
APPENDIX XX
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE,
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 15TH OCTOBER, 2008.
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘G-074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Hanan Mollah
4. Shri D. Narbula
5. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
6. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
8. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Balihari Babu
10. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
11. Shri Bhagwati Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Vinod Gupta — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee, the Committee then took up for
consideration the draft Report on ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Bill, 2007’ and adopted the said draft Report with slight modifications.

164
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft
Report on the ‘Drinking water scenario in rural areas in the country’
and adopted the same without any modifications.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the aforesaid
draft Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministry/Department and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
5. The two Bill viz. ‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’
and ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ had been referred
to the Committee for examination and report to Parliament. The
Committee had already considered and adopted the draft Report on
‘The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007 at their sitting held on
3 October, 2008. The Committee while considering and adopting the
draft Report on ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’
observed that the aforesaid two legislations are historical and path
breaking pieces of legislations and as such decided that the Reports
on the two Bills should be presented to Parliament in the printed
form.
The Committee then adjourned.

FORTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
THE REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
BILL, 2007
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 October, 2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 21 October, 2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 46
Price : Rs. 180.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  ON URBAN AND RURAL  D EVELOPMENT
(1994-1995) ............................................................................................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2007-2008) ...................................... (vii)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2008-2009) ...................................... (ix)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (xi)
CHAPTER I Background of the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill, 2007 ............................................ 1
CHAPTER II Formulation of the Bill by the Government
and its examination by the Committee .............. 4
CHAPTER III Issues common in ‘The Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2007’ and ‘The Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Bill, 2007’................................... 8
C
HAPTER IV Clause by Clause analysis of the various
provisions made in different clauses of
the bill .........................................................................
A. To whom the provisions made under the
aforesaid legislation will apply ..................... 10
B. Definition of ‘affected family’ ....................... 12
C. Definition of ‘agricultural labourer’ ............ 15
D. Whether rehabilitation benefits provided
under R&R legislation are applicable when
the number of involuntarily displaced
families is less than 400 or more en masse
in plain areas or 200 or more families
en masse in tribal or hilly areas etc. ........... 17
E. Social Impact Assessment and Environment
Impact Assessment Studies ............................ 20
F. Child Rights ....................................................... 21
G. Including Secretaries concerned with the
welfare of Women and Child as well as
representatives of the Local Self Government
in the composition of the multi-
disciplinary expert group ............................... 23
(i)

H. Authorities for Rehabilitation &
Resettlement ....................................................... 24
I. Qualification of Ombudsman and
Administrator to be appointed for
Inter-State projects ............................................ 26
J. Appeals in proceedings before Court ......... 27
K. Multiplicity of Committees ............................ 28
L. Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions
and  Municipalities .......................................... 29
M. Fate of Social Impact Assessment Study
when people refuse to cooperate ................. 30
N. Rehabilitation and Resettlement benefits
for the affected family .................................... 31
O. Indexation of rehabilitation grant and
other monetary benefits .................................. 44
P. Punishment for false information and
bar of jurisdiction of Civil Courts ............... 45
C
HAPTER V Bringing one legislation instead of two
legislations relating to land acquisition and
rehabilitation and resettlement .............................. 48
C
HAPTER VI M ISCELLANEOUS
A. Providing solatium to the person who
voluntarily offers his land to Government
for acquisition .................................................... 51
B. Awareness Campaign....................................... 51
C. Expeditious enactment of the Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Legislation ......................... 52
A
PPENDICES
I. The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007 ................ 53
II. The List of Experts/Representatives of Organisations,
Associations/Individuals who appeared before the
Committee. .................................................................................. 105
III. List of States/Union Territory Administrations whose
views on the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill,
2007 were received, list of Ministries/Departments
from whom written replies on List of Points were
obtained and with whom the Committee held
detailed  deliberations on various provisions of the
Bills and details of the sittings of the Committee
held in connection with examination of
‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ .............. 107
P
AGE
(ii)

PAGE
(iii)
IV. The extracts of observations/recommendations made
by the Committee in the report on ‘The Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ on the issues
common in both the Bills ................................................... 111
V. Minutes of the Fifth sitting held on 24 December,
2007 ........................................................................................... 119
VI. Minutes of the Sixth sitting held on 18 January ,
2008 ........................................................................................... 123
VII. Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting held on 17 June,
2008 ........................................................................................... 127
VIII. Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting held on 17 June,
2008 ........................................................................................... 130
IX. Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting held on 18 June,
2008 ........................................................................................... 132
X. Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting held on 18 June,
2008 ........................................................................................... 135
XI. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting held on 2 July,
2008 ........................................................................................... 138
XII. Minutes of the Twentieth sitting held on 2 July,
2008 ........................................................................................... 141
XIII. Minutes of the Twenty-first sitting held on 3 July,
2008 ........................................................................................... 144
XIV. Minutes of the Twenty-second sitting held on
3 July, 2008 ............................................................................. 147
XV. Minutes of the Twenty-third sitting held on
18 July, 2008 ........................................................................... 150
XVI. Minutes of the Twenty-fourth sitting held on
18 July, 2008 ........................................................................... 153
XVII. Minutes of the Second sitting held on 25 August,
2008 ........................................................................................... 156
XVIII. Minutes of the Seventh sitting held on 22 September,
2008 ........................................................................................... 159
XIX. Minutes of the Eighth sitting held on 22 September,
2008 ........................................................................................... 161
XX. Minutes of the Tenth sitting held on 15 October,
2008 ........................................................................................... 163

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (1994-1995)
Shri Prataprao B. Bhosale —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijayarama Raju S.
3. Shri Bh. Vijayakumar Raju
4. Shri V . Sobhanadreeswara Rao
5. Dr. Y.S. Rajasekhar Reddy
6. Shri S. Gangadhara
7. Shri J. Chokka Rao
8. Shri Dharmabhiksham
9. Md. Ali Ashraf Fatmi
10. Shri Sukhadeo Paswan
11. Shri Shailendra Mahto
12. Shri Karia Munda
13. Shri K.M. Mathew
14. Shri P .D. Chavan
15. Shri Ram Singh Kashwan
16. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
17. Shri Prabhulal Rawat
18. Shri P .P . Kaliaperumal
19. Shri N. Murugesan
20. Shri N. Sundararaj
21. Shri Surendra Pal Pathak
22. Shri Devi Bux Singh
23. Shri Ram Pal Singh
24. Shri Sudhir Giri
25. Shri Rajesh Khanna
26. Shri Subrata Mukherjee
27. Shri Sajjan Kumar
28. Shri Gulam Mohammad Khan
(v)

Rajya Sabha
29. Shri Ram Deo Bhandari
30. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
31. Smt. Chandrakala Pandey
32. Shri Thennala Balkrishna Pillai
33. Shri Shiv Prasad Chanpuria
34. Shri Shivajirao Giridhar Patil
35. Shri Sangh Priya Gautam
36. Shri Debabrata Biswas
37. Shri Jagmohan
38. Prof. Vijay Kr. Malhotra
39. Shri Nagmani
40. Shri S. Dronamraju
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.C. Gupta — Joint Secretary
2. Shri G.R. Juneja — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri C.S. Joon — Assistant Director
(vi)

(vii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri George Fernandes
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari*
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
12. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar $
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikder
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
17. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
18. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar #
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav

(viii)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot**
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Dr. Ram Prakash**
28. Shri P .R. Rajan
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
31. Shrimati Kanimozhi
@
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari, MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 30 August, 2007, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4022
dated August 30, 2007.
@Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha nominated Shrimati Kanimozhi, MP , (RS) to Standing
Committee on Rural Development w.e.f. 15 September, 2007  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin
Part-II, Para No. 4096 dated 19 September, 2007.
#Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri Tarit Baran Topdar, MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Energy to Standing Committee on Rural Development
w.e.f. 12 December, 2007 as intimated  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4366
dated 12 December, 2007.
**Ceased to be member of the Standing Committee on Rural Development consequent
upon the retirement from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9 April, 2008.
$Hon’ble Speaker has nominated Shri Neeraj Shekhar, MP , Lok Sabha to the Standing
Committee on Rural Development w.e.f 10 March, 2008. Consequent upon vacancy
caused by resignation given by Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy, MP (LS) from the
membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 4 March, 2008.

(ix)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2008-2009)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri George Fernandes
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
12. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
17. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
18. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
19. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shrimati T. Ratna Bai
24. Shri Prabhat Jha
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal

(x)
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Shrimati Kanimozhi
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director

(xi)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf present this Fortieth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘The
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’.
2. ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ was introduced
in Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2007 and was referred to the Standing
Committee on Rural Development by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha
under Rule 331 E (1) (b) of the ‘Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha’ on 7 December, 2007 for examination and report
to Parliament.
3. ‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’ was formulated
by the Government to give a statutory backing to the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007.
4.  The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the Bill from the nodal Ministry i.e., The
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources). The
preliminary meeting of the Committee was held on 24 December, 2007
wherein the Committee were briefed about the various provisions of
the Bill by the nodal Ministry. Since, the proposed provisions contained
in the Bill affect the public at large, the Committee at the aforesaid
sitting decided to invite the views of experts/organizations and
individuals through print and electronic media.
5. In response to the Press Communiqué, the Secretariat received
190 related memoranda. 15 selected experts/representatives of
association and individuals (the list indicated at Appendix-II) which
include top researchers, social workers, representatives of various
organizations, legal persons, representatives from child organizations
deposed before the Committee at their sittings held on 17 and 18
June, 2008.
6. With the purpose of having wider consultations, the Committee
decided to hear the views of the various related Ministries/Departments
of the Union Government. The representatives of the various Ministries
viz. Tribal Affairs; Environment and Forest; Panchayati Raj; Agriculture;
Commerce and Industry; Urban Development; Social Justice and
Empowerment; Railways; Defence; Home Affairs; Communication and

IT (Department of Telecommunications and Department of Posts);
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of Road
Transport & Highways) and Ministry of Power deposed before the
Committee at the sitting held on 18 January, 2008, 2 and 3 July, 2008
and 18 July, 2008. Besides various sets of written documents containing
the responses on the various issues raised in large number of sets of
list of points were submitted by the aforesaid Ministries, which helped
the Committee in arriving at meaningful conclusions.
7. Since the State Governments acquire land and decide on
optimum rehabilitation and resettlement benefits to be provided to the
displaced persons, the primary responsibility of the implementation of
the provisions made under the Bill lies with the respective State
Governments/Union Territory Administrations. All State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations were requested to give their views on
the aforesaid Bill, after seeking permission of Hon’ble Speaker as per
direction 60 of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. Nine State
Governments/UTs viz Chandigarh, Puducherry, Jharkhand, Goa,
Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Arunachal
Pradesh, Nagaland and Himachal Pradesh have furnished their views
in this regard.
8. The term of the Committee (2007-2008) expired on 4 August,
2008 and the Committee (2008-2009) was constituted w.e.f. 5 August,
2008. The Committee (2008-2009) at the first sitting held on 11 August,
2008 decided to continue the examination of the Bill from the stage
the earlier Committee had left. Thereafter, the Committee took evidence
of the representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry
of Rural Development) at their sitting held on 25 August, 2008. The
nodal Department furnished replies to the issues raised in a number
of sets of list of points and submitted the desired documents to the
Committee. The representatives of the nodal Ministry were also present
at the various sittings of the Committee where the Committee took
evidence of the various concerned Ministries/Departments and assisted
the Committee. The representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) also assisted
the Committee by clarifying the various legal matters. The Committee
undertook clause by clause consideration of the Bill at the sittings
held on 22 September, 2008.
9. The Draft Report was adopted by the Committee at their sitting
held on 15 October 2008. The Committee were immensely benefited
by the contribution made by the Members of the Committee for which
I express my sincere thanks to them.
(xii)

10. The Committee place on record their deep appreciation of the
work done by the earlier Committee i.e. the then Committee on Rural
Development (2007-2008).
11. The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development examined the various provisions made under the Principal
Land Acquisition Act of 1894 in consultation with the State
Governments and made exhaustive recommendations/observations in
the Eighth Report (Tenth Lok Sabha), presented to Parliament on
15 December, 1994. The Committee were greatly benefited by the
observations/recommendations made by the erstwhile Standing
Committee on Urban and Rural Development. The Committee place
on record their deep sense of appreciation of the work done by the
erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development
(1994-95).
12. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land
Resources) who appeared before the Committee and placed their
considered views. They further wish to thank the officers of the other
concerned Ministries as mentioned above, who assisted the Committee
and offered their valuable suggestions. The Committee express their
gratitude to officials of State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations for furnishing valuable information and suggestions
which the Committee desired in connection with the examination of
‘The Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007’.
13. The Committee are greatly benefited from the perspectives/
suggestions of various individuals/associations/experts on various
provisions of the Bill. The Committee express their gratitude to experts/
individuals who furnished memoranda or tendered evidence before
the Committee.
14. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation of the invaluable assistance rendered to them
from time to time by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached
to the Committee.
15. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold type in
the body of the report.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
16 October, 2008 Chairman,
24 Asvina, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(xiii)

40
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
‘THE REHABILITATION AND
RESETTLEMENT BILL, 2007’
FORTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI