16
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
SIXTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


SIXTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF  LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 21.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 019
Price : Rs. 34.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2005-2006) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 28
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 39
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 41
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 60
APPENDICES
I. Summary of recommendations of the
12th Finance Commission ....................................... 62
II. Extract of the minutes of the Ninth Sitting of
the Committee held on 12 December 2005 ....... 76
III. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Tenth
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ...... 78

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Pallani Shamy
*12. Shri Prabodh Panda
13. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri Prabodh Panda, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural Development
vide para no. 1580, Lok Sabha Bulletin part II dated 23 August, 2005.

Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shrimati Vanga Geetha$
24. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
25. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
26. Shri Penumalli Madhu
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri V . K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
4. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri A. K. Shah — Under Secretary
(iv)
$Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has changed the nomination of Shrimati Vanga Geetha,
MP (RS) from Standing Committee on Industry to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 23 August, 2005 vide Committee Branch-I note dated 25.8.2005.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Sixteenth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Tenth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2004-2005) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2005-2006)
of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005. The
replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in
the Report were received on 25 August, 2005.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
12 December, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee is given in Appendix III .
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
12 December, 2005 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2005-2006)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Tenth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of
the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 36 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 2.31, 2.32, 2.46, 2.47, 2.55, 2.56,
3.25, 3.53, 3.55, 3.73, 3.74, 3.94 and 3.101.
(ii) Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s reply:
Para No. 2.37
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.12, 2.16, 2.30, 2.43, 2.57, 3.21, 3.22, 3.23, 3.24,
3.54, 3.75, 3.76, 3.91, 3.92, 3.93 and 3.102.
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.38, 2.42 and 2.63
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Underutilisation of outlay earmarked for different schemes in
North-Eastern Region
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.12, 3.24, 3.75 & 3.76)
5. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note that the concept of allocation of
10 per cent exclusive outlay of each Department/Ministry of the
Union Government for North Eastern Region including Sikkim
was started in 2000-2001. After that, whenever the attention of
the Department has been drawn towards underspending, a
common reply stating that allocation for two area specific
programmes DDP and DPAP is being made every year, whereas
these schemes are not in operation in these States has been
furnished. The Committee while noting the concept of allocation
for North Eastern Region find that 10 per cent lump-sum
allocation of the overall outlay of a Department is earmarked
exclusively for these areas. No scheme-wise allocation is being
made. If that is the state of affairs, the Committee fail to
understand the logic of the Department in this regard. The
Committee feel that instead of furnishing such reasons, the
Department should stress upon increasing the scope of the
schemes viz. IWDP and land records. The position of land records
in said States is very poor and hence needs more attention. The
detailed analysis in this regard has been done in the subsequent
part of the report. Here the Committee would like to emphasis
that the outlay can be used for this sector after having
consultations with the concerned State Governments. The
Committee would like the Department to explain the position in
view of their aforesaid observation so as to enable them to analyse
the position and comment further in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
“The Committee further note that in North-Eastern States
during 2004-2005, the number of projects sanctioned is almost
half of the number of projects sanctioned during previous year.
Underspending in North-Eastern region is the major area of
concern as pointed out in the previous Reports, and indicated in
the earlier part of the report. Not only that in North-Eastern
States, 10 per cent of the allocation for DPAP and DDP is also
being made available although no DDP and DPAP areas are there
in that region. In view of the aforesaid position there is an urgent
need to sanction more and more additional projects under IWDP
in North-Eastern Areas. The Committee would like the
Department to take the desired action in this regard and apprise
the Committee accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.24)

3
“The Committee further note that in North-Eastern States, the
implementation of programme IWDP is even worse. Out of
Rs. 491.80 lakhs, Rs. 289.22 lakhs is the utilisation position. The
Committee find that the various issues, in case of North Eastern
States need to be tackled in a different perspective keeping in
view the fact that tribal ownership, distribution and its use is
governed by the tribal customs. The Committee would like that
various bottlenecks being faced in the implementation of the
scheme should be reviewed in consultation with the State
Governments and local bodies in such States which may be in a
better position to suggest the remedial action.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.75)
“The Committee further note that another issue which need to
be tackled particularly for North-Eastern States is non-existence
of land records in some of the North-Eastern States for example
Meghalaya State and Lakshadweep Union Territory have no land
records. In other non-Eastern States too, the land records may
not be proper. In view of this scenario, the Committee feel that
the success of computerization programme depends on the
position of land records in various States and Union territories.
Thus some sort of coordination should be maintained with the
two schemes of the Department SRA & ULR and Computerisation
of Land Records.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.76)
6. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The observation of the Committee for increasing the scope of
the schemes of IWDP and Land Records in the North East is
very valid. It is submitted that the Department is making all
efforts in this direction. The position of release of funds under
IWDP is as follows:
(Rs. in Crore)
 Year Allocation to NE States Expenditure in NE States
2002-03 82.00 56.45
2003-04 84.24 66.20
2004-05 115.00 81.43
2005-06 119.00 —

4
From the above table, it is evident that the expenditure in the NE
States under IWDP is steadily increasing. There is continuous effort to
stimulate the demand and expenditure in these States.
To increase capacity building, efforts are being made to organise
seminars and workshops. One such workshop was organised on
12th and 13th July 2005 which was chaired by AS (LR). The States
have also been asked to prepare their perspective plans indicating
their annual projections so that advance planning for the earmarked
funds for NE States can be taken up and scarce resources are
meaningfully utilised.
During the Tenth Plan period, the performance of the Scheme of
‘Computerisation of Land Records’ in NE States is as below:
(Rupees in crore)
  Year Budget Funds earmarked Released to Balance amount in
Estimate for NE States NE States the Non-lapsable
pool of resources
2002-03 55.00 5.00 0.08 4.92
2003-04 55.00 5.00 1.03 3.97
2004-05 50.00 6.00 1.63 4.37
2005-06 100.00 10.00 — —
Due to non-receipt of proposals from the N.E. States, funds could
not be fully utilized. The reason is that States have not utilized the
funds released during the previous years, therefore, they have not
requested for additional funds.
The performance of the Scheme on ‘Strengthening of Revenue
Administration & Updating of Land Records (SRA&ULR)’ during the
first four years of the Tenth Plan period, for the North-Eastern States
is given below:
(Rupees in crore)
  Year Budget Funds earmarked Released to Balance amount in
Estimate for NE States NE States the Non-lapsable
pool of resources
2002-03 35.00 5.00 4.42 0.58
2003-04 35.00 5.00 4.91 0.09
2004-05 20.00 2.00 3.44 —
2005-06 40.00 4.00 2.92 —

5
It may be seen from above that the funds earmarked for the
NE States were almost fully released during 2002-03 & 2003-04.
However, during 2004-05 more than the earmarked funds were
released to N.E. States. There is scope for enhancement of outlay
for the NE States during the financial year 2005-2006 as some
more States may request for release of additional funds under the
Scheme of SRA & ULR.
The Committee of Revenue Secretaries of selected States
constituted by this Department under the Chairmanship of Joint
Secretary, Department of Land Resources in its report has
recommended that the component of Survey & Settlement
operations with the use of modern survey equipments like GPS &
Total Stations which is presently being taken under the 50 : 50
Scheme of SRA & ULR could be made a part of the 100 per cent
funded Scheme of CLR so that updated land records data may be
used for Computerisation. This will enable this Department to
utilise the funds fully earmarked for the Scheme of CLR.”
The Committee while considering the action taken replies had
desired that the name of selected States whose Revenue Secretaries
are represented in the Committee constituted by the Department
of Land Resources for the purpose of updating of land records
should be obtained from the Department of Land Resources. The
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
vide their O.M. No. Z-11014/1/2005-GC (Vol. II) dated
13 December, 2005 has informed that the Revenue Secretaries/
Commissioners of the following States are represented in the said
Committee:
1. Andhra Pradesh
2. Madhya Pradesh
3. Maharashtra
4. Karnataka
5. Tamil Nadu
6. Uttaranchal
7. West Bengal
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
“…… the Department is making all efforts to stimulate the
demand and expenditure in North Eastern States. More new

6
projects have been sanctioned in subsequent years as it is evident
from the increasing expenditure. The States have also been asked
to prepare their perspective plans indicating their annual projection
so that advance planning can be done for the earmarked funds for
North Eastern States.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.24)
“The Hon’ble Minister of Rural development has written to
Chief Ministers of all the North-Eastern States to take expeditious
steps for implementation of the scheme of CLR and completion of
various activities within the timeframe fixed by this Ministry. The
progress of the scheme was further reviewed in the Ministry with
the NE States during the months of May & June, 2005. The NE
States were requested to conduct survey with the use of modern
equipments and techniques for the un-surveyed areas so that land
records with ownership details can be first prepared and then
computerized. In this regard, the States of Tripura, Sikkim, Mizoram
(plain areas) and Assam have shown considerable progress under
the scheme of CLR. Out of the total releases of Rs. 1,956.07 lakh
to NE States under the Scheme of CLR, utilization reported by
these States is Rs. 1,470.36 lakh (75 per cent). Other States were
requested to speed up their implementation.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.75)
“The State of Meghalaya and Union territory of Lakshadweep
have been requested to undertake survey work with the use of
modern survey equipments like GPS (Global Positioning System)
and Electronic Total Stations under the Scheme of SRA & ULR to
create the land records data and then start computerisation of land
records. All the States including the North-Eastern States have been
requested to submit information about un-surveyed areas, which
have never been surveyed (District/Tehsil/Revenue Village-wise),
to this Department.
The Department of Land Resources, in the case of North-
Eastern States and other States where land has not been surveyed,
co-ordinates between the Schemes of SRA & ULR and
Computerisation of Land Records. The effort is to provide financial
support for surveying those areas which are not surveyed so far
and, thereafter, computerise the land records created by survey .”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.76)

7
7. The Committee have persistently been recommending to the
Department to expand the area of operation of different schemes
like IWDP , SRA and ULR and Computerisation of Land Records in
North-Eastern Region so as to ensure 100 per cent exclusive allocation
made for the said Region. From the replies, it seems that efforts in
the right direction have been made by the Department. The
Department has been playing a pro-active role. State Governments,
Union territory Administrations are being motivated through
correspondence, seminars and conferences. The Union Minister of
Rural Development has also taken the initiative to write to
Chief Ministers for effective implementation of the schemes.
Inspite of the best efforts being made by the Department, the
utilisation position is not very encouraging as is evident from the
analysis of the data given in the replies as given below:
(i) the Department has clarified that through the continuous
efforts the expenditure in North-Eastern Region is steadily
increasing. The data indicates that the expenditure is
increasing if the data of a year is compared to previous
years in absolute terms. However, if the expenditure made
in a year is compared in the light of the allocation, the
gap between the allocation and expenditure is rather
increasing. This gap, which was Rs. 18.04 crore during
2003-2004, increased to Rs. 33.57 crore during 2004-2005;
and
(ii) the position of expenditure under the scheme
‘Computerisation of Land Records’ is further disturbing.
The underspending which is the balance amount deposited
in the Non-lapsable pool of resources ranges between
80 per cent to 90 per cent in the years 2002-2003 to
2004-2005.
While noting the efforts being made by the Department, the
Committee find that a lot more needs to be done in order to expand
the base of activities of different schemes of the Department in
North-Eastern Region. The Committee would like the Department to
continue the efforts being made in this regard more vigorously so
as to achieve the objective of 10 per cent exclusive allocation being
made by the Department.
The Committee further find that certain initiatives have been
taken by the Department to improve the position of land records in
North-Eastern States. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development
has written to Chief Ministers of all the North-Eastern States to take

8
expeditious steps for implementation of the schemes of CLR and
completion of various activities within the framework fixed by the
Department. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
deadline of the Department in this regard. Besides, the State of
Meghalaya and Union territory of Lakshadweep have been requested
to undertake survey work with the use of modern survey equipments
like GPS (Global Positioning System) and ETS (Electronic Total
Stations) under the Scheme of SRA & ULR to create the land records
data and then start computerisation of land records. All the States
including the North-Eastern States have been requested to submit
information about areas which have never been surveyed (District/
Tehsil/Revenue Village-wise), to the Department. The Committee
would like the Department to pursue the mater further with these
States so that the position of land records can be made better in
these States. The Committee may be kept apprised of the position
in this regard.
Besides, the Committee find that the Committee of Revenue
Secretaries of selected States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Uttaranchal and West Bengal
constituted by the Department under the chairmanship of Joint
Secretary, Department of Land Resources in its report has
recommended that the component of survey and settlement operations
with the use of modern survey equipments like GPS and Total
Stations which is presently being taken under the 50 : 50 Scheme of
SRA and ULR could be made a part of the 100 per cent funded
Scheme of CLR so that updated land records data may be used for
computerisation. The Committee would like to be informed whether
the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee of Revenue
Secretaries relates to all the States or only to North Eastern States.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of
implementation of the recommendation of the aforesaid Committee.
B. Monitoring mechanism for different watershed projects
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.16 and 3.21)
8. The Committee had noted as below:
“** ** ** the Budget documents of the Department indicate that
the releases to the State Governments/implementing agencies are
considered as spending. There is no mechanism to analyse the
performance of projects being undertaken under different schemes

9
due to long gestation period. Further the foreclosure of projects
specifically under watershed schemes indicate that the physical
performance of the projects may not be so satisfactory as the data
with regard to financial achievement indicate. The Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to evolve some sort of mechanism for
evaluating the performance of different projects. Some sort of
grading indicating poor, satisfactory or very good may be indicated
against the number of projects being undertaken in various States.
Besides, another mechanism can be to have some system indicating
the projects at First stage, Second stage, Third stage etc. Such type
of analysis would enable a critical evaluation of the projects. The
Committee would like the Department to consider the said aspect
and apprise the Committee accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
“The Committee note that around 65 per cent to 70 per cent
of IWDP funds are meant for committed liabilities for ongoing
projects during entire 9th Plan (1997-2002). For instance the
Committee find that during 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 out of the
total outlay of Rs. 480 crore and Rs. 430 crore the major portion
of Rs. 350 crore and Rs. 200 crore was for committed liabilities.
The Committee feel that with more and more committed
liabilities for the ongoing projects, it will be difficult to achieve
the set targets of development of wastelands. Since more and more
money would be needed for committed liabilities, it would result
in lesser new projects and similarly lesser coverage of additional
wastelands.
The Committee further note that on an average the gestation
period of a project is four to five years as indicated by the
Department. However, the data show that some of the projects
started in 1997, 1998 are yet to be completed. Thus a project may
continue even after completion of seven to eight years. In this
scenario the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to
periodically evaluate the performance of projects. As recommended
in the earlier part of the Report, the projects should be evaluated
at certain specified stages, say first stage, second stage and some
sort of grading should be given. The Committee urge for stricter
monitoring on the lines suggested above.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)

10
9. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“There is a period of five years for completion of watershed projects
and the total project cost is released in instalments. There is an
inbuilt mechanism to monitor the fund utilization under which
the next instalment of central share is released only when more
than 50 per cent of the Central and State share released earlier has
been utilised. Hence, the number of instalments released is a
parameter to determine the performance and the implementation
status of the projects. Accordingly, the Department maintains the
data of release of instalments of each project to evaluate their
performance. The analysis of the data gives a clear picture on
performance ratings of different projects. The data is reviewed
continuously and the States/Districts which are found slow in
implementation are persuaded and directed to ensure timely
implementation of projects.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
“It may be clarified that watershed projects are sanctioned for a
period of five years and the total project cost is released in five
instalments, i.e. only 15 per cent funds are released during first
year, 30 per cent during 2nd year, 30 per cent during 3rd year,
15 per cent during 4th year and 10 per cent during 5th year. To
ensure completion of the sanctioned projects about 65 to 70 per
cent of the budget for the Area Development Programmes is spent
on ongoing projects. Therefore, only the balance funds are utilized
for sanction of new projects after fulfilling the requirement of on-
going projects. Thus approximately 30 per cent of the total funds
is utilised for sanctioning new projects.
There is an inbuilt mechanism to monitor the fund utilisation,
under which the next instalment of Central share is released only
when more than 50 per cent of the Central and State share released
earlier, has been utilised. Hence, the number of instalments released
in a project is an indicator of the pace of implementation of the
project. The Department maintains the data of release of various
instalments of each project. The performance is periodically
reviewed and the States/Districts which are found slow in
implementation of projects are persuaded and directed to ensure
timely completion of projects.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)

11
10. The Committee in their earlier recommendations had noted
that although average gestation period of a watershed project is five
years, the projects started in 1997-1998 are still continuing. Besides
the Committee had also found that there was no system of
monitoring the physical performance of watershed projects. The
Committee had suggested a mechanism to evaluate the physical
performance of such projects. Some system of grading the
performance of projects indicating poor, satisfactory or very good
was suggested by the Committee. Besides, to know the status of the
projects, these could be evaluated by indicating the progress at first
stage, second stage, third stage etc. The Department instead of
working on the formula suggested by the Committee has given a
vague reply indicating the already known procedure of releasing
outlay for these projects. The Committee strongly deplore the way
their recommendations have been dealt with by the Department.
The Committee find that due to lack of proper mechanism of judging
the physical and qualitative performance of projects, a number of
projects are being foreclosed thus wasting the national resources.
The issue of foreclosure has been dealt with in the subsequent para
of the report. Here, the Committee would like to reiterate their
recommendation that proper monitoring mechanism as spelt out by
the Committee be evolved at the earliest even though there is
continuous reviewing of data of watershed projects at Ministry level.
C. Need for convergence of various watershed and other related
programmes under one umbrella
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.30, 2.43 and 2.57)
11. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee disapprove the way the new schemes are proposed
and outlay earmarked without any planning or preparedness on
the part of the Government resulting in blockage of outlay in the
resources starved economy of the country. They note that Rs. 1,000
crore were earmarked during 10th Plan for the ‘New Initiative’.
The two new schemes viz. (i) Renovation of Traditional Water
Bodies and (ii) Development of Bio-fuel were to be launched.
Initially Renovation of Traditional Water Bodies was proposed to
be under the Ministry of Land Resources but finally the Ministry
of Water Resources was chosen as the Ministry to handle the
aforesaid scheme. The Committee find that the handling of
watershed projects by various Ministries of the Union Government
viz. Ministries of Agriculture, Water Resources and Land Resources

12
is the main cause of such a state of affairs. The Committee in their
earlier reports have been expressing their concern in this regard.
The issue of convergence although decided in principle, is being
delayed by the Government.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
“The Committee were informed that it will take 17-18 years to
develop the wastelands with the existing pace and outlay of the
Department. The Committee find that other Ministries/Departments
of the Union Government viz. Agriculture, Water Resources etc.
are also having schemes for watershed development. Huge
resources are being allocated to these Ministries also. Besides State
Governments may be having some schemes for tackling the issue
of development of wastelands. Unless there is some sort of
coordinating mechanism, no meaningful conclusion indicating the
position of coverage of wastelands in the country can be arrived
at. As indicated in the preceding para, the final decision on the
issue of convergence of the efforts being made by Union
Government cannot be arrived at even after the concurrence of the
planning Commission in this regard. Pending decision in this
regard, the Committee may like to recommend to the Department
to evolve some sort of mechanism by which the efforts made by
several Ministries/Departments/State Governments could be
coordinated so as to have a clear cut position of scenario of
wastelands development. Only when such a data is available, a
time bound programme for tackling the issue of wastelands
development can be made.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.43)
“Further the Committee find that ‘Hariyali’ guidelines of the
Department emphasise the convergence of all the programmes of
not only of Union Government but also those being implemented
by the State Governments at the field level. While appreciating the
formulation of said guidelines the Committee feel that there is an
urgent need to implement the aforesaid guidelines since the other
Ministries and State Governments are involved in this regard. There
is an urgent need to discuss and debate this issue during the
various conferences, seminars held where State Governments and
other Ministries represent. Besides the said guidelines should be
publicised widely. To motivate the State Governments, the impact
of convergence should be studied carefully and the success of the
States/districts which could have positive impact, should be
replicated in other States/districts.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.57)

13
12. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“In view of the Standing Committee’s recommendations to expedite
the issue of converging various watershed and other related
programmes as well as the concern expressed by the Committee
on the undue delay in the matter, a fresh Cabinet Note was
prepared explicitly mentioning the recommendations and concerns
of the Committee. This Cabinet Note was put up for approval in
November, 2004. However, a decision was taken at the highest
level not to pursue this Cabinet Note for the present, as the
Planning Commission had set up an Inter-Ministerial Task Group
for the same purpose.
The Inter-Ministerial Task Group, under the chairmanship of
the Secretary, Planning Commission, was set up by the Planning
Commission in August 2004. The Task Group Report has since
been finalised by the Planning Commission in October, 2005. The
Report recognised the need to bring all watershed programmes
under one Ministry and implement them in a mission mode.
Alternatively, it was recommended that a separate mission under
the Prime Minister may be created with four mini-missions under
the Ministries of Agriculture, Rural Development, Environment &
Forests and Water Resources.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
“It is true that watershed development programmes are being
implemented by various Ministries and, therefore, coordination is
needed to have a clear position on wasteland development. Ministry
of Rural Development has asked the State Governments to prepare
five-year perspective plans for each district in their States clearly
indicating the wastelands so far covered under various programmes
of the Government and the target set for the  next five years. It
will ensure convergence among different programmes of watershed
development.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.43)
“The guidelines for Hariyali for implementation of watershed
development programmes have been circulated to the State
Governments. The nodal agency at District level for implementation
of Programmes/Schemes administered by the Ministry of Rural
Development is the District Rural Development Agency (DRDA).
Accordingly, the guidelines provide that the ZP/DRDA shall take
all possible measures to ensure convergence of other Programmes
of the Ministry of Rural development in the villages chosen for
the implementation of the watershed development projects. In
addition, they are to converge programmes of similar nature of
other Ministries in the villages selected under watershed

14
development schemes. The issue of integrating DPAP , DDP and
IWDP with their financial allocations as additionality with related
Area Development and Poverty Alleviation Programmes such as
National Watershed Development Programme for the Rainfed Areas
(NWDPRA), National Wasteland Development Programme for
Degraded Forest Lands, Food for Work Programme, Employment
Guarantee Scheme etc. is also being examined by the Expert
Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri S.
Parthasarathy. The Committee would recommend a suitable strategy
for convergence of different programmes. Ministry of Rural
Development has also asked the States to prepare five-year
perspective plans for each district indicating the wastelands covered
so far under various Government programmes and the target set
for the next five years. It will ensure convergence at the district
level.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.57)
13. The Committee have repeatedly been recommending for
convergence of different watershed development schemes being
handled by different Ministries/Department. The issue of
convergence, although agreed to in principle by the Government, is
being delayed. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had
insisted on some mechanism to coordinate the activities related to
watershed development being handled by different Ministries
pending the final decision on the issue of convergence. The
Committee find from the replies that the inter-Ministerial Task Group
under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Planning Commission in
the report submitted in October, 2004 had recommended for bringing
all watershed programmes under one mission or alternatively creation
of a separate mission under the Prime Minister with four mini-
missions under different Ministries dealing with the scheme of
watershed development. Further, the Department has mentioned that
a Cabinet Note was prepared explicitly mentioning the
recommendations and concerns of the Committee. The Cabinet Note
was put up for approval in November, 2004. However, a decision
was taken at the highest level not to pursue the Cabinet Note for
the present, as the Planning Commission had set up an inter-
Ministerial Task Group for the same purpose. The Committee fail to
understand the stand taken by the Department particularly when
the Task Group has made recommendations on same lines as
suggested by the Committee. The Committee would like the
Department to explain its stand clearly. Further, the Committee would
like to stress that the matter of convergence may further be pursued
in the light of the repeated recommendations of the Committee as
well as the suggestion of the Task Group and issue should be settled
expeditiously.

15
The Committee in their earlier recommendation had also stressed
upon the need for implementation of Hariyali guidelines scrupulously
so as to ensure convergence of watershed activities at the field level.
The Committee had also suggested a mechanism to implement the
guidelines which include publicising the same widely, replicating
the positive impact of convergence in a State/District in other States/
Districts. The Department instead of addressing the matter has chosen
to reproduce the extract from the guidelines. The Committee would
like the Department’s categorical response in this regard.
The Committee further note that the Department has asked the
State Governments to prepare five year Perspective Plan for each
district clearly indicating the wastelands covered so far under various
programmes of the Government and set targets for the next five
years. The Committee would like the Department to ensure that the
said Perspective Plan is prepared in consultation with the local bodies
in respective districts/States. The Committee would also like the
Department to pursue the matter further and apprise the Committee
about the feed back received from the State Governments in this
regard.
D. Expeditious updation of Wasteland Atlas
Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
14. The Committee had recommended as below:
“Besides the Committee find that Atlas indicating the district wise
data of wastelands by employing the scientific remote sensing
satellite data products was finalised on 9th March, 2000. Five years
have passed since then, as per Department’s reply, efforts are being
made to update the data. The Committee would like to be apprised
when the exercise of updation would be completed. Besides the
Committee also feel that there should be some mechanism to
update the data periodically so as to know how far the efforts of
the Government could result in actual treatment of land. Besides
updation of data would also make the position of slippage of
treated land again into wastelands clear.”
15. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The exercise of updation of the Wasteland Atlas is to be completed
by the end of the current financial year i.e. 2005-06 and it would
reflect the current status of various categories of wastelands in the
country. The observation of the Committee for developing a
mechanism for periodic updation of data is valid and the
Department would examine the proposition and work out its
modalities.”

16
16. The Committee find that updation of Wasteland Atlas is still
to be completed even after finalisation of data of wastelands way
back in March, 2000. The Committee further note that their
recommendation for developing a mechanism for periodic updation
of data has principally been agreed to by the Department. The
Department has assured examination of the proposition and to
workout its modalities. The Committee would like to hear about the
final position in this regard.
E. Perspective plan for development of wastelands in the country
Recommendation (Para No. 2.42)
17. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The detailed analysis of the allocation proposed by the
Department, Budget Estimates indicating the availability of data
and expenditure position has been made in the preceding part of
the report. So far as the overall scenario of wastelands development
vis-a-vis outlay required is concerned, the Committee find that there
is an urgent need to allocate more funds to complete the
development of total wastelands in a stipulated time frame. The
Committee note that wastelands when developed can be a major
economic resource for the country. Besides there is an urgent need
for the proper and integrated planning for the purpose.”
18. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Committee has very rightly noted that the wastelands when
properly developed can be a major economic resource for the
country. The State  Governments have been asked to prepare a
district-wise Perspective Plan for their respective States for a period
of five years for tackling wastelands. This will ensure that funds
from the Ministry of Rural Development are planned judiciously
and the convergence among different programmes of the Ministry
is meaningfully implemented.”
19. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Department
pursuant to the recommendation for proper and integrated planning
for the purpose of development of wastelands in the country. The
State Governments have been asked to prepare a district-wise
perspective plan for their respective States for a period of five years
for tackling the problem of wastelands. The Committee would like
the Department to pursue the matter further with the State
Governments. The Committee again emphasise the need for an

17
integrated plan for the development of wastelands in the country
which can be a major economic resource for the country.
F. Scope of wage employment under three areas development schemes
under the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
Recommendation (Para No. 2.56)
20. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee further find that the Union Government has
brought an ambitious legislation viz. ‘The National Rural
Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ which is being examined by the
Committee. The said legislation seeks to provide 100 days of wage
employment to each BPL family in rural areas. The Committee
find that 60 per cent of expenditure under all area development
programmes goes for wage employment in the project area. Further
the impact assessment studies have indicated a favourable impact
on employment generation in the areas covered by the programmes
of the Department. The Committee observe that the watershed
programmes can help the Government in achieving the objectives
of the aforesaid legislation. The related issues will be examined in
detail while the aforesaid Bill will be examined by the Committee.
The Committee would like to recommend here that the various
revelations regarding wage employment should be discussed with
the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission and the Department
of Rural Development so as to have some integrated planning to
achieve the objectives of the aforesaid legislation.’
21. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to
the Department of Rural Development who are dealing with the
Legislation viz. The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill,
2004 so that the same could be kept in view while processing the
Bill.”
22. The Committee find that their observation regarding exploring
the possibility of using watershed programmes (60 per cent of
expenditure of which goes for wage employment) in achieving the
objectives of the National Rural Employment Guarantee legislation
has been forwarded to the nodal Department of Rural Department.
The Committee note that the said legislation has now been enacted.
In view of this, the Department should pursue the matter with the
sister Department and apprise the Committee about the stand taken
by them in this regard.

18
G. Findings of Parthasarathy Committee on review of DDP and DPAP
blocks in the country
Recommendation (Para No. 2.63)
23. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee in their earlier reports have been recommending
to review the position of DDP and DPAP blocks since these blocks
were identified a decade back. Since then the situation may have
changed. Many more blocks may need assistance under DDP and
DPAP programmes. Besides, State Governments have been
requesting for coverage of additional blocks. The Committee
appreciate that a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri S.
Parthasarathy has been appointed for this purpose. The said
Parthasarathy Committee will submit the report within six months.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the recommendations
of the said Committee when finalised.”
24. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Report of the Parthasarathy Committee is to be submitted by
31 October, 2005. The Department will be pleased to apprise the
Standing Committee of the recommendations of the Parthasarathy
Committee.”
25. The Committee find that the report of the Parthasarathy
Committee which was set up to review the position of DDP and
DPAP blocks was expected by 31 October, 2005. The Committee hope
that the report would have been finalised by now and would like
to be apprised of the findings of the said report.
H. Foreclosure of projects under IWDP , DDP , DPAP and TDET
Schemes
Recommendations (Para Nos. 3.22, 3.23, 3.54 and 3.102)
26. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note with concern the issue of foreclosure of
(IWDP) projects. They find from the data made available to them
that out of 630 projects sanctioned since 1995-96, 13 projects were
foreclosed. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details
of the funds allocated for the said projects and the stage at which
these were foreclosed. Besides the detailed reasons for foreclosure

19
of these projects should also be indicated so as to enable the
Committee to come to some meaningful conclusion on wastage of
national resources and comment further in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22)
“The Committee find from the State-wise data furnished by
the Department that certain amount has been indicated as to be
recovered and recovered from each of the States. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the details on which account the
outlay was to be recovered and recovered from these States to
enable the Committee to review the position in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.23)
“The Committee find from the data furnished by the
Department that the problems under three watershed programmes
viz. IWDP , DDP and DPAP are common. As pointed out in the
earlier part of the report relating to IWDP , the major area of concern
is foreclosure of projects. Under DPAP , 1,764 projects have been
foreclosed till date. Similarly under DDP , 300 projects have been
foreclosed till date. The Committee feel that huge national resources
are being wasted by foreclosing the projects under such important
schemes of the Department. The Committee would like to be
informed of the outlay spent on these projects, alongwith the stage
at which these projects were foreclosed. The Committee would
also like to be informed of the specific reasons for the foreclosure
of these projects so as to enable them to analyse the position and
comment further in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.54)
“With regard to foreclosure of projects, the Committee note
that this is a common problem with all the schemes related to
wastelands development. Under TDET scheme, the number of
foreclosed projects is much higher. As per the reply of the
Government, out of 148 sanctioned projects, 22 projects were
foreclosed. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons
for such a huge number of foreclosed projects. They would also
like to be apprised of the total expenditure made for these projects
so far, to enable the Committee to have an idea of the wastage of
national resources due to the foreclosure of the projects.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.102)

20
27. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“It may be clarified that a project may be foreclosed at any stage,
when there is inordinate delay in implementation of the project. When
a decision for foreclosure is taken, the subsequent instalments are
stopped and the utilisation certificate for the funds already released is
obtained. Thus there is no question of wastage  of the entire investment
made on the project. If the funds released are not properly utilized,
recoveries are effected. 13 projects were closed for various reasons
such as conflict amongst various groups, cases being sub-judice leading
to undue delay etc. In most cases, foreclosed projects are followed by
fresh projects to avoid deprivation of benefits to the people of that
area. The project-wise details are given as below:
(Rs. in Lakh)
Year of State District Area Total Funds Remarks
Sanction cost released
  1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1995-96 Bihar Nalanda 1000 40.00 6.00 Funds were given to
Rajendra Prasad
University, Pusa. As per
records, most of the
funds were utilised for
plantation etc. without
participatory approach.
University has been
asked to refund balance
amount with interest.
1996-97 M.P . Datia-II 532 21.28 17.01 Demonstration project
created by ICAR, funds
not fully utilised.
U.P . Azamgarh 7982 319.28 143.68 Performance of PIAs
not satisfactory.
U.P . Firozabad 11479 459.16 403.70 State govt. has
recommended for fore-
closure of the project.
Orissa Dhenkanal-II 2515 100.60 89.08 In absence of revised
approved work plan,
no further request for
release of next instl.
received.

21
  1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1996-97 Orissa Koraput-III 317 12.68 8.19 Demonstration project,
final Report submitted.
No further funds
sought.
1997-98 UP Unnao 12041 481.64 216.73 Performance of NGO
PIAs not satisfactory,
State Govt. black-listed
PIAs, under CBI
enquiry.
UP Raebareli-I 12100 484.00 172.60 -do-
UP Unnao-II 12054 482.16 172.32 -do-
UP Sultanpur 12039 481.56 72.23 Pr oject remained non-
starter, money refunded.
1998-99 J&K Kathua 8650 346.00 86.50 Performance of NGO
PIA not satisfactory.
CAPART has also
black-listed the NGO.
Orissa Sambalpur 1025 41.00 10.25 Sub-judice.
Replies to Recommendations (Para Nos. 3.22 & 3.23)
“Department of Land Resources has been impressing upon
programme States/DRDAs/ZPs from time to time, the need for timely
completion of ongoing projects for effective delivery of benefits to the
resource poor. Inspite of repeated efforts to improve performance
1,764 projects under DPAP and 300 projects under DDP were foreclosed
due to excessive delay in their implementation.
The reasons for delayed implementation of such projects are:
(a) time taken in understanding the new watershed approach
and selection and prioritization of watersheds
(b) delay in selecting suitable Project Implementation Agencies
(PIAs)
(c) non-availability of adequate technical support, locally, in
implementing watershed activities
(d) severe climatic conditions/difficult terrain of project sites

22
(e) local community conflicts as the projects are essentially
implemented through Community Based Organizations
(CBOs).
It may be brought to the notice of the Committee that the term
foreclosure gives an impression of total wastage of project money. The
fact of the matter, however, is that the investment made in these
projects till the time of their closure is utilized in implementing various
activities of soil conservation, water harvesting, afforestation, pasture
development, creation of livelihood opportunities, training of stake
holders, etc., and corresponding benefits are delivered to the
community. In fact, foreclosure only implies that the projects, being
slow in implementation, could not claim the entire Central share within
the prescribed period and project activities could only be implemented
to the extent of funds claimed.
Since, funds are released in 7 instalments (15%, 10%, 20%, 20%,
15%, 10% and 10%) over a period of five years, the number of
instalments claimed is the indicator of the stage of implementation.
The details regarding instalments released and total Central funds
claimed in respect of foreclosed projects are given as under:
Number of instalments and funds released in respect of
foreclosed projects DPAP
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of State Total No. of Total funds
No. Projects       Number of instalments released released
foreclosed
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 60 — — — 60 — — 390.00
2. Bihar 101 — 22 14 65 — — 540.50
3. Chhattisgarh 112 — — — — 112 896.00
4. Gujarat 27 — — — 20 7 — 186.00
5. Himachal Pradesh 00
6. J&K 32 22 10 233.00
7. Jharkhand 244 51 108 69 16 1139.00
8. Karnataka 114 21 93 973.50
9. Madhya Pradesh 00

23
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
10. Maharashtra 657 8 235 227 187 5046.50
11. Orissa 162 12 132 18 1074.00
12. Rajasthan 19 8 11 151.00
13. Tamil Nadu 40 8 12 20 296.00
14. Uttaranchal 00
15. Uttar Pradesh 61 61 549.00
16. West Bengal 135 8 127 861.50
Total 1764 51 38 142 751 382 400 12336.00
DDP
1. Haryana 50 — — — — 14 36 1033.11
2. Jammu and Kashmir 85 — — — — 61 24 1735.35
3. Karnataka 165 — 9 82 — 24 50 1760.01
Total 300 — 9 82 — 99 110 4528.47
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.54)
“Out of 148 projects sanctioned under TDET, 22 projects were
foreclosed. In this connection, it may be pointed out that pilot
projects sanctioned under TDET have the specific purpose of
validating appropriate technologies for wastelands development. If
for some reason, this focus is not maintained, certain sanctioned
projects are foreclosed since they are not expected to realise the
intended purpose. The main reasons for these foreclosures were
deviation from approved work plan, non-realisation of beneficiary/
institutional contribution, delay in further release of funds by the
implementing organizations, particularly Universities and delay in
project implementation leading to expiry of sanctioned project
period. In a few cases, all project works were completed at less
than the estimated project cost, but the projects were shown as
incomplete due to pendency of refund of unspent balances.
An amount of about Rs. 2.03 crore was released to these 22
foreclosed projects, out of which an expenditure of about Rs. 1.74
crore was made. An amount of Rs. 19.49 lakh has already been
refunded by the implementing agencies out of the unspent balance
of Rs. 29 lakh.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.102)

24
28. The Committee in their earlier recommendations had
expressed serious concerns over the foreclosure of projects under
different watershed schemes of the Department viz. IWDP , DDP ,
DPAP and TDET.
The Committee find from the information furnished by the
Department that some projects were foreclosed at the last stage when
major portion of the allocated outlay was already released. For
example under IWDP , in Firozabad Rs. 403.70 lakh out of the total
cost of Rs. 459.16 lakh were released and in case of Dhenkanal II
(Orissa) out of the total cost of Rs. 100.60 lakh Rs. 89.08 lakh were
already released. As regards the observation of the Committee with
regard to waste of national resources, the Department has responded
that the investment made in these projects is not wasted. It is utilized
in implementing various activities of some conservation, water
harvesting, aforestation, pasture development, creation of livelihood
opportunities, training of stake holders etc.
The Committee deplore the way their recommendation on such
a serious issue like fore closure of projects has been responded to
by the Department. Instead of taking certain corrective measures,
the foreclosure has been justified by the Department. On the one
hand it has been stated that the foreclosure does not amount to
national wastage, on the other hand it is stated that the reason for
foreclosure (in case of TDET projects) was non-achievement of the
intended purpose. Further, regarding recoveries the Department has
clarified on the one hand that recoveries are effected if funds released
are not properly utilised and on the other hand the reply is silent
on the recommendation of the Committee to furnish the details of
the recoveries effected from States ( refer recommendation para no.
3.23 of 10th Report-14th Lok Sabha). Further, the reason of foreclosure
of TDET projects has been stated as pendency of refund of unspent
balances.
The Committee express serious concern at the casual manner, in
which the Department has addressed such a serious issue of
foreclosure of projects. The Committee feel that foreclosure indicates
some problems in implementing the projects. As such, there is no
question of achievement of the objective of the projects. Foreclosure
certainly amounts to wastage of huge national resources of the starved
economy. The Committee while strongly reiterating their earlier
recommendation would like that the reasons for foreclosure, the stage
at which the project was foreclosed, the total cost of the project and
the funds released at the stage of foreclosure, recovery, if any, made,

25
etc. should invariably be analysed periodically and indicated in the
Budget documents like Performance Budget. A proper system of
monitoring should be evolved as suggested by the Committee in the
earlier para of the report.
I. Reviewing the funding pattern for schemes meant for land records
i.e. SRA & ULR and Computerisation of Land Records.
Recommendations (Para Nos. 3.91, 3.92 & 3.93)
29. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee find that the major problem being encountered
by some of the States viz. Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh, Uttaranchal and North Eastern States is the difficulty to
provide matching share of 50 per cent. The Committee find that in
most of the schemes of the Department of Rural Development and
Land Resources  Centre and State’s share is 75 : 25. Moreover,
another scheme related to land records viz. ‘Computerization of
Land Records’ is a 100 per cent Centrally Sponsored Scheme. The
Committee observe that land records are the important documents
not only fore individuals but also for the Government which can
be used for the purpose of making planning in different sectors.
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to review the
existing 50 per cent matching share by the State Governments.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.91)
“The Committee understand that there is a proposal to review
the existing funding pattern from 50:50 to 90:10 for North-Eastern
States and 75:25 in case of other than North-Eastern States.
The Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance should further
be pursued in this regard and the Committee be apprised
accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.92)
“The Committee further find that the 12th Finance Commission
has provided more resources for States which should enable them
to meet their matching contribution. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the details of the 12th Finance Commission’s
recommendations. The Committee note that during 2005-2006 the
allocation for SRA and ULR has been doubled to Rs. 40 crore. The
Committee strongly recommend that the Department should take
desired steps to ensure that objectives of maintenance of land

26
records are achieved in different States. The issue regarding
matching share as recommended should also be finalised
expeditiously to enable the State Governments to maintain/update
land records.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.93)
30. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“Under the 50:50 funded Scheme of SRA & ULR, financial
assistance is provided to States for construction of survey &
settlement training institutes, Patwar Ghar, Record rooms and
undertaking survey & settlement operations with the use of modern
survey equipments. However under the 100 per cent Centrally
Sponsored Scheme of CLR, funds are provided to States for
undertaking data entry work, setting up of computer centers at
tehsil/taluk and sub-division level, imparting training to Revenue
officials on application software & computerization technology.
The Committee of Revenue Secretaries of selected States
constituted by this Department under the chairmanship of Joint
Secretary, Department of Land Resources in its report has
recommended that the component of Survey & Settlement
operations with the use of Modern Survey equipments like GPS &
Total Stations which is presently being taken under the Scheme of
SRA & ULR could be made a part of the Scheme of CLR so that
updated land records data may be used for Computerization. The
other components of the Scheme of SRA & ULR will continue to
be funded on the existing pattern of 50:50.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.91)
“The matter for change in the funding pattern of the scheme
of SRA & ULR from 50:50 to 75:25 between the Centre and States
and 90:10 for the North-Eastern States was taken up with the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission in their reply
has mentioned that the 12th Finance Commission’s Report provides
more resources to states, which should assist them in meeting their
matching contribution. Therefore, the existing funding pattern of
50:50 under the scheme of SRA & ULR should continue.
The matter will further be taken up with the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance for their consideration.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.92)

27
“A copy of the summary of recommendations of the
12th Finance Commission’s is enclosed at Appendix-I.
During the conferences of Revenue Ministers/Secretaries of
States organised by this department from time-to-time, States are
being requested to undertake survey/revisional survey for creation
& continuous updation of land records & cadastral maps with the
use of latest technologies and equipments. It has also been
emphasised to States to provide their matching share of
50 per cent and also take appropriate action for modernisation of
Revenue Administration and updation of land records on regular
basis.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.93)
31. The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, while noting
the problems being faced by some of the State Governments in
providing 50 per cent of matching contribution for SRA and ULR,
had recommended to finalise the proposal of the Government to
review the funding pattern for 50:50 to 90:10 for North Eastern States
and 75:25 in cases other than North Eastern States. The Committee
had also noted the views of the Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance on the said issue according to which 12th Finance
Commission had provided more resources to the States which should
enable them to meet their matching contribution. The Department
in the action taken reply has assured to take up the matter again
with the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.
The Committee find from the details of 12th Finance Commission
recommendations that on certain specific matters like health,
education, road, bridges and local bodies etc., additional allocation
has been earmarked to State  Governments. However no additional
amount seems to have been earmarked for the purpose of land
records. The Committee further find that although two schemes  i.e.
SRA and ULR and Computerisation of  Land Records are inter-
related, the Centre-State allocation criteria is altogether different. For
Computerisation of Land Records 100 per cent Central assistance is
provided and for SRA and ULR the allocation is 50:50. The
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation in the light of the
aforesaid observations and would like the Department to take up
the matter with Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission in the
light of the above observations as well as observations made in the
earlier recommendations. The Committee may be kept apprised of
the follow up action in this regard.

28
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
The Committee after analysing the data as indicated in the aforesaid
paras of the report find that Rs. 561 crore has been allocated more
than the proposed outlay during 10th Plan. Not only that, the outlay
provided during 10th Plan is more than two times of the allocation
made during 9th Plan. The scheme-wise analysis further indicates that
the allocation during 2005-2006 has been increased in all the schemes
specifically under the schemes meant for computerisation and updation
of land records where the hike is 100 per cent. However, if allocation
scheme-wise is analysed in the context of proposed allocation, the
data indicate that excepting scheme meant for land records the
allocation provided is lesser than the proposed allocation. Further if
the trends of what was proposed scheme-wise by the Department and
what was eventually allocated scheme-wise during 10th Plan is
compared to 9th Plan, the data indicate that the differences between
proposed and agreed to allocation under each of the scheme is much
less as compared to 9th Plan.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)
With regard to the position of expenditure, the Committee note
that during 9th Plan the underspending was to the tune of Rs. 290
crore. The reasons indicated by the Department include cut imposed
by the Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimates stage. Further if the
expenditure is compared to Revised Estimates during 9th Plan, the
underspending comes to the tune of Rs. 36.48 crore. During 10th Plan
the underspending is due to lesser utilisation in North-Eastern  States.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
The Committee conclude from what has been stated above that
the data indicate quite a favourable performance of the Department as
compared to the other counterpart Departments of the Ministry of
Rural Development viz. the Department of Rural  Development and
Drinking Water Supply where the actual allocation is far less than the
proposed outlay of those Departments. The better allocation position

29
is also due to very good expenditure position shown by the Department
under several schemes. The allocation and the efforts made by the
Department need to be continued in a bigger way keeping in view
the gigantic task of huge areas falling under wastelands in the country.
The analysis in this regard has been made in the subsequent part of
the Report.
Reply of the Government
Since the recommendations contained in the above three paras are
regarding outlay and expenditure of the Department, the reply is
accordingly being furnished at one place as under:
The Committee has rightly observed that compared to the
Ninth Plan, the difference between proposed and agreed to allocation
scheme-wise during Tenth Plan is much less. Further, the reasons for
under-spending during Ninth Plan and during the first three years of
the Tenth Plan have also been correctly reflected and are acknowledged.
As rightly suggested by the Committee, efforts are being made to
seek increased allocation each year under the Area Development
Programmes viz. DPAP , DDP and IWDP so that more area falling
under the category of wastelands/degraded lands in the country could
be covered under these schemes.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.31)
There is uncertainty over the fate of another new scheme
‘Bio fuel’, for which Rs. 50 crore have been allocated during
2005-2006. The Secretary during the course of oral evidence acknowledged
that Jatropha plantation envisaged under the scheme is neither proven
nor cost effective. The use of Jatropha plant for Bio-fuel is still at the
experimental stage and TERI is preparing the project report. Not only
that, the viability of Jatropha plant and other issues relating to its
plantation like the need for irrigation, farmers willingness to plantation
etc. are still to be debated. Without examining all these issues, the
detailed Project Report (DPR) for the scheme is being prepared for
obtaining clearance from the Planning Commission. Although it is
acknowledged that no expenditure can be made under the scheme, an
allocation of Rs. 50 crore has already been made during 2005-2006,
thereby blocking the resources. While the Committee are not against
initiating novel schemes as part of energy security like Bio fuel, they

30
feel that before launching the scheme, its viability should be ascertained.
The technology should be tested and proven only then the decision to
launch the scheme should be taken and allocation for the purpose
provided.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.32)
In the aforesaid state of affairs the Committee express their strong
reservations on the issue of handling of new schemes. They stronly
recommend that before launching a new scheme Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance should analyse the proposals of the concerned
Ministry. Only after initially home work is done, and all the things are
ready for implementation, allocation should be made as blockage of
outlay earmarked for non-viable schemes deprives the other established
schemes of their due allocation. The Committee strongly recommend
that their concerns in this regard should be duly communicated to the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance and  also to the Cabinet
Secretariat.
Reply of the Government
In fact, the launching of new scheme of Bio-fuel in the
demonstration phase is intended to establish the viability and economic
feasibility of utilising the oils from Jatropha for bio-fuel production.
Keeping in view the lack of sufficient research data on various aspects
of Jatropha cultivation and the ensuing uncertainties to the farmers,
the demonstration phase of the project provided for a major component
of R&D and awareness compaigns. After the successful implementation
of the project in the demonstration phase, establishing its viability, the
project will be enlarged and implemented on a full scale.
It is submitted that the issues related to technological and economic
viability of the project have been discussed in the review meeting of
the Planning Commission. These issues will be carefully examined and
duly incorporated in the proposal that would be submitted to the
Planning Commission and the Department of Expenditure for their
approval. It may also be mentioned that a provision for a new scheme
in the Budget Estimate is one of the essential criteria for approval.
Accordingly, a provisional outlay in the budget estimate is earmarked
when it is proposed to launch a new scheme during a financial year.
However, the scheme is launched only after due approval of the
Planning Commission & the Ministry of Finance.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]

31
Recommendation (Para No. 2.46)
The Committee find that a large part of wastelands to be treated
are is in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamilnadu, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh in terms
of districts. The Committee feel that there is a need to frame a State-
wise and phase-wise programme for development of wastelands in
consultation with the concerned State Governments on priority basis.
Reply of the Government
To overcome the problem of tackling wastelands by different
departments, the Ministry of Rural Development has asked the State
Governments to prepare a district-wise Perspective Plan for their
respective States for a period of 5 years for tackling wastelands. This
will ensure that funds from the Ministry of Rural Development are
utilised for the purpose and are well reflected in a single document
avoiding commonalities amongst the different departments.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.47)
The Committee would also like to recommend to study
international experience in the field of wastelands development so as
to have exposure of the technologies and policy formulation being
made in this regard in those countries. Such a study will help the
Government to take the benefit of the positive experiences of these
countries.
Reply of the Government
The sharing of experience with other countries on watershed
management and cooperation in technology transfer would greatly
benefit the country in strengthening and improving our programmes.
The Department appreciates the recommendation of the Committee.
The officers of the Department will be sent on study tours, participation
in international seminars/workshops to benefit from the positive
experiences of those countries.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]

32
Recommendation (Para No. 2.55)
The Committee are please to note the results of impact assessment
studies commissioned by the Department in 16 States covering two
hundred districts. These studies evaluated the impact of watershed
programmes IWDP , DPAP and DDP in the areas covered. As revealed
by said studies, the programmes have positive impact on net sown
area, gross cropped area sown more than once, the increasing of option
of irrigation, fuelwood and fodder availability. Besides the studies reveal
favourable impact by way of increase in household income and wage
employment. The committee note that the favourable impact of these
studies should be widely pubicised. The various field level agencies,
State Governments, NGOs and all those involved with the watershed
programme should be made aware of the findings of the evaluation
studies. Such an exercise will definitely motivate the State Governments
and all other concerned to take more and more projects for the purpose.
Besides emphatic reports should be presented to the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance while presenting budget projections
so that adequate outlay could be provided for different schemes.
Reply of the Government
The Evaluation Studies carried out by the Ministry in respect of
the Programmes are conducted with the assistance of the State
Governments. The findings of the Evaluation Studies are shared with
the State  Governments at various fora including the workshops of
Project Directors of District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs).
The publication of these evaluation studies in periodicals, journals
will also be encouraged. The success stories of different schemes are
widely published through ‘Grameen Bharat’. The IEC Division in the
Ministry of Rural  Development takes various initiatives for wide
publicity of the programmes.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.56)
The Committee further find that the Union Government has
brought an ambitious legislation viz. ‘The National Rural Employment
Guarantee Bill, 2004’ which is being examined by the Committee. The
said legislation seeks to provide 100 days of wage employment to
each BPL family in rural areas. The Committee find that 60 per cent
of expenditure under all area development programmes goes for wage

33
employment in the project area. Further the impact assessment studies
have indicated a favourable impact on employment generation in the
areas covered by the programmes of the Department. The Committee
observe that the watershed programmes can help the Government in
achieving the objectives of the aforesaid legislation. The related issues
will be examined in detail while the aforesaid Bill will be examined
by the Committee. The Committee would like to recommend here that
the various revelations regarding wage employment should be
discussed with the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission and the
department of Rural Development so as to have some integrated
planning to achieve the objectives of the aforesaid legislation.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the
Department of Rural Development who are dealing with the Legislation
viz. The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004 so that the
same could be kept in view while processing the Bill.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.25)
The Committee find that some of the States have taken laudable
action like coordinating units at the State level as has been done by
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka and  Nagaland, identification of district level Institutions/
NGOs as has been done by Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh
need to be replicated by other States urgently. The Committee would
like the Department to take desired steps in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The need for a coordinating unit at the State level, is being
emphasised and the remaining States are being motivated for similar
action. Results are forthcoming in respect States like Orissa, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]

34
Recommendation (Para No. 3.53)
The Committee find that though the utilisation performance under
DPAP and DDP programme has been satisfactory during 9th Plan and
first three years of the current plan, a lot more is to be done in DDP
areas in some of the States. The Committee find that keeping in view
the area as large as around 199 thousand square km. in Rajasthan,
96 square km. in J&K, 55 thousand square km. in Gujarat, the quantum
of funds are barely sufficient to accomplish the task. In this connection
there is a need to enhance the funds for DPAP and DDP programmes.
The Committee hope that Government will do the needful in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources)
has been pursuing the issue of enhancing the funds for DPAP & DDP
programmes with the Planning Commission. As a result, substantial
increase has been made in the outlay for the current financial year for
both the programmes. A budget allocation of Rs. 353.00 crore for DPAP
and Rs. 268.00 crore for DDP has been made during 2005-06, as against
Rs. 300.00 crore and Rs. 215.00 crore respectively provided last year.
However, efforts will be made to impress upon the Planning
Commission, the need to enhance the investment in future so as to
cover the entire estimated and identified areas in the country within
a suitable time frame.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.55)
Another important area, the Committee would like to comment
upon is the need for active involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions
in DPAP and DDP programmes. The Committee find that Mid Term
Evaluation of DPAP and DDP programmes has indicated favourable
results in covered blocks in terms of productivity of land, vegetative
cover and water table. The Committee recommend that DPAP and
DDP projects should be so framed which may take into account the
needs of common man at grass root level.
Reply of the Government
DPAP and DDP aim at improving the economic and social
condition of the resource poor and disadvantaged sections with the

35
objectives of combating desertification and mitigating adverse effects
of drought on crops and livestock and restoration of ecological balance
in the long run.
The Watershed Development Guidelines envisage a focused role
for Panchayati Raj Institutions and greater community participation in
project planning, implementation, post project maintenance of assets
and their equitable sharing. Under the new umbrella Guidelines
“Hariyali” which have been made applicable to projects sanctioned
from 1.4.2003, an effort has been made to empower the Panchayati Raj
Institutions by giving them a pivotal role in implementation of the
programmes. The Gram Panchayats have been authorised to execute
the projects with block/Zila Panchayats to act as Project Implementation
Agencies. Thus, Department of Land Resources has taken measures to
ensure total participation of the local people, right from the planning
stage of watershed projects so that these programmes fulfil the
aspirations and the needs of the people at the grass roots level.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.73)
The Committee note that although Computerisation of Land
Records is a cent per cent Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the utilisation
position since the inception of the scheme is not very encouraging.
Out of Rs. 344.86 crore released, the utilisation position is Rs. 220.21
crore, which is approximately 65 per cent of the total funds released.
The Committee find that the scheme was recently reviewed at the
meetings of Cabinet Secretary with the State Revenue Secretaries and
Revenue Ministers. The said review found that the overall pace of
implementation of the scheme was not satisfactory. The various
shortcoming enumerated include, lack of focus given by State level
authorities to the implementing authorities, and instability of tenure of
Senior Offices of Revenue Department at the State level. The Committee
appreciate the initiative taken by the Cabinet Secretary in this regard
and would like that a follow up of the various issues, as raised at the
review meetings should be done.
Reply of the Government
The Cabinet Secretary reviewed the progress of the scheme of
Computerization of Land Records (CLR) during the Workshop of
Revenue Secretaries of States held on 13th August, 2004 at New  Delhi,
wherein he emphasized that interim milestones may be fixed for

36
completion of various activities under this scheme. The scheme was
further reviewed by Minister (RD) during the Conference of Revenue
Ministers of States held on 22.11.2004 at New Delhi wherein he
requested the State Governments that the targets fixed by this Ministry
for various activities may be achieved on a Mission Mode. The Hon’ble
Minister of Rural Development has also written to Chief Ministers of
poor performing States requesting them to give personal attention so
that the CLR project may be completed within the stipulated timeframe.
In view of the concerted efforts by this Department, the utilization
position has improved from 66% to 70% (Rs. 243.30 crore, out of the
total releases of Rs. 346.13 crore, till 31.3.2005).
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.74)
The Committee further find that at the aforesaid review meeting
convened by Cabinet Secretary , the deadline for completing the targets
was fixed. The States were divided into three categories. Category A
States were to complete the target by March, 2005, Category B States
by June, 2005 and Category C States by December, 2005. The Committee
find that even after the intervention at the level of Cabinet Secretary,
the targets were further spilled over by three months for States.
Karnataka and Goa have completed the targets. The Committee feel
that further pursuance and a more pro-active role of the Union
Government is required in this regard.  The Committee would like to
be apprised of the further development of the said targets by the
respective State Governments.
Reply of the Government
During the Conference of the Revenue Ministers of States held on
22.11.2004, some of the States requested Minister (RD) that the time
fixed for completion of various activities under the scheme of CLR
may be further extended. Accordingly, this Department extended the
time for fulfilment of targets by three months for different categories
of States.  The States of Karnataka, Goa, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat
have successfully achieved the targets. Other States like Madhya
Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, West Bengal,
Delhi and Sikkim have also completed major activities within the
stipulated time. However, the States could not stop the manual
distribution of computerized copies of Record of Rights (RoR). During
the months of May & June, 2005, this Department further reviewed

37
the progress of the implementation of the scheme of CLR with the
poor-performing States and requested them to give high priority so
that the targets fixed by this Department may be achieved within the
stipulated timeframe.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.94)
With regard to North-Eastern States, the Committee find that
cadastral survey has not been carried out and some of these States
have no proper legislation regarding land and land related matters. As
recommended earlier, these issues need to be tackled in a different
way taking into account the tribal tradition there. The Committee
recommend that the issue of land reforms should be discussed with
the concerned State Governments/local bodies so that the improvement
in the implementation of the programme can be achieved.
Reply of the Government
North-Eastern States have been requested in various fora to chalk
out an Action Plan to complete survey, re-survey and settlement
operations within a stipulated time frame. They have been requested
to submit the information about the areas which have never been
surveyed to this Department so that a strategy could be worked out
for completion of this activity at the earliest. It has also been proposed
to call a meeting of the Revenue Secretaries of States including North-
Eastern States shortly to discuss the programmes/Schemes of  Land
Reforms.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.101)
The Committee find the Technology Development Extension and
Training (TDET) Scheme, is an important scheme. The scheme aims at
operationalisation of cost effective and proven technologies for
development of various categories of wastelands as well as
dissemination of research finding and appropriate technologies for
promoting wastelands development. The Committee further note that
State  Agricultural Universities and ICAR Research Institutes are the
main implementing agencies of the Scheme. The Committee understand
from the information provided by the Department that the main

38
bottleneck in the effective implementation of the scheme is the norm
and requirement prescribed by the Finance Division. The Committee
would like the Department to simplify the said norm which are not
acceptable to the research institutes, so as to help these Institutes to
analyse the position and comment further. The Committee find that
wastelands development is one of the greatest challenge before the
Government and there is much scope in making cost effective
technology for the purpose. To achieve this objective, there is a further
need to interact with the research organizations through various
meetings, seminars and persuade them to come forward. The
Committee hope that the Department would take desired action in
this regard and apprise them accordingly.
Reply of the Government
In general, the expenditure auditing procedures prescribed by the
Finance Division for processing release proposals are also applied to
the projects sanctioned under TDET. However, the Implementing
Agencies of the TDET projects, particularly agencies like Universities,
ICAR institutes etc., have different procedures for audit than that
prescribed by the Finance Division. Keeping this in view, the
Department has now been coordinating with the Finance Division to
clear release proposals on the basis of the Audit reports submitted by
the Implementing Agencies as per their own procedures.
The Committee has rightly pointed out that there is much scope
for making cost effective technology for wastelands development and
for this purpose intensive interaction with research organizations is
necessary to persuade them to come forward. For this purpose, the
Department has been in regular contact with various research
organizations.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]

39
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 2.37)
The Committee find that total wastelands in the country is
63.85 million hectare. If forest area (under the jurisdiction of the
Ministry of Forests) and untreatable land is deducted, the total treatable
area comes to around 30 million hectares. The Committee find that as
informed earlier [reference para 2.18 of 2nd report (2004-2005)], the
Government had planned development of wastelands amounting to 40
million hectares. Further as per Wastelands Atlas there are varying
estimates of total wastelands in the country, however, no less than
37.5 million hectares are currently expected to be available for viable
treatment.
The Committee find from the position as given above that perhaps
there is no clarity on the issue of minimum wastelands that could be
developed in the country. The Committee would like the Department
to clarify the position in this regard since the data with regard to
minimum treatable wastelands is the necessary input for future
planning.
Reply of the Government
As per Wastelands Atlas of India (2000), the wastelands categories
can be broadly grouped as given below:
(i) Degraded Forests 14.07 million hectares
(ii) Non-forest wastelands
(a) Treatable wastelands 36.98 million hectares
(b) Untreatable wastelands 12.80 million hectares
Total 63.85 million hectares
The data of Land Sat imagery has been worked out at 1:50,000
scale and it can not be delineated into Government, Community and
Private wastelands. Various estimates provided by Ministry of

40
Agriculture, Planning Commission and Department of Land Resources
have different criteria for identification of wastelands as per their
requirements. For the purpose of DoLR, 36.98 mha. of treatable
wastelands is the acceptable figure for planning.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]

41
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
The Committee note that the concept of allocation of 10 per cent
exclusive outlay of each Department/Ministry of the Union Government
for North Eastern Region including Sikkim was started since 2000-2001.
After that, whenever the attention of the Department has been drawn
towards underspending, a common reply stating that allocation for
two area specific programmes DDP and DPAP is being made every
year, whereas these schemes are not in operation in these States has
been furnished. The Committee while noting the concept of allocation
for North Eastern Region find that 10 per cent lump-sum allocation of
the overall outlay of a Department is earmarked exclusively for these
areas. No scheme-wise allocation is being made. If that is the state of
affairs, the Committee fail to understand the logic of the Department
in this regard. The Committee feel that instead of furnishing such
reasons, the Department should stress upon increasing the scope of
the schemes viz. IWDP and land records. The position of land records
in said States is very poor and hence needs more attention. The detailed
analysis in this regard has been done in the subsequent part of the
report. Here the Committee would like to emphasise that the outlay
can be used for this sector after having consultations with the concerned
State Governments. The Committee would like the Department to
explain the position in view of their aforesaid observation so as to
enable them to analyse the position and comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
“The observation of the Committee for increasing the scope of the
schemes of IWDP and Land Records in the North East is very valid.
It is submitted that the Department is making all efforts in this
direction. The position of release of funds under IWDP is as follows:
(Rs. in Crore)
Year Allocation to NE States Expenditure in NE States
2002-03 82.00 56.45
2003-04 84.24 66.20
2004-05 115.00 81.43
2005-06 119.00 —

42
From the above table, it is evident that the expenditure in the NE
States under IWDP is steadily increasing. There is continuous effort to
stimulate the demand and expenditure in these States.
To increase capacity building, efforts are being made to organise
seminars and workshops. One such workshop was organised on 12th
and 13th July 2005 which was chaired by AS (LR). The States have
also been asked to prepare their perspective plans indicating their
annual projections so that advance planning for the earmarked funds
for NE States can be taken up and scarce resources are meaningfully
utilised.
During the Tenth Plan period, the performance of the Scheme of
‘Computerisation of Land Records’ in NE States is as below:
(Rupees in crore)
  Year Budget Funds earmarked Released to Balance amount
Estimate for NE States NE States in the Non-
lapsable pool
of resources
2002-03 55.00 5.00 0.08 4.92
2003-04 55.00 5.00 1.03 3.97
2004-05 50.00 6.00 1.63 4.37
2005-06 100.00 10.00 — —
Due to non-receipt of proposals from the N.E. States, funds could
not be fully utilized. The reason is that States have not utilized the
funds released during the previous years, therefore, they have not
requested for additional funds.
The performance of the Scheme on ‘Strengthening of Revenue
Administration & Updating of Land Records (SRA&ULR)’ during the
first four years of the Tenth Plan period, for the North-Eastern States
is given below:
(Rupees in crore)
  Year Budget Funds earmarked Released to Balance amount
Estimate for NE States NE States in the Non-
lapsable pool
of resources
2002-03 35.00 5.00 4.42 0.58
2003-04 35.00 5.00 4.91 0.09
2004-05 20.00 2.00 3.44 —
2005-06 40.00 4.00 2.92 —

43
It may be seen from above that the funds earmarked for the NE
States were almost fully released during 2002-03 & 2003-04. However,
during 2004-05 more than the earmarked funds were released to N.E.
States. There is scope for enhancement of outlay for the NE States
during the financial year 2005-2006 as some more States may request
for release of additional funds under the Scheme of SRA & ULR.
The Committee of Revenue Secretaries of selected States constituted
by this Department under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary,
Department of Land Resources in its report has recommended that the
component of Survey & Settlement operations with the use of modern
survey equipments like GPS & Total Stations which is presently being
taken under the 50:50 Scheme of SRA & ULR could be made a part
of the 100 per cent funded Scheme of CLR so that updated land
records data may be used for Computerisation. This will enable this
Department to utilise the funds fully earmarked for the Scheme of
CLR.”
The Committee while considering the action taken replies had
desired that the name of selected States whose Revenue Secretaries are
represented in the Committee constituted by the Department of Land
Resources for the purpose of updating of land records should be
obtained from the Department of Land Resources. The Department of
Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) vide their O.M. No.
Z-11014/1/2005-GC (Vol. II) dated 13 December, 2005 has informed
that the Revenue Secretaries/Commissioners of the following States
are represented in the said Committee:
1. Andhra Pradesh
2. Madhya Pradesh
3. Maharashtra
4. Karnataka
5. Tamil Nadu
6. Uttaranchal
7. West Bengal
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)

44
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
The scheme-wise analysis has also been made in the subsequent
part of the report. Hence the Committee may like to highlight that the
Budget document of the Department indicate that the releases to the
State Governments/implementing agencies are considered as spending.
There is no mechanism to analyse the performance of projects being
undertaken under different schemes due to long gestation period.
Further the foreclosure of projects specifically under watershed schemes
indicate that the physical performance of the projects may not be so
satisfactory as the data with regard to financial achievement indicate.
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to evolve some sort
of mechanism for evaluating the performance of different projects. Some
sort of grading indicating poor, satisfactory or very good may be
indicated against the number of projects being undertaken in various
States. Besides, another mechanism can be to have some system
indicating the projects at First stage, Second stage, Third stage etc.
Such type of analysis would enable a critical evaluation of the projects.
The Committee would like the Department to consider the said aspect
and apprise the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
There is a period of five years for completion of watershed projects
and the total project cost is released in instalments. There is an inbuilt
mechanism to monitor the fund utilization under which the next
instalment of central share is released only when more than 50 per
cent of the Central and State share released earlier has been utilised.
Hence, the number of instalments released is a parameter to determine
the performance and the implementation status of the projects.
Accordingly, the Department maintains the data of release of
instalments of each project to evaluate their performance. The analysis
of the data gives a clear picture on performance ratings of different
projects. The data is reviewed continuously and the States/Districts
which are found slow in implementation are persuaded and directed
to ensure timely implementation of projects.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)

45
Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
The Committee disapprove the way the new schemes are proposed
and outlay earmarked without any planning or preparedness on the
part of the Government resulting in blockage of outlay in the resources
starved economy of the country. They note that Rs. 1,000 crore were
earmarked during 10th Plan for the ‘New Initiative’. The two new
schemes viz. (i) Renovation of Traditional Water Bodies and (ii)
Development of Bio-fuel were to be launched. Initially Renovation of
Traditional Water Bodies was proposed to be under the Ministry of
Land Resources but finally the Ministry of Water Resources was chosen
as the Ministry to handle the aforesaid scheme. The Committee find
that the handling of watershed projects by various Ministries of the
Union Government viz. Ministries of Agriculture, Water Resources and
Land Resources is the main cause of such a state of affairs. The
Committee in their earlier reports have been expressing their concern
in this regard. The issue of convergence although decided in principle,
is being delayed by the Government.
Reply of the Government
In view of the Standing Committee’s recommendations to expedite
the issue of converging various watershed and other related
programmes as well as the concern expressed by the Committee on
the undue delay in the matter, a fresh Cabinet Note was prepared
explicitly mentioning the recommendations and concerns of the
Committee. This Cabinet Note was put up for approval in November,
2004. However, a decision was taken at the highest level not to pursue
this Cabinet Note for the present, as the Planning Commission had set
up an Inter-Ministerial Task Group for the same purpose.
The Inter-Ministerial Task Group, under the chairmanship of the
Secretary, Planning Commission, was set up by the Planning
Commission in August 2004. The Task Group Report has since been
finalised by the Planning Commission in October, 2004. The Report
recognised the need to bring all watershed programmes under one
Ministry and implement them in a mission mode. Alternatively, it was
recommended that a separate mission under the Prime Minister may
be created with four mini-missions under the Ministries of Agriculture,
Rural Development, Environment & Forests and Water Resources.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)

46
Recommendation (Para No. 2.43)
The Committee were informed that it will take 17-18 years to
develop the wastelands with the existing pace and outlay of the
Department. The Committee find that other Ministries/Departments of
the Union Government viz. Agriculture, Water Resources etc. are also
having schemes for watershed development. Huge resources are being
allocated to these Ministries also. Besides, State Governments may be
having some schemes for tackling the issue of development of
wastelands. Unless there is some sort of coordinating mechanism, no
meaningful conclusion indicating the position of coverage of wastelands
in the country can be arrived at. As indicated in the preceding para,
the final decision on the issue of convergence of the efforts being
made by Union Government cannot be arrived at even after the
concurrence of the Planning Commission in this regard. Pending
decision in this regard, the Committee may like to recommend to the
Department to evolve some sort of mechanism by which the efforts
made by several Ministries/Departments/State Governments could be
coordinated so as to have a clear cut position of scenario of wastelands
development. Only when such a data is available, a time bound
programme for tackling the issue of wastelands development can be
made.
Reply of the Government
It is true that watershed development programmes are being
implemented by various Ministries and, therefore, coordination is
needed to have a clear position on wasteland development. Ministry
of Rural Development has asked the State Governments to prepare
five-year perspective plans for each district in their States clearly
indicating the wastelands so far covered under various programmes
of the Government and the target set for the  next five years. It will
ensure convergence among different programmes of watershed
development.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.57)
Further the Committee find that ‘Hariyali’ guidelines of the
Department emphasise the convergence of all the programmes of not

47
only of Union Government but also those being implemented by the
State Governments at the field level. While appreciating the formulation
of said guidelines the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to
implement the aforesaid guidelines since the other Ministries and State
Governments are involved in this regard. There is an urgent need to
discuss and debate this issue during the various conferences, seminars
held where States Governments and other Ministries represent. Besides,
the said guidelines should be publicised widely. To motivate the State
Governments, the impact of convergence should be studied carefully
and the success of the States/districts which could have positive impact,
should be replicated in other States/districts.
Reply of the Government
The guidelines for Hariyali for implementation of watershed
development programmes have been circulated to the State
Governments. The nodal agency at District level for implementation of
Programmes/Schemes administered by the Ministry of Rural
Development is the District Rural Development Agency (DRDA).
Accordingly, the guidelines provide that the ZP/DRDA shall take all
possible measures to ensure convergence of other Programmes of the
Ministry of Rural Development in the villages chosen for the
implementation of the watershed development projects. In addition,
they are to converge programmes of similar nature of other Ministries
in the villages selected under watershed development schemes. The
issue of integrating DPAP , DDP and IWDP with their financial
allocations as additionality with related Area Development and Poverty
Alleviation Programmes such as National Watershed Development
Programme for the Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA), National Wasteland
Development Programme for Degraded Forest Lands, Food for Work
Programme, Employment Guarantee Scheme etc. is also being examined
by the Expert Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of
Shri S. Parthasarathy. The Committee would recommend a suitable
strategy for convergence of different programmes. Ministry of Rural
Development has also asked the States to prepare five-year perspective
plans for each district indicating the wastelands covered so far under
various Government programmes and the target set for the next five
years. It will ensure convergence at the district level.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)

48
Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)
The Committee note that around 65 per cent to 70 per cent of
IWDP funds are meant for committed liabilities for ongoing projects
during entire 9th Plan (1997-2002). For instance the Committee find
that during 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 out of the total outlay of
Rs. 480 crore and Rs. 430 crore the major portion of Rs. 350 crore and
Rs. 200 crore was for committed liabilities.
The Committee feel that with more and more committed liabilities
for the ongoing projects, it will be difficult to achieve the set targets
of development of wastelands. Since more and more money would be
needed for committed liabilities, it would result in lesser new projects
and similarly lesser coverage of additional wastelands.
The Committee further note that on an average the gestation period
of a project is four to five years as indicated by the Department.
However, the data show that some of the projects started in 1997,
1998 are yet to be completed. Thus a project may continue even after
completion of seven to eight years. In this scenario the Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to periodically evaluate the performance
of projects. As recommended in the earlier part of the Report, the
projects should be evaluated at certain specified stages, say first stage,
second stage and some sort of grading should be given. The Committee
urge for stricter monitoring on the lines suggested above.
Reply of the Government
It may be clarified that watershed projects are sanctioned for a
period of five years and the total project cost is released in five
instalments, i.e. only 15 per cent funds are released during first year,
30 per cent during 2nd year, 30 per cent during 3rd year, 15 per cent
during 4th year and 10 per cent during 5th year. To ensure completion
of the sanctioned projects about 65 to 70 per cent of the budget for
the Area Development Programmes is spent on ongoing projects.
Therefore, only the balance funds are utilized for sanction of new
projects after fulfilling the requirement of on-going projects. Thus
approximately 30 per cent of the total funds is utilised for sanctioning
new projects.
There is an inbuilt mechanism to monitor the fund utilisation,
under which the next instalment of Central share is released only
when more than 50 per cent of the Central and State share released
earlier, has been utilised. Hence, the number of instalments released in
a project is an indicator of the pace of implementation of the project.

49
The Department maintains the data of release of various instalments
of each project. The performance is periodically reviewed and the
States/Districts which are found slow in implementation of projects
are persuaded and directed to ensure timely completion of projects.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22)
The Committee note with concern the issue of foreclosure of
projects. They find from the data made available to them that out of
630 projects sanctioned since 1995-96, 13 projects were foreclosed. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the funds
allocated for the said projects and the stage at which these were
foreclosed. Besides the detailed reasons for foreclosure of these projects
should also be indicated so as to enable the Committee to come to
some meaningful conclusion on wastage of national resources and
comment further in this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.23)
The Committee find from the State-wise data furnished by the
Department that certain amount has been indicated as to be recovered
and recovered from each of the States. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the details on which account the outlay was to be
recovered and recovered from these States to enable the Committee to
review the position in this regard.
Reply of the Government
It may be clarified that a project may be foreclosed at any stage,
when there is inordinate delay in implementation of the project. When
a decision for foreclosure is taken, the subsequent instalments are
stopped and the utilisation certificate for the funds already released is
obtained. Thus there is no question of wastage  of the entire investment
made on the project. If the funds released are not properly utilized,
recoveries are effected.
13 projects were closed for various reasons such as conflict amongst
various groups, cases being sub-judice leading to undue delay etc. In
most cases, foreclosed projects are followed by fresh projects to avoid

50
deprivation of benefits to the people of that area. The project-wise
details are given as below:
(Rs. in Lakh)
Year State District Area Total Funds Remarks
of cost released
Sanction
12 3 4 5 6 7
1995-96 Bihar Nalanda 1000 40.00 6.00 Fu nds were given to
Rajendra Prasad
University, Pusa. As
per records, most of
the funds were utilised
for plantation etc.
without participatory
approach. Univ. has
been asked to Refund
balance amount with
Interest.
1996-97 M.P . Datia-II 532 21.28 17.01 Demonstration project
created by ICAR,
funds not fully
utilised.
U.P . Azamgarh 7982 319.28 143.68 Performance of PIAs
not satisfactory.
U.P . Firozabad 11479 459.16 403.70 State govt. has
recommended for fore-
closure of the project.
Orissa Dhenkanal II 2515 100.60 89.08 In absence of revised
approved work plan,
no further request for
release of next instl.
received.
Orissa Koraput-III 317 12.68 8.19 Demonstration project,
final Report submitted.
No further funds
sought.
1997-98 UP Unnao 12041 481.64 216.73 Performance of NGO
PIAs not Satisfactory ,
State Govt. black-listed
PIAs, under CBI
enquiry .

51
12 3 4 5 6 7
UP Raebareli-I 12100 484.00 172.60 -do-
UP Unnao-II 12054 482.16 172.32 -do-
UP Sultanpur 12039 481.56 72.23 Project remained non-
starter, money
refunded
1998-99 J&K Kathua 8650 346.00 86.50 Performance of NGO
PIA not satisfactory.
CAPART has also
black-listed the NGO.
Orissa Sambalpur 1025 41.00 10.25 Sub-judice.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.24)
The Committee further note that in North-Eastern States during
2004-2005, the number of projects sanctioned is almost half of the
number of projects sanctioned during previous year. Underspending
in North-Eastern region is the major area of concern as pointed out in
the previous Reports, and indicated in the earlier part of the report.
Not only that in North-Eastern States, 10 per cent of the allocation for
DPAP and DDP is also being made available although no DDP and
DPAP areas are there in that region. In view of the aforesaid position
there is an urgent need to sanction more and more additional projects
under IWDP in North-Eastern Areas. The Committee would like the
Department to take the desired action in this regard and apprise the
Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
As replied in earlier paragraph, the Department is making all efforts
to stimulate the demand and expenditure in North Eastern States.
More new projects have been sanctioned in subsequent years as it is
evident from the increasing expenditure. The States have also been
asked to prepare their perspective plans indicating their annual

52
projection so that advance planning can be done for the earmarked
funds for North Eastern States.”
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.54)
The Committee find from the data furnished by the Department
that the problems under three watershed programmes viz. IWDP , DDP
and DPAP are common. As pointed out in the earlier part of the
report relating to IWDP , the major area of concern is foreclosure of
projects. Under DPAP , 1,764 projects have been foreclosed till date.
Similarly under DDP , 300 projects have been foreclosed till date. The
Committee feel that huge national resources are being wasted by
foreclosing the projects under such important schemes of the
Department. The Committee would like to be informed of the outlay
spent on these projects, alongwith the stage at which these projects
were foreclosed. The Committee would also like to be informed of the
specific reasons for the foreclosure of these projects so as to enable
them to analyse the position and comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Department of Land Resources has been impressing upon
programme States/DRDAs/ZPs from time to time, the need for timely
completion of ongoing projects for effective delivery of benefits to the
resource poor. Inspite of repeated efforts to improve performance
1,764 projects under DPAP and 300 projects under DDP were foreclosed
due to excessive delay in their implementation.
The reasons for delayed implementation of such projects are:
(a) time taken in understanding the new watershed approach
and selection and prioritization of watersheds.
(b) delay in selecting suitable Project Implementation Agencies
(PIAs)
(c) non-availability of adequate technical support, locally, in
implementing watershed activities
(d) severe climatic conditions/difficult terrain of project sites

53
(e) local community conflicts as the projects are essentially
implemented through Community Based Organizations
(CBOs).
It may be brought to the notice of the Committee that the term
foreclosure gives an impression of total wastage of project money. The
fact of the matter, however, is that the investment made in these
projects till the time of their closure is utilized in implementing various
activities of soil conservation, water harvesting, afforestation, pasture
development, creation of livelihood opportunities, training of stake
holders, etc., and corresponding benefits are delivered to the
community. In fact, foreclosure only implies that the projects, being
slow in implementation, could not claim the entire Central share within
the prescribed period and project activities could only be implemented
to the extent of funds claimed.
Since, funds are released in 7 instalments (15%, 10%, 20%, 20%,
15%, 10% and 10%) over a period of five years, the number of
instalments claimed is the indicator of the stage of implementation.
The details regarding instalments released and total Central funds
claimed in respect of foreclosed projects are given as under:
Number of instalments and funds released in respect of
foreclosed projects
DPAP
Sl. Name of State Total No. of Number of instalments released Total funds
No. Projects released
foreclosed (Rs. in lakhs)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 60 — — — 60 — — 390.00
2. Bihar 101 — 22 14 65 — — 540.50
3. Chhattisgarh 112— —— —1 12 896.00
4. Gujarat 27 — — — 20 7 — 186.00
5. Himachal Pradesh 00
6. J&K 32 22 10 233.00
7. Jharkhand 244 51 108 69 16 1139.00
8. Karnataka 1142 19 3 973.50
9. Madhya Pradesh 00

54
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
10. Maharashtra 57 8 235 227 187 5046.50
11. Orissa 162 12 132 18 1074.00
12. Rajasthan 19 8 11 151.00
13. Tamil Nadu 40 8 12 20 296.00
14. Uttaranchal 00
15. Uttar Pradesh 61 61 549.00
16. West Bengal 135 8 127 861.50
Total 1764 51 38 142 751 382 400 12336.00
DDP
1. Haryana 50 — — — — 14 36 1033.11
2. Jammu and Kashmir 85 — — — — 61 24 1735.35
3. Karnataka 165 — 9 82 — 24 50 1760.01
Total 300 — 9 82 _ 99 110 4528.47
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.75)
The Committee further note that in North-Eastern States, the
implementation of programme is even worse. Out of Rs. 491.80 lakhs,
Rs. 289.22 lakhs is the utilisation position. The Committee find that
the various issues, in case of North Eastern States need to be tackled
in a different perspective keeping in view the fact that tribal ownership,
distribution and its use is governed by the tribal customs. The
Committee would like that various bottlenecks being faced in the
implementation of the scheme should be reviewed in consultation with
the State Governments and local bodies in such States which may be
in a better position to suggest the remedial action.

55
Reply of the Government
The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has written to
Chief Ministers of all the North-Eastern States to take expeditious steps
for implementation of the scheme of CLR and completion of various
activities within the timeframe fixed by this Ministry. The progress of
the scheme was further reviewed in the Ministry with the NE States
during the months of May & June, 2005. The NE States were requested
to conduct survey with the use of modern equipments and techniques
for the un-surveyed areas so that land records with ownership details
can be first prepared and then computerized. In this regard, the States
of Tripura, Sikkim, Mizoram (plain areas) and Assam have shown
considerable progress under the scheme of CLR. Out of the total
releases of Rs. 1,956.07 lakh to NE States under the Scheme of CLR,
utilization reported by these States is Rs. 1,470.36 lakh (75 per cent).
Other States were requested to speed up their implementation.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.76)
The Committee further note that another issue which need to be
tackled particularly for North-Eastern States is non-existence of land
records in some of the North-Eastern States for example Meghalaya
State and Lakshadweep Union Territory have no land records. In other
non-Eastern States too, the land records may not be proper. In view
of this scenario, the Committee feel that the success of computerization
programme depends on the position of land records in various States
and Union territories. Thus some sort of coordination should be
maintained with the two schemes of the Department SRA & ULR and
Computerisation of Land Records.
Reply of the Government
The State of Meghalaya and Union territory of Lakshadweep have
been requested to undertake survey work with the use of modern
survey equipments like GPS (Global Positioning System) and Electronic
Total Stations under the Scheme of SRA & ULR to create the land
records data and then start computerisation of land records. All the
States including the North-Eastern States have been requested to submit

56
information about un-surveyed areas, which have never been surveyed
(District/Tehsil/Revenue Village-wise), to this Department.
The Department of Land Resources, in the case of North-Eastern
States and other States where land has not been surveyed, co-ordinates
between the Schemes of SRA & ULR and Computerisation of Land
Records. The effort is to provide financial support for surveying those
areas which are not surveyed so far and, thereafter, computerise the
land records created by survey.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.91)
The Committee find that the major problem being encountered by
some of the States viz . Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand, Rajasthan,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and North Eastern States is the difficulty
to provide matching share of 50 per cent. The Committee find that in
most of the schemes of the Department of Rural Development and
Land Resources  Centre and State’s share is 75:25. Moreover, another
scheme related to land records viz. ‘Computerization of Land Records’
is a 100 per cent Centrally Sponsored Scheme. The Committee observe
that land records are the important documents not only for individuals
but also for the Government which can be used for the purpose of
making planning in different sectors. The Committee feel that there is
an urgent need to review the existing 50 per cent matching share by
the State Governments.
Reply of the Government
Under the 50:50 funded Scheme of SRA & ULR, financial assistance
is provided to States for construction of survey & settlement training
institutes, Patwar Ghar, Record Rooms and undertaking survey &
settlement operations with the use of modern survey equipments.
However under the 100 per cent Centrally Sponsored Scheme of CLR,
funds are provided to States for undertaking data entry work, setting
up of computer centres at tehsil/taluk and sub-division level, imparting
training to Revenue officials on application software & computerization
technology.

57
The Committee of Revenue Secretaries of selected States constituted
by this Department under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary,
Department of Land Resources in its report has recommended that the
component of Survey & Settlement operations with the use of Modern
Survey equipments like GPS & Total Stations which is presently being
taken under the Scheme of SRA & ULR could be made a part of the
Scheme of CLR so that updated land records data may be used for
Computerization. The other components of the Scheme of SRA & ULR
will continue to be funded on the existing pattern of 50:50.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.92)
The Committee understand that there is a proposal to review the
existing funding pattern from 50:50 to 90:10 for North-Eastern States
and 75:25 in case of other than North-Eastern States. The Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance should further be pursued in this
regard and the Committee be apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The matter for change in the funding pattern of the scheme of
SRA & ULR from 50:50 to 75:25 between the Centre and States and
90:10 for the North-Eastern States was taken up with the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission in their reply has mentioned
that the 12th Finance Commission’s Report provides more resources to
States, which should assist them in meeting their matching contribution.
Therefore, the existing funding pattern of 50:50 under the scheme of
SRA & ULR should continue.
The matter will further be taken up with the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance for their consideration.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)

58
Recommendation (Para No. 3.93)
The Committee further find that the 12th Finance Commission has
provided more resources for States which should enable them to meet
their matching contribution. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the details of the 12th Finance Commission’s recommendations. The
Committee note that during 2005-2006 the allocation for SRA and ULR
has been doubled to Rs. 40 crore. The Committee strongly recommend
that the Department should take desired steps to ensure that objectives
of maintenance of land records are achieved in different States. The
issue regarding matching share as recommended should also be
finalised expeditiously to enable the State Governments to maintain/
update land records.
Reply of the Government
A copy of the summary of recommendations of the 12th Finance
Commission’s is enclosed at Appendix-I.
During the conferences of Revenue Ministers/Secretaries of States
organised by this department from time-to-time, States are being
requested to undertake survey/revisional survey for creation &
continuous updation of land records & cadastral maps with the use of
latest technologies and equipments. It has also been emphasised to
States to provide their matching share of 50 per cent and also take
appropriate action for modernisation of Revenue Administration and
updation of land records on regular basis.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.102)
With regard to foreclosure of projects, the Committee note that
this is a common problem with all the schemes related to wastelands
development. Under TDET scheme, the number of foreclosed projects
is much higher. As per the reply of the Government, out of 148
sanctioned projects, 22 projects were foreclosed. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the reasons for such a huge number of foreclosed
projects. They would also like to be apprised of the total expenditure
made for these projects so far, to enable the Committee to have an
idea of the wastage of National resources due to the foreclosure of the
projects.

59
Reply of the Government
Out of 148 projects sanctioned under TDET, 22 projects were
foreclosed. In this connection, it may be pointed out that pilot projects
sanctioned under TDET have the specific purpose of validating
appropriate technologies for wastelands development. If for some
reason, this focus is not maintained, certain sanctioned projects are
foreclosed since they are not expected to realise the intended purpose.
The main reasons for these foreclosures were deviation from approved
work plan, non-realisation of beneficiary/institutional contribution,
delay in further release of funds by the implementing organizations,
particularly Universities and delay in project implementation leading
to expiry of sanctioned project period. In a few cases, all project works
were completed at less than the estimated project cost, but the projects
were shown as incomplete due to pendency of refund of upspent
balances.
An amount of about Rs. 2.03 crore was released to these
22 foreclosed projects, out of which an expenditure of about
Rs. 1.74 crore was made. An amount of Rs. 19.49 lakh has already
been refunded by the implementing agencies out of the unspent balance
of Rs. 29 lakh.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)

60
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
Besides the Committee find that Atlas indicating the district wise
data of wastelands by employing the scientific, remote sensing satellite
data products was finalised on 9th March, 2000. Five years have passed
since then, as per Department’s reply, efforts are being made to update
the data. The Committee would like to be apprised when the exercise
of updation would be completed. Besides the Committee also feel that
there should be some mechanism to update the data periodically so as
to know how far the efforts of the Government could result in actual
treatment of land. Besides updation of data would also make the
position of slippage of treated land again into wastelands clear.
Reply of the Government
The exercise of updation of the Wasteland Atlas is to be completed
by the end of the current financial year i.e. 2005-06 and it would
reflect the current status of various categories of wastelands in the
country. The observation of the Committee for developing a mechanism
for periodic updation of data is valid and the Department would
examine the proposition and work out its modalities.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.42)
The detailed analysis of the allocation proposed by the Department,
Budget Estimates indicating the availability of data and expenditure
position has been made in the preceding part of the report. So far as
the overall scenario of wastelands development vis-a-vis outlay required
is concerned, the Committee find that there is an urgent need to allocate
more funds to complete the development of total wastelands in a
stipulated time frame. The Committee note that wastelands when
developed can be a major economic resource for the country. Besides
there is an urgent need for the proper and integrated planning for the
purpose.

61
Reply of the Government
The Committee has very rightly noted that the wastelands when
properly developed can be a major economic resource for the country.
The State  Governments have been asked to prepare a district-wise
Perspective Plan for their respective States for a period of five years
for tackling wastelands. This will ensure that funds from the Ministry
of Rural Development are planned judiciously and the convergence
among different programmes of the Ministry is meaningfully
implemented.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.63)
The Committee in their earlier reports have been recommending
to review the position of DDP and DPAP blocks since these blocks
were identified a decade back. Since then the situation may have
changed. Many more blocks may need assistance under DDP & DPAP
programmes. Besides, State Governments have been requesting for
coverage of additional blocks. The Committee appreciate that a
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri S. Parthasarathy has been
appointed for this purpose. The said Parthasarathy Committee will
submit the report within six months. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the recommendations of the said Committee when finalised.
Reply of the Government
The Report of the Parthasarathy Committee is to be submitted by
31 October, 2005. The Department will be pleased to apprise the
Standing Committee of the recommendations of the Parthasarathy
Committee.
[Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
OM No. Z-11014/1/2004-GC, Dated : 24 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
12 December, 2005 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

62
APPENDIX I
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
12TH FINANCE COMMISSION
Plan for Restructuring Public Finances
1. By 2009-10, the combined tax-GDP ratio of the centre and the
states should be increased to 17.6 per cent, primary expenditure
to a level of 23 per cent of GDP and capital expenditure to
nearly 7 per cent of GDP .
(Para 4.52)
2. The combined debt-GDP ratio with external debt measured at
historical exchange rate should, at a minimum, be brought down
to 75 per cent by the end of 2009-10.
(Para 4.45)
3. The system of on-lending should be brought to an end over
time and the long term goal for the centre and states for the
debt-GDP ratio should be 28 per cent each.
(Para 4.45)
4. The fiscal deficit to GDP ratio targets for the centre and the
states may be fixed at 3 per cent of GDP each.
(Para 4.45)
5. The centre’s interest payment relative to revenue receipts should
reach about 28 per cent by 2009-10. In the case of states, the
level of interest payments relative to revenue receipts should
fall to about 15 per cent by 2009-10.
(Para 4.54)
6. The revenue deficit relative to GDP for the centre and the states,
for their combined as well as individual accounts should be
brought down to zero by 2008-09.
(Para 4.51)
7. States should follow a recruitment and wage policy, in a manner
such that the total salary bill relative to revenue expenditure
net of interest payments and pensions does not exceed 35 per
cent.
(Para 4.63)

63
8. Each state should enact a fiscal responsibility legislation, which
should, at a minimum, provide for
(a) eliminating revenue deficit by 2008-09;
(b) reducing fiscal deficit to 3 per cent of GSDP or its
equivalent, defined as the ratio of interest payment to
revenue receipts;
(c) bringing out annual reduction targets of revenue and fiscal
deficits;
(d) bringing out annual statement giving prospects for the state
economy and related fiscal strategy; and
(e) bringing out special statements along with the budget giving
in detail the number of employees in government, public
sector, and aided institutions and related salaries.
(Para 4.79)
Sharing of Union Tax Revenues
9. The share of the states in the net proceeds of  shareable central
taxes shall be 30.5 per cent. For this purpose, additional excise
duties in lieu of sales tax are treated as apart of the general
pool of central taxes. If the tax rental arrangement is terminated
and the states are allowed to levy sales tax (or VAT) on these
commodities without any prescribed limit, the share of the states
in the net proceeds of shareable central taxes shall be reduced
to 29.5 per cent.
(Para 7.22)
10. If any legislation is enacted in respect of service tax after the
eighty eight Constitutional amendment is notified, it must be
ensured that the revenue accruing to a state under the legislation
should not be less than the share that would accrue to it, had
the entire service tax proceeds been part of the shareable pool.
(Para 7.22)
11. The indicative amount of over all transfers to states may be
fixed at 38 per cent of the central gross revenue receipt.
(Para 7.22)
12. The states should be given a share as specified in the following
table in the net proceeds of all the shareable Union taxes in

64
each of the five financial years during the period 2005-06 to
2009-10.
(Para 7.35, 7.36)
State Share (all Share of
shareable taxes Service Tax
excluding (per cent)
service tax)
(per cent)
12 3
Andhra Pradesh 7.356 7.453
Arunachal Pradesh 0.288 0.292
Assam 3.235 3.277
Bihar 11.028 11.173
Chhattisgarh 2.654 2.689
Goa 0.259 0.262
Gujarat 3.569 3.616
Haryana 1.075 1.089
Himachal Pradesh 0.522 0.529
Jammu & Kashmir 1.297 Nil
Jharkhand 3.361 3.405
Karnataka 4.459 4.518
Kerala 2.665 2.700
Madhya Pradesh 6.711 6.799
Maharashtra 4.997 5.063
Manipur 0.362 0.367
Meghalaya 0.371 0.376
Mizoram 0.239 0.242
Nagaland 0.263 0.266
Orissa 5.161 5.229
Punjab 1.299 1.316

65
12 3
Rajasthan 5.609 5.683
Sikkim 0.227 0.230
Tamil Nadu 5.305 5.374
Tripura 0.428 0.433
Uttar Pradesh 19.264 19.517
Uttaranchal 0.939 0.952
West Bengal 7.057 7.150
All  States 100.000 100.000
Local Bodies
13. A total grant of Rs. 20000 crore for the panchayati raj institutions
and Rs. 5000 crore for the urban local bodies may be given to
the states for the period 2005-10 with inter se  distribution as
indicated in Table 8.1
(Para 8.38)
14. The PRIs should be encouraged to take over the assets relating
to water supply and sanitation and utilize the grants for repairs/
rejuvenation as also the O&M costs. The PRIs should, however,
recover at least 50 percent of the recurring costs in the form of
user charges.
(Para 8.40)
15. Out of the grants allocated for the panchayats, priority should
be given to expenditure on the O&M costs of water supply and
sanitation. This will facilitate panchayats to take over the
schemes and operate them.
(Para 8.41)
16. At least 50 per cent of the grants provided to each state for the
urban local bodies should be earmarked for the scheme of solid
waste management through public-private partnership. The
municipalities should concentrate on collection, segregation and
transportation of solid waste. The cost of these activities, whether
carried out in house or out sourced, could be met from the
grants.
(Para 8.42)

66
17. Besides expenditure on the O&M costs of water supply and
sanitation in rural areas and on the schemes of solid waste
management in urban areas, PRIs and ULBs should, out of the
grants allocated, give high priority to expenditure on creation
of data base and maintenance of accounts through the use of
modern technology and management systems, wherever possible.
Some of the modern methods like GIS (Geographic Information
Systems) for mapping of properties in urban areas and
computerization for switching over to a modern system of
financial management would go a long way in creating strong
local governments, fulfilling the spirit of the 73rd and 74th
Constitutional amendments.
(Para 8.43)
18. The States may assess the requirement of each local body on
the basis of the principles stated by us and earmark funds
accordingly out of the total allocation recommended by us.
(Para 8.43)
19. Grants have not been recommended separately for the normal
and the excluded areas under the fifth and sixth schedule of
the Constitution. The States having such areas may distribute
the grants recommended by us to all local bodies, including
those in the excluded areas, in a fair and just manner.
(Para 8.51)
20. The Central Government should not impose any condition other
than those prescribed by us, for release or utilization of these
grants, which are largely in the nature of a correction of vertical
imbalance between the Centre and the States.
(Para 8.52)
21. The normal practice of insisting on the utilization of amounts
already released before further releases are considered, may
continue and the grants may be released to a state only after
it certifies that the previous releases have been passed on to
the local bodies. The amounts due to the States in the first year
of our award period i.e. 2005-06 may be released without such
an insistence.
(Para 8.52)
22. State Governments should not take more than 15 days in
transferring the grants to local bodies after these are released
by the Central Government. The Centre should take a serious
view of any undue delay on the part of the State.
(Para 8.53)

67
23. The Central Government should take note of our views on the
issues listed in para 8.23, while formulating or revising various
policy measures. In particular, action may be taken to raise the
ceiling on profession tax.
(Para 8.23)
24. The state should adopt the best practices listed in para 8.19 to
improve the resources of the panchayats.
(Para 8.19)
25. The suggestions made by us in respect of State Finance
Commissions in paras 8.29 to 8.37 and 8.54 should be acted
upon with a view to strengthening the institution of SFCs, so
that it may play an effective role in the system of fiscal transfers
to the third tier of government.
(Para 8.29 to 8.37, 8.54)
Calamity Relief
26. The scheme of CRF be continued in its present form with
contributions from the Centre and the States in the ratio of
75:25.
(Paras 9.10, 9.11)
27. The size of the CRF for our award period is worked out at
Rs. 21333.33 crore.
(Para 9.11)
28. The scheme of NCCF may continue in its present form with
core corpus of Rs. 500 crore. The outgo from the fund may
continue to be replenished by way of collection of National
Calamity Contingent Duty and levy of special surcharges.
(Para 9.16, 9.17)
29. The definition of natural calamity , as applicable at present, may
be expanded to cover landslides. avalanches, cloud burst and
pest attacks.
(Para 9.12)
30. The Centre may continue to make allocation of foodgrains to
the needy States as a relief measure, but a transparent policy in
this regard is required to be put in place.
(Para 9.18)

68
31. A committee consisting of scientists, flood control specialists
and other experts be set up to study and map the hazards to
which several States are subject to.
(Para 9.14)
32. The provision for disaster preparedness and mitigation needs
to be built into the State plans, and not as a part of calamity
relief.
(Para 9.14)
Grants-in-aid to States
33. The system of imposing a 70:30 ratio between loans and grants
for extending plan assistance to non-special category States (10:90
in the case of special category states) should be done away
with. Instead, the centre should confine itself to extending plan
grants to the States, and leave it to the States to decide how
much they wish to borrow and from whom.
(Para 10.4)
34. A total non-plan revenue deficit grant of Rs. 56855.87 crore is
recommended during the award period for fifteen States ( vide
Table 10.4).
(Paras 10.12, 10.13)
35. Eight States have been recommended for grants amounting to
Rs. 10171.65 crore over the award period for the education sector,
with a minimum of Rs. 20 crore in a year for any eligible State
(vide Table 10.5).
(Para 10.17)
36. Seven States have been recommended for grants amounting to
Rs. 5887.08 crore over the award period for the health sector
(major heads 2210 and 2211), with a minimum of Rs. 10 crore
a year for any eligible State ( vide Table 10.6).
(Para 10.18)
37. The grants for the education and health sectors are an
additionality, over and above the normal expenditure to be
incurred by the States in these sectors. These grants should be
utilised only for the respective sectors (non-plan), i.e., major
head 2202 in the case of education and major heads 2210 and
2211 in the case of health. Conditionalities governing the releases

69
and utilisation of these grants have been specified in annexures
10.1 to 10.3. No further conditionalities should be imposed by
the Central or the State Government for the release or utilisation
of these grants. Monitoring of the expenditure relating to these
grants will rest with the State Government concerned.
(Para 10.19)
38. A grant of Rs. 15,000 crore over the award period is
recommended for maintenance of roads and bridges. This
amount will be in addition to the normal expenditure which
the States would be incurring on maintenance of roads and
bridges. This amount will be provided in equal instalments over
the last four years ( i.e., 2006-07 to 2009-10) of the award period,
so that the States get a year for making preparations to absorb
these funds.
(Para 10.21)
39. An amount of Rs. 5000 crore is recommended as grants for
maintenance of public buildings.
(Para 10.22)
40. The maintenance grants for roads and bridges, and for buildings,
are an additionality, over and above the normal maintenance
expenditure to be incurred by the States. These grants should
be released and spent in accordance with the conditionalities
indicated in annexures 10.4 to 10.6.
(Para 10.23)
41. A grant of Rs. 1000 crore spread over the award period 2005-
10 is recommended for maintenance of forests. This would be
an additionality over and above what the States would be
spending through their forest departments. It should also result
in increased expenditure to the extent of this grant, in addition
to the normal expenditure of the forest department.
(Para 10.25)
42. A grant of Rs. 625 crore spread over the award period is
recommended for heritage conservation. This grant will be used
for preservation and protection of historical monuments,
archaeological sites, public libraries, museums and archives, and
also for improving the tourist infrastructure to facilitate visits
to these sites.
(Para 10.26)

70
43. An amount of Rs. 7100 crore has been recommended as grant
for State specific needs. While these grants have been phased
out equally over the last four years, this phasing should be
taken as indicative in nature. The States may communicate the
required phasing of grants to the Central Government ( vide Table
10.11).
(Para 10.28)
Fiscal Reform Facility
44. The scheme of Fiscal Reform Facility may not continue over
the period 2005-10, as the scheme of debt relief, as described in
chapter 12 obviates the need for a separate Fiscal Reform Facility.
(Para 11.25)
Debt Relief and Corrective Measures
45. Each State must enact a fiscal responsibility legislation
prescribing specific annual targets with a view to eliminating
the revenue deficit by 2008-09 and reducing fiscal deficits based
on a path for reduction of borrowings and guarantees. Enacting
the fiscal responsibility legislation on the lines indicated in
chapter 4 will be a necessary pre-condition for availing of debt
relief.
(Para 12.36)
46. Debt relief may not be linked with performance in human
development or investment climate.
(Para 12.38)
47. The central loans to states contracted till 31.3.04 and outstanding
on 31.3.05 (amounting to Rs. 128795 crore) may be consolidated
and rescheduled for a fresh term of 20 years (resulting in
repayment in 20 equal instalments), and an interest rate of 7.5
per cent be charged on them. This will be subject to the state
enacting the fiscal responsibility legislation and will take effect
prospectively from the year in which such legislation is enacted.
(Para 12.42)
48. A debt write-off scheme linked to the reduction of revenue
deficit of States may be introduced. Under the scheme, the
repayments due from 2005-06 to 2009-10 on central loans
contracted up to 31.3.04 and recommended to be consolidated
will be eligible for write off. The quantum of write off of

71
repayment will be linked to the absolute amount by which the
revenue deficit is reduced in each successive year during the
award period. The reduction in the revenue deficit must be
cumulatively higher than the cumulative reduction attributable
to the interest relief recommended by us. Also, the fiscal deficit
of the State must be contained at least to the level of 2004-05.
In effect, if the revenue deficit is brought down to zero, the
entire repayments during the period will be written off. The
enactment of the fiscal responsibility legislation would be a
necessary pre-condition for availing the debt relief under this
scheme also with the benefit accruing prospectively. Details of
the scheme have been outlined in para 12.44
(Para 12.43)
49. The Central Government should not act as an intermediary for
future lending and allow the States to approach the market
directly. If some fiscally weak States are unable to raise funds
from the market, the Centre could borrow for the purpose of
on lending to such states, but the interest rates should remain
aligned to the marginal cost of borrowing for the Centre.
(Para 12.46)
50. External assistance may be transferred to States on the same
terms and conditions as attached to such assistance by external
funding agencies, thereby making Government of India a
financial intermediary without any gain or loss. The external
assistance passed through to States should be managed through
a separate fund in the public account.
(Para 12.49)
51. The moratorium on repayments and interest payments on the
outstanding special term loan amounting to Rs. 3772 crore as
on 31.3.2000 given to Punjab may continue for another two
years i.e. up to 2006-07, by which time the Central Government
must finalize the quantum of debt relief to be allowed in terms
of the recommendations of the EFC.
(Para 12.51)
52. In respect of relief and rehabilitation loans given to Gujarat
from ADB and World Bank through the Central Government,
the Central Government may, if the Government of Gujarat so
desires, alter the terms and conditions of these loans, so that
these are available to Gujarat on the same terms on which the
external agencies have extended these loans.
(Para 12.55)

72
53. All States should set up sinking funds for amortization of all
loans including loans from banks, liabilities on account of NSSF
etc. The fund should be maintained outside the consolidated
fund of the States and the public account and should not be
used for any other purpose, except for redemption of loans.
(Para 12.59)
54. States should set up guarantee redemption funds through
earmarked guarantee fees. This should be preceded by risk
weighing of guarantees. The quantum of contribution to the
fund should be decided accordingly.
(Para 12.60)
Profit Petroleum
55. The Union should share the profit petroleum from NELP areas
with the States from where the mineral oil and natural gas are
produced. The share should be in the ratio of 50 : 50.
(Para 13.31)
56. There need not be sharing of profits in respect of nomination
fields and non-NELP blocks.
(Para 13.32)
57. The revenues earned by the Central Government on contracts
signed under the coal bed methane policy may be shared with
the producing States in the same manner as profit petroleum.
(Para 13.33)
58. In respect of any mineral, if a loss of revenue is anticipated for
a State in the process of implementation of a policy, which
involves production sharing, a similar compensation mechanism
should be adopted by the Central Government.
(Para 13.34)
A Permanent Secretariat for the Finance Commission
59. The finance commission division of the Ministry of Finance
should be converted into a full-fledged department, serving as
the permanent secretariat for the finance commissions. This
secretariat should be vested with the powers of a full-fledged
department of the Government, with Ministry of Finance only
as its nodal ministry for the purpose of linkage with the
Parliament.
(Paras 14.6, 14.7)

73
60. The expenditure of finance commissions should be treated as
expenditure “charged” on the consolidated fund of India.
(Para 14.9)
61. A research committee should be set up with adequate funding
to organize studies relevant to fiscal federalism.
(Para 14.8)
62. The finance commissions should have a tenure of at least 3
years to enable them to do their work adequately.
(Para 14.8)
63. The Thirteenth Finance Commission should be set up at the
beginning of 2007 and appropriate and adequate arrangements
for the office and residence of the chairman and members of
the Commission must be made before the appointment of the
Commission, so that Commission’s time is not wasted in routine
administrative matters.
(Para 14.8)
Monitoring Mechanism
64. Every State should set up a high level monitoring committee
headed by the Chief Secretary with the Finance Secretary and
the Secretaries/heads of departments as members for monitoring
proper utilization of finance commission grants.
(Paras 14.11, 14.12)
65. The monitoring committee should meet at least once in every
quarter to review the utilization of the grants and to issue
directions for mid-course correction, if considered necessary.
(Para 14.12)
66. The monitoring committee should be responsible for monitoring
both financial and physical targets and for ensuring adherence
to the specific conditionalities in respect of each grant, wherever
applicable.
(Para 14.11)
67. In the beginning of the year, the monitoring committee should
approve finance commission assisted projects to be undertaken
in each sector, quantify the targets, both in physical and financial
terms and lay down the time period for achieving specific
milestones.
(Para 14.11)

74
Accounting Procedure
68. Central Government should gradually move towards accrual
basis of accounting.
(Para 14.16)
69. In the interim period, additional information in the form of
statements should be appended to the present system of cash
accounting to enable more informed decision-making. The
additional information may relate to subsidies, expenditure on
salaries, expenditure on pensions, committed liabilities,
maintenance expenditure, segregation of salary and non-salary
portions and liabilities and repayment schedule on outstanding
debts.
(Para 14.16)
70. The definition of revenue and fiscal deficits be standardized
and instructions for a uniform classification code down to the
object head may be issued to all the States.
(Para 14.17)
71. A National Institute of Public Financial Accountants be set up
by the Government of India and its charter be decided in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General.
(Para 14.18)
C. Rangarajan
Chairman
Shankar N. Acharya T. R. Prasad D. K. Srivastava
Member Member Member
G. C. Srivastava
Member Secretary
New Delhi
November 30, 2004

75
I am happy to record my deep appreciation of the unstinted
cooperation and support provided by Members of the Commission.
The Report is a joint effort and has benefited from the wealth of
knowledge and experience brought to bear on it by each Member. I
also wish to thank Shri Som Pal, who was a member of the
Commission till May, 2004. He articulated his views with great clarity
and sincerity in the various discussions that the Commission had. I
must place on record the exemplary services rendered by the Member
Secretary, Dr. G.C. Srivastava, who, besides making a substantive
contribution to the Report, provided effective leadership to the
Secretariat and organized meticulously the multifarious work related
to the Commission. His experience at the various levels of Government
was a great asset to the Commission.
New Delhi; C. Rangarajan
November 30, 2004 Chairman

76
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
EXTRACTS  OF  MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 12 DECEMBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hannan Mollah
3. Shri Dawa Narbula
4. Shri Prabodh Panda
5. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
6. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
7. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
8. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
9. Shri Penumalli Madhu
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11.D r. Gyan Prakash Pilania
12. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
SECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary

77
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 4 alongwith the draft Action Taken Report on Tenth
Report of the Committee, on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development). While
considering para No. 7 of the draft Report, the Committee desired
that name of selected States whose Revenue Secretaries are represented
in the Committee of Revenue Secretaries constituted by the Department
of Land Resources for the purpose of updation of land records be
obtained from the Department of Land Resources and incorporated
suitably in the recommendation. After deliberations the Committee
adopted the draft Action Taken Report with slight modifications.
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Action Taken Reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the minutes are not related to the subject have been kept
separately.

78
APPENDIX III
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 36
II. Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 2.31, 2.32, 2.46, 2.47,
2.55, 2.56, 3.25, 3.53, 3.55, 3.73, 3.74, 3.94
and 3.101 16
Percentage to the total recommendations (44.44%)
III. Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies:
Para No. 2.37 1
Percentage to the total recommendation (2.79%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.12, 2.16, 2.30, 2.43, 2.57, 3.21,
3.22, 3.23, 3.24, 3.54, 3.75, 3.76, 3.91, 3.92,
3.93 and 3.102 16
Percentage to the total recommendations (44.44%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.38, 2.42 and 2.63 3
Percentage to the total recommendations (8.33%)