17
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


SEVENTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF  RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 21.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 020
Price : Rs. 123.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2005-2006) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 40
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 64
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 65
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 90
APPENDICES
I. Statement showing Financial and Physical
performance of NYKs: 152(1) ................................ 96
II. Statement showing Financial and Physical
performance of NYKs: 153(2) ................................ 99
III. Statement showing Financial and Physical
performance of NYKs: 153(3) ................................ 102
IV. Statement showing Financial and Physical
performance of NYKs: 155(4) ................................ 105
V. Note on under-performing States in respect of
PMGSY ........................................................................ 108
VI. Name and place where Extension Training
Centres (ETCs) are functioning ............................. 112
VII. Extract of the minutes of the Ninth Sitting
of the Committee held on 12 December, 2005 ... 114
VIII. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Ninth
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ...... 116

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
*12. Shri Prabodh Panda
13. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri Prabodh Panda, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural Development
vide para No. 1580, Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II dated 23 August, 2005.

Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
$23. Shrimati Vanga Geetha
24. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
25. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
26. Shri Penumalli Madhu
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
4. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
6. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Committee Officer
(iv)
$Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has changed the nomination of Shrimati Vanga Geetha,
MP (RS) from Standing Committee on Industry to Standing Committee on Rural
Develpment w.e.f. 23 August, 2005 vide Committee Branch-I note dated 25.8.2005.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Seventeenth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
2004-2005 (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2005-2006)
of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development).
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
20 April, 2005. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 29 August, 2005.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
12 December, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee is given in Appendix VIII.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
12 December, 2005 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2005-2006)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of
the Department of Rural Development (Ministry or Rural Development)
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 53 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.4, 2.15, 2.19, 2.33, 2.41, 2.42, 3.13, 3.15, 3.31,
3.57, 3.63, 3.64, 3.65, 3.108, 3.109, 3.110, 3.114, 3.127, 3.128,
3.129, 3.139, 3.140, 3.141 and 3.142.
(ii) Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No. 2.5.
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.6, 2.16, 2.27, 2.28, 2.29, 2.34, 2.36, 2.46, 3.12,
3.14, 3.32, 3.33, 3.35, 3.50, 3.56, 3.69, 3.76, 3.78, 3.79, 3.80,
3.105, 3.106 and 3.107.
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.47, 3.34, 3.77, 3.103 and 3.104.
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
(i) Problem of huge unspent balances
Recommendation (Para No. 2.6)
5. The Committee had noted as below:
“One of the biggest concerns expressed by the Committee almost
every year is underutilization of resources. The aforesaid data of
under spending i.e. Rs. 337.43 crore as compared to Revised
Estimates during 9th Plan indicate the shortfall in releases by the
Union Government to States/Union territory Administrations. The
picture of under spending is more clear when we analyse the
under spending by way of huge opening balances with different
State Governments, the analysis of which has been done in the
subsequent part of the Report. Even if actual releases are taken
into consideration, the Committee feel that the amount of
Rs. 337.43 crore is a big amount in the resources starved economy
of the country. In view of the aforesaid position the Committee
hold the strong view that not even a single paise of the allocated
amount should remain as unutilized. The Committee strongly
call for more effective steps on the part of the Government in
this regard.”
6. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Ministry of Rural development shares the concern expressed
by the Committee with regard to a considerable unspent balances
and unutilized outlays under various programmes of the Ministry.
It may, however, be mentioned that there are certain practical
difficulties in fully utilizing the outlays as the programmes of
the Ministry of Rural Development are implemented at the village
level and it involves multiple agencies. It takes time for the flow
of information on the actual utilization of funds, which is required
to claim the release of next instalment. In addition to above,
there are certain other factors such as a limited time available
for the implementation of programmes in some States, natural
calamities like drought, floods etc. and elections of various
legislative and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) etc. These factors
adversely affect the pace of implementation of rural development
programmes. Further, the Ministry has to follow a strict financial
discipline in order to ensure that the funds released under various
programmes are utilized for the purpose for which it has been
released. For this purpose a comprehensive monitoring mechanism
has been put in place by the Ministry. The funds are released to
the Programme Implementing Agencies only on production of

3
proper audit reports/utilization certificates by the programme
implementing agencies. As an effort to further strengthen the
monitoring mechanism State Level and District Level Vigilance
& Monitoring Committees have been constituted with the elected
representative of the people. At the District level, these Vigilance
& Monitoring Committees are headed by the members of the
Parliament. It is hoped that with the new approach, an
improvement in the utilization of funds under rural development
programmes will be achieved.”
7. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had expressed
serious concerns over the issue of under spending on the part of
Union Government as well as huge opening balances with the
respective State  Governments under the different schemes. The
Committee had strongly recommended for effective steps on the part
of the Government to overcome the problem of underspending.
Although the Department has acknowledged the problem of under
spending, nothing concrete has been suggested to overcome the
problem. The existing monitoring mechanism as known to the
Committee has been reproduced in the replies. The Committee feel
that the problem of under spending is a serious issue for which the
remedy may be State/Scheme specific. There is an urgent need to
probe the reasons for under spending. The Committee are not
satisfied with the general reply of the Department and may like the
Department to take the effective steps after analyzing the problem
in a more detailed and analytical way. The Committee may also be
kept informed about the action taken in this regard.
(ii) Ensuring sufficient funds for Rural Development Schemes at
Budget Estimate Stage
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
8. The Committee had noted as below:
“……while noting that although the Ministry of Finance has
agreed to provide additional allocation at  Supplementary Grants
stage, the Committee feel that sanction of grants at Supplementary
Grants stage always leads to uncertainty. In view of this, they
would like that adequate outlay commensurating the targets
should be provided at Budget Estimates stage for the schemes.”
9. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as under:
“The plan outlay of the Ministry of Rural Development including
the Department of Rural Development, Department of Land

4
Resources, and Department of Drinking water supply for the
year 2005-06 is Rs. 24,480 crore which is higher than the revised
estimates for the year 2004-05 which was Rs. 18,216.40 crore. The
appropriate monitoring mechanism would help in achieving the
objectives proposed during the current year. The additional
resources would be met out through dovetailing the funds.”
10. The earlier recommendation of the Committee was based on
the information furnished by the Department according to which
the Planning Commission had allocated a total outlay of Rs. 18,334 crore
for the Department of Rural Development for the year 2005-2006.
There was reduction of outlay under certain schemes like SGRY,
SGSY, IAY, DRDA Administration and Training. When the issue of
reduction of outlay under the important schemes was raised, the
Department had informed that the Ministry of Finance had agreed
to make re-allocation/re-adjustment through re-appropriation/
Supplementary Demands during the course of the year ( refer Para
No. 2.12 of 9th Report (2005-2006). On this the Committee had
disapproved the allocation of outlay at supplementary Grants stage
since it leads to uncertainty. Instead of addressing the issue the
Department has tried to sidetrack the matter by furnishing the
consolidated data of three Departments of the Ministry. The
Committee take a serious view of the manner in which their
recommendation has been addressed by the Department. The
Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation would like
a categorical response of the Department.
(iii) Effective Monitoring Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 2.27)
11. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee strongly feel that there is an urgent need to
improve the quality of implementation and enhance the efficiency
and accountability of the monitoring mechanism as stressed by
Finance Minister in his speech while presenting the Budget for
the year 2005-06. They also note from the information furnished
by the Department that different types of monitoring mechanism
like concurrent evaluation, different types of Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees, Area Officers  Schemes etc. are in place.
The Committee further find that during 10th Plan, independent
and in-depth evaluation studies were conducted for all the major
schemes of the Department. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the details scheme-wise, of the major findings and

5
corrective action taken thereon by the Department so as to enable
them to analyse the usefulness of the system and comment further
in this regard. The Committee would also like to be informed
about the way these studies could provide an input for further
improvement in the schemes of the Department.”
12. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Ministry of Rural Development has already mentioned about
the comprehensive mechanism of Monitoring and Implementation
of various Rural Development Programmes including proper
utilisation of funds and measurement of outcomes. The Evaluation
Studies and Impact Assessment Studies conducted by the Ministry
through independent Research Organisation have greatly helped
in designing/restructuring the Rural Development Programmes
and to take adequate corrective major policy decision.”
13. The Committee in their earlier recommendation while sharing
the concern expressed by Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
had desired the details with regard to scheme-wise impact of different
evaluation studies conducted by the Department so far. The
Committee also desired to be informed about the way these studies
could provide an input for further improvement in the schemes of
the Department. The reply of the Department does not address the
issues raised by the Committee. The Department has casually
reproduced the structure of existing monitoring mechanism. Crores
of rupees are being allocated for different schemes of the Department
of Rural Development. There is a genuine concern about the need
for an effective monitoring mechanism so as to ensure that the outlay
reach to intended beneficiary. The concerns expressed by not less
than Hon’ble Finance Minister and shared by the Standing
Committee have been taken so casually by the Department. The
Committee strongly disapprove the way the Department has
responded to such serious issues. While reiterating their earlier
recommendation the Committee desire an analytical and categorical
reply of the Department.
(iv) Expeditious constitution of District and State Level Vigilance
and Monitoring Committees
Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)
14. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee note that the Ministry has introduced a system
of District and State Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees.

6
These Committees are to be constituted by the Union Ministry of
Rural Development. From the information provided by the
Department it seems that such Committees could be an effective
monitoring mechanism only in few States. Not only that, there is
confusion on the issue of constitution of such Committees.
Different data regarding the constitution of Committees were
indicated in the written note as well as during the course of oral
evidence as indicated in the preceding para of the report. The
Committee are constrained to note that if this is the state of
affairs of the Committees that were to be constituted by the
Union Government, the status of other Committees being
constituted by State Governments can be well imagined. The
Committee would like the Department to furnish a detailed note
indicating the action taken by them for early constitution of such
Committees. Besides it should be ensured that such Committees
are constituted in all States and districts without any further
delay. Further no State or Union territory should be allowed to
be exempted from constituting the said Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees. Not only that there is an urgent need to monitor
that the sittings of such Committees are held periodically as per
guidelines so as to prove an effective mechanism for effective
implementation of various schemes of the Department for which
crores of Rupees are being spent annually.”
15. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The State Governments and District  Authorities have requested
to hold meetings of the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
regularly. They have also been reminded to send information
about the meetings of the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
held. The State Governments and District Authorities are sending
the information to the Ministry.”
16. The following information/action was desired with regard to
District and State level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees in the
earlier recommendation of the Committee:
(i) a detailed note indicating the action taken by the
Department for early constitution of said Committees;
(ii) it should be ensured that said Committees at district and
State level are constituted without any further delay;

7
(iii) no State or Union territory Administration should be
exempted from constitution of such Vigilance Committees,
and
(iv) the position of sittings of the Committees as per guidelines
should be strictly monitored.
The department in the reply has not addressed even a single
issue seriously. It has casually been stated that the State and District
authorities have been requested to hold meetings and said
information is being furnished to the Department. The Committee
are really unhappy over the way their recommendation has been
responded specifically when these Committees have to be constituted
by the Union Government. The Committee feel that the Department
owes an explanation on this account.
(v) Strengthening the monitoring mechanism for different schemes/
programmes
Recommendation (Para No. 2.29)
17. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee would further like to be apprised about the
corrective action taken on the findings of the area officers under
the monitoring system of the Ministry of Rural Development.
The Committee would also like to be apprised about the number
of States/districts covered by the said scheme during the last
three years so as to enable them to analyse the usefulness of this
system and comment further in this regard. The Committee would
also like to recommend that there should be an in built
mechanism in each of the schemes for regular monitoring/
evaluation. Not only that, there should be specific allocation of
outlay for the purpose. Besides, the Committee find that there is
no system of fixing accountability. They feel that there should be
well defined system of fixing accountability and some sort of
action against the defaulter officers/agencies involved in the
implementation of the schemes/programmes to serve as a
deterrent for others. Further there is a need to have a more
transparent system for implementation of various schemes so that
the public may be well informed about the spending under
various schemes. Such a system will automatically put a pressure
on the implementing authorities to perform better and deliver
results. Gram Sabhas in this regard can be the best forum in
rural areas. There is an urgent need to strengthen the

8
Gram Sabhas so that they can function as an institution of social
audit. The Committee would like the Department to take urgent
action in this regard and inform the Committee accordingly.”
18. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“Under the Area Officers Schemes of the Ministry, 26 districts of
14 States were visited during 2002-03, 13 districts of 8 States
were visited during 2003-04 and 58 districts of 20 States were
visited by the Area Officers during 2004-05. It is further mentioned
that the guidelines of the Rural Development Programmes has
specifically emphasized the involvement of Gram Sabha in
planning, formulation of Need Based Shelf of Projects, proper
implementation of Rural development Programmes with
transparency through display of signboard of each project giving
financial details and project period. Besides the Gram Sabhas are
required to have social audit of all the projects implemented/
executed by them.”
19. The Committee find that the Department has addressed the
issues raised in their recommendation partially. The following issues
have not been touched in the replies at all:
(i) there should be an in built mechanism in each of the
schemes for regular monitoring/evaluation. Besides there
should be specific outlay for the purpose;
(ii) there should be well defined system of fixing
accountability; and
(iii) there should be more transparent system for
implementation of various schemes.
The Committee would like the detailed response of the
Department in this regard. Besides the Committee had recommended
to strengthen the Gram Sabhas. The Department instead of taking
certain steps in this regard has chosen to reproduce the existing
position in respect of the position of Gram Sabha as per the
stipulated guidelines. But nothing specific has been mentioned about
how far these guidelines are being implemented in different States.
Besides, nothing has been indicated about the action taken by the
Department to ensure that the guidelines are followed in letter and
spirit so that Gram Sabhas could really be strengthened and serve
the purpose of social audit. The Committee urge upon the
Department to take initiatives in line with their earlier
recommendation and aforesaid observations.

9
(vi) Estimation of BPL persons as per 1999-2000 survey
Recommendation (Para No. 2.34)
20. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee are further unhappy to note the decision of the
Government according to which the number of BPL persons
estimated should not exceed those of identified as per 1999-2000
survey. The Committee feel that such an arbitrarily limit of BPL
persons to be identified will do a great injustice to the genuine
BPL persons who could be debarred from certain benefits. Not
only that, it would be a major factor for providing unreasonable
authority to the agencies involved thereby inviting corruption
and malpractices. The Committee strongly recommend not to fix
any such limitations. They would also like that their concerns in
this regard should also be brought before the Planning
Commission and matter should be reviewed afresh.”
21. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“It is clarified that the States have asked to identify the number
of BPL families in accordance with the adjusted share as worked
out by the Planning Commission after detailed discussions with
them. The number of BPL families based on the adjusted share
is very close to the poverty estimates of 1993. This means that
the State Governments are having more flexibility in identifying
the total number of BPL families. The cap on the total number
of BPL families to be identified has been prescribed with the
view that the resources for the programmes are limited, therefore,
it becomes necessary to ensure that only the actually deserving
poor people get the benefits. Further, the methodology followed
for BPL Census, 2002 is based on 13 scorable socio-economic
indicators, which are more transparent. The list of BPL families
prepared on the basis of these scorable parameters is required to
be discussed and approved by the Gram Sabha before it is
submitted to the Block Level/District Level Authorities. In order
to check the corrupt practices in preparation of BPL list, the
Ministry has already issued the detailed guidelines to the State
Governments to display these lists at the prominent places of the
village so that everybody is in a position to check his position
in the BPL lists.”

10
22. The Committee have repeatedly been deploring the arbitrary
cut off limit of BPL persons by Planning Commission according to
which the number of BPL families identified through the BPL census,
2002 may not exceed the number of BPL persons estimated by the
Planning Commission during 1999-2000 for the rural sector. An
additional 10 per cent may be permitted to account for the transit
poor. Instead of conveying the concerns of the Committee to Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance, the Department has chosen to
justify the said cut off limit of BPL persons. The Committee fail to
understand how the declared BPL persons as per the prescribed
parameters in a district can be governed by a cap on the total number
of BPL families. The Committee had also noted in their earlier
recommendation that such cut off limit would be a major factor for
providing unconditional authority to the agencies involved, thereby
inviting corruption and malpractices. While reiterating the earlier
stand in this regard, the Committee would like that their concerns
should be placed before Planning  Commission/Ministry of Finance
expeditiously.
(vii) Implementation of all the schemes of Department directly by
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and release of funds meant
to PRIs
Recommendation (Para No. 2.36)
23. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee find that there is an urgent need to implement
all the schemes of the Department directly by the Panchayati Raj
Institutions in the true spirit of the mandate of the Constitution
as per article 243G of the Constitution. Besides the funds for all
the schemes should be released directly to Panchayats in the
specific accounts for the purpose. Such a system will not only
empower Panchayats but also improve the implementation of
the Progrmames. The common Implementing agency and the
funds transfer agency would further simplify the procedure and
avoid delay in transfer of funds. The Committee in their earlier
reports had also been drawing the attention of the Government
in this regard. While reiterating their earlier stand in this regard,
the Committee would like that earnest action in this regard should
be taken.”
24. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The guidelines of the Rural Development Programmes have
already incorporated for great involvement of Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs). However, the modalities for transfer of
resources under other than SGRY Scheme may be further
discussed with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.”

11
25. The Committee are unhappy to note that their important
recommendations regarding implementation of all the Schemes of
the Department directly by the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
and release of funds to PRIs has not been answered by Ministry in
the desired spirit. The Department has simply stated that the
guidelines of the rural development programmes have already
incorporated greater involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions. The
Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing on the need to
implement all the schemes by the Panchayati Raj Institutions. By
recommending this the Committee clearly mean identification,
execution and monitoring of schemes by PRIs. The Committee may
like the response of the Department in the true spirit of their
recommendation.
As regards the transfer of funds directly to PRIs, the Committee
find that some consultation is being done and the modality in this
regard is being discussed with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The
Committee hope that the final decision in this regard is taken
expeditiously. The Committee may be apprised accordingly.
(viii) Utilisation of Outlay in North Eastern Region
Recommendation (Para No. 2.46)
26. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee note from the data provided by the Department
that spending position under different schemes in North Eastern
Region has improved. But under spending still persists. The
Committee would like to take up the issue of under spending
with North-Eastern States so as to improve the position further.”
27. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“As a practice, an on going procedure is followed by the
concerned programme divisions of the Department of Rural
Development releasing funds for its various schemes as a measure
to take up the issue of under spending by monitoring its
utilization position on monthly and quarterly basis through MPRs
and QPRs and also while considering release proposals of Second
Installments funds are released on the basis of 60 per cent
utilization of the available funds and funds are further deducted
in case of late receipt of proposals from the State Government.”

12
28. The Committee deplore the way the Department has
addressed each of the issues raised in the Report. In the aforesaid
recommendation the Committee had desired to take up the matter
of underspending with North Eastern States. Instead of probing the
reasons for underspending and finding out ways and means to
improve the utilisation position, the existing procedure for transfer
of funds is reproduced. The Committee had finalised the said
recommendation after taking note of the guidelines. Inspite of the
provisions made in the guidelines, underspending persists. That is
why, the Department has been asked to take up the issue with the
North Eastern States. The Committee while reiterating their earlier
recommendation would like the Department to take concrete action
and apprise the Committee accordingly.
(ix) Revision of Centre-State allocation
Recommendation (Para No. 2.47)
29. The Committee had recommended as below:
“On the issue of revision of norms for Centre vis-a-vis State’s
allocation, the Committee find that the matter of revision of
Centre, State allocation from 75 : 25 to 90 : 10 is being taken up
with the Planning Commission. The Committee would like to
know the final decision when taken in this respect.”
30. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The matter has been taken up with the Planning Commission
and still under its consideration.”
31. The Committee note that the issue of revision of norms for
Centre-State allocation under different schemes of the Department
from 75 : 25 to 90 : 10 for North Eastern region is under consideration
with Planning Commission. The Committee would like the
Department to pursue the matter further and apprise the Committee
the final decision taken in this regard.
(x) Need for merger of SGRY and National Food for Work
Programme in 150 districts where National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme is applicable
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12)
32. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee find from the information and clarification
provided by the Department that at present National Food for

13
Work Programme along with Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
(SGRY) is being implemented in 150 selected districts. In the
remaining district  Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana is being
implemented. When the National Employment Guarantee Act will
be applicable, these two programmes will be merged together
and shall be known by the name of the Act. While noting the
aforesaid scheme of things, the Committee are at a loss to
understand the plethora of schemes with the same objective. Not
only that it is not clear where the National Employment Scheme
will be applicable, indicating clearly whether it is the replacement
of Food for Work Programme. The Committee strongly
recommend that SGRY and Food for Work programme should
be merged together in the 150 districts selected so far which will
pave the way for 100 days guarantee. The merged scheme should
be known as National Employment Guarantee Scheme which will
ultimately be proposed to take the shape of legal guarantee after
the aforesaid enactment.”
33. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“For the present, SGRY and NFFWP should be run as separate
programmes because NFFWP is confined to only 150 districts in
the country due to different programme objectives and
implementation modalities. SGRY is a broad-based wage
employment programme implemented entirely through PRIs and
forms main resource base of the PRIs for need-based infrastructure
in villages. While the need for generation of additional wage
employment is paramount, the local need-based infrastructure
such as primary schools, health centres, sanitation, etc. in villages
is a preferred choice of the village community and it would not
be desirable to deny PRIs resources altogether for such purposes.
Under NFFWP , which is being implemented by District collector,
resources should be channelised into some focus areas like water
conservation and drought proofing which is the principal problem
in some States and a major cause of backwardness of certain
regions. When the National Employment Guarantee Bill is passed
and becomes operational as a law, merger of SGRY and NFFWP
in those districts can be considered making adequate provision
for need-based village infrastructure.”
34. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had desired
the merger of SGRY and Food for Work Programme in 150 districts
which would have paved the way for National Rural Employment

14
Guarantee Scheme. The Committee are at a loss to understand the
stand of the Department in this regard. On the one hand it has
been stated that SGRY and Food for Work Programme are being
implemented by different agencies, i.e. SGRY by PRIs and Food for
Work Programme by District Collector and hence the merger is not
desirable. On the other hand, it has been stated that merger of SGRY
and NFFWP in the districts where the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme will be applicable can be considered. The
Committee note that the National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme legislation has already been enacted. The Committee
understand that Food for Work Programme is being implemented in
150 districts which may have now been converted into National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme with the enactment of the legislation.
Not only that, under the Guarantee Scheme too, PRIs may be the
main implementing agencies. The interpretation of the Department
in this scenario is not understandable. The Committee while
reiterating their earlier recommendation would like the Department
to reconsider their earlier recommendation i.e. merger of SGRY and
Food for Work Programme in the districts where Employment
Guarantee Scheme will be applicable and take the desired action.
The Committee may be kept apprised about the decision taken in
this regard.
(xi) Parameters for selection of most backward districts under
National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
35. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee further fail to understand the difference between
the most backward districts selected by the Department for the
purpose of National Food for Work Programme with those of
170 most backward districts mentioned by the Finance Minister
in his Budget speech. The Committee would like the Department
to analyse the position in this regard and furnish explanation to
the Committee. The Committee would also like to strongly
recommend that while selecting the districts for National Food
for Work Programme, it should be strictly ensured that parameters
for selection of districts are such that first of all the most
backward districts in a State get the due priority in the
Programme.”
36. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The districts under National Food for Work Programme were
selected on the basis of exercise undertaken by the Planning

15
Commission based on three para-meters namely—SC/ST
population, inverse of agricultural productivity and agricultural
wage. The districts mentioned by the Finance Minister is a later
exercise by the Planning Commission based on different para-
meters.”
37. The Committee fail to understand how two different sets of
most backward districts are being selected by two different
methodologies adopted by one body i.e. Planning Commission of
Government of India. The Committee strongly disapprove the way
how different criteria are being adopted for providing benefits for
different programmes. The Committee are in a fix to understand as
to how the most backward districts can be separately chosen for
different purposes. The Committee while expressing their strongest
concern in this regard would like to reiterate their earlier stand that
parameters for selection of districts for Food for Work Programme
now converted into National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme,
should be such that first of all most backward districts in a State
get the due priority in the Programme.
(xii) Specifying allocations and outstanding dues to Food Corporation
of India (FCI) under SGRY and NFFWP in Budget documents
Recommendation (Para No. 3.32)
38. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee find that with regard to the payment for
foodgrains component under SGRY as well as NFFWP , there is
utter confusion. They note that as per the recent decision, the
payment for foodgrains component will directly be managed by
the Ministry of Finance. As per the data reported by the Secretary
during evidence Rs. 15,000 crore is the outstanding payment to
Food Corporation of India. The Committee also note that during
2005-2006, no allocation has been indicated against the proposed
allocation of Rs. 27,375.87 crore under SGRY and Rs. 2,313 crore
under NFFWP for foodgrains component. In such a scenario the
Committee fail to understand how the Government will fulfil the
commitment of providing adequate allocation under the wage
employment programme of the Department. The Committee feel
that the specific allocation and outstanding due to Food
Corporation of India should invariably be indicated in the Budget
documents irrespective of the fact whether payment is made by

16
the Ministry of Rural Development or Ministry of Finance to the
Food Corporation of India or to the Department of Food and
Public Distribution (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
Distribution) so as to know about the clear picture of the
allocation. The Committee would like to be clearly informed how
the Government propose to arrange for the outlay for the
employment guarantee for which ambitious commitments have
been made in the National Common Minimum Programme as
well as in the Budget announcements.”
39. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“Under the proposed national Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme, the foodgrains are not essential to be given as part of
the wages.”
40. While noting that there was huge outstanding payment with
regard to the food component under SGRY and NFFWP , the
Committee had inter-alia desired:
(i) Specific allocation and outstanding due to FCI should
invariably be indicated in the Budget documents
irrespective of the fact whether payment is made by the
Ministry of Finance or by other Department of the
Government of India; and
(ii) The Committee had desired to be informed how the
Government propose to arrange the outlay for the
implementation of the National Rural Employment
Guarantee legislation.
The Committee are dismayed to note the reply of the Department
whereby it has simply been stated that under the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme, the foodgrains are not essential to
be given as part of the wages. The Committee note that their concerns
were with regard to the outstanding dues to FCI pertaining to SGRY
and NFFWP , as the national rural employment guarantee legislation
was still to be enacted by that time. Even under national rural
employment guarantee scheme there is a provision to pay part wages
in kind. The Department has further chosen to avoid the issue at
(ii) above as raised in their earlier recommendation. The Committee
disapprove the way such serious are addressed by the Department.
They desire a categorical response to both the issues referred in
their earlier recommendation.

17
(xiii) Implementation of National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP)
in Union territories
Recommendation (Para No. 3.33)
41. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee are disappointed to note the implementation of
SGRY in some of the States particularly Union territories. The
Committee are further constrained to note the reply of the
Department stating that Union territories have never utilized their
allocated resources to the fullest extent under SGRY and as such
no district under Food for Work Programme was included for
Union territories. The Committee strongly recommend to analyse
the reasons for poor performance in each of the States as indicated
in the preceding para of the report and take the corrective action
immediately. The Committee may also be kept informed about
this. The Committee are unable to understand poor performance
of SGRY in Union territories which are directly under the
administrative control of the Union Government. They would
like the explanation of the Department in this regard.”
42. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Union territories are getting resources under various schemes
and due to their small size, the demand for wage employment
is less.”
43. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had
recommended to the Department to analyse the reasons for poor
performance of SGRY. While examining Demands for Grants
2005-2006, strong concerns were expressed on the response of the
Department with regard to performance of Union territory
Administration, particularly over the reply given by the Department
that Union territories had never utilised their allocated resources to
the fullest extent under SGRY and hence not consulted while
choosing 150 most backward districts. The Committee are annoyed
to note such an evasive reply. On the part of the recommendation
relating to poor performance of SGRY in States, the Department has
chosen to remain silent. With regard to Union territory Administration
without analyzing the facts, it has been stated that the Union
territories are getting resources under various schemes and due to
their small size, the demand for wage employment is less. The
Committee would like the Department to substantiate the reasons
with facts and figures. With regard to poor performance of States
the Department may furnish the categorical response.

18
(xiv) Specific data to be obtained with regard to SGRY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.34)
44. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee are further constrained to note that out of
12 States to whom foodgrains were released under Special
Component of SGRY, only 4 States have submitted the progress
reports. Further the data submitted by the Department in case of
these States is also not clear. Foodgrains authorized indicated is
for the year 2004-2005, whereas the utilization data is cumulative
data including utilization for the year 2004-2005. Thus the
performance cannot be evaluated. The Committee would like that
the data for each year under specific item should be made
individually so as to enable the Committee to come to some
meaningful conclusion. The committee strongly recommend that
proper monitoring of data should be done for the outlay
earmarked under Special Component of SGRY so as to ensure
that the meagre resources earmarked for calamity affected areas
reach the intended calamity stricken beneficiaries. The Committee
would like the Department to collect the utilization data from
such States/District and submit before the Committee along with
the position of mandays created.”
45. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“All the State Governments concerned have been requested to
indicate utilization of quantity of foodgrains and mandays
generated with the resources given under the Special Component
of SGRY. The Committee will be informed after collecting
information from the States in this regard.”
46. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had desired
the specific data with regard to foodgrains authorized and foodgrains
utilised during 2004-2005. The Committee had also desired the
Department to collect the utilisation data from States/Union territories
and submit alongwith the position of mandays created. The replies
indicate that the specific data is being collected from the State
Governments. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
information when received from State Governments.
(xv) Additional allocation to Tsunami affected areas
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35)
47. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee further note that during 2005-2006, Rs. 360 crore
out of overall savings has been allocated additionally for Tsunami

19
affected States. The Committee strongly recommend to monitor
the utilization position in the said district/States regularly so
that the benefits reach to the targeted persons.”
48. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“Additional grants provided under SGRY for Tsunami affected
States is being monitored along with funds provided under
normal SGRY because it would be difficult for the implementing
agencies to keep separate accounts for the grants under the same
programme.”
49. During 2005-2006, Rs. 360 crore had been additionally allocated
under SGRY to Tsunami affected areas. On the recommendation of
the Committee to monitor the utilisation position, the Department
has expressed inability to monitor the utilisation position separately.
It has been stated that additional grants are being monitored
alongwith the funds provided under SGRY. The Committee are not
inclined to accept the response of the Department. The Committee
are unhappy to note that no effort has been made by the Department
to ensure that the additional assistance reach the targeted T sunami
affected areas. The Committee would like the Department to evolve
some mechanism to monitor the utilisation position separately for
additional grants released to Tsunami affected areas.
(xvi) Slow performance with regard to credit mobilization targets
under SGSY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.50)
50. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee are concerned to note a reduction of four percent
outlay under SGSY in 2005-2006 as compared to previous year
allocation at BE stage. They also note that during 10th plan the
Department has been allocated less than half of what was proposed
under SGSY. Similarly during 2005-2006, the Department has got
less than 75 per cent of the proposed outlay in this regard. A little
over Rs. 1,068 crore credit mobilization only has so far been
achieved by States and Union territories against the target of Rs.
2,508 crore during the previous year. Further alarming is the fact
that none of the States except Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan
could distribute more than 50 per cent of the credit available during
2004-2005. The Committee, therefore, conclude that the Department

20
has to blame itself for the reduction of outlay of the scheme in the
current year. They note the assurance of the Planning Commission
to restore the Central outlay of SGSY at the level of the previous
year i.e. Rs. 1,000 crore. They also note the reports of the Area
Officers regarding the reasons for poor performance of the scheme.
In this scenario the Committee urge the Government to take
corrective measures for satisfactory implementation of the scheme
and then approach the Planning Commission by which the
commission could be convinced for higher allocation under the
scheme.”
51. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Planning Commission has approved an outlay of
Rs. 1,000 crore for SGSY during 2005-06 which is same as the
outlay for the financial year 2004-05.
Realising the fact that in no single year the targeted volume of
credit has been fully mobilised, the Department has taken various
initiatives in this regard. Problems of credit flow to swarozgaries
are regularly discussed at various fora including meetings of
Central Level Coordination Committee (CLCC), Performance
Review Committee, RBI’s Monitoring Cell for PMRY & SGSY,
Project Directors Conferences etc. The issue was also discussed
in the meeting of the Central Level Coordination Committee
(CLCC) held on 7th February, 2005, where the Committee, inter-
alia, recommended that:
(i) the State Governments to regularly hold meetings of the
SGSY Implementation and Coordination Committees at State,
District and Block levels and to ensure participation of the
other concerned departments and Bankers.
(ii) RBI should expedite decision for opening new bank
branching in unbanked areas.
(iii) all loan applications pending at the close of the year should
be brought forward to the next year and decided upon.
(iv) the Committee advised the banks to take steps to achieve
the desired credit subsidy ratio.
Taking cognizance of the fact that the promotional agencies like
non-government organizations/SHPIs play a greater role in
formation and capacity building of groups, State Governments have
been advised to ensure greater involvement of such institutions.
Bank branches not achieving even 25 per cent of their credit
mobilization targets are being systematically identified and reported
to the Chief Executives of the concerned banks for timely remedial
measures.

21
To ensure effective implementation of the programme, State
Governments have been advised to hold SGSY Committee
meetings regularly at Block, District and State levels as per
prescribed frequency under SGSY guidelines.
As a result of various steps taken by the Ministry, credit
mobilization has substantially increased from Rs. 1302.96 crore in
2003-2004 to Rs. 1640.11 crore in 2004-2005 (as per the latest
reports available from the States/Union territories), an increase
of about 26 percent, as can be seen from the statement given
below:
Credit mobilised under SGSY during 2003-04 and 2004-05
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl.No.  State/Union territory 2003-2004 2004-05
12 3 4
 1. Andhra Pradesh 9013.19 9547.27
 2. Arunachal Pradesh 141.47 199.12
 3. Assam 4597.57 6108.08
 4. Bihar 18640.61 21519.77
 5. Chhattisgarh 3907.32 4582.55
 6. Goa 62.02 92.94
 7. Gujarat 3283.58 4171.79
 8. Haryana 2471.49 2884.44
 9. Himachal Pradesh 1837.69 2306.97
10. Jammu & Kashmir 1956.54 2338.65
11. Jharkhand 6230.35 5022.35
12. Karnataka 6505.04 7560.16
13. Kerala 2516.90 3046.22
14. Madhya Pradesh 9828.74 11116.53
15. Maharashtra 9948.66 11058.06
16. Manipur 0.00 0.00

22
12 3 4
17. Meghalaya 247.54 209.38
18. Mizoram 82.06 73.72
19. Nagaland 211.26 8.48
20. Orissa 7789.65 9750.10
21. Punjab 1426.12 1215.98
22. Rajasthan 7965.36 10245.10
23. Sikkim 197.48 143.67
24. Tamil Nadu 4131.44 6867.23
25. Tripura 1762.08 1511.08
26. Uttar Pradesh 20396.07 36963.40
27. Uttaranchal 1549.44 2006.85
28. West Bengal 3487.58 3338.98
29. A&N Islands 0.00 0.20
30. Daman & Diu 0.00 0.00
31. D&N Haveli 12.50 0.00
32. Lakshadweep 6.30 1.30
33. Pondicherry 89.74 120.46
Total 130295.79 164010.82
52. The Committee in their earlier recommendation while noting
a reduction of four per cent outlay under SGSY in 2005-2006 as
compared to previous year had observed that the poor performance
of the programme is the main reason for getting lesser allocation
from Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance. The Committee had
stressed upon the need for taking effective steps to improve the
implementation of the programme before approaching Planning
Commission for higher outlay.
The Committee find from the replies that certain initiatives in
the right direction have been taken by the Department due to which
credit mobilization position during 2004-2005 has improved from
Rs. 1,068 to Rs. 1,640 crore as reported while examining Demands
for Grants. Even then the achievement is far less than the target of

23
Rs. 2,508 crore. The Committee stress upon the need to continue the
said initiatives more vigorously so as to achieve the set targets under
SGSY. Besides Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance may also
be pursued for allocating higher outlay as desired by the Committee
in their earlier recommendation.
(xvii) Certification of SHG products
Recommendation (Para No. 3.56)
53. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee observe that due care has not so far been taken
by the Government either to arrange for proper certification or
for marketing of SHG products. The Committee note the reply of
the Department that some initiatives by only two States viz.
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra have been taken to facilitate
quality certification of various SHG products. They feel that these
efforts are not enough. The laboratory at Wardha cannot cater to
the need of all SHGs of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should help to establish at least
one laboratory in each region of the country that too only for
certification of SHG products, which can be replicated for
establishment of such centres in all States and Union territories
in a time bound manner later.”
54. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The quality of products produced by SGSY beneficiaries is
absolutely important to ensure sustained marketing. Therefore,
care is being taken that products which come under the category
of certification by various agencies i.e. ISI, Agmark, FPO license
should be certified accordingly. DRDAs have been directed to
facilitate process by organizing trainings to create awareness
among the Swarozgaries and ensure effective liaison with
concerned agencies to ensure certification of products. Guidelines
to utilize amount of Rs. 5 lakh earmarked for each DRDA would
be reiterated to all States for its effective implementation.
In Andhra Pradesh SGSY products have been identified for
sale through 1,100 APNA Bazar outlets. Similarly in Maharashtra
DRDAs have funded for strengthening of infrastructure by
constructing/upgrading market-sheds at Taluka Headquarters/
places of weekly bazaars, Gram Panchayats etc. Retail outlets for
display and sale of SGSY products have been established in cities

24
like Pune (Savitri), Nagpur (Samruddi) etc. Brand names have
been given to SHG products i.e. Sindhu in Sindhudurg District,
Sewagram Nisarg in Wardha DRDA Pune has started a marketing
outlet “Savitri” to provide urban markets for the SGSY products.
In Orissa, ORMAs have been created as an autonomous body
under Panchayati Raj Department with an objective to remove
all the critical gaps experienced in marketing and research of
products produced by swarozgaris under SGSY. The SGSY
products are channeled through long-term marketing tie up with
buyers. These products are also sold through institutions selling,
fairs and exhibitions.
Marketing initiatives have also been undertaken in Madhya
Pradesh and agro-based non timber forest produce and dairy
products have been selected for production/processing and
marketing by the State  Government, developing a “Vindhya
Valley” brand for all food products with a focus on purity.
In West Bengal Swayambhan is marketing outlet established in
Hooghly district. Besides serving as a marketing outlet for display
and sale of various products manufactured by SHGs, the outlet
plays facilitation role to act as a platform to share the experience
of the group members, assess market demands and production
needs besides to design development and improvement of
products. A similar marketing outlet by the name of “Prayas”
has already been established at Mahali.
RUDA—Rural non-farm Development Agency has been set up
by the Government of Rajasthan to promote rural non-farm sector.
RUDA collaborates with NPRI, Technical & Research Institute,
Design Institute, private entrepreneurs, including exports, domestic
and International Promotional Trade Agencies.”
55. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had
categorically desired the Department to help the State Governments
to establish at least one laboratory in each region of the country
only for certification of SHG products followed by such laboratories
in all States/Union territories. The Department’s response is not
specific. A general reply specifying the initiatives taken in different
States for marketing of products has been furnished. The Committee
note that certification of SGSY products is altogether essential to
enable such products to face stiff competition from finished products
produced by machines and imported goods. Besides to get the
reasonable price for SGSY products certification is necessary. The
Committee desire the specific reply on the earlier recommendation.

25
(xviii) Involvement of Nehru Yuvak Kendras (NYKs) in the
implementation of SGSY special projects
Recommendation (Para No. 3.69)
56. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee are unhappy to note the performance of SGSY
special projects. They find that Rs. 8.26 crore during 2003-2004
and Rs. 94.53 crore so far during 2004-2005 have remained
unspent. Not only that, the Government have involved in the
implementation Nehru Yuvak Kendras which are under the
administrative control of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
even though DRDAs/Zilla Parishads continue to implement rural
development schemes in all districts of the country. As admitted
by the Government, the progress of the projects being
implemented by NYKs was very slow but the pace is improving
now. The Committee fail to understand as to why the NYKs
were involved in the implementation of SGSY project specifically
when DRDAs/Zilla Parishads have been established and are
functioning in most of the districts of the country to monitor the
implementation of schemes of the Ministry. The Committee in
this regard would like the Department to furnish the reasons for
involving NYKs in the implementation of SGSY special projects.
Besides they would like to be apprised of about the details of
such projects indicating the financial and physical performance
of these projects which are being taken up by NYKs so as to
enable the Committee to ensure the reasons for their involvements
and comment further in this regard.”
57. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“Regarding the Committee’s observations on the performance of
SGSY Special projects and the unspent balances during the year
2003-04 and 2004-05, the position is clarified as follows:
The Ministry of Rural development has received proposals from
several States under Special Project Component Swarna Jayanti
Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) for approval during the last two
years. The proposals received under SGSY special projects are
first desk scrutinized to see whether the minimum requirements
of guidelines such as forwarding of projects by the State

26
Governments, commitment of the State Government for meeting
25 per cent State share, Bank’s commitment, if credit is involved,
focus on the Below Poverty Line (BPL) population, constituency
and viability of the concept etc. are being met by the proposals.
If the project proposals do not fulfill the above requirements,
they are returned to the concerned State Governments. There is
a two level system of approval of the project proposals. They are
first screened by the Project Screening Committee (PSC) headed
by the Joint Secretary (SGSY) and then approved by the Project
Approval Committee (PAC) headed by Secretary (RD) with
Adviser (Planning Commission), Additional Secretary & Financial
Advisor, Ministry of Rural Development as members. The
approval of the proposals is a continuous process. Since during
the years 2003-04 and 2004-05, many proposals did not fulfill the
prescribed requirements and thus could not get the approval of
Project Approval Committee, the amount remained unspent
during the years.
In reply to the observation of the Committee regarding the
implementation of special projects by Nehru Yuvak Kendras, it is
stated that NYKs is an autonomous body under the administrative
control of Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and they are
engaged in the Poverty Alleviation programmes with active
involvement of Youth Clubs. They are also involved in other
activities like Health, Education, Environment etc.
NYKs is the largest rural youth network in the country. The
basic objective is to bring the rural youth into the mainstream of
development as partner of development. NYKs has formed more
than two lakh youth clubs at village panchayat level in as many
as 500 districts of India and has a youth volunteers force of over
eight million.
The Youth Clubs/Mahila Mandals formed by NYKs are
involved in various developmental activities at voluntarily basis.
They have the experience of working in rural areas and pioneers
in SHG movement also. The youth clubs/mahila mandals are
forming Self Help Groups and collaborating with PRIs/DRDAs
and local bodies at local level for eradication of poverty.
Since our projects involve ground level mobilization and
interaction with the beneficiaries and NYKs have strengthened

27
on that account, NYKs were involved. NYKs have sanctioned
four projects which were to be implemented in following
14 districts:
Sl.No. Name of the District State
 1. Sarguja Chhattisgarh
 2. Kalahandi Orissa
 3. Gwalior M.P .
 4. Jagatsinghpur (Cuttack) Orissa
 5. Gumla Jharkhand
 6. Vaishali Bihar
 7. Kamrup Assam
 8. Nalbari Assam
 9. Bhopal M.P .
10. Sehore M.P .
11. Dewas M.P .
12. Hamirpur U.P .
13. Chamoli Uttaranchal
14. Nellore A.P .
In these districts, the projects are implemented as per the norms
of SGSY guidelines. District Collector is the Chairman of District
Advisory Committee of Rural Youth Initiative (DACRYI)
Committee formed for SGSY scheme by NYKs, ADC, Project
Director DRDA, Lead Bank Manager, representative of NABARD
and representative of other developmental department and public
representatives are also the member of DACRYI to guide, help
and for monitoring of SGSY projects which are being run through
NYKs.
Statements showing the financial and physical performance of
the projects implemented by the NYKs are enclosed at
Appendix I to IV .”

28
58. Regarding accumulation of unspent balances since 2003-2004
under SGSY special projects, the Committee note the vague reply of
the Department that many proposals did not fulfill the prescribed
requirements which could not get the approval of Project Approval
Committee. Hence, the amounts remained unspent. The Committee
understand that unspent balances denote the amount which could
not be released by the State Governments to the implementing
agencies. The reply of the Department indicates that the outlay could
not be released by the Department of Rural Development in the
Union Government. The Committee fail to understand how the
reason for not releasing the outlay by Union Government could
justify underspending under special projects.
The Committee in their earlier recommendation had also desired
the details of the NYKs projects indicating the financial and physical
performance of the projects so that the Committee could draw a
meaningful conclusion about implementation of special projects by
NYKs. The Department has indicated the performance in four
statements which have been given in Appendix I to IV . It could be
seen from the statements that percentage of total available funds
seem to be lesser than 25 per cent. Besides various columns in the
statement have not been filled properly and some are even left blank.
For example in the column, percentage expenditure to total available
funds certain data in lakhs has been indicated. Further, the States’
share in each of the statement has been indicated as nil whereas the
reply indicates that one of the condition for approval of special
projects is the commitment of the State Government for meeting
25 per cent State share. In view of the incomplete and vague
statements the Committee fail to understand the physical and
financial progress of the project and draw any conclusion about
continuing the projects to be implemented by NYKs. While
expressing strong concerns over the way the information is made
available, the Committee would like a detailed and categorical
response in this regard.
(xix) Inadequate outlay to end shelterlessness
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.76, 3.78, 3.79 and 3.80)
59. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee find from the data indicated above that there is
an increase of 11 per cent in the outlay provided during BE
2005-2006, but if compared to RE, there is further reduction of
outlay. As clarified by the Department, even if it is accepted that
Rs. 400 crore special assistance is provided to Bihar for

29
construction of 2.15 lakh additional houses damaged by floods is
included in the outlay, the outlay provided during 2005-2006 is
inadequate keeping in view the data of shelterlessness in the
country. As per Government’s own data 14.84 million is the
housing shortage. Not only that shortage of around 10 lakh
houses is added to it annually. The Committee find that shelter
is basic necessity of life and there is an urgent need to tackle the
issue on war footing.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.76)
“The Committee further note that the Government have started
implementing several sub-schemes hurriedly which have now
been merged with IAY from this year. They are astonished to
find that the Government have not been able to monitor the
physical progress of the sub-schemes except IAY, after these are
merged with IAY. The plea taken by the Department that these
sub-schemes are demand-driven and hence unmonitorable is
unacceptable to the Committee. When scarce resources are being
provided, it should be spent judiciously and the target and
achievements should be monitored accordingly. Therefore, the
Committee would like that the infrastructure created under all
sub-schemes of rural housing should be monitored even after
these are merged with IAY and should be reflected in the various
Budget documents.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.78)
“The Committee note that nearly 15 million families were
houseless in the rural area as per 2001 Census. In addition, about
10 lakh houses are being added to the existing shelterlessness.
The Committee also find that various parallel rural housing
schemes are being implemented by the respective State
Governments. The States of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat are
dovetailing funds with IAY. The Committee feel that there is an
urgent need for dovetailing the rural housing schemes with IAY
in the remaining States. The dovetailing of State Sector Schemes
would not only help in avoiding the problem of coordination
but would also help in having accurate data about the level of
shelterlessness in a particular State. The Committee would like
that said issue should be taken up and discussed at the various
conference/workshops and through various review meetings
conducted by the Ministry to which representatives of State
Governments participate. The Committee should also be apprised
about the deliberations and outcome of such discussions.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.79)

30
“The Committee are concerned to note that several IAY houses
have been constructed without basic necessities, like proper
ventilation, provision for windows, drinking water, toilets etc. as
found by them during their Study visit. They feel that without
the provision for basic necessities the condition of poor people
living in IAY houses can not be improved. They , therefore,
recommend that it should be ensured to provide basic necessities
in IAY houses so that poor people can live with dignity .”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.80)
60. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Government is making all efforts to end shelterlessness in
rural areas as soon as possible. With a total outlay of Rs. 2,775
crore during the current financial year 2005-2006, about
14.55 lakh houses are likely to be constructed.”
(Reply to recommendation Para No. 3.76)
“Each project sanctioned under Innovative Stream of rural
Housing and Habitat Development is being monitored and further
instalment of funds in respect of ongoing projects are released
only after examining the financial and physical progress/
achievements.”
(Reply to recommendation Para No. 3.78)
“The information has been called for from all State Governments
to know as to which of the State  Governments are implementing
parallel rural housing schemes.”
(Reply to recommendation Para No. 3.79)
“Construction of sanitary latrine and smokeless chulha is an
integral part of IAY houses. however, in case of default by any
beneficiary, an amount of Rs. 600 and Rs. 100 respectively is
deducted from the Central financial assistance. As regards
provision of ventilation, it is stated that the construction of IAY
houses is done by the beneficiary himself according to this
choice.”
(Reply to recommendation Para No. 3.80)

31
61. The Committee in their earlier recommendations had raised
serious concerns over the various issues related with the subject
‘Rural Housing’. The major issues inter-alia are as under:
(i) Adequate outlay to end shelterness in rural areas should
be provided the Government’s data indicate shortage of
around 14.84 million houses added by 10 lakh additional
houses shortage annually. The Committee emphasized on
an urgent need to tackle the issue on war footing;
(ii) Monitoring of various housing schemes merged with IAY
was stressed upon;
(iii) The dovetailing of  State sector housing schemes with the
schemes provided by the Union Government was stressed
upon. The Department was recommended to take up this
issue at various conferences/workshops/review meetings;
(iv) The Committee expressed concern over IA Y houses without
basic necessities like proper ventilation, provision of
drinking water, toilets etc. as found during the study visit
at Varanasi and Lucknow and recommended to ensure that
the basic necessities are provided in IAY housing.
The Committee are unhappy to note the vague and incomplete
replies on each of the issues raised by the Committee. On
item No. (i) the existing data of outlay earmarked and physical targets
has been furnished. The Department has not bothered to make any
analysis of the serious observations of the Committee. No efforts
seem to have been made to tackle the issue in a time bound manner.
As regards the observation of the Committee at (ii) above, the
reply of the Department is vague and incomplete. Initially at the
stage of examination of Demands for Grants, the Department had
stated that the sub-schemes merged with IAY are demand driven
and unmonitorable. Now in the action taken reply, it has been stated
that each project under Innovative Stream of Rural Housing and
Habitat Development is being monitored. The Committee find that
besides the said Innovative Stream of Rural Housing and Habitat
Development, the other schemes namely Credit-cum-Subsidy Scheme,
Rural Building Centre were also merged. There is no mention of the
aforesaid schemes. With regard to recommendation at item No. (iii),
no efforts have been made to interact with the State  Governments
so that the dovetailing of the State Sector Schemes as done by some
of the States could be achieved.

32
With regard to item No. (v), the Department did not bother to
verify the position of IAY houses, even when the serious
shortcomings Committee had been noticed and conveyed to the
Department by the Parliamentary Committee.
The Committee express serious concerns over the way the
Department has dealt with their recommendations. The Committee
would like the Department to deal with each of the issue analytically
and furnish categorical response.
(xx) Adequate outlay under ‘Bharat Nirman’
Recommendation (Para No. 3.77)
62. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee further note that ambitious targets of constructing
60 lakh houses in four years (2005-2006 to 2008-2009) have been
set up under ‘Bharat Nirman’. They feel that without adequate
funding, targets will remain only dreams. To translate such
ambitious programmes in to reality, the Committee strongly
recommend that adequate outlay should be provided. Ministry
of Finance/Planning Commission should be approached for
adequate funding. The Committee would like to be apprised of
their reaction. with regard to special allocation of Rs. 400 crore
as provided to Bihar for construction of 2.15 lakh additional
houses damaged by floods, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the physical achievement in this regard.”
63. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Planning Commission has been approached to provide
adequate funds under IAY for construction of 15 lakh houses
annually under ‘Bharat Nirman’ Programme. As regards special
allocation of Rs. 400 crore to Bihar, the State Government has
been asked to furnish physical achievements in this regard.”
64. On the recommendation of the Committee to provide adequate
outlay for the ambitious programme ‘Bharat Nirman’, it is noted
from the replies of the Ministry that Planning Commission has been
requested to provide adequate outlay. The Committee would like
the Department to pursue the matter with the Planning Commission
in this regard. On the issue of monitoring of special allocation made
to Bihar for additional houses damaged by floods, the Department

33
in pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee has asked
the Government of Bihar to furnish the data of physical achievement.
The Committee would like to monitor the financial and physical
achievements and apprise the Committee.
(xxi) Augmenting available resources for PMGSY
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.103 and 3.104)
65. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee note that a laudable programme was launched
by the Government on 25 December, 2000 with the objective to
provide road connectivity, through good all weather roads to all
unconnected rural habitations with a population of 1000 or more
by 2003 an those habitations having population of more than
500 persons by the year 2007. As per the revised estimates under
‘Bharat Nirman’ the habitations having population of 1000
(or 500 in hilly, tribal areas) are now proposed to be covered by
2009. The earlier estimates of outlay required were for Rs. 60,000
crore. As per Economic Survey, now the said projections have
increased to Rs. 1,33,000 crore. Further if the objective set under
‘Bharat Nirman’ i.e. to upgrade and renew a portion of the Core
Net Work is included, as the Government’s estimates, an outlay
of Rs. 48,000 crore will be required during next four years which
implies an annual allocation of Rs. 9,600 crore against the current
budget of Rs. 4,235 during 2005-06.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.103)
“The Committee find from what has been stated above, that the
targets of connectivity cannot be achieved with present level of
allocation. They also find that due to spillover of targets, the
estimates of required outlay have considerably increased. The
present estimates of requirement of Rs. 48,000 crore for four years
may further enhance, if the set targets are not achieved as per
the revised date of coverage of habitation population of 1000  i.e.
by the year 2009. Thus the Committee conclude that inadequate
financial resources is the biggest concern. For augmenting
resources for the programme, the Committee suggest the
following:
(i) the projections made by the Department during 2005-06 do
not correspond to the annual requirement of outlay to
achieve the objective of Bharat Nirman. The Department in

34
fact got Rs. 595 crore more than the projected outlay during
2005-2006. The projections made by the Department
should commensurate to the overall projections of the
Government.
(ii) there is enough scope to tap external funding from ADB/
World Bank. More efforts need to be made to explore the
potential for augmenting available resources with external
funding.
(iii) The Committee in their earlier report ( refer paragraph
No. 3.126 of 3rd Report—14th Lok Sabha) had expressed
their concern over not allocating funds on account of
increase in diesel cess. As reported by the Department, the
arrears amounting to Rs. 2,500 crore on account of additional
cess imposed since 2003-2004 have not been allocated to the
Department. Besides, during the current year i.e. 2005-2006
although there is a proposal to increase the cess on petrol
and diesel by 50 paise per litre, the additional resources are
proposed to be exclusively earmarked for the National
Highways. Keeping in view the escalation in cost of
construction roads due to spillover of the targets as stated
above, at least 50 percent of the additional resources to be
procured by the additional cess should be made available
for PMGSY.
(iv) As replied by the Department a proposal has been moved
to amend the Central Road Fund Act to enable cess funds
to be used for repaying loans taken for constructing and
upgrading rural roads to facilitate leverage of the cess in
the domestic capital market. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to finalise the aforesaid
proposal which may enable the Government to leverage long
term funds from the domestic capital market.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.104)
66. The Government in the action taken replies to recommendation
para Nos. 3.103 and 3.104 have stated as under:
“At present, the PMGSY programme is being funded from
(a) Accruals from the cess on High Speed Diesel (HSD) and
(b) Borrowings from the World Bank and Asian Development
Bank (ADB).

35
For the year 2005-06, the Department had projected a requirement
of Rs. 7,240 crore, including Rs. 1,250 crore for World Bank/ADB
projects. This projection was based on the likely accruals from
Diesel cess and likely flow for World Bank/ADB funding.
For Bharat Nirman, fund requirement is estimated at Rs. 48,000 crore
over the next five years period (till 2009). The bulk of funding
will be required for 19 States comprising the 10 Core States
(Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West
Bengal), the 7 NE States and 2 Hill States. In the meeting of the
National Committee on Rural Infrastructure held on 16th May,
2005 under the Chairmanship of the hon’ble Prime Minister, it
was concluded that after taking into account likely availability of
funding through Cess on High Speed Diesel at the current rates
and after factoring in three ADB loans and two World Bank
credits, there is a net gap of Rs. 17,835 crore upto 2009-2010. The
Committee has desired that the Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission locate the funds necessary to meet the gap in
consultation with the Ministry. Discussions have taken place on
8th June 2005 and final response of the Finance Ministry and
Planning Commission is awaited.
Separately Department of Economic Affairs has been requested
that the ADB’s Rural Roads Sector Projects (RRSP)-III loan of
US $350 million due in 2007 be clubbed with the RRSP-II for
US $400 million currently under negotiation, to make loan size a
more goal-oriented size of US $750 million.
Ministry of Finance has also been requested to ask the World
Bank to start discussion on a second loan and to increase the
loan size from the current $570m to $750m.
Amendment to Central Road Fund Act is required to enable States
to leverage their cess allocation to raise funds to meet their
requirement of modernizing and augmenting the rural roads
network and to repay the loan. Further action will be taken after
the final decision of the Rural Infrastructure Committee.”
67. The Committee find that pursuant to their recommendation,
the Department is pursuing with the Ministry of Finance to tap all
available sources as suggested by the Committee. The Committee
would like the Department to continue the efforts and apprise about
the final decision taken in this regard.

36
(xxii) Maintenance and upgradation of roads constructed under
PMGSY
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.105, 3.106 and 3.107)
68. The Committee had recommended as below:
“While recommending for higher outlay , the Committee feel that
there is an urgent need to take stringent steps for the better and
effective implementation of the programme. As stated above, the
performance of the projects taken under I to IV stages of PMGSY
is not satisfactory in some of the States. The problems as stated
by the Department are manifold like institutional problems, and
procedural delays etc. The Committee would like that the State—
specific problems in the under performing States should be
analysed critically and the corrective action taken thereon. The
Committee may also be apprised in this regard.”
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.105)
“The Committee further note that the guidelines of the Yojana
provide for the maintenance of roads. The roads constructed
under PMGSY will be maintained by the Project Implementing
Units and after that the maintenance will be taken over by the
PRI designated for the purpose. The State authorities are also
required to furnish an undertaking that they would remit to the
identified PRI from the State Government funds, the requisite
cost of maintenance. The Committee find that although an
elaborate system has been indicated in the guidelines for the
maintenance of roads constructed under PMGSY there is an
urgent need that these provisions are strictly adhered to by the
State Governments. The Committee would like the Department
to take the desired steps in this regard and apprise them
accordingly.”
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.106)
“The Committee note that PMGSY was envisaged with a laudable
objective of providing connectivity to not connected habitations.
The guidelines of the Yojana provides for upgradation of roads
up to 20 per cent of the State’s allocation where unconnected
habitations still exist. The Committee also note that although it
has been indicated in the guidelines that upgradation is not
central to the Programme, there is a need to monitor and ensure
that the main emphasis of Yojana is to provide new connectivity

37
so that the main objective of starting the Yojana is not sidelined.
The Committee therefore like the Department to strictly monitor
the position in this regard. Besides the Committee would like to
be apprised to the data indicating the per cent allocation and
expenditure made on new connectivity as well as on maintenance
scheme-wise, year-wise and State and Union Territory-wise.”
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3.107)
69. The Government in the action taken replies to recommendation
paragraph Nos. 3.105, 3.106 and 3.107 have stated as under:
“The Department has analysed the issues in the under-performing
States and a critical note is enclosed at Appendix-V .
The maintenance provisions are strictly adhered to from
Phase III (2003-04) onwards since they are governed by contracts
enforceable in a Court of Law. The Department regularly reviews
the status of maintenance budgeting and funding during
Empowered Committee meetings, Regional Review meetings etc.
Fresh proposals for road works are approved only after requisite
provisions for maintenance are made by the State Government
concerned.
While considering the project proposals of States, the Department
invariably examines the percentage of funds allocated for
upgradation works to ensure that the guidelines in this regard
are strictly adhered to.
The works of Phase I and Phase II were awarded with a 5 year
defect-free guarantee from the contractors. The 5 years
maintenance clause has been included in the Contracts from
Phase III onwards. The Phase III works would be completed by
2004-05 or later and, therefore, provision for contract maintenance
would be made in the budget of the States from the year
2005-06 onwards. Expenditure on maintenance during 2005-06 will
be available in 2006-07”.
70. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had observed
as under:
(i) while noting the elaborate system of maintenance as
indicated in the guidelines, the Committee desired that
these provisions be strictly adhered to;

38
(ii) the Committee desired the data indicating the percent
allocation and expenditure made on new connectivity as
well as on maintenance scheme-wise, year-wise and State
and Union territory-wise.
With regard to item at (i) above the Committee are surprised to
note that five years maintenance clause has been included in the
contracts from Phase III onwards. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the reasons for not adhering to the guidelines while
sanctioning projects at Phase I and Phase II, so as to enable them
to analyse the position in a better way.
As regards the issue at item (ii) above, the Department has
furnished the vague and incomplete reply stating that the Department
invariably examines the percentage of funds allocated for upgradation
work. The Committee while deploring the way the response has
been made would like the categorical response indicating the desired
data  State, Union territory-wise.
(xxiii) Preparation of Core Network under PMGSY in Bihar
Recommendation (Para No. 3.110)
71. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee further find that in Bihar so far  District Road
Plans have not been prepared. They would like to know the
reasons for delay in preparing DRPs, specifically when the Central
Agency has been inducted as the executing agency in that State.”
72. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“Preparation of DRRP and Core Network is the responsibility of
the State Government and has to be done as per guidelines
circulated to all States in 2001.
Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) had prepared Core
Network on behalf of the State  Government. Since DRRP is a
prerequisite for preparation of Core Network, it has been decided
that Central Agencies would prepare DRRP based on data from
State Government, and the Core Network prepared by CRRI
would be taken as final only after it is checked against the DRRP
and found accurate.

39
The Nominated Executing Agencies (NEAS) have been given CDs
containing the scanned images of the Core Network maps of
each block in the districts under their jurisdiction prepared by
CRRI for the State Government. The NEAS in consultation with
the officers of Rural Engineering Organisation (REO), Bihar will
carry out the verification and finalize the data with correction,
where necessary, for finalizing the DRRP and Core Network.
In recent interaction with Government of Bihar, it was observed
that about 70% of the master data has been entered in OMMAS
module by the Government of Bihar. Now correction to the master
data, based on verification, will be entered by the NEAs in the
respective districts and Government of Bihar will arrange to
provide all additional data regarding habitation/villages to
respective NEAs, without any loss of time.
It is expected that DRRP and Core Network for Bihar would be
compiled by the NEAs with the assistance of CRRI by September
2005.”
73. The Committee find that District Road Plan and Core Network
for Bihar are being compiled by Nominated Executive Agencies with
the assistance of Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) and were
expected by September, 2005. The DRRP and Core Network would
have been finalised by now and the Committee be apprised
accordingly.

40
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.4)
The Committee find from the analyses of 9th and 10th Plan outlay
as indicated above that although during 9th Plan, the actual allocation
was enhanced by Rs. 8,144.83 crore, there was reduction of Rs. 262.05
crore at Revised Estimates stage. The expenditure position further
indicates under spending of Rs. 317.43 crore if compared to the outlay
given at Revised Estimates stage during 9th Plan. The Committee
further note that although the allocation during 10th Plan has been
enhanced by Rs. 15,995.35 crore if compared to 9th Plan allocation, the
allocation as agreed to is far lesser i.e. less than half of the projected
outlay during 10th Plan. The Committee also find that certain ambitious
projections have been made by the Government under the vision
“Bharat Nirman”. The Committee fail to understand how such
ambitious targets would be achieved with the outlay that is almost
half of what was projected to the Planning Commission. Scheme-wise
details have been analyzed in the subsequent Paragraphs/Chapters of
the Report. The Committee would like to strongly recommend the
Government, to pursue with the Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance for adequate allocation commensurating the targets projected
by the Government, so that the benefits envisaged under different
schemes of the Department could be extended to the poorest of the
poor in the country. While approaching Planning Commission/Ministry
of Finance in this regard the concerns of the Standing Committee in
this regard should be duly communicated.
Reply of the Government
The concern expressed by the Committee is appreciated. The outlay
for the 10th Plan for rural development programmes was enhanced
significantly as also mentioned in the report of the Committee. The
matter for allocating higher outlays for the programmes covered under
the ‘Bharat Nirman’ has been taken up with the Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance at the highest level. The efforts in this regard
will be continued and the concerns of the Committee will also be
communicated to the concerned at the time of next annual plan
discussions.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H. 11020/3/2005-GC,
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]

41
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
The Committee find that although the overall outlay (both plan
and non-plan) during 2005-2006 has been enhanced by Rs. 4,468.47 crore
as against Revised Estimates of previous year and by Rs. 6,897.91 crore
(excluding North Eastern allocation) as compared to Budget Estimates
of previous year, there is net reduction of outlay under the priority
schemes of the Department viz., Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana,
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana. Rural Housing, DRDA
Administration and Training. The detailed analysis of the impact of
reduction on implementation of these schemes has been given in the
subsequent part of the report. Here the Committee from the data
furnished by the Department find that the increase in allocation is
only under National Food for Work Programme and Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY). The Committee while appreciating the
Government’s targets of providing 100 days wage employment to each
family in rural India, feel that the outlay for this programme should
not be provided at the cost of other established major schemes of the
Department. The committee also note that the Department has
approached the Planning Commission for providing enhanced allocation
under these schemes. The Committee expressed their strongest concern
over the trend of allocating outlay at the cost of other schemes and
disapproved the policy of the Government in providing adequate outlay
for a scheme after adjustments in one or the other schemes. The
Committee would like that their strongest concern in this regard should
be properly conveyed to the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.
Reply of the Government
The spirit behind the observations of the Committee is appreciated,
however, it is mentioned that reduced budget allocation for 2005-2006
under Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY), Swarnajayanti Gram
Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), DRDA Administration and Rural Housing
was noticed by the Ministry immediately after the Budget Estimates
were made available. The matter was taken up with the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance at the highest level.
Accordingly, the Planning Commission has agreed to raise the Budget
Estimates for SGRY from Rs. 4000 crores to Rs. 5500 crore and BE
under National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) would be
Rs. 4500 crore. Similarly under SGSY, the BE for 2005-06 would be
Rs. 1000 crores which is at the previous year’s level. Under Rural
Housing, an additional allocation of Rs. 400 crore was made for the
flood affected areas of Bihar during 2004-2005. Therefore, RE for Rural

42
Housing has been shown as Rs. 2900 crores. Otherwise, the BE for
2005-2006 are Rs. 2775 crore under Rural Housing which is higher
than the BE of 2004-2005. The concern expressed by the Committee in
their observation is noted and will be conveyed to the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance as well during the next year’s
Annual Plan discussions.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H. 11020/3/2005-GC,
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
The Committee are unable to comprehend the position of seeking
additional funds as supplementary grants and then surrendering the
amount at the close of the year. To understand the position in a much
better way, the Committee would like to be informed about the details
of the physical achievement under the sectors for which supplementary
grants have been sought for. The Committee would also like to be
informed about the position of amount surrendered during 2004-2005
so as to enable them to comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As already explained in the replies to the Points No. 11 and 12 of
the Supplementary List of Points for oral evidence of the representatives
of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development) on Demands for Grants (2005-2006), the Supplementary
Grant during the course of the year is obtained for a specific purpose
and it is normally utilized in full.
However, there is only a single instance when during the year
2002-2003, an amount of Rs. 75.00 crore had to be surrendered out of
the Supplementary Grant of Rs. 260.00 crore obtained under the then
Food for Work Programme as Food Corporation of India was not able
to send adequate number of bills towards supply of foodgrains under
the programme before 31.3.2003. Therefore, the surrender had to be
done under compelling circumstances beyond the control of the
Department.
In the year 2003-2004, entire supplementary grant of Rs. 5230 crore
was utilized in full for clearing the bills received from the Food
Corporation of India towards supply of foodgrains under the
Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana (SGRY).

43
In the year 2004-2005, the additional funds were obtained through
Supplementary Grant mainly for meeting the requirement of the
following three programmes:
1. National Food for Work Programme (New Scheme) — Rs. 2020 crore
2. Additional requirement of funds for the Scheme of PURA — Rs. 9 crore
3. For construction of houses in flood affected districts of — Rs. 400 crore
Bihar under Indira Awas Yojana
The position regarding utilization of these funds vis-a-vis details of
physical achievement, if any, under the above sectors is given below:
1. National Food for Work Programme
In fulfillment of the commitment made by the UPA Government
under NCMP , the National Food for Work Programme was launched
pending enactment of Employment Guarantee Act to create immediate
additional employment opportunities in the rural areas with food
security. For the purpose, an amount of Rs. 2020 crore under the cash
component was provided through Supplementary Demands during last
week of November, 2004 and the entire cash component was released
to the identified 150 Districts alongwith 20 lakh tonnes of foodgrains
to implement the programme. During the four months (upto March,
2005) of its implementation during 2004-2005, a total of 783.68 lakh
mandays were generated and 17568 works had been completed and
52385 works were in progress.
2. PURA
During the year 2004-05, the initial budgetary outlay for the scheme
of Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA) was Rs. 1
crore. An additional outlay of Rs. 9 crore was obtained through the
supplementary demands for grants during the year thereby making
the total outlay to the tune of Rs. 10 crore. As per the decisions taken
in consultation with the Planning Commission initially, a pilot phase
of the scheme has been launched in the selected clusters of the seven
States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh for providing physical connectivity in the selected
clusters. The total allocation of Rs. 10 crore was fully utilised during
the  financial year 2004-05.
3. Indira Awaas Yojana
During 2004-2005, an amount of Rs. 400 crore was approved by
the Prime Minister as Additional Central Assistance for the 20 flood-
affected districts of Bihar under the Indira Awaas Yojana for
construction of houses damaged due to floods. This amount was

44
obtained through Supplementary Demands for Grants and was released
in full to the State Government of Bihar during the year 2004-2005.
The State Government has been requested to furnish physical
achievements against this release.
4. Token Supplementary Grants
A token provision of Rs. 1 lakh was obtained for enabling this
Department to re-appropriate Rs. 242 crore under major Head 2552—
North Eastern Region for meeting additional requirement of North
Eastern States including Sikkim under National Food for Work
Programme (Rs. 202 crore) and Indira Awaas Yojana (Rs. 40 crore) i.e.
10% of the Supplementary Grant of Rs. 2020 crore and Rs. 400 crore
respectively. The entire funds were re-appropriated from the functional
programme heads to the Major Head ‘2552’ and released in full to the
NE States.
Another token provision of Rs. 1 lakh was obtained for enabling
this Department to re-appropriate Rs. 5.00 crore under the Scheme of
State Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) for meeting the additional
requirement under the Scheme from the available savings within the
Grant. This amount was accordingly re-appropriated and released to
the SIRDs in full during the year. An additional amount of Rs. 44
lakhs was also made available through the last batch of Supplementary
Demands—2004-2005 for meeting the additional requirement of the
establishment expenditure of the Department. This amount has also
been utilized in full.
It may, therefore, be observed that the additional funds obtained
through Supplementary Grants during the year 2004-2005 were utilized
in full and there was no surrender against the Supplementary Grants.
Surrender of funds during 2004-2005
The position regarding surrender of funds during 2004-2005 under
the budget grant of the Department of Rural Development is indicated
below:
(Rs. in crore)
B.E. R.E. Actual Amount Amount
Expenditure surrendered surrendered
(provisional) as compared as compared
to B.E. to R.E.
Plan 11437.40 13866.40 13857.77 0.00 8.63
Non-Plan 18.56 19.00 19.00 0.00 0.00

45
It may be observed, that there was no surrender under Non-Plan.
However, under Plan, there was a nominal surrender of Rs. 8.63 crore
against the R.E. of Rs. 13866.40 crore ( i.e. 0.06% of RE). The surrender
was mainly under PMGSY where there was a saving of Rs. 7.18 crore
out of which Rs. 6.55 crore was under the provision for  ADB loans.
The non-utilisation of this amount was due to restriction of the first
instalment to 50% of the approved value of projects as per the
provisions of the guidelines.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
While noting that the results of BPL Survey (2002) could not be
finalized due to the direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court, the Committee
would like to be apprised about the latest position with regard to the
hearing on the aforesaid case by Hon’ble Supreme Court. Further the
Committee are concerned to note that the exercise of BPL Census, is
further being delayed by the State Governments/Union territory
Administration. The Committee strongly recommend that pending
decision by the Supreme Court, the exercise by States/Union territories
should be completed expeditiously and the provisional results should
be made available by the Government so that the results could be
finalized immediately when the decision in this regard is taken by the
Supreme Court.
Reply of the Government
While the Ministry of Rural Development have made all efforts to
get the stay granted by the Apex Court vacated, at the same time, the
issue was also discussed with representatives of the People’s Union
for Civil Liberties (PUCL) and the Commissioner of the Supreme Court
in a series of meetings. The Govt. has already moved an application
before the Supreme Court to review its order dated 5th May, 2003 and
this application is likely to be listed very shortly. Simultaneously, the
State  Governments have been repeatedly asked to complete the entire
spade-work and submit the entire data to the Ministry of Rural
Development in the software already provided to them. Based on the
advice given by the Additional Solicitor General, the Ministry of Rural
Development has now requested all the State Governments/Union
territory Administrations to finalise the BPL list based on the BPL
Census, 2002 immediately. The BPL List of 2002 will be first prepared
based on the BPL Census, 2002. In addition, the list will also have at
the bottom separately, the details of all those families who were in the

46
BPL list of 1997 but were getting excluded in the new List based on
the BPL Census, 2002. The families in the BPL list will be placed in
the order in which they were ranked by the scorecard of the Census,
2002.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.41)
The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Government to
present gender budgeting by all the Departments of the Union
Government and also to make benefit incidence analyses. They also
appreciate the initiative taken by the Department of Rural Development
to indicate the data with regard to women beneficiaries. Such type of
data brings transparency towards the efforts of different Departments
for the welfare of women and also help the Government to monitor
the implementation of the policies initiated for women welfare.
Reply of the Government
Though the Committee has appreciated the initiative taken by the
Ministry of Rural Development with regard to the welfare of women,
the Ministry would work further continuously in an effective way.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.42)
The Committee note that in the schemes meant for providing wage
employment for manual labour work, like SGRY and Food for Work
Programme the participation of women, may not be so encouraging.
The data with regard to SGRY, as well as the observation of the
Committee during the Study-visit to Varanasi and Lucknow in Uttar
Pradesh substantiate this point. The Committee find that the
Government propose to provide 100 days of wage employment to
each family in rural area. To achieve this objective the Government
have brought a legislation, ‘The National Employment Guarantee Bill,
2004’ which is under examination of this Standing Committee. At
present National Food for Work Programme is being launched in
150 districts to achieve the said objective. The Committee feel that
serious efforts have to be made by taking the suitable action in this
regard so as to encourage participation of women under the
Employment Guarantee Scheme. The Committee would further like to

47
hear from the Government their experience under the National Food
for Work Programme as well as the efforts envisaged to protect the
interests of women at the work fields to enable the  Committee to
analyse the position and comment further in this regard.
Reply of the Government
It has been found that participation of women in manual labour
work under SGRY and NFFWP varies from State to State. The
participation of women workers has been found more than 30% of the
total employment under the programme in 13 States and UTs while it
is less than 20% in nine States/UTs. The SGRY Guidelines have
provision for facilities for creches for children coming with working
mothers. The NFFWP also has similar provision. The NFFWP was
launched in November, 2004 and the percentage of women workers
under NFFWP is about 34.25% during the year 2004-05.
The SGRY and NFFWP Guidelines provided that facilities like
drinking water, rest sheds for workers and creches for the children
coming with working mothers should be made available. Both these
programmes ensure equal wages to both men and women workers.
The facilities would certainly protect the interest of women workers
under the programmes.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.13)
The Committee find from the Budget documents as well as replies
furnished by the Department that allocation and utilisation has been
indicated state-wise. The Committee note that in view of the existing
system of indicating and monitoring data, it is not possible to know
the performance of the programme in the selected 150 districts. The
Committee would like to recommend that district-wise physical and
financial achievement should be indicated against each of the districts
so as to know the impact of the programme in each of the districts.
Such data will also enable the Government to know the various
shortcomings in the programme which will ultimately be taking the
shape of a guarantee scheme.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. District-
wise monitoring is currently in vogue. National Food for Work
Programme is applicable in 150 districts. Allocations of cash and food
grains under the programme are being made district-wise and physical

48
and financial progress of the programme is also being monitored
district-wise. The district-wise progress of the programme is reviewed
from time to time.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill (2004) is being
examined by this Committee and all related matters will be analysed
and suitably recommended in the report. At this stage, the Committee
would like to say that although the Government has started the Food
for Work Programme in 150 districts meant to achieve the similar
objective as of the said legislation, there is no planning on the part of
the Government as to how the Guarantee Scheme will be applicable
throughout the country. The Committee are constrained to find that so
far no exercise has been made to know about the estimated outlay
that will be required to cover the whole country with the said
guarantee. The Committee fail to understand how the Government
would be achieving the objective of such an ambitious legislation. The
Committee strongly recommend that the Government should do the
desired home-work so that such a big programme with laudable
objectives could be translated into reality.
Reply of the Government
As already submitted earlier, as per Census 2001, the total Rural
Population is 74.17 crore while the number of persons in the age
group 18—64 is 38.61 crore. If all the adults in rural areas are to be
provided employment of 100 days @Rs. 100 per manday, then the
total cost will be Rs. 3,86,100 crore. The entitlement under the National
Rural Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004 is restricted to rural poor
households. Even if the poverty-qualification is relaxed, it is expected
that since the wage employment is to be provided only through
unskilled manual work, only the poor households will opt for it. Hence,
an estimate of BPL families provides a reasonable basis for projecting
fund requirements for universal targeting.
The total number of BPL persons in rural areas during 1999-2000
as estimated by Planning Commission is 19.32 crore. As per census
2001, the total Rural Population is 74.17 croe while the number of
persons in the age group 18 to 64 is 38.61 crore, making the ratio of
persons in the age group 18 to 64 to the total rural population as 0.52.
Using this ratio on the number of total BPL persons in the rural areas,

49
the estimated number of BPL persons in rural areas in the age group
18 to 64 will be 10.04 crore. If all these persons are to provided
100 days of employment @Rs. 100 per manday, then Rs. 1,00,464 crore
will be needed.
The general experience has been that all persons do not demand
work through wage employment. The requirement of funds if a certain
percentage of persons demand work is given in the table below:
Sl.No. % of the people Requirement of
demanding work funds per year
(Rs. in crore)
1. 100 1,00,464
2. 50 50,232
3. 30 30,139.20
4. 20 20,092.80
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.31)
The Committee find that during 10th Plan under Sampoorna
Grameen Rozgar Yojana, Planning Commission has allocated for cash
component Rs. 18,538 crore lesser than the proposed allocation.
Similarly during 2005-2006, the allocation is Rs. 1,428 crore lesser than
proposed allocation. Under National Food for Work Programme during
2005-06, the allocation for cash component is Rs. 573 crore higher than
the proposed allocation. The Committee further note that SGRY will
be applicable in the districts where National Food for Work Programme
which eventually will be converted into Guarantee Scheme, is not
applicable. In such a situation, the Committee hold the view that till
the scope of NFFWP is further extended the majority of the districts
will be covered by SGRY. In such a situation the Committee recommend
that due priority should be accorded to SGRY. The outlay under
National Food for Work Programme should not be provided at the
cost of SGRY.
Reply of the Government
It has been submitted earlier that in the BE 2005-2006, allocation
under the SGRY for 150 districts where the NFFWP is under

50
implementation, has been included in the consolidated outlay of
Rs. 6000 crore provided under the NFFWP . Since SGRY will continue
to be implemented as a separate scheme in 150 districts until the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme comes into force,
this Ministry had requested the Planning Commission to transfer the
SGRY allocation for these districts to the SGRY budget head. The
Planning Commission agreed to revise budget allocation for NFFWP
from Rs. 6000 crore to Rs. 4500 crore while outlay for SGRY will be
corresponding enhanced from Rs. 4000 crore to Rs. 5500 crore. In that
case, the outlay of SGRY will not be reduced during the current year.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.57)
The Committee also note with concern that marketing of several
SHG products including silk sarees has reduced considerably in
Uttar Pradesh where the existing marketing organisations ceased to
operate. They feel that similar problems might be arising in other
States/Union territories from time to time. It is an irony that the SHG
members continue to face tremendous problems even now for
marketing of their products. As importance of marketing of SHG
products cannot be overlooked, the Committee recommend that
appropriate action may be taken in this regard and they be apprised
accordingly. Further, the Government should also ensure that such
problems do not take place in other  States and Union territories.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development would be writing to the State
Secretary Rural Development, Uttar Pradesh regarding reduction of
marketing facilities in Silk Sarees mentioned in the report. The State
Government would also be requested to allot stalls to these groups
during the 20 Regional SARAS fairs proposed to be organized all over
India during 2005-06. The Ministry of Rural Development would also
reiterate these guidelines to the States for opening of alternative
marketing channels. Special projects under SGSY for creation of
infrastructure and support have also been sanctioned to the tune of
total Rs. 13593.205 lakhs in the State of Andhra Pradesh (1999-2000),
Assam (2002-03), Goa (2003-04), Gujarat (1999-2000), Himachal Pradesh
(2001-02), Madhya Pradesh (2001-02 & 2002-03), Orissa (2000-01),
Rajasthan (2001-02 & 2003-04), Tamil Nadu (1999-2000), Uttar Pradesh
(1999-2000), Uttaranchal (1999-2000), (2 Projects in 2001-02).
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]

51
Recommendation (Para No. 3.63)
The Committee find that over the years there has been considerable
reduction in rate of interest being charged by commercial Banks from
the customers. They further note that whereas people in urban areas
are enjoying the benefits of this lower interest rate regime, the poorest
of the poor are being deprived of the said benefits. People in urban
areas can get loan for buying a car or a house at much less rate than
the rate of interest being imposed on the poorest of the poor under
the social sector schemes like SGSY. Similar may be the position for
loans advanced for housing in rural areas. Not only that, whereas
banks get refinance at a much cheaper rate of 5.50 per cent, they
charge interest at much higher rate between 8.5 to 9.5 per cent as the
Committee noticed during the Study visit to Varanasi and Lucknow.
Besides the Committee found during the said study tour that banks
were charging old rate of interest i.e. on the loans advanced earlier
under SGSY. The benefit of the lower interest regime is not being
extended to the old loans sanctioned to SGSY beneficiaries at much
higher rates as compared to present day rate of interest.
While noting the data with regard to recovery of loans under
SGSY in various States, the Committee feel that the ground reality in
this regard may not be so worse as indicated in the data provided by
the Department. Another noticeable point is the zero per cent recovery
rate in Manipur, Tripura, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Mizoram,
Lakshadweep, Daman and Diu. The Committee feel that there are
certain discrepancies in the data furnished by the Department with
regard to the recovery rate of SGSY loan. The Committee would like
the Department to explain the position in this regard. Besides, they
would like to be apprised of the data with regard to the recovery of
commercial lending by banks so as to enable them to react further in
this regard. On the issue of administrative charges, the Committee feel
that 3 per cent charges as indicated by banks during the Study visit
are much on higher side.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.64)
In view of the aforesaid scenario, the Committee strongly feel that
there is no justification for charging higher rate of interest from the
poorest of the poor in rural areas. While noting that the Government
has deregulated the interest rate and banks are free to charge rate of
interest from customers, the Committee feel that while dealing with
the issues related to the poorest of the poor, some sort of regulation
is necessary. Besides there is an urgent need to change the mindset of

52
banks towards lending for social sector. They feel that the mindsets of
the banks should be pro-poor. The Committee strongly recommend to
the Government to take up the issue raised above on an urgent basis
with the Ministry of Finance, Reserve Bank of India and all other
concerned. Not only that, the intervention at much higher level in this
regard is required. The Committee will also like that their concerns in
this regard should be communicated to the Cabinet Secretary so that
this issue may get the top most priority . The Committee would also
like that the said issue should be taken in consideration for Cooperative
as well as Regional Rural Banks also as these banks are also charging
high rate of interest on social sector lending like SGSY loans.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.65)
The Committee further find that besides the higher rate of interest,
there are other severe anomalies as the Committee noticed and the
banks admitted during the Study visit. The most glaring anomaly
noticed is charging of interest on subsidy which is a gross violation of
the guidelines. The reaction of the Department stating that the
complaints when received are taken up with the concerned bank,
smacks of the casual approach of the Department towards such a
serious issue. The Committee feel that this is not a normal complaint.
Some sort of accountability should be fixed. Stringent and serious efforts
are called for on behalf of the Department when such issue specifically
by a Parliamentary Committee are brought to the notice of the
Department. The Committee would like the Department to explain the
position in this regard.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Reply of the Government to recommendations
(Para No. 3.63, 3.64 and 3.65)
The matter on more than one occasion has been raised with the
Ministry of Finance at the highest level. In response to Ministry’s
request, Finance Minister has informed that the matter of pegging the
interest rate of SGSY loans within a band of 4-6% had been discussed
with NABARD and RBI. They have further informed that interest rate
regime has been deregulated and individual banks are free to fix rate
of interest depending on the cost of funds and risks involved in such
lending. However, the Government, on its part, has been regularly
advising the Bank to keep the interest as low as 9% for rural and
agricultural loan amounts up to Rs. 50,000. The RBI guidelines also
provide that the loans up to Rs. 2,00,000 should not be above

53
Benchmark Prime Lending Rate. NABARD, however, extends refinance
to Banks at the rate of 5.5% for loans up to Rs. 50,000 and 6.25% for
loans above Rs. 50,000 under SGSY. However, Ministry of Rural
Development reiterates its stand of fixing the interest rate charged on
SGSY loans with in a band of 4-6%. With regard to the interest rates
structure for individual and group loans under SGSY, the Ministry
had observed that group loans were attracting higher rates of interest
as compared to individual loans which was not only discriminatory
but also against the consolidation of group approach of the scheme.
This issue was taken up by this Ministry with the Ministry of Finance.
Accordingly, RBI has corrected the anomaly by issuing instructions to
banks vide their letter dated April 13, 2005 that the rate of interest to
be charged on Group loans under SGSY may be linked to per capita
size of the loans so as to mitigate the burden on the BPL beneficiaries.
The RBI has also directed all the commercial banks to take action
on various points identified in the recent meeting of the  Central
Level Coordination Committee (CLCC) to lower the interest rate on
SGSY loans and to ensure smooth, timely and sufficient flow of credit
to swarozgaries. The Ministry has been incessantly campaigning for
lowering the interest rates charged on loans advance under
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) at the highest level. The
Ministry of Rural Development has been urging the Ministry of Finance
to lower the rate of interest on loans extended to swarozgaries within
a band of 4 to 6%. So far as recovery position is concerned, a quick
study was conducted by the Reserve Bank of India for the year
2003-04 and the study revealed that average recovery percentage is
generally good in case of group loans, which stood at 78.17%. Whereas
the average recovery percentage in case of individual loans is 50.99%.
The Ministry notes the charging of 3% of the total loan as
administrative charge and will take up the matter for appropriate
action. Ministry has also compiled a list of about 1200 bank branches
which have failed to achieve even 25% credit target for Swarnjayanti
Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) lending or have recorded only 0%
lending. The matter has been taken up with Finance Minister, Reserve
Bank of India, CMDs of commercial banks. National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development and the concerned State Rural
Development secretaries. The Ministry is informing on monthly basis
to the Cabinet about all the important policy decisions or other areas
of concern. The Ministry is making all out effort to avoid charging of
interest on subsidy by banks. To generate awareness Ministry has taken
up the issue at larger fora such as Central Level Coordination
Committee (CLCC) meetings and the special meeting convened by the
RBI on Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY). The Ministry

54
has urged the State Governments and commercial banks to be vigilant
to avoid such incidents and has written to them to take appropriate
actions in case of erring bank branches. To avoid this situation, the
subsidy component in the scheme has been made back ended.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.108)
The Committee further note that Central agencies like NBCC and
NHPC have been inducted for construction of roads under PMGSY in
Bihar and Tripura. The Committee would like to be apprised whether
the induction of Central agencies in said States could help in getting
better results. After evaluating the performance of such Central
Agencies, the Committee would like that in the under performing
States, where there is problem of executing agencies, the possibility of
induction of such agencies, should be explored in consultation with
State Governments.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Rural Development has been assisting the State
Governments and Central Agencies to expedite the work of PMGSY
and many training programmes, workshops, reviews and other required
interventions have been organized through NRRDA. A former Chief
Engineer of Rural Engineering Organisation (REO), Bihar has been
engaged as Coordinating Consultant to coordinate the activities of
Nominated Executing Agencies (NEAs), State Technical Agencies (STAs)
and the State Government in Bihar.
Similarly, Government of Tripura has signed a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) with NBCC and the Ministry of Rural
Development in April 2004 for execution of PMGSY works in West
Tripura district by NBCC in accordance with the PMGSY Guidelines
in force. Subsequently, NBCC has also been entrusted with the task of
execution of PMGSY works in  South Tripura district. Efforts to build
up capacity in other States, including Hill States and North Eastern
States, are continuing. The success of these experiments is being studied
for replication.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]

55
Recommendation (Para No. 3.109)
The Committee would also like to recommend to put in place a
strict monitoring mechanism to ensure the quality of the roads
constructed under PMGSY. Besides, they would like to be informed
the number of States/Union territories who have put the Core Network
reports indicating DRRP Road wise and habitation wise. Road wise
and habitation wise network on the website as per the guidelines.
Besides the Committee would like that the details of the projects
indicating the date of starting the project, estimated outlay, stage of
implementation, total road length etc. should also be put on the web-
site for the purpose of bringing transparency in the implementation of
the programme.
Reply of the Government
Under the PMGSY Scheme, a 3-tier Quality Control System has
already been operationalised.
For effective monitoring of the PMGSY, the On-line Management,
Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS) has been laid down as
the chief mechanism for monitoring the Programme. The URL is
www.pmgsyonline.nic.in. The officials of the Implementing States ( i.e.
the Executive Engineer/Head of the PIU) are required to furnish, ‘On-
line’, all relevant information, in respect of every road work including
the details of the contractor, in the relevant module of the On-line
Management, Monitoring and  Accounting System. They are responsible
for ensuring placement of all Master data including the Rural Roads
Plan in the database and for regular updating of data relating to the
progress of road works, record of Quality control tests as well as the
payments made. The web site provides National Reports on the
following items relating to PMGSY Habitation Coverage.
• Sanctioned Projects
• Pending Proposals
• Completion of Packages
• Physical and Financial Projects Summary
• Physical Progress of Works
• Financial Progress of Works
• Financial Progress as per Accounts Module
• State Profile
• National Projects Summary

56
These can be drilled down to State Reports as well as District
Reports. In regard to Quality Monitoring , details of inspection of roads
(district wise) are also available. In addition, details about Tendering
are also available. However, due to poor internet connectivity in some
States, there are data gaps and the web site also indicates these data
gaps in the States.
All States, except Bihar and Tripura, have entered data on DRRP/
Core Network on the website. Verification of these data is done by the
States.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.110)
The Committee further find that in Bihar so far District Road Plans
have not been prepared. They would like to know the reasons for
delay in preparing DRPs, specifically when the Central Agency has
been inducted as the executing agency in that State.
Reply of the Government
Preparation of DRRP and Core Network is the responsibility of
the State Governments and has to be done as per guidelines circulated
to all States in 2001.
Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) had prepared Core Network
on behalf of the State Government. Since DRRP is a prerequisite for
preparation of Core Network, it has been decided that Central Agencies
would prepare DRRP based on data from State Government, and the
Core Network prepared by CRRI would be taken as final only after it
is checked against the DRRP and found accurate.
The Nominated Executing Agencies (NEAs) have been given CDs
containing the scanned images of the Core Network maps of each
block in the districts under their jurisdiction prepared by CRRI for the
State Governments. The NEAs in consultation with the officers of Rural
Engineering Organisation (REO), Bihar will carry out the verification
and finalize the data with correction, where necessary, for finalizing
the DRRP and Core Network.
In recent interaction with Government of Bihar, it was observed
that about 70% of the master data has been entered in OMMAS module
by the Government of Bihar. Now correction to the master data, based

57
on verification, will be entered by the NEAs in the respective districts
and Government of Bihar will arrange to provide all additional data
regarding habitation/villages to respective NEAs, without any loss of
time.
It is expected that DRRP and Core Network for Bihar would be
compiled by the NEAs with the assistance of CRRI by September
2005.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.114)
The Committee note the reply of the Government that Rs. 4 crore
to  Rs. 5 crore per cluster is estimated to be required for development
of a PURA cluster. They also note that since 2003-04, Rs. 20 crore have
been allocated under PURA. They, therefore conclude that with these
funds only 4 PURA clusters can be taken up for development. For the
development of one PURA cluster in 7 selected States at least
Rs. 35 crore will be required. With the present level of allocation under
the Scheme, the Government may take another two years to start a
single PURA cluster each in all these States. They also apprehend that
with the present pace of implementation, the complete development
of pilot PURA clusters may not end before 2008-09 as the development
of cluster will take about 3 years time. This might delay the framing
of the guidelines and the launching of PURA in the Country as a
whole. They, therefore, recommend that the Department should
approach Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for adequate outlay
for pilot projects. The Department should also ensure that pilot projects
are taken up expeditiously so that the ambitious programme could be
launched Nation-wide.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development is the nodal Ministry for
formulation, implementation and monitoring of the scheme Provision
of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA). As per the decisions taken
in consultation with the Planning Commission, initially a pilot phase
of the scheme has been launched in the selected clusters of the seven
States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh for providing physical connectivity in the selected
clusters. The pilot phase of the scheme has been launched to field test
the design concept of PURA so that based on the experience gained
out of the pilot phase, the final design and detailed guidelines of the

58
Scheme can be worked out. The budget allocation for PURA during
the current year is of Rs. 10 crore. If need for additional funds arises,
it will sought at RE stage. During the year 2004-05 all the seven States
have been provided funds for initiating the work of providing physical
connectivity and States have already started implementing the scheme
to develop the selected cluster. The Ministry is taking steps to expedite
the implementation of the pilot phase.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.127)
The Committee note that during 2004-2005, Rs. 26.49 crore could
be spent up to January 2005 out of total allocation of Rs. 33.40 crore
earmarked under plan budget for the training. They find that nearly
Rs. 7 crore of the plan funds remained unspent for training during
2004-2005 up to the month of January. The Committee further note
that even for training schemes there is rush of funds in the last two
months of the financial year. The Committee urge the Department to
properly plan ahead so that the pace of expenditure for training is
evenly spread throughout year during 2005-2006.
Reply of the Government
Noted for future compliance. As recommended, during the year
2005-2006, it is proposed to evenly spread through the year the pace
of expenditure against the allocation of Rs. 34.00 crore
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.128)
The Committee note that out of 28 SIRDs the Central share for
recurring expenditure of Rs. 9.07 crore has been provided to 23 SIRDs
so far. They, therefore, conclude that 5 SIRDs have not been provided
with the funds for recurring expenditure this year. The Committee
would like to know the name of the States to which SIRD allocation
has not been made. They would also like to be apprised of the reasons
for which the said 5  SIRDs have been deprived of the Central funds.
As training is an important input for the success of rural development
programmes, all SIRDs should received the funds in time and it should
be ensured that the scarce resources are spent in a proper manner.
The Committee further note that in 24 States, 88 ETCs have been

59
established and are functioning. ETCs have not been constituted in
Goa, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttaranchal. The Committee would like to
recommend for the early constitution of ETCs in said States. Besides
the Committee would like to be informed about the number of ETCs
in each State so as to have a better idea of the functioning of ETCs
and recommend further in this regard. The Committee would also like
to recommend for early construction of SIRDs in Chhattisgarh and
Uttaranchal.
Reply of the Government
The Scheme for strengthening of State Institutes of Rural
Development and Extension Training Centre is a demand-driven
Scheme. No SIRD-wise allocation is made under the scheme. However,
the Central funds for recurring expenditure are released after receipt
of specific proposals from SIRDs. The SIRDs, which have not been
provided with the Central share of recurring expenditure during the
year (upto January, 2005), is Gujarat, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir. Subsequently, the Central share of
recurring expenditure to SIRD, Madhya Pradesh was released in March,
2005. Thus, only four SIRDs in the State of Gujarat, Jharkhand, Uttar
Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir were not provided with the Central
funds for recurring expenditure as these  SIRDs did not send any
proposal during the year 2004-2005.
In Uttaranchal, 5 ETCs are functioning at Rudrapur, Hawalbagh,
Haldwani, Haridwar and Pauri Garhwal. No proposals for establishing
ETCs from the States of Goa, Sikkim and Tripura have been received
by the Ministry. A statement showing number of ETCs functioning in
the States is added at Appendix-VI.
The construction of SIRD building in Chhattisgarh has already been
completed. The construction of SIRD building in Uttaranchal is in
progress.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.129)
The Committee further find that SIRDs/ETCs have so far conducted
only 1,719 training programmes out of the target of 5,899 training
programmes during 2004-2005. They also find that only 66,002
participants have so far taken training against a target of 1,74,390.
They, therefore, conclude that the training activity by SIRDs/ETCs are

60
not up to the mark during the said year. The Committee observe that
since the training is the basic input for the effective implementation of
rural development schemes, there is an urgent need to give more stress
in this regard. The Committee strongly recommend to the Department
to analyse the position of training programme more critically in each
State and it should be ensured that the targets are fully achieved in
a particular year. The Committee would also like to be kept informed
about the reasons for shortfall in targets State-wise alongwith the
corrective action initiated by the Department.
Reply of the Government
According to the latest progress reports received from SIRDs for
2004-2005, the SIRDs have conducted 2858 training programmes against
the target of 2675 and the number of participants were 1,71,688 against
the target of 1,53,805.
As per the latest progress reports received from 47 ETCs, they
have conducted 1105 training programmes against the target of 3224
and number of participants were 39,124 against the target of 1,17,147.
The ETCs who have not sent their reports have been reminded to
furnish the latest progress report.
In the XIX and XX National Colloquium of State  Secretaries
incharge of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj and Heads of the
State Institutes of Rural Development held at Mysore and Shimla in
months of February and June, 2005, the training programmes of SIRDs
and ETCs have been reviewed in detail. Apart from increasing the
number of training programmes, the SIRDs have been requested to
function as Centre of Excellence in specific areas to improve the quality
of training. The SIRDs have also been advised to exercise more effective
functional and administrative control over the ETCs to enhance their
performance.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.139)
The Committee find that CAPART has been constituted with the
laudable objectives which include training of voluntary organizations,
reduction of rural poverty, selection and encouragement of innovative
technologies and their dissemination, providing the minimum need in
respect of safe drinking water and sanitation. The Committee would
like to be apprised how far CAPART could achieve the aforesaid

61
objectives to enable the Committee to analyse the performance of
CAPART.
Reply of the Government
The programmes of CAPART are focused on mobilization and
empowerment of women, SCs, STs and disadvantaged sections of the
society. Thrust is given to the infrastructure development, common
property resources for the benefit of the community, imparting of skills
and promotion of value addition activities to generate additional income
for the poor families through the voluntary organizations.
During the year 2004-2005, 634 projects involving an amount of
Rs. 38.40 crores were sanctioned to 550 NGOs. Apart from that, over
95 workshops/training programmes were organized to benefit over
2900 NGOs all over the country in various capacity building
programmes.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.140)
From the detailed expenditure position during 2004-2005, the
Committee understand that the main expenditure was on account of
Public Cooperation Scheme, Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme
as well as Administration. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the achievement of CAPART under the aforesaid schemes to analyse
the position of expenditure and comment further in this regard. On
account of expenditure on administration, the Committee would also
like to be apprised of the details of organization structure of CAPART
for which an amount of Rs. 6.33 crore was spent during 2004-2005. In
other sectors the Committee find that the level of expenditure is
marginal. The Committee would like a detailed note indicating how
the meagre outlay would enable CAPART to achieve the desired results
in the different schemes.
Reply of the Government
CAPART with its mandate to promote voluntary action and
propagate appropriate technologies for the benefit of rural masses
entertains viable project proposals from the eligible voluntary
organizations working in different rural areas of the country. The project
proposals posed by the voluntary organizations are sanctioned to them
under various rural development schemes to be implemented in
participatory and consultative manner.

62
During the year 2004-05, CAPART has sanctioned 203 projects under
Public Cooperation to 268 NGOs, involving an amount of
Rs. 12.99 crore. Similarly, under Advancement of Rural Technology
Scheme, 293 projects were sanctioned to 185 NGOs involving an amount
of Rs. 11.80 crore.
The actual physical achievements under the projects will be
evaluated after these are completed because at present the projects are
at various stages of implementation. Since an area approach is followed
in most of the projects, any developmental activity or infrastructure
creation benefits the whole area.
The expenditure under administration is mainly on the pay and
allowances to the officers and members of staff and as such the
question of achievement under this head does not arise.
CAPART under its mandate promotes Voluntary Action and
propagates appropriate technologies for the benefit of rural masses. It
has been contributing to the rural development and poverty alleviation
process through the work of VOs at the grassroot level and supporting
Governments’ efforts. One of the important objectives of CAPART is
to act the role of a catalyst and facilitate the creation of innovative
and replicable models, which can attract the attention of other
institutions including DRDAs and State  Governments who may then
multiply the same. Therefore, even with the meagre resources, the
objectives and mandate of CAPART can be fulfilled to a great extent.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.141)
The Committee find that one of the main activities of CAPART is
to provide training to voluntary organization. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the number of voluntary organizations who
could be imparted training so far. Besides they would also like to be
apprised of the details of the curriculum for training.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2004-05, over 95 workshops/trainings on various
programmes were organized in which over 2900 voluntary organizations
participated and benefited. The main topics/curriculum taught in these
trainings/workshops were project formulation technique, PRA exercises,
social mobilization process, latest food processing technologies,

63
cultivation of herbal medicines, organic farming, watershed
development etc.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.142)
The Committee note that during 2004-05, out of 659 NGOs,
22 NGOs were blacklisted. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the mechanism to ensure that once an NGO is blacklisted it cannot
be registered again and get any grant from CAPART. The Committee
would also like that stringent monitoring mechanism is required to
monitor the activities of NGOs.
Reply of the Government
Blacklisted NGO’s particulars are entered into the database and
also put on the website of CAPART and further funding of such NGOs
are stopped as long as these are on the blacklist. The blacklisting
orders are also circulated to other funding Departments/Agencies.
Photographs of the members of Executive Committees of the NGOs
are made mandatory in order to avoid funding to the NGOs run by
proxy/non-existent NGOs.
First timer Voluntary Organizations are asked to produce original
bank/post office pass books and registration certificates before the
release of funds to respective VOs to avoid funding to the NGOs who
have submitted fabricated and forged documents.
CAPART has instituted a three-tier monitoring system in the form
of Pre-funding Appraisal, Mid-term Appraisal and Post-evaluation to
safeguard against fake and non-credible NGOs. Money for the
sanctioned projects is released in instalments only after monitoring
and not in one go.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]

64
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 2.5)
While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee strongly
feel that whatever allocation is agreed to at Budget Estimates stage
should not further be reduced at Revised Estimates stage as has been
done during 9th Plan, since, even the slightest reduction of outlay
means depriving the lakhs of poor of the little hope that is intended
by such schemes of the Union Government.
Reply of the Government
During the first four years of the 10th Five Year Plan the Ministry
has been able to get enhanced outlays during the Revised  Estimates
as indicated below:
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE
2002-03 13670.00 18376.00
2003-04 14070.00 19200.00
2004-05 16246.00 18216.40
2005-06 24480.00 —
Keeping in view the recommendations of the Committee, the
Ministry will continue its efforts to get enhanced allocations at RE
stage.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]

65
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.6)
One of the biggest concerns expressed by the Committee almost
every year is underutilization of resources. The aforesaid data of under
spending i.e. Rs. 337.43 crore as compared to Revised Estimates during
9th Plan indicate the shortfall in releases by the Union Government to
States/Union territory Administrations. The picture of under-spending
is more clear when we analyse the under-spending by way of huge
opening balances with different State Governments, the analysis of
which has been done in the subsequent part of the Report. Even if
actual releases are taken into consideration, the Committee feel that
the amount of Rs. 337.43 crore is a big amount in the resources starved
economy of the country. In view of the aforesaid position the
Committee hold the strong view that not even a single paise of the
allocated amount should remain as unutilized. The Committee strongly
call for more effective steps on the part of the Government in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development shares the concern expressed
by the Committee with regard to considerable unspent balances and
unutilized outlays under various programmes of the Ministry. It may,
however, be mentioned that there are certain practical difficulties in
fully utilizing the outlays as the programmes of the Ministry of Rural
Development are implemented at the village level and it involves
multiple agencies. It takes time for the flow of information on the
actual utilization of funds, which is required to claim the release of
next instalment. In addition to above, there are certain other factors
such as a limited time available for the implementation of programmes
in some States, natural calamities like drought, floods etc. and elections
of various legislative and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) etc. These
factors adversely affect the pace of implementation of rural development
programmes. Further, the Ministry has to follow a strict financial
discipline in order to ensure that the funds released under various
programmes are utilized for the purpose for which it has been released.

66
For this purpose a comprehensive monitoring mechanism has been
put in place by the Ministry. The funds are released to the Programme
Implementing Agencies only on production of proper audit reports/
utilization certificates by the programme implementing agencies. As
an effort to further strengthen the monitoring mechanism State Level
and District Level Vigilance & Monitoring Committees have been
constituted with the elected representative of the people. At the district
level, these Vigilance & Monitoring Committees are headed by the
members of the Parliament. It is hoped that with the new approach,
an improvement in the utilization of funds under rural development
programmes will be achieved.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
Further, while noting that although the Ministry of Finance has
agreed to provide additional allocation at  Supplementary Grants stage,
the Committee feel that sanction of grants at Supplementary Grants
stage always leads to uncertainty. In view of this, they would like that
adequate outlay commensurating the targets should be provided at
Budget Estimates stage for the schemes.
Reply of the Government
The plan outlay of the Ministry of Rural Development including
in the Department of Rural Development, Department of Land
Resources, and Department of Drinking Water Supply for the year
2005-06 is Rs. 24,480 crore which is higher than the revised estimates
for the year 2004-05 which was Rs. 18,216.40 crore. The appropriate
monitoring mechanism would help in achieving the objectives proposed
during the current year. The additional resources would be met out
through dovetailing the funds.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)

67
Recommendation (Para No. 2.27)
The Committee strongly feel that there is an urgent need to improve
the quality of implementation and enhance the efficiency and
accountability of the monitoring mechanism as stressed by Finance
Minister in his speech while presenting the Budget for the year
2005-06. They also note from the information furnished by the
Department that different types of monitoring mechanism like
concurrent evaluation, different types of Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees, Area Officers  Schemes etc. are in place. The Committee
further find that during 10th Plan, independent and in-depth evaluation
studies were conducted for all the major schemes of the Department.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details scheme-wise,
of the major findings and corrective action taken thereon by the
Department so as to enable them to analyse the usefulness of the
system and comment further in this regard. The Committee would
also like to be informed about the way these studies could provide an
input for further improvement in the schemes of the Department.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development has already mentioned about
the comprehensive mechanism of Monitoring and Implementation of
various Rural Development Programmes including proper utilisation
of funds and measurement of outcomes. The Evaluation Studies and
Impact Assessment Studies conducted by the Ministry through
independent Research Organisation have greatly helped in designing/
restructuring the Rural Development Programmes and to take adequate
corrective major policy decision.
The Ministry of Rural Development has already mentioned about
the comprehensive mechanism of Monitoring and Implementation of
various Rural Development Programmes including proper utilisation
of funds and measurement of outcomes. The Evaluation Studies and
Impact Assessment Studies conducted by the Ministry through
independent Research Organisation have greatly helped in designing/
restructuring the Rural Development Programmes and to take adequate
corrective major policy decision.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)

68
Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)
The Committee further note that the Ministry has introduced a
system of District and State level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees.
These Committees are to be constituted by the Union Ministry of Rural
Development. From the information provided by the Department it
seems that such Committees could be an effective monitoring
mechanism only in few States. Not only that, there is confusion on the
issue of constitution of such Committees. Different data regarding the
constitution of Committees were indicated in the written note as well
as during the course of oral evidence as indicated in the preceding
para of the report. The Committee are constrained to note that if this
is the state of affairs of the Committees that were to be constituted by
the Union Government, the status of other Committees being
constituted by State Governments can be well imagined. The Committee
would like the Department of furnish a detailed note indicating the
action taken by them for early constitution of such Committees besides
it should be ensured that such Committee are constituted in all States
and districts without any further delay. Further no State or Union
territory should be allowed to be exempted from constituting the said
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees. Not only that there is an urgent
need to monitor that the sittings of such Committees are held
periodically as per guidelines so as to prove an effective mechanism
for effective implementation of various schemes of the Department for
which crores of Rupees are being spent annually.
Reply of the Government
The State Government and District  Authorities have been requested
to hold meetings of the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees regularly.
They have also been reminded to send information about the meetings
of the Vigilance and Monitoring Committees held. The State
Governments and District Authorities are sending the information to
the Ministry.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.29)
The Committee would further like to be apprised about the
corrective action taken on the findings of the area officers under the

69
monitoring system of the Ministry of Rural Development. The
Committee would also like to be apprised about the number of States/
districts covered by the said scheme during the last three years so as
to enable them to analyse the usefulness of this system and comment
further in this regard. The Committee would also like to recommend
that there should be an in built mechanism in each of the schemes for
regular monitoring/evaluation. Not only that, there should be specific
allocation of outlay for the purpose. Besides, the Committee find that
there is no system of fixing accountability. They feel that there should
be well defined system of fixing accountability and some sort of action
against the defaulter officers/agencies involved in the implementation
of the schemes/programme to serve as a deterrent for others. Further
there is a need to have a more transparent system for implementation
of various schemes so that the public may be well informed about the
spending under various schemes. Such a system will automatically
put a pressure on the implementing authorities to perform better and
deliver results. Gram Sabha in this regard can be the best forum in
rural areas. There is an urgent need to strengthen the Gram Sabhas so
that they can function as an institution of social audit. The Committee
would like the Department to take urgent action in this regard and
inform the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Under the Area Officers Schemes of the Ministry, 26 districts of
14 States were visited during 2002-03, 13 districts of 8 States were
visited during 2003-04 and 58 districts of 20 States were visited by the
Area Officers during 2004-05. It is further mentioned that the guidelines
of the Rural Development Programmes has specifically emphasized
the involvement of Gram Sabha in planning, formulation of Need Based
Shelf of Projects, proper implementation of Rural Development
Programmes with transparency through display of signboard of each
project giving financial details and project period. Besides the Gram
Sabhas are required to have social audit of all the projects
implemented/executed by them.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)

70
Recommendation (Para No. 2.34)
The Committee are further unhappy to note the decision of the
Government according to which the number of BPL persons estimated
should not exceed those of identified as per 1999-2000 survey. The
Committee feel that such an arbitrarily limit of BPL persons to be
identified will do a great injustice to the genuine BPL persons who
could be debarred from certain benefits. Not only that, it would be a
major factor for providing unreasonable authority to the agencies
involved thereby inviting corruption and malpractices. The Committee
strongly recommend not to fix any such limitations. They would also
like that their concerns in this regard should also be brought before
the Planning Commission and matter should be reviewed afresh.
Reply of the Government
It is clarified that the States have been asked to identify the number
of BPL families in accordance with the adjusted share as worked out
by the Planning Commission after detailed discussions with them. The
number of BPL families based on the adjusted share is very close to
the poverty estimates of 1993. This means that the State Governments
are having more flexibility in identifying the total number of BPL
families. The cap on the total number of BPL families to be identified
has been prescribed with the view that the resources for the
programmes are limited, therefore, it becomes necessary to ensure that
only the actually deserving poor people get the benefits. Further, the
methodology followed for BPL Census, 2002 is based on 13 scorable
socio-economic indicators, which are more transparent. The list of BPL
families prepared on the basis of these scorable parameters is required
to be discussed and approved by the Gram Sabha before it is submitted
to the Block Level/District Level Authorities. In order to check the
corrupt practices in preparation of BPL list, the Ministry has already
issued the detailed guidelines to the State Governments to display
these lists at the prominent places of the villages so that everybody is
in a position to check his position in the BPL lists.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)

71
Recommendation (Para No. 2.36)
The Committee find that there is an urgent need to implement all
the schemes of the Department directly by the Panchayati Raj
Institutions in the true spirit of the mandate of the Constitution as per
article 243G of the Constitution. Besides the funds for all the schemes
should be released directly to Panchayats in the specific accounts for
the purpose. Such a system will not only empower Panchayats but
also improve the implementation of the Progrmames. The common
Implementing Agency and the funds transfer agency would further
simplify the procedure and avoid delay in transfer of funds. The
Committee in their earlier reports had also been drawing the attention
of the Government in this regard. While reiterating their earlier stand
in this regard, the Committee would like that earnest action in this
regard should be taken.
Reply of the Government
It is clarified that the States have been asked to identify the number
of BPL families in accordance with the Adjusted Share as worked out
by the Planning Commission after detailed discussions with them. The
number of BPL families based on the Adjusted Share is very close to
the poverty estimates of 1993. This means that the State Governments
are having more flexibility in identifying the total number of BPL
families. The cap on the total number of BPL families to be identified
has been prescribed with the view that the resources for the
programmes are limited, therefore, it becomes necessary to ensure that
only the actually deserving poor people get the benefits. Further, the
methodology followed for BPL Census, 2002 is based on 13 scorable
socio-economic indicators, which are more transparent. The list of BPL
families prepared on the basis of these scorable parameters is required
to be discussed and approved by the Gram Sabha before it is submitted
to the Block Level/District Level Authorities. In order to check the
corrupt practices in preparation of BPL list, the Ministry has already
issued the detailed guidelines to the State Governments to display
these lists at the prominent places of the village so that everybody is
in a position to check his position in the BPL lists.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)

72
Recommendation (Para No. 2.46)
The Committee note from the data provided by the Department
that spending position under different schemes in North Eastern Region
has improved. But under spending still persists. The Committee would
like to take up the issue of under spending with North-Eastern States
so as to improve the position further.
Reply of the Government
As a practice, an on going procedure is followed by the concerned
programme divisions of the Department of Rural Development releasing
funds for its various schemes as a measure to take up the issue of
under spending by monitoring its utilization position on monthly and
quarterly basis through MPRs and QPRs and also while considering
release proposals of Second Installments funds are released on the
basis of 60 per cent utilization of the available funds and funds are
further deducted in case of late receipt of proposals from the State
Government.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12)
The Committee find from the information and clarification provided
by the Department that at present National Food for Work Programme
along with Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) is being
implemented in 150 selected districts. In the remaining district
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana is being implemented. When the
National Employment Guarantee Act will be applicable, these two
programmes will be merged together and shall be known by the name
of the Act. While noting the aforesaid scheme of things, the Committee
are at a loss to understand the plethora of schemes with the some
objective. Not only that it is not clear where the National Employment
Scheme will be applicable, indicating clearly whether it is the
replacement of Food for Work Programme. The Committee strongly
recommend that SGRY and Food for Work Programme should be
merged together in the 150 districts selected so far which will pave
the way for 100 days guarantee. The merged scheme should be known
as National Employment Guarantee Scheme which will ultimately be
proposed to take the shape of legal guarantee after the aforesaid
enactment.

73
Reply of the Government
For the present, SGRY and NFFWP should be run as separate
programmes because NFFWP is confined to only 150 districts in the
country due to different programme objectives and implementation
modalities. SGRY is a broad-based wage employment programme
implemented entirely through PRIs and forms main resource base of
the PRIs for need-based infrastructure in villages. While the need for
generation of additional wage employment is paramount, the local
need-based infrastructure such as primary schools, health centres,
sanitation, etc. in villages is a preferred choice of the village community
and it would not be desirable to deny PRIs resources altogether for
such purposes. Under NFFWP , which is being implemented by District
collector, resources should be chanelised into some focus areas like
water conservation and drought proofing which is the principal problem
in some States and a major cause of backwardness of certain regions.
When the National Employment Guarantee Bill is passed and becomes
operational as a law, merger of SGRY and NFFWP in those districts
can be considered making adequate provision for need-based village
infrastructure.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 34 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
The Committee further fail to understand the difference between
the most backward districts selected by the Department for the purpose
of National Food for Work Programme with those of 170 most
backward districts mentioned by the Finance Minister in his Budget
speech. The Committee would like the Department to analyse the
position in this regard and furnish explanation to the Committee. The
Committee would also like to strongly recommend that while selecting
the districts for National Food for Work Programme, it should be
strictly ensured that parameters for selection of districts are such that
first of all the most backward districts in a State get the due priority
in the Programme.
Reply of the Government
The districts under National Food for Work Programme were
selected on the basis of exercise undertaken by the Planning
Commission based on three para-meters namely—SC/ST population,
inverse of agricultural productivity and agricultural wage. The districts

74
mentioned by the Finance Minister is a later exercise by the Planning
Commission based on different para-meters.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 37 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.32)
The Committee further find that with regard to the payment for
foodgrains component under SGRY as well as NFFWP , there is utter
confusion. They note that as per the recent decision, the payment for
foodgrains component will directly be managed by the Ministry of
Finance. As per the data reported by the Secretary during evidence
Rs. 15,000 core is the outstanding payment to Food Corporation of
India. The Committee also note that during 2005-2006, no allocation
has been indicated against the proposed allocation of Rs. 27,375.87
crore under SGRY and Rs. 2,313 crore under NFFWP for foodgrains
component. In such a scenario the Committee fail to understand how
the Government will fulfil the commitment of providing adequate
allocation under the wage employment programme of the Department.
The Committee feel that the specific allocation and outstanding due to
Food Corporation of India should invariably be indicated in the Budget
documents irrespective of the fact whether payment is made by the
Ministry of Rural Development or Ministry of Finance to the Food
Corporation of India or to the Department of Food and Public
Distribution (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution)
so as to know about the clear picture of the allocation. The Committee
would like to be clearly informed how the Government propose to
arrange for the outlay for the employment guarantee for which
ambitious commitments have been made in the National Common
Minimum Programme as well as in the Budget announcements.
Reply of the Government
Under the proposed National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme, the foodgrains are not essential to be given as part of the
wages.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 40 of Chapter I of the Report)

75
Recommendation (Para No. 3.33)
The Committee are disappointed to note the implementation of
SGRY in some of the States particularly Union territories. The
Committee are further constrained to note the reply of the Department
stating that Union territories have never utilized their allocated
resources to the fullest extent under SGRY and as such no district
under Food for Work Programme was included for Union territories.
The Committee strongly recommend to analyse the reasons for poor
performance in each of the States as indicated in the preceding para
of the report and take the corrective action immediately. The Committee
may also be kept informed about this. The Committee are unable to
understand poor performance of SGRY in Union territories which are
directly under the administrative control of the Union Government.
They would like the explanation of the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Union territories are getting resources under various schemes
and due to their small size, the demand for wage employment is less.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 43 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35)
The Committee further note that during 2005-2006, Rs. 360 crore
out of overall savings has been allocated additionally for Tsunami
affected States. The Committee strongly recommend to monitor the
utilization position in the said district/States regularly sot hat the
benefits reach to the targeted persons.
Reply of the Government
Additional grants provided under SGRY for Tsunami affected States
is being monitored along with funds provided under normal SGRY
because it would be difficult for the implementing agencies to keep
separate accounts for the grants under the same programme.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 49 of Chapter I of the Report)

76
Recommendation (Para No. 3.50)
The Committee are concerned to note a reduction of four per cent
outlay under SGSY in 2005-2006 as compared to previous year
allocation at BE stage. They also note that during 10th plan the
Department has been allocated less than half of what was proposed
under SGSY. Similarly during 2005-2006, the Department has got less
than 75 per cent of the proposed outlay in this regard. A little over
Rs. 10,068 crore credit mobilization only has so far been achieved by
States and Union Territories against the target of Rs. 2,508 crore during
the previous year. Further alarming is the fact that none of the States
except Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan could distribute more than
50 per cent of the credit available during 2004-2005. The Committee,
therefore, conclue that the Department has to blame itself for the
reduction of outlay of the scheme in the current year. They note the
assurance of the Planning Commission to restore the Central outlay of
SGSY at the level of the previous year i.e. Rs. 1,000 crore. They also
note the reports of the Area Officers regarding the reasons for poor
performance of the scheme. In this scenario the Committee urge the
Government to take corrective measures for satisfactory implementation
of the scheme and then approach the Planning Commission by which
the commission could be convinced for higher allocation under the
scheme.
Reply of the Government
The Planning Commission has approved an outlay of Rs. 1,000
crore for SGSY during 2005-06 which is same as the outlay for the
financial year 2004-05.
Realising the fact that in no single year the targeted volume of
credit has been fully mobilised, the Department has taken various
initiatives in this regard. Problems of credit flow to swarozgaries are
regularly discussed at various fora including meetings of Central Level
Coordination Committee (CLCC), Performance Review Committee, RBI’s
Monitoring Cell for PMRY & SGSY, Project Directors Conferences etc.
The issue was also discussed in the meeting of the Central Level
Coordination Committee (CLCC) held on 7th February, 2005, where
the Committee, inter-alia, recommended that:
(i) the State Governments to regularly hold meetings of the
SGSY Implementation and Coordination Committees at State,
District and Block levels and to ensure participation of the
other concerned departments and Bankers.

77
(ii) RBI should expedite decision for opening new bank
branching in unbanked areas.
(iii) all loan applications pending at the close of the year should
be brought forward to the next year and decided upon.
(iv) the Committee advised the banks to take steps to achieve
the desired credit subsidy ratio.
Taking cognizance of the fact that the promotional agencies like
non-government organizations/SHPIs play a greater role in formation
and capacity building of groups, State Governments have been advised
to ensure greater involvement of such institutions. Bank branches not
achieving even 25 per cent of their credit mobilization targets are being
systematically identified and reported to the Chief Executives of the
concerned banks for timely remedial measures.
To ensure effective implementation of the programme, State
Governments have been advised to hold SGSY Committee meetings
regularly at Block, District and State levels as per prescribed frequency
under SGSY guidelines.
As a result of various steps taken by the Ministry , credit
mobilization has substantially increased from Rs. 1302.96 crore in
2003-2004 to Rs. 1640.11 crore in 2004-2005 (as per the latest reports
available from the States/Union Territories), an increase of about
26 per cent, as can be seen from the statement given below:
Credit mobilised under SGSY during 2003-04 and 2004-05
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl.No. State/Union Territory 2003-2004 2004-05
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 9013.19 9547.27
2. Arunachal Pradesh 141.47 199.12
3. Assam 4597.57 6108.08
4. Bihar 18640.61 21519.77
5. Chhattisgarh 3907.32 4582.55
6. Goa 62.02 92.94
7. Gujarat 3283.58 4171.79

78
 12 3 4
 8. Haryana 2471.49 2884.44
 9. Himachal Pradesh 1837.69 2306.97
10. Jammu & Kashmir 1956.54 2338.65
11. Jharkhand 6230.35 5022.35
12. Karnataka 6505.04 7560.16
13. Kerala 2516.90 3046.22
14. Madhya Pradesh 9828.74 1116.53
15. Maharashtra 9948.66 11058.06
16. Manipur 0.00 0.00
17. Meghalaya 247.54 209.38
18. Mizoram 82.06 73.72
19. Nagaland 211.26 8.48
20. Orissa 7789.65 9750.10
21. Punjab 1426.12 1215.98
22. Rajasthan 7965.36 10245.10
23. Sikkim 197.48 143.67
24. Tamil Nadu 4131.44 6867.23
25. Tripura 1762.08 1511.08
26. Uttar Pradesh 20396.07 36963.40
27. Uttaranchal 1549.44 2006.85
28. West Bengal 3487.58 3338.98
29. A&N Islands 0.00 0.20
30. Daman & Diu 0.00 0.00
31. D&N Haveli 12.50 0.00
32. Lakshadweep 6.30 1.30
33. Pondicherry 89.74 120.46
Total 130295.79 164010.82
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 52 of Chapter I of the Report)

79
Recommendation (Para No. 3.56)
The Committee observe that due care has not so far been taken by
the Government either to arrange for proper certification or for
marketing of SHG products. The Committee note the reply of the
Department that some initiatives by only two States viz. Madhya
Pradesh and Maharashtra have been taken to facilitate quality
certification of various SHG products. They feel that these efforts are
not enough. The laboratory at Wardha cannot cater tot he need of all
SHGs for the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should help to establish at least one laboratory in each
region of the country that too only for certification of SHG products,
which can be replicated for establishment of such centers in all States
and Union territories in a time bound manner later.
Reply of the Government
The quality of products produced by SGSY beneficiaries is
absolutely important to ensure sustained marketing. Therefore, care is
being taken that products which come under the category of
certification by various agencies i.e. ISI, Agmark, FPO license should
be certified accordingly. DRDAs have been directed to facilitate process
by organizing trainings to create awareness among the Swarozgaries
and ensure effective liaison with concerned agencies to ensure
certification of products. Guidelines to utilize amount of Rs. 5 lakh
earmarked for each DRDA would be reiterated to all States for its
effective implementation.
In Andhra Pradesh SGSY products have been identified for sale
through 1,100 APNA Bazar outlets. Similarly in Maharashtra DRDAs
have funded for strengthening of infrastructure by constructing/
upgrading market-sheds at Taluka Headquarters/places of weekly
bazaars, Gram Panchayats etc. Retail outlets for display and sale of
SGSY products have been established in cities like Pune (Savitri),
Nagpur (Samruddi) etc. Brand names have been given to SHG products
i.e. Sindhu in Sindhudurg District, Sewagram Nisarg in Wardha DRDA
Pune has started a marketing outlet “Savitri” to provide urban markets
for the SGSY products.
In Orissa, ORMAs have been created as an autonomous body under
Panchayati Raj Department with an objective to remove all the critical
gaps experienced in marketing and research of products produced by
Swarozgaries under SGSY. The SGSY products are channeled through
long-term marketing tie up with buyers. These products are also sold
through institutions selling, fairs and exhibition.

80
Marketing initiatives have also been undertaken in Madhya Pradesh
and agro-based non timber forest produce and dairy products have
been selected for production/processing and marketing by the State
Government, developing a “Vindhya Valley” brand for all food products
with a focus on purity.
In West Bengal Swayambhan is marketing outlet established in
Hooghly district. Besides serving as a marketing outlet for display
and sale of various products manufactured by SHGs, the outlet plays
facilitation role to act as a platform to share the experience of the
group members, assess market demands and production needs besides
to design development and improvement of products. A similar
marketing outlet by the name of “Prayas” has already been established
at Mahali.
RUDA—Rural non-farm Development Agency has been set up by
the Government of Rajasthan to promote rural non-farm sector. RUDA
collaborates with NPRI, Technical & Research Institute, Design Institute,
private entrepreneurs, including exports, domestic and International
Promotional Trade Agencies.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 55 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.69)
The Committee are unhappy to note the performance of SGSY
special projects. They find that Rs. 8.26 crore during 2003-2004 and
Rs. 94.53 crore so far during 2004-2005 have remained unspent. Not
only that, the Government have involved in the implementation Nehru
Yuvak Kendras which are under the administrative control of the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports even though DRDAs/Zilla
Parishads continue to implement rural development schemes in all
districts of the country. As admitted by the Government, the progress
of the projects being implemented by NYKs was very slow but the
pace is improving now. The Committee fail to understand as to why
the NYKs were involved in the implementation of SGSY project
specifically when DRDAs/Zilla Parishads have been established and
are functioning in most of the districts of the country to monitor the
implementation of schemes of the Ministry. The Committee in this
regard would like the Department to furnish the reasons for involving

81
NYKs in the implementation of SGSY special projects. Besides they
would like to be apprised of about the details of such projects
indicating the financial and physical performance of these projects
which are being taken up by NYKs so as to enable the Committee to
ensure the reasons for their involvements and comment further in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Regarding the Committee’s observations on the performance of
SGSY Special projects and the unspent balances during the year
2003-04 and 2004-05, the position is clarified as follows:
The Ministry of Rural development has received proposals from
several States under Special Project Component Swarna Jayanti Gram
Swarozgar Yojana (SRGSY) for approval during the last two years.
The proposals received under SGSY special projects are first desk
scrutinized to see whether the minimum requirements of guidelines
such as forwarding of projects by the State Governments, commitment
of the State Government for meeting 25 per cent State share, Bank’s
commitment, if credit is involved, focus on the Below Poverty Line
(BPL) population, constituency and viability of the concept etc. are
being met by the proposals. If the project proposals do not fulfill the
above requirements, they are returned to the concerned State
Governments. There is a two level system of approval of the project
proposals. They are first screened by the Project Screening Committee
(PSC) headed by the Joint Secretary (SGSY) and then approved by the
Project Approval Committee (PAC) headed by Secretary (RD) with
Adviser (Planning Commission), Additional Secretary & Financial
Advisor, Ministry of Rural Development as members. The approval of
the proposals is a continuous process. Since during the years 2003-04
and 2004-05, many proposals did not fulfill the prescribed requirements
and thus could not get the approval of Project Approval Committee,
the amount remained unspent during the years.
In reply to the observation of the Committee regarding the
implementation of special projects by Nehru Yuva Kendras, it is stated
that NYKs is an autonomous body under the administrative control of
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and they are engaged in the Poverty
Alleviation Programmes with active involvement of Youth Clubs. They
are also involved in other activities like Health, Education, Environment
etc.
NYKs is the largest rural youth network in the country. The basic
objective is to bring the rural youth into the mainstream of development

82
as partner of development. NYKs has formed more than two lakh
youth clubs at village panchayat level in as many as 500 districts of
India and has a youth volunteers force of over eight million.
The Youth Clubs/Mahila Mandals formed by NYKs are involve
din various developmental activities at voluntarily basis. They have
the experience of working in rural areas and pioneers in SHG
movement also. The youth clubs/mahila mandals are forming Self Help
Groups and collaborating with PRIs/DRDAs and local bodies at local
level for eradication of poverty.
Since our projects involve ground level mobilization and interaction
with the beneficiaries and NYKs have strengthened on that account,
NYKs were involved. NYKs have sanctioned four projects which were
to be implemented in following 14 districts:
Sl.No. Name of the District State
1. Sarguja Chhattisgarh
2. Kalahandi Orissa
3. Gwalior M.P .
4. Jagatsinghpur (Cuttack) Orissa
5. Gumla Jharkhand
6. Vaishali Bihar
7. Kamrup Assam
8. Nalbari Assam
9. Bhopal M.P .
10. Sihore M.P .
11. Dewas M.P .
12. Hamirpur U.P .
13. Chamoli Uttaranchal
14. Nellore A.P .
In these districts, the projects are implemented as per the norms
of SGSY guidelines. District Collector is the Chairman of District
Advisory Committee of Rural Youth Initiative (DACRYI) Committee
formed for SGSY scheme by NYKs, ADC, Project Director DRDA, Lead

83
Bank Manager, representative of NABARD and representative of other
developmental department and public representatives are also the
member of DACRYI to guide, help and for monitoring of SGSY projects
which are being run through NYKs.
Statements showing the financial and physical performance of the
projects implemented by the NYKs are enclosed at Appendix I to IV .
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 58 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.76)
The Committee find from the data indicated above that there is an
increase of 11 percent in the outlay provided during BE 2005-2006, but
if compared to RE, there is further reduction of outlay. As clarified by
the Department, even if it is accepted that  Rs. 400 crore special
assistance is provided to Bihar for construction of 2.15 lakh additional
houses damaged by floods is included in the outlay, the outlay
provided during 2005-2006 is inadequate keeping in view the data of
shelterlessness in the country. As per Government’s own data 14.84
million is the housing shortage. Not only that shortage of around 10
lakh houses is added to it annually. The Committee find that shelter
is basic necessity of life and there is an urgent need to tackle the issue
on war footing.
Reply of the Government
The Government is making all efforts to end shelterlessness in
rural areas as soon as possible. With a total outlay of Rs. 2,775 crore
during the current financial year 2005-2006, about 14.55 lakh houses
are likely to be constructed.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 61 of Chapter I of the Report)

84
Recommendation (Para No. 3.78)
The Committee further note that the Government have started
implementing several sub schemes hurriedly which have now been
merged with IAY from this year. They are astonished to find that the
Government have not been able to monitor the physical progress of
the sub-schemes except IAY, after these are merged with IAY. The plea
taken by the Department that these sub-schemes are demand-driven
and hence unmonitorable is unacceptable to the Committee. When
scarce resources are being provided, it should be spent judiciously
and the target and achievements should be monitored accordingly.
Therefore, the Committee would like that the infrastructure created
under all sub-schemes of rural housing should be monitored even
after these are merged with IAY and should be reflected in the various
Budget documents.
Reply of the Government
Each project sanctioned under Innovative Stream of rural Housing
and Habitat Development is being monitored and further instalment
of funds in respect of ongoing projects are released only after examining
the financial and physical progress/achievements.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 61 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.79)
The Committee note that nearly 15 million families were houseless
in the rural areas as per 2001 Census. In addition, about 10 lakh
houses are being added to the existing shelterlessness. The Committee
also find that various parallel rural housing schemes are being
implemented by the respective State Governments. The States of Kerala,
Tamil Nadu and Gujarat are dovetailing funds with IAY. The Committee
feel that there is an urgent need for dovetailing the rural housing
schemes with IAY in the remaining States. The dovetailing of State
Sector Schemes would not only help in avoiding the problem of
coordination but would also help in having accurate data about the
level of shelterlessness in a particular State. The Committee would
like that said issue should be taken up and discussed at the various
conference/workshops and through various review meetings conducted

85
by the Ministry in which representatives of State Governments
participate. The Committee should also be apprised about the
deliberations and outcome of such discussions.
Reply of the Government
The information has been called for from all State Governments to
know as to which of the State  Governments are implementing parallel
rural housing schemes.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 61 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.80)
The Committee are concerned to note that several IAY houses have
been constructed without basic necessities, like proper ventilation,
provision for windows, drinking water, toilets etc. as found by them
during their Study visit. They feel that without the provision for basic
necessities the condition of poor people living in IAY houses can not
be improved. They, therefore, recommend that it should be ensured to
provide basic necessities in IAY houses so that poor people can live
with dignity.
Reply of the Government
Construction of sanitary latrine and smokeless chulha is an integral
part of IAY houses. However, in case of default by any beneficiary, an
amount of Rs. 600 and Rs. 100 respectively is deducted from the Central
financial assistance. As regards provision of ventilation, it is stated
that the construction of IAY houses is done by the beneficiary himself
according to his choice.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 61 of Chapter I of the Report)

86
Recommendation (Para No. 3.105)
While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee feel that
there is an urgent need to take stringent steps for the better and
effective implementation of the programme. As stated above, the
performance of the projects taken under I to IV phases of PMGSY is
not satisfactory in some of the States. The problems as stated by the
Department are manifold like institutional problems, and procedural
delays etc. The Committee would like that the State—specific problems
in the under performing States should be analysed critically and the
corrective action taken thereon. The Committee may also be apprised
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department has analysed the issues in the under-performing
States and a critical note is enclosed at  Appendix-V.
The maintenance provisions are strictly adhered to from Phase III
(2003-04) onwards since they are governed by contracts enforceable in
a Court of Law. The Department regularly reviews the status of
maintenance budgeting and funding during Empowered Committee
meetings, Regional Review meetings etc. Fresh proposals for road works
are approved only after requisite provisions for maintenance are made
by the State Government concerned.
While considering the project proposals of States, the Department
invariably examines the percentage of funds allocated for upgradation
works to ensure that the guidelines in this regard are strictly adhered
to.
The works of Phase I and phase II were awarded with a 5 year
defect-free guarantee from the contractors. The 5 years maintenance
clause has been included in the Contracts from Phase III onwards.
The Phase III works would be completed by 2004-05 or later and,
therefore, provision for contract maintenance would be made in the
budget of the States from the year 2005-06 onwards. Expenditure on
maintenance during 2005-06 will be available in 2006-07.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 70 of Chapter I of the Report)

87
Recommendation (Para No. 3.106)
The Committee further note that the guidelines of the Yojana
provide for the maintenance of roads. The roads constructed under
PMGSY will be maintained by the Project Implementing Units and
after that the maintenance will be taken over by the PRI designated
for the purpose. The State authorities are also required to furnish an
undertaking that they would remit to the identified PRI from the State
Government funds, the requisite cost of maintenance. The Committee
find that although an elaborate system has been indicated in the
guidelines for the maintenance of roads constructed under PMGSY
there is an urgent need that these provisions are strictly adhered to by
the State Governments. The Committee would like the Department to
take the desired steps in this regard and apprise them accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Department has analysed the issues in the under-performing
States and a critical note is enclosed at Appendix-V.
The maintenance provisions are strictly adhered to from Phase III
(2003-04) onwards since they are governed by contracts enforceable in
a Court of Law. The Department regularly reviews the status of
maintenance budgeting and funding during Empowered Committee
meetings, Regional Review meetings etc. Fresh proposals for road works
are approved only after requisite provisions for maintenance are made
by the State Government concerned.
While considering the project proposals of States, the Department
invariably examines the percentage of funds allocated for upgradation
works to ensure that the guidelines in this regard are strictly adhered
to.
The works of Phase I and Phase II were awarded with a 5 year
defect—free guarantee from the contractors. The 5 years maintenance
clause has been included in the Contracts from Phase III onwards.
The Phase III works would be completed by 2004-05 or later and,
therefore, provision for contract maintenance would be made in the
budget of the States from the year 2005-06 onwards. Expenditure on
maintenance during 2005-06 will be available in 2006-07.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC,
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 70 of Chapter I of the Report)

88
Reply of the Government
The Department of Rural Development has been assisting the State
Governments and Central Agencies to expedite the work of PMGSY
and many training programmes, workshops, reviews and other required
interventions have been organized through NRRDA. A former Chief
Engineer of Rural Engineering Organisation (REO), Bihar has been
engaged as Coordinating Consultant to coordinate the activities of
Nominated Executive Agencies (NEAs), State Technical Agencies (STAs)
and the State Government in Bihar.
Similarly Government of Tripura has signed a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) with NBCC and the Ministry of Rural
Development in April 2004 for execution of PMGSY works in West
Tripura district by NBCC in accordance with the PMGSY Guidelines
in force. Subsequently, NBCC has also been entrusted with the task of
execution of PMGSY works in South Tripura district. Efforts to build
up capacity in other States, including Hill States and North Eastern
States, are continuing. The success of these experiments is being studied
for replication.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC,
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 70 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.107)
The Committee note that PMGSY was envisaged with a laudable
objective of providing connectivity to not connected habitations. The
guidelines of the Yojana provides for upgradation of roads up to
20 per cent of the State’s allocation where unconnected habitations
still exist. The Committee also note that although it has been indicated
in the guidelines that upgradation is not central to the Programme,
there is a need to monitor and ensure that the main emphasis of
Yojana is to provide new connectivity so that the main objective of
starting the Yojana is not sidelined. The Committee therefore like the
Department to strictly monitor the position in this regard. Besides the
Committee would like to be apprised to the data indicating the per
cent allocation and expenditure made on new connectivity as well as on
maintenance scheme-wise, year-wise and State and Union territory wise.

89
Reply of the Government
The Department has analysed the issues in the under-performing
States and a critical note is enclosed at Appendix-V.
The maintenance provisions are strictly adhered to from Phase III
(2003-04) onwards since they are governed by contracts enforceable in
a Court of Law. The Department regularly reviews the status of
maintenance budgeting and funding during Empowered Committee
meetings, Regional Review meetings etc. Fresh proposals for road works
are approved only after requisite provisions for maintenance are made
by the State Government concerned.
While considering the project proposals of States, the Department
invariably examines the percentage of funds allocated for upgradation
works to ensure that the guidelines in this regard are strictly adhered
to.
The works of Phase I and Phase II were awarded with a 5 year
defect—free guarantee from the contractors. The 5 years maintenance
clause has been included in the Contracts from Phase III onwards.
The Phase III works would be completed by 2004-05 or later and,
therefore, provision for contract maintenance would be made in the
budget of the States from the year 2005-06 onwards. Expenditure on
maintenance during 2005-06 will be available in 2006-07.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC,
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 73 of Chapter I of the Report)

90
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 2.47)
On the issue of revision of norms for Centre vis-a-vis State’s
allocation, the Committee find that the matter of revision of Centre,
State allocation from 75 : 25 to 90 : 10 is being taken up with the
Planning Commission. The Committee would like to know the final
decision when taken in this respect.
Reply of the Government
The matter has been taken up with the Planning Commission and
still under its consideration.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC,
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.34)
The Committee are further constrained to note that out of 12 States
to whom foodgrains were released under Special Component of SGRY,
only 4 States have submitted the progress reports. Further the data
submitted by the Department in case of these States is also not clear.
Foodgrains authorized indicated is for the year 2004-2005, whereas the
utilization data is cumulative data including utilization for the year
2004-2005. Thus the performance cannot be evaluated. The Committee
would like that the data for each year under specific item should be
made individually so as to enable the Committee to come to some
meaningful conclusion. The Committee strongly recommend that proper
monitoring of data should be done for the outlay earmarked under
Special Component of SGRY so as to ensure that the meagre resources
earmarked for calamity affected areas reach the intended calamity
stricken beneficiaries. The Committee would like the Department to
collect the utilization data from such States/District and submit before
the Committee along with the position of mandays created.

91
Reply of the Government
All the State Governments concerned have been requested to
indicate utilization of quantity of foodgrains and mandays generated
with the resources given under the Special Component of SGRY. The
Committee will be informed after collecting information from the States
in this regard.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC,
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 46 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.77)
The Committee further note that ambitious targets of constructing
60 lakh houses in four years (2005-2006 to 2008-2009) have been set
up under ‘Bharat Nirman’. They feel that without adequate funding,
targets will remain only dreams. To translate such ambitious
programmes in to reality, the Committee strongly recommend that
adequate outlay should be provided. Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission should be approached for adequate funding. The
Committee would like to be apprised of their reaction. With regard to
special allocation of Rs. 400 crore as provided to Bihar for construction
of 2.15 lakh additional houses damaged by floods, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the physical achievement in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Planning Commission has been approached to provide
adequate funds under IAY for construction of 15 lakh houses annually
under ‘Bharat Nirman’ Programme. As regards special allocation of
Rs. 400 crore to Bihar, the State Government has been asked to furnish
physical achievements in this regard.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC,
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 64 of Chapter I of the Report)

92
Recommendation (Para No. 3.103)
The Committee note that a laudable programme was launched by
the Government on 25 December, 2000 with the objective to provide
road connectivity, through good all weather roads to all unconnected
rural habitations with a population of 1000 or more by 2003 and those
habitations having population of more than 500 persons by the year
2007. As per the revised estimates under ‘Bharat Nirman’ the
habitations having population of 1000 (or 500 in hilly, tribal areas) are
now proposed to be covered by 2009. The earlier estimates of outlay
required were for Rs. 60,000 crore. As per Economic Survey, now the
said projections have increased to Rs. 1,33,000 crore. Further if the
objective set under ‘Bharat Nirman’ i.e. to upgrade and renew a portion
of the Core Net Work is included, as per the Government’s estimates,
an outlay of Rs. 48,000 crore will be required during next four years
which implies an annual allocation of Rs. 9,600 crore against the current
budget of Rs. 4,235 during 2005-06.
Reply of the Government
At present, the PMGSY programme is being funded from (a)
Accruals from the cess on High Speed Diesel (HSD) and (b) Borrowings
from the World Bank and Asian Development Bank (ADB).
For the year 2005-06, the Department had projected a requirement
of Rs. 7,240 crore, including Rs. 1,250 crore for World Bank/ADB
projects. This projection was based on the likely accruals from Diesel
cess and likely flow for World Bank/ADB funding.
For Bharat Nirman, fund requirement is estimated at
Rs. 48,000 crore over the next five year period (tills 2009). The bulk of
funding will be required for 19 States comprising the 10 Core States
(Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya
Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal), the 7 NE
States and 2 Hill States. In the meeting of the National Committee on
Rural Infrastructure held on 16th May, 2005 under the Chairmanship
of the Hon’ble Prime Minister, it was concluded that after taking into
account likely availability of funding through Cess on High Speed
Diesel at the current rates and after factoring in three ADB loans and
two World Bank credits, there is a net gap of Rs. 17,835 crore upto
2009-2010. The Committee has desired that the Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission locate the funds necessary to meet the gap
in consultation with the Ministry. Discussions have taken place on
8th June 2005 and final response of the Finance Ministry and Planning
Commission is awaited.

93
Separately Department of Economic Affairs has been requested that
the ADB’s Rural Roads Sector Projects (RRSP)-III loan of US $ 350
million due in 2007 be clubbed with the RRSP-II for US $ 400 million
currently under negotiation, to make loan size a more goal-oriented
size of US$ 750 million.
Ministry of Finance has also been requested to ask the World Bank
to start discussion on a second loan and to increase the loan size from
the current $570m to $750m.
Amendment to Central Road Fund Act is required to enable States
to leverage their cess allocation to raise funds to meet their requirement
of modernizing and augmenting the rural roads network and to repay
the loan. Further action will be taken after the final decision of the
Rural Infrastructure Committee.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 67 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.104)
The Committee find from what has been stated above, that the
targets of connectivity cannot be achieved with present level of
allocation. They also find that due to spillover of targets, the estimates
of required outlay have considerably increased. The present estimates
of requirement of Rs. 48,000 crore for four years may further enhance,
if the set targets are not achieved as per the revised date of coverage
of habitation population of 1000 i.e. by the year 2009. Thus the
Committee conclude that inadequate financial resources is the biggest
concern. For augmenting resources for the programme, the Committee
suggest the following:
(i) the projections made by the Department during 2005-06 do
not correspond to the annual requirement of outlay to
achieve the objective of Bharat Nirman. The Department in
fact got Rs. 595 crore more than the projected outlay during
2005-2006. The projections made by the Department should
commensurate to the overall projections of the Government;
(ii) there is enough scope to tap external funding from ADB/
World Bank. More efforts need to be made to explore the
potential for augmenting available resources with external
funding;

94
(iii) The Committee in their earlier report (refer paragraph No.
3.126 of 3rd Report—14th Lok Sabha) had expressed their
concern over not allocating funds on account of increase in
diesel cess. As reported by the Department, the arrears
amounting to Rs. 2,500 crore on account of additional cess
imposed since 2003-2004 have not been allocated to the
Department. Besides, during the current year i.e. 2005-2006
although there is a proposal to increase the cess on petrol
and diesel by 50 paise per litre, the additional resources are
proposed to be exclusively earmarked for the National
Highways. Keeping in view the escalation in cost of
construction roads due to spillover of the targets as stated
above, at least 50 percent of the additional resources to be
procured by the additional cess should be made available
for PMGSY;
(iv) As replied by the Department a proposal has been moved
to amend the Central Road Fund Act to enable cess funds
to be used for repaying loans taken for constructing and
upgrading rural roads to facilitate leverage of the cess in
the domestic capital market. The Committee strongly
recommend to the Government to finalise the aforesaid
proposal which may enable the Government to leverage long
term funds from the domestic capital market.
Reply of the Government
At present, the PMGSY programme is being funded from (a)
Accruals from the cess on High Speed Diesel (HSD) and (b) Borrowings
from the World Bank and Asian Development Bank (ADB).
For the year 2005-06, the Department had projected a requirement
of Rs. 7,240 crore, including Rs. 1,250 crore for World Bank/ADB
projects. This projection was based on the likely accruals from Diesel
cess and likely flow for World Bank/ADB funding.
For Bharat Nirman, fund requirement is estimated at
Rs. 48,000 crore over the next five year period (tills 2009). The bulk of
funding will be required for 19 States comprising the 10 Core States
(Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya
Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal), the 7 NE
States and 2 Hill States. In the meeting of the National Committee on
Rural Infrastructure held on 16th May, 2005 under the Chairmanship
of the hon’ble Prime Minister, it was concluded that after taking into
account likely availability of funding through Cess on High Speed

95
Diesel at the current rates and after factoring in three ADB loans and
two World Bank credits, there is a net gap of Rs. 17,835 crore upto
2009-2010. The Committee has desired that the Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission locate the funds necessary to meet the gap
in consultation with the Ministry. Discussions have taken place on
8th June 2005 and final response of the Finance Ministry and Planning
Commission is awaited.
Separately Department of Economic Affairs has been requested that
the ADB’s Rural Roads Sector Projects (RRSP)-III loan of US $350
million due in 2007 be clubbed with the RRSP-II for US $400 million
currently under negotiation, to make loan size a more goal-oriented
size of US$ 750 million.
Ministry of Finance has also been requested to ask the World Bank
to start discussion on a second loan and to increase the loan size from
the current $570m to $750m.
Amendment to Central Road Fund Act is required to enable States
to leverage their cess allocation to raise funds to meet their requirement
of modernizing and augmenting the rural roads network and to repay
the loan. Further action will be taken after the final decision of the
Rural Infrastructure Committee.
 [Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H.11020/3/2005-GC
dated 25.8.2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 67 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
12 December, 2005 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

96
APPENDIX I
STATEMENT SHOWING FINANCIAL AND PHYSICAL
PERFORMANCE OF NYKs: 152(1)
FORMAT-1
Format for Special Project under SGSY NYKs-152(I)
Physical & Financial Progress for the Quarter ending March, 2005
Form at 1.1 : Project Profile
 1. Name of the State NYKs
 2. Name of Project A Rural Youth Initiative
 3. Date of Sanction 31.3.2000
 4. Date of Completion Continue
 5. No. of districts covered 4
 6. Approved Cost of the project 15 crore
(i) Central Share 15 crore
(ii) State Share Nil
(iii) Bank loan 5 crore
(iv) Total project cost 20 crore
(v) Average per beneficiary cost 50,000
7.1 Physical Target (Activity wise) Units
(i) Formation of SHG 400 SHG
(ii) Capacity Building 4000 SHG
Members
(iii) Skill Training 4000 SHG
Members
7.2 If irrigation project, size of command —
area (in hectare)

97
7.3 No. of SHGs proposed  400 SHG
7.4 No. of Swarozgaries 4000
Total 4000
SC 1513
ST 1234
Women 2466
Disabled    3
7.5 Average per capita annual income of 30,000 Rs.
Swarozgaries after completion of project
1.2 Financial Performance
Sl. Name of Total Available Funds Total Expenditure Amount of Credit
No. District mobilised
Central State Bank Misc. Total Exp. upto During Total %Exp. to Credit Upto During Total % to total
Loan Receipts last the total target last the targeted
Quarter Quarter available quarter quarter loan of
funds project
1. Cuttack
2. Sarguja 7.50 7.50 2,20,46,016 — 2,20,46016 5,29,53,984 5 — — — —
crore crore crore
3. Kalahandi
4. Gwalior
FORMAT-2
Format for Special Project under SGSY
Infrastructure Project
Financial and Physical Progress upto Quarter 2005
Format 2.1 : Project Profile (Rs. in lakh)
State NYKs
Name of Project A Rural Youth Initiative
Year of launching 31.3.2000
Approved Cost of the project 15 crore
(i) Central Share 15 crore

98
(ii) State Share Nil
(iii) Total project cost 15 crore
Activities proposed
(i) Formation of SHG 400 SHG
(ii) Capacity Building 4000 SHG Members
(iii) Skill Training 4000 SHG Members
N.B.: for Item No. 6 please use rows as per the number of activities.
Format 1.3 Physical Performances—District-wise/Activity-wise
Sl. Name of No. of SHG formed Individual Swarozgaries No. of assets
No. District Assisted created
No. of No. of SC ST Women Disabled Total Total SC ST Women Disabled Name No.
SHG SHG
formed Assisted
1. Cuttack 100 100 83 100 1366 290 10 838
2. Sarguja 100 100 52 100 1110 380 646 578
3. Kalahandi 100 100 76 100 1186 260 410 814 3
4. Gwalior 100 100 16 — 100 972 543 168 236
Total 400 400 227 400 4634 1513 1234 2466 3
Format 2.2 Financial Performance—State level position
Total funds received 7.50 crore
(i) Central release 7.50 crore
(ii) State release —
(iii) Misc. receipts —
(iv) Total 7.50 crore
Total Expenditure 2,20,46,016
(i) Exp. during the month —
(ii) Exp. upto the month 2,20,46,016
%exp. Total available fund 5,29,53,984

99
APPENDIX II
STATEMENT SHOWING FINANCIAL AND PHYSICAL
PERFORMANCE OF NYKs: 153(2)
FORMAT-1
Format for Special Project under SGSY NYKs-153(2)
Physical & Financial Progress for the Quarter ending March, 2005
Format 1.1 : Project Profile
1. Name of the State NYKs
2. Name of Project A Rural Youth
Initiative
3. Date of Sanction 31.3.2000
4. Date of Completion Continue
5. No. of districts covered 4
6. Approved Cost of the project 13.38 crore
(i) Central Share 13.38 crore
(ii) State Share Nil
(iii) Bank loan 5 crore
(iv) Total project cost 18.38 crore
(v) Average per beneficiary cost 46,000
7.1 Physical Target (Activity-wise) Units
(i) Formation of SHG 400 SHG
(ii) Capacity Building 4000 SHG
Members
(iii) Skill Training 4000 SHG
Members
7.2 If irrigation project, size of command —
area (in hectare)
7.3 No. of SHGs proposed 400 SHG

100
7.4 No. of Swarozgaries 4000
Total 4000
SC 955
ST 1048
Women 2460
Disabled 35
7.5 Average per capital annual income of Rs. 30,000
Swarozgaries after completion of
project
1.2 Financial Performance
Sl. Name of Total Available Funds Total Expenditure Amount of Credit
No. District mobilized
Central State Bank Misc. Total Exp. upto During Total %Exp. to Credit Upto During Total % to total
Loan Receipts last the total target last the targeted
Quarter Quarter available quarter quarter loan of
funds project
1. Vaishali
2. Kamrup 6.69 6.69 1,95,99,001 — 1,95,99,001 4,73,00,999 5 — — — —
crore crore crore
3. Nalbari
4. Gumla
FORMAT-2
Format for Special Project under SGSY NYKs Project-153(2)
Infrastructure Project
Financial and Physical Progress upto Quarter 2005
Format 2.1 : Project Profile (Rs. in lakh)
State NYKs
Name of Project A Rural Youth Initiative
Year of launching 31.3.2000
No. of districts covered 4
Approved Cost of the 13.38 crore
project
(i) Central Share 13.38 crore

101
(ii) State Share Nil
(iii) Total project cost 13.38 crore
Activities proposed
(i) Formation of SHG 400 SHG
(ii) Capacity Building 4000 SHG Members
(iii) Skill Training 4000 SHG Members
N.B.: for Item No. 6 please use rows as per the number of activities.
Format 1.3 Physical Performances—District-wise/Activity-wise
Sl. Name of No. of SHG formed Individual Swarozgaries No. of assets
No. District Assisted created
No. of No. of SC ST Women Disabled Total Total SC ST Women Disabled Name No.
SHG SHG
formed Assisted
1. Vaishali 100 100 8 100 831 404 — 196 10
2. Kamrup 100 100 67 100 1408 310 819 984 —
3. Nalbari 101 100 67 101 1000 236 10 585 10
4. Gumla 100 100 67 — 100 1104 5 229 695 15
Total 401 400 209 401 4343 955 1048 2460 35
Format 2.2 Financial Performance—State level position
Total funds received 6.69 crore
(i) Central release 6.69 crore
(ii) State release —
(iii) Misc. receipts —
(iv) Total 6.69 crore
Total Expenditure 1,95,99,001
(i) Exp. during the month —
(ii) Exp. upto the month 1,95,99,001
%exp. Total available fund 4,73,00,999

102
APPENDIX III
STATEMENT SHOWING FINANCIAL AND PHYSICAL
PERFORMANCE OF NYKs: 154(3)
FORMAT-1
Format for Special Project under SGSY NYKs-154(3)
Physical & Financial Progress for the Quarter ending March, 2005
Form at 1.1 : Project Profile
1. Name of the State NYKs
2. Name of Project A rural Youth
Initiative
3. Date of Sanction 2002
4. Date of Completion Continue
5. No. of districts covered 3
6. Approved Cost of the project 10.66 crore
(i) Central Share 10.66 crore
(ii) State Share Nil
(iii) Bank loan 3.75 crore
(iv) Total project cost 14.41 crore
(v) Average per beneficiary cost 42,000
7.1 Physical Target (Activity wise) Units
(i) Formation of SHG 300 SHG
(ii) Capacity Building 300 SHG
(iii) Skill Training 300 SHG
Members
7.2 If irrigation project, size of command —
area (in hectare)
7.3 No. of SHGs proposed 400 SHG

103
7.4 No. of Swarozgaries 3000
Total 3000
SC 1091
ST 480
Women 1204
Disabled 37
7.5 Average per capital annual income of Rs. 30,000
Swarozgaries after completion of
project
1.2 Financial Performance
Sl. Name of Total Available Funds Total Expenditure Amount of Credit
No. District mobilized
Central State Bank Misc. Total Exp. upto During Total %Exp. to Credit Upto During Total % to total
Loan Receipts last the total target last the targeted
Quarter Quarter available quarter quarter loan of
funds project
1. Bhopal
2. Sehore 4.264 4.264 89,48,397 — 89,48,397 3,36,91,703 7.50 — — — _
crore crore crore
3. Dewas
FORMAT-2
Format for Special Project under SGSY NYKs Project-153(2)
Infrastructure Projects
Financial and Physical Progress upto Quarter 2005
Format 2.1 : Project Profile (Rs. in lakh)
State NYKs
Name of Project A Rural Youth Initiative
Year of launching 2002
No. of districts covered 3
Approved Cost of the 10.66 crore
project
(i) Central Share 10.66 crore
(ii) State Share Nil

104
(iii) Total project cost 10.66 crore
Activities proposed
(i) Formation of SHG 300 SHG
(ii) Capacity Building 3000 SHG Members
(iii) Skill Training 3000 SHG Members
N.B.: for item no. 6 please use rows as per the number of activities.
Format 1.3 Physical Performances-District-wise/Activity-wise
Sl. Name of No. of SHG formed Individual Swarozgaries No. of assets
No. District Assisted created
No. of No. of SC ST Women Disabled Total Total SC ST Women Disabled Name No
SHG SHG
formed Assisted
1. Bhopal 100 100 25 100 602 256 9 250 7
2. Sehore 100 100 39 100 1067 432 88 547 —
3. Dewas 100 100 29 100 1077 403 383 407 30
Total 300 300 93 300 2746 480 480 1204 37
Format 2.2 Financial Performance—State level position
Total funds received 4,26,40,000
(i) Central release 4,26,40,000
(ii) State release —
(iii) Misc. receipts —
(iv) Total 4,26,40,000
Total Expenditure 89,48,397
(i) Exp. during the month —
(ii) Exp. upto the month 89,48,397
%exp. Total available fund 3,36,91,703

105
APPENDIX IV
STATEMENT SHOWING FINANCIAL AND PHYSICAL
PERFORMANCE OF NYKs: 155(4)
FORMAT-1
Format for Special Project under SGSY NYKs-155(4)
Physical & Financial Progress for the Quarter ending March, 2005
Form at 1.1 : Project Profile
1. Name of the State NYKs
2. Name of Project A Rural Youth
Initiative
3. Date of Sanction 2002
4. Date of Completion Continue
5. No. of districts covered 3
6. Approved Cost of the project 15.00 crore
(i) Central Share 10.66 crore
(ii) State Share Nil
(iii) Bank loan 3.75 crore
(iv) Total project cost 15 crore
(v) Average per beneficiary cost 42,000
7.1 Physical Target (Activity-wise) Units
(i) Formation of SHG 300 SHG
(ii) Capacity Building 3000 Members
(iii) Skill Training 3000 Members
7.2 If irrigation project, size of command —
area (in hectare)
7.3 No. of SHGs proposed 300 SHG

106
7.4 No. of Swarozgaries 3000
Total 3000
SC 949
ST 435
Women 923
Disabled 16
7.5 Average per capital annual income of Rs. 30,000
Swarozgaries after completion of
project
1.2 Financial Performance
Sl. Name of Total Available Funds Total Expenditure Amount of Credit
No. District mobilized
Central State Bank Misc. Total Exp. upto During Total %Exp. to Credit Upto During Total % to total
Loan Receipts last the total target last the targeted
Quarter Quarter available quarter quarter loan of
funds project
1. Nellore
2. Chamoli 4.264 4.264 1,37,46,233 — 2,88,93,767 2,88,93,767 3.75 — — _ —
crore crore crore
3. Hamirpur
FORMAT-2
Format for Special Project under SGSY NYKs Project-153(2)
Infrastructure Projects
Financial and Physical Progress upto Quarter 2005
Format 2.1 : Project Profile (Rs. in lakh)
  1     2    3
State NYKs
Name of Project A Rural Youth Initiative
Year of launching 2002
No. of districts covered 3
Approved Cost of the 15 crore
project
(i) Central Share 10.66 crore

107
  1     2    3
(ii) State Share Nil
(iii) Total project cost 15 crore
Activities proposed
(i) Formation of SHG 300 SHG
(ii) Capacity Building 3000 Members
(iii) Skill Training 3000 Members
N.B.: for item no. 6 please use rows as per the number of activities.
Format 1.3 Physical Performances—District-wise/Activity-wise
Sl. Name of No. of SHG formed Individual Swarozgaries No. of assets
No. District Assisted created
No. of No. of SC ST Women Disabled Total Total SC ST Women Disabled Name No
SHG SHG
formed Assisted
1. Bhopal 100 100 25 100 602 256 9 250 7
2. Sehore 100 100 39 100 1067 432 88 547 —
3. Dewas 100 100 29 100 1077 403 383 407 30
Total 300 300 93 300 2746 480 480 1204 37
Format 2.2 Financial Performance—State level position
Total funds received 4,26,40,000
(i) Central release 4,26,40,000
(ii) State release —
(iii) Misc. receipts —
(iv) Total 4,26,40,000
Total Expenditure 1,37,46,233
(i) Exp. during the month —
(ii) Exp. upto the month 1,37,46,233
% exp. Total available fund 2,88,93,767

108
APPENDIX V
NOTE ON UNDER-PERFORMING STATES IN
RESPECT OF PMGSY
The progress of implementation of PMGSY in Phase I (2000-2001)
got delayed as this was the first year of the programme and funds
were released on the basis of line estimates but since clearance was
given on the basis of line estimates, it took time to prepare DPRs. In
Phase-II, pace of implementation picked up significantly in January-
March 2001. In Phase-III, the States were advised to furnish DPRs
before placing proposals before the Empowered Committee.
Consequently, clearances were accorded, in many cases, at the fag end
of 2003-2004. Tendering and awarding was held up, in many cases,
due to General Elections and the enforcement of the Model Code of
conduct. In the case of Phase-IV (2004-2005), the proposals were cleared
mostly during the year 2004-05.
The progress in the following nine States is less than satisfactory:
Progress of works under PMGSY
(% of No. of Road Works completed)
State Phase
II I III
Bihar 61% 35% 0%
Goa 100% 0% 0%
Jammu & Kashmir 92% 9% 0%
Kerala 91% 80% 0%
Manipur 61% 13% 0%
Meghalaya 100% 44% 0%
Sikkim 100% 53% 0%
Tripura 100% 11% 0%
Uttaranchal 96% 47% 0%

109
In respect of Bihar, the progress of Phase I (2000-01) and Phase II
(2001-03) had been extremely slow and only about 61% works have
been completed in Phase I and about 35% works have been completed
in Phase II so far. The SRRDA is not properly functional, in terms of
posting of senior full time staff like CEO, Financial Controller and
Empowered Officer. In view of slow progress of works under PMGSY,
mainly due to inadequacy of State executing agency, it was decided to
have tie-up with Central Executing Agencies and after detailed
discussions with the Central PSUs and in consultation with the State
Government, tripartite Agreements were executed by Central PSUs
(NHPC, NBCC, NPCC and IRCON), the State Government and the
Ministry of Rural Development in August, 2004 for execution of works,
whereby 33 of the 37 districts of the State have been assigned to these
Agencies. The remaining 4 districts have been assigned to CPWD.
These Agencies have mobilised and have commenced the
implementation process.
In respect of Goa, the progress of Phase II (2000-01) onwards had
been extremely slow mainly due to non-availability of land as
No Objection Certificate (NOC) from private owners is reported to be
very difficult. It has been reported by the State  Government that
initially roads were proposed based on the assurance given by the
Village Panchayat that NOC from the land owners would be made
available. Subsequently, it has been reported that the name of the
owners of the land shown in the land records are mostly of the
ancestors and it is difficult to obtain NOCs from the present occupants
of the land.
In respect of Jammu and Kashmir, the works of Phase I (2000-01)
and Phase II (2001-03) have not been completed so far and in
Phase I, 92% works have been completed but in Phase II even 10% of
the works could not be completed. The works of Phase I and Phase
II were being executed by the Rural Development Department and
adequate institutional arrangements were not in place. Now, the State
has strengthened the institutional arrangements and placed the SRRDA
with the Public Works Department. For Phase III (2003-04), the clearance
for works was given in June 2004 but the works could not be grounded
as tendering process was stayed by the Hon’ble High Court of Jammu
& Kashmir. The stay has been got vacated and tendering process was
started afresh and most of the works have now been reported to have
been allotted. The staff of the executing agency and contractors require
rigorous training, for which, the State Government has been advised
to forward proposals for funding through NRRDA.

110
In the case of Kerala, Phase III was cleared in 2003 and in last
2 years, no work out of 53 road works of 99.07 km length has been
completed. Clearance for Phase-IV (2004-05) was accorded during
December, 2004 but tendering is yet to be completed. The problems in
Kerala have been partly due to weak institutional capacity (lack of
Executive Engineers at the PIU level) as well as in part due to difficulty
in obtaining land. Even officers of AE and JE level are not available
for the programme. Supporting staff has also not been provided to the
Cells. The State Government has been advised to take urgent steps to
strengthen the institutional capacity. It has been reported that PIUs
and Blocks have been strengthened with Technical officers—one
Executive Engineer each has been posted in 14 districts and vacancies
of Assistant Executive Engineers in DRDAs and Assistant Engineers in
Blocks have been filled up.
In respect of Manipur, the implementation of the programme has
been extremely slow and only 61% works have been completed in
Phase I (2000-01) and 13% of works have been completed in Phase II
(2001-03). The State Government has been advised to use the unspent
balance under Phase I along with interest accrued to complete
Phase II works. Though the State has created the SRRDA, dedicated
technical officers of the rank of SE or CE are not available within the
SRRDA to perform its functions. After repeated interventions by the
Ministry, 6 PIUs have been constituted in 9 Districts recently. In absence
of the supervising officers, the quality of works and contract
management is way below expectations and for requisite training of
its engineers and contractor’s engineers the State Government has been
requested to depute them for training to be funded through NRRDA.
In respect of Meghalaya, the progress of works of Phase II
(2001-03) is extremely slow and only 44% works have been completed
so far even after the lapse of three years. This was due to the fact that
the Contract Management Systems are still not in place and liquidated
damages for delay are not being systematically levied against the
contractors and payments to contractors for work done are also delayed.
The staff of the executing agency and contractors need rigorous training.
The State Government has been advised to get them trained with
funding through NRRDA.
In respect of Sikkim, the progress of works in Phase II (2001-03)
is very slow as only 33% of works have been completed even after
the lapse of three years. In Phase III (2003-04), though the clearance
was accorded in September, 2003, the works could commence only in
the month of February, 2004 as a lot of time was taken because of

111
delay in payment of compensation for land. Though the institutional
capacity in the State has been enhanced through the SRRDA and
outsourcing some of the activities to a Consultant, the staff of the
executing agency and Contractors still require rigorous training, which
may be funded through NRRDA.
In respect of Tripura, the institutional arrangements are extremely
weak due to which there has been no progress in Phase-II of the
programme. Having regard to the capacity constraints, the work of
two districts has been given by the State Government to NBCC and
combined proposals for Phase III, IV and V in respect of West Tripura
district have recently been cleared for Rs. 39.59 crore. The State
Government has been requested to explore the possibility of deploying
Central Agencies in the other two districts also to expedite the progress.
In respect of Uttaranchal, progress of works is slow and the
programme in the State has suffered since the very beginning of
implementation, due to inadequate planning and implementation
arrangements. The progress of Phase II has been extremely slow and
only about 40% works have been completed, even after the lapse of
three years. The clearance for Phase III proposals was given by the
Ministry in the month of June 2004, but the works have not been
grounded so far and there is no progress in this Phase except for
bridge works, because of delay in obtaining forest clearance. Though
the State has now created the SRRDA and has placed some officers in
the Agency , this needs further strengthening as at present very few of
the officers are dedicated whole time for the programme and without
them the institutional arrangements may not yield desired results.

112
APPENDIX VI
NAME AND PLACE WHERE THE EXTENSION TRAINING
CENTRES (ETCs) ARE FUNCTIONING
State Places where the ETCs are functioning
12
Andhra Pradesh Srikalahasti, Warangal, Bapatala (Guntur),
Samalkota (East Godavari and Rajendranagar
(Hyderabad)-5
Arunachal Pradesh Pasighat-1
Assam Jorhat, Joysagar, Kahikuchi and Hailakandi-4
Bihar Gaya, Saharsa and Muzaffarpur-3
Chhattisgarh Chandkuri (Raipur)-1
Gujarat Junagarh, Disa and Navasari-3
Haryana Nilokheri-1
Himachal Pradesh Mashobra-1
Jammu & Kashmir R.S. Pura (Jammu) and Budgam (Srinagar)-2
Jharkhand Jasidih (Santhal Pargana) and Hazaribagh-2
Karnataka Gulbarga, Sirsi, Mysore, Gowripet (Kolar) and
Mandya-5
Kerala Kottarakara, Mannuthy (Thrissur) and
Taliparamba (Kannur)-3
Madhya Pradesh Ujjain, Bhopal, Multai, Jabalpur, Indore,
Nowgaon (Chattarpur) and Gwalior-7
Maharashtra Parbhani, Jalna, Buldana, Kosbad Hill (Thane),
Gargoti (Kohlapur), K. Bamda (Kolhapur),
Manjri Farm (Pune) and Amaravati-8
Meghalaya Nongsder-1
Mizoram Pukpui-1

113
12
Nagaland Tuensang and Phek-2
Orissa Bhubaneswar, Keonjhar and Bhawanipatna-3
Punjab Batala and Nabha-2
Rajasthan Dungarpur, Ajmer and Mandore-3
Tamil Nadu T. Kullupatty, S.V . Nagaram, Bhavani Sagar,
Pattukkottai and Krishnagiri-5
Uttaranchal Rudrapur, Hawalbhag, Haldwani, Haridwar
and Pauri Garhwal-5
Uttar Pradesh Lucknow, Bakewar, Baraut, Bichpuri,
Chirgaon, Dhorigat, Bulandshahar, Faizabad,
Kalakankar, Mainpuri, Lakhaoti, Chargaon,
Raibareilly, Ghazipur, Badaun and Afim Ki
Kothi-16
West Bengal Cooch Bihar, Burdwan, Digha and Raiganj-4
Total 88

114
APPENDIX VII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 12TH DECEMBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hannan Mollah
3. Shri Dawa Narbula
4. Shri Prabodh Panda
5. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
6. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
7. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
8. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
9. Shri Penumalli Madhu
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11.D r. Gyan Prakash Pilania
12. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
SECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee.

115
*** *** ***
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 5 alongwith draft  Action Taken Report on Ninth
Report of the Committee, on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development).
The Committee after deliberations adopted the said Action Taken Report
with slight modifications.
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Action Taken Reports on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the minutes are not related to the subject have been kept
separately.

116
APPENDIX VIII
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 53
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 24
Government:
Para Nos. 2.4, 2.15, 2.19, 2.33, 2.41, 2.42,
3.13, 3.15, 3.31, 3.57, 3.63, 3.64, 3.65, 3.108,
3.109, 3.110, 3.114, 3.127, 3.128, 3.129, 3.139,
3.140, 3.141 and 3.142
Percentage to the total recommendations (45.28%)
III. Recommendation which the Committee do not 1
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Para No. 2.5
Percentage to the total recommendations (1.89%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of 23
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 2.6, 2.16, 2.27, 2.28, 2.29, 2.34, 2.36,
2.46, 3.12, 3.14, 3.32, 3.33, 3.35, 3.50, 3.56, 3.69,
3.76, 3.78, 3.79, 3.80, 3.105, 3.106 and 3.107
Percentage to the total recommendations (43.40%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final 5
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.47, 3.34, 3.77, 3.103 and 3.104
Percentage to the total recommendations (9.43%)