7
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the First Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the First Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.03.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 19.03.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 010
Price : Rs. 33.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE (2004-2005) .................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ....................................................... 28
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .......................................................................... 53
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .................................................... 55
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
reply of the Government is still awaited ......... 67
APPENDICES
I. Status of Sector Reform Project (as on
30.11.2004) .................................................................. 68
II. State-wise Status of Swajaldhara Scheme
(2002-2003) ................................................................. 71
III. State-wise Status of Swajaldhara Scheme
(2003-2004) ................................................................. 72
IV. Extract of minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 4.03.2005 ............................... 73
V. Analysis of Action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the First
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha). .... 75

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
12. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
14. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
15. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
24. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
25. Shri Penumalli Madhu
26. Shri Stephen Marandi
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
(iii)

(iv)
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Shri Keshubhai S. Patel
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Seventh Report on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the First
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2004-2005)
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the
Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 August,
2004. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 14 December, 2004.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
4 March, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee is
given in Appendix II.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
19 March, 2005 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2004-2005)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their First Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of
the Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 August, 2004.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 31 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.15, 2.16, 2.18, 2.25, 2.32, 2.33, 2.59, 2.79, 2.80,
2.81, 2.82, 2.90, 2.104, 2.109, 2.110, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10 and 3.11.
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 2.30, 2.39 and 2.91
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.19, 2.24, 2.28, 2.29, 2.40, 2.60, 2.98 and 2.99.
(iv) Recommendation in respect of which final reply of the
Government is still awaited:
Para No. 2.17.
3. The Committee desire that final reply in respect of a
recommendation for which only interim reply has been given by
the Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Inadequate allocation of outlay and funds constraint to rural
water supply sector
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find from the position of data as indicated above
that the Department has been allocated almost half of what has
been proposed by Planning Commission during Tenth Plan. Similar
trend has been noticed while analysing the outlay position during
2004-2005. Out of the proposed allocation of Rs. 3,142 crore, the
Department has been sanctioned BE for Rs. 2,900 crore. Further,
the Committee find that the various aspects covered while
proposing the outlay for Tenth Plan viz. the position of slippage of
FC category of habitations into PC and PC into NC habitations
have not been taken into account. The Committee also note that
the gap in the resources is proposed to be bridged through extra
budgetary assistance like World Bank assistance. While analyzing
the position of World Bank assistance coming in the field of
drinking water, the Committee note that only in four States, one
or two projects could be taken up by donor assistance/loan. The
said aspect of getting lesser outlay as proposed by Planning
Commission has repeatedly been taken up while analyzing the
Demands for Grants of previous years and the Committee have
repeatedly been emphasizing to take up the matter with the
Planning Commission in view of the top most priority accorded
by the Government to provide drinking water to rural areas. While
appreciating the resource constraints, the Committee would again
like to recommend to take up the matter with the Planning
Commission for adequate allocation for drinking water with
convincing reasons and commensurate with ground realities.
Allocation of lesser amount by Planning Commission shows that
the Ministry has not been able to plead their case forcefully for
optimum amount. The Committee feel that the Ministry has not
done their homework properly before going to Planning
Commission for enhanced amount. The Ministry should be able to
convince the Planning Commission that shortfall in allocation in
such a vital area affects the quality of life and involves great risk.
The Committee also note that the Secretary of the Department
has stated that though overall allocation for rural water supply
sector has increased over the years, the actual allocation for the
main programme of ARWSP has not increased to that extent as a

3
substantial part of the total outlay is diverted for other programmes
and activities such as Swajaldhara, Sector Reforms, etc. In this
context, the Committee recommend that outlay for both the
programmes should be increased and fund constraint should not
hinder the implementation of any of the rural drinking water
supply schemes.
The Committee appreciate that World Bank has been
approached in the field of drinking water. The Committee would
like to recommend that the Government should endeavour to get
World Bank assistance for taking up more projects in remaining
States so as to bridge the gap between the required outlay and the
Government resources in hand. The issue regarding involving
corporate sector in the field of drinking water has been analyzed
in the succeeding chapters of the Report. Here the Committee
would like to emphasize that the Government should endeavour
to chalk out an effective and result oriented strategy to motivate
and convince the corporate/private sector in fulfilling their social
responsibility i.e. providing drinking water to rural masses.”
6. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Department of Drinking Water Supply has been making
concerted efforts to get higher allocations for the rural water supply
sector every year. The matter has also been taken up at the level
of Minister (RD) with the Planning Commission.
The Committee’s recommendation for seeking assistance from
the World Bank and the Corporate/private sector towards providing
drinking water to rural masses has been noted. In fact the
Department had already initiated steps in this regard. Two concept
papers on Water Quality and Sustainability and Sanitation have
been prepared and sent to the Department of Economic Affairs for
posing the same to External Funding Agencies like the World Bank.
A presentation on the subject was also made by the Secretary,
Department of Drinking Water Supply to the World Bank President
on 18 November, 2004 at New Delhi wherein both the Finance
Minister and the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission were
present. The Department has also prepared a concept paper on
School Sanitation and Hygiene Education, which includes, inter
alia, the drinking water supply component and forwarded the same
to the Planning Commission with request for additional funding
from the Education cess levied in the current year‘s budget. The

4
Department has also posed the fund requirement to Twelfth Finance
Commission through a memorandum.
The Planning Commission has decided to allocate the amount
of Rs. 248 crore as additional grant for rural water supply sector
during the year 2004-05.”
7. The Committee note the efforts made by the Department for
seeking adequate outlay from the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission as well as to generate additional resources from World
Bank and the Corporate/Private Sector to meet the challenge of
providing drinking water to rural masses in the country, pursuant to
the earlier recommendation. They also find that due to the efforts of
the Department, Planning Commission has allocated an additional
grant of Rs. 248 crore for rural water supply sector during the year
2004-05. The Committee would like the Department to continue the
efforts in this regard and inform the Committee on the achievement
made accordingly.
B. Regular information on slippage of habitations from fully covered
to partially covered and non covered categories
Recommendation (Para No. 2.17)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee in their earlier Reports on Demands for Grants
had expressed their concern over the dichotomy in the data with
regard to accessibility and availability of drinking water. The
Committee have been informed that the Government is
commissioning a survey to analyze the position with regard to
slippage of habitations from FC to PC and PC to NC categories.
They note that the survey results could be received from 24 States/
Union territories. Further, they also note that after the survey results
are received, the same would be re-evaluated through an
independent evaluator. The Committee find that State/UT
Governments are taking long time in finalization of the survey.
They are unable to comprehend how planning on the part of the
Government is made without having a clear picture of the slippage
of habitations thereby indicating the actual position with regard to
availability of drinking water to rural masses. In this scenario, the

5
Committee feel that there should be some in built mechanism in
the monitoring system of the Government to know about the
position of slippage of targets at a regular interval and the same
should be indicated every year in the Performance Budget.”
9. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as under:
“A mechanism for monitoring the slippage of habitations on
quarterly basis is being worked out in consultation with the State
Governments.”
10. The Committee find that pursuant to their recommendation,
a mechanism for monitoring the slippage of habitations on quarterly
basis is being worked out in consultation with the State
Governments. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details
of the said mechanism and final action taken by the Department in
this regard.
C. Projection of realistic targets
Recommendation (Para No. 2.18)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee further find that the Government on the one hand
claims coverage of 94 percent rural habitations. On the other hand,
they find that by their own admission two lakh habitations are
estimated to slip back from FC to PC and PC to NC habitations
by the end of the Tenth Plan. The position may be further alarming
when the survey is completed and evaluated by the independent
evaluator. Further, the Committee also find that during every year,
the Government claims to cover all the NC habitations, but the
final result is slippage of targets. The Government propose to cover
70,484 habitations (30,423 NC+40,061 PC) during the year
2004-2005. During the first three months of the financial year, the
Government could cover only 1,380 habitations that speaks volume
of the dim possibility of covering the target habitations during the
said year. The Committee fail to understand how the Department
would address the remaining issues of sustainability, quality and
sector reforms, etc. The Committee are deeply concerned over the
unrealistic projections being made by the Department which on
paper reflect a bright picture with regard to implementation of
drinking water schemes. The Committee also feel that the ground
reality in this regard is not so optimistic as could be been from

6
the Budget Speech of the Finance Minister whereby he has stated
that the biggest crisis that the world will face in the 21st Century
will be crisis of water. In this scenario, the Committee would like
to strongly recommend to the Government to project realistic targets
during each Plan.”
12. The Government in their action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The slippage of two-lakh habitations from FC to PC/NC and
from PC to NC is based on the estimates made by the working
group of Tenth Plan. It was envisaged in the Tenth Plan to cover
all the NC and PC habitations as per the survey results of 1999 in
the first two years and cover the ‘slipped back’ habitations in the
next three years. The targets from the first two years of Tenth
Plan were, therefore, so fixed so as to achieve full coverage in first
two years. Notwithstanding this, the targets were fixed in
consultation with the State Governments.
A fresh habitation survey has been completed by the State/
Union territories and the results thereof are being validated by the
Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA). After validation,
the Department will have a more realistic picture of coverage in
rural areas.
The Department agrees that there is need to project realistic
targets. The procedure for fixation of targets is being streamlined.
It is felt that while fixing targets, basis parameters such as status
of coverage of habitations at the beginning of the year, unit cost
of installation of water source, allocation under ARWSP and State
Sector are kept in view. The entire procedure for fixation of target
was deliberated in the Conference cum Workshop of State
Secretaries held on 22-23 November 2004.”
13. The Committee note that the Department has acknowledged
the need for projecting realistic targets and the entire procedure for
fixation of target was deliberated in the Conference-cum-Workshop
of State Secretaries held on 22-23 November. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the details of the deliberations held at the
aforesaid Conference and the decision taken in this regard. The
Committee also find that the position of slippage of targets was
assessed by the survey which is being validated by the Indian
Institution of Public Administration. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the result of the aforesaid survey so as to have a
better idea of the position of coverage of habitation in the country.

7
D. Mismatch between physical and financial achievement under
Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find from the data made available to them that
there is a mismatch between physical and financial achievement
under ARWSP . During the year 2003-04, financial achievement has
been shown as 83.67 per cent. However, the position of achievement
of NC and PC targets indicate 35.33 per cent. The Committee also
note that there is a declining trend, if we analyse the data with
regard to achievement of NC and PC habitations. The achievement
during the year 2003-04 is around 35 per cent, if compared with
the achievement during the year 1998-99. The Committee would
like the Department to explain the specific reasons for mismatch
between target and achievement and the declining trend in
achievement in the coverage of NC and PC habitations.”
15. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The Department agrees that there had been mismatch between
physical and financial achievements. The main reason is that the
allocation of funds under ARWSP is made on the basis of criteria
wherein the weightage to different parameters is as under:
1. Rural Population 40
2. States under DDP , DPAP , HADP 35
and special category hill states in
terms of rural areas
3. NC/PC village (at 2:1 ratio) 15
4. Quality affected villages 10
Thus, in the allocation of funds, number of NC/PC habitations
has only 15 per cent weightage. Further, slippage from ‘Fully
Covered’ (FC) to ‘Partially Covered’ (PC)/‘Not Covered’ (NC) status
occurs due to, inter alia,  sources going dry, systems becoming
defunct due to outliving of their designed life span, emergence of
quality problems and poor operation and maintenance. Especially
for solving water quality problems, in 90 per cent cases water has

8
to be brought from an alternative safe source which could be at a
distance and hence capital intensive. Thus, there could be a
mismatch between financial allocation and physical targets for
coverage.”
16. The Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons given
by the Department for discrepancy between physical and financial
achievement under ARWSP . While acknowledging the constraints
faced by the Department in tackling rural water supply problem,
especially with regard to Operation and Maintenance, the Committee
still feel that discrepancy between financial and physical achievement
appears to be huge and Department has failed to furnish satisfactory
reply on reasons for declining trend in the coverage of NC and PC
habitations over the years despite remarkable increase in allocation
to rural water supply sector. Here, the Committee would like the
Department to consider issues raised by the Committee more
seriously and try to bridge the gap between physical and financial
achievement so as to address the problem of declining trend in
achievement in the coverage of NC and PC habitations.
E. Under achievement of physical targets in ARWSP in certain
States/Union territories
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that year after year the physical performance
of ARWSP in certain States/Union territories is not up to the mark.
The attention of the government has repeatedly been drawn
towards this aspect in the previous Reports on Demands for Grants.
However, nothing concrete seems to have been done. While
admitting that implementation of ARWSP is the responsibility of
State Governments, the Committee feel that the Union Government
have to play a pro-active role so as to ensure that different Centrally
Sponsored Schemes are successfully implemented. The Committee
could like the Department to find out State-wise/UT-wise, reasons
for under achievement of physical targets in ARWSP in certain
State/Union territories and inform the Committee accordingly.”
18. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The habitations yet to be covered are in difficult areas where
there are no sources or the sources are in far off places. The States

9
explained during the review meetings that in the absence of
adequate sources in the vicinity of habitations, they are finding it
extremely difficult to achieve coverage within the limited resources
allocated to them. It is also relevant to mention that the continuous
drought for three years in some States from the year 2001 onwards
had its impact on the achievement of coverage by the States.
However, it would be the endeavour of the Department to
streamline the procedure for fixation of targets with reference to
the availability of resources so that there is no under achievement
of physical targets by the States.”
19. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had urged
the Department to find out the State/Union territory-wise reasons
for under achievement of physical target in ARWSP in non
performing States/Union territory. The Department, instead of
addressing the issue categorically, has given a general reply stating
that the habitations yet to be covered are in difficult areas where
there are no sources or the sources are in far off places. The
Committee have been hearing the same routine reply for the last
many years. While expressing their unhappiness on such vague reply,
the Committee would like to be clearly informed of the State/Union
territory-wise data of Not Covered/Partially Covered habitations,
required allocation, allocation made so far year wise along with the
physical and financial achievements so as to enable the Committee
to understand the problem encountered in case of NC/PC habitations
in a more realistic way.
F. Provision for relaxation of norms
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.28 and 2.29)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that the aforesaid norms with regard to
supply of drinking water in rural areas were fixed in 1977-78.
They also note that in the guidelines there is a provision for
relaxation of norms to provide for 55 liters per capita per day
with a source within 0.5 kilometers in the plains and 50 meters
elevation in the hills. They further find that the side relaxed norms
were applicable in case of States where coverage of all NC and
PC rural habitations have been completed. Further relaxation is
subject to 10 per cent beneficiary contribution and shouldering full
responsibility for O&M. The Committee would like to be informed
about the names of States/Union territories who are enjoying the
relaxed norms.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)

10
21. “The Committee in their preceding Chapter have analyzed the
position of slippage of FC & PC habitations into NC habitations and
had concluded that there is no clear picture available with the Union
Ministry with regard to slippage of habitations. In view of the aforesaid
position, the Committee feel that the Government should, first of all,
ascertain the position of full coverage in different States/Union
territories and then only the revised norms to the State having full
coverage should be applied.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.29)
22. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The States, which have covered all NC/PC habitations, can make
use of the provision for relaxation of the norms to provide for 55
lpcd with a source with 0.5 km in the plains and 50 metre elevation
in the hills. As per the coverage status reported by the State based
on Comprehensive Action Plan, 1999, 11 States and 3 Union
territories viz. Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Madhya
Pradesh, Manipur, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West
Bengal, Daman & Diu, Delhi and Chandigarh have no NC/PC
habitations. However, the position in regard to availing of the
relaxed norms under ARWSP is being ascertained from the
aforesaid States/Union territories.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)
“The results of the new all India survey are being complied and
validated and the revised norms will be applicable only to such
States/Union territories, which are found to have no NC/PC
habitations.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.29)
23. The Committee note that the information regarding the names
of the States/Union territories who are at present enjoying the relaxed
norms for drinking water for rural areas is awaited from States/
Union territories. The Committee would like to be informed about
the information when received. The Committee are further surprised
to note the names of States/Union territories which includes Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Orissa in the list of States which have achieved the
full coverage status. The Committee feel that the ground reality in
this regard is quite different. The position of full coverage is reflected

11
only on paper. The Committee may like to add that in the guidelines
there is provision of relaxed norms, but the State/Union territories
which are enjoying this position is not known to the Union
Government. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to
have the available data of the actual ground position is various States/
Union territories for the future planning and making projections.
The Committee would like the Department to ascertain the actual
ground position of availability of drinking water first of all and
apprise the Committee accordingly.
The Committee reiterate that planning regarding rural water
supply sector will be inadequate and ineffective without concrete
information on the slippage of habitations. The Committee would,
therefore, like to be apprised of the result of the All-India Survey
as well as the observations/recommendations of the Union
Government on the same.
G. Involvement of corporate/private sector in the field of drinking
water supply in rural areas
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.32 and 2.33)
24. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that the Government have been requesting
corporate sector to come forward in the field of drinking water
supply in rural areas in different conferences, seminars through
CII and ASSOCHAM. The Committee would like to be informed
about the reaction of the corporate sector in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.32)
“The Committee further feel that adequate and effective steps to
motivate the corporate sector/private sector to fulfill their social
obligations like provision of drinking water for rural areas have
not been made by the Government. Instead of delving deep into
the matter, a very casual approach has been made through
conferences and seminars. To motivate the corporate sector,
concerted efforts and skills are essential. In this regard, the
Committee feel that the Government should explore all possibilities
of involving the private/corporate sectors in the field of rural
infrastructure development like rural drinking water supply.
However, at the same time the, Committee show their apprehension
that development of such an important sector as drinking water

12
supply should not be left to the mercy of the private/corporate
bodies and the Government should be able to generate enough
funds for investment in the rural drinking water supply sector.
Keeping these varied aspects in view, the Committee would
like to recommend that the Government should chalk out a
comprehensive strategy so that the corporate and private sector
could be convinced and motivated to come forward for
participation.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
25. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The Department has made presentations and interacted with CII,
FICCI and ASSOCHAM on issues and strategies in rural water
management. However, no positive response has so far been
received from them.
Since drinking water is a State subject, the policy framework
providing for role of corporate sector in rural drinking water supply
will need to be evolved by the respective State Governments.
Government of India has, however, initiated discussions with the
State Governments on alternative delivery mechanisms and this
was discussed in the recent Conference cum Workshop of State
Secretaries organized at New Delhi on 23-23 November, 2004. State
Governments have requested Government of India to have a
concept note outlining various successfully operative models
involving public-private partnership in rural drinking water supply
sector in different countries/States prepared which could form
discussion paper for initiating suitable policy changes by the State
Governments. Action has been initiated in this regard by
Government of India and it is expected that the concept note so
prepared would facilitate evolution of effective public-private
partnership in rural drinking water supply sector.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.32)
“As mentioned in the reply to para No. 2.32, Government of India
will provide technical support to the State Governments in taking
appropriate policy initiative in this regard.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)

13
26. The Committee note the initiatives taken by the Government
to involve corporate sector in the field of rural drinking water sector.
The Committee would further like to be informed of the deliberations
on above theme in the Conference of State Secretaries. The
Committee expect the Government of India to complete the concept
note at the earliest to enable State Governments in initiate suitable
policy changes in this regard.
H. Status of the three programmes of the Prime Minister
Recommendation (Para No. 2.40)
27. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that the three Programmes of the Prime
Minister were initiated with the noble objective to address the
problem arising out of unprecedented drought of 2002. The
programme was to be implemented in two years 2003-2005 and
Rs. 800 crore were earmarked for the programme. From the
financial and physical achievements as reported above, the
Committee find that there is a huge gap between release and
expenditure reported by the State Government. Almost 70 per cent
of the funds released are lying unspent with various State
Governments. The Committee are constrained to note the position
of expenditure reported by the States and would like the
Government to explain the reasons for such a huge underspending.
The Committee observe that the physical achievement in three
sectors for which the programme was meant is as below:
(i) Number of hand pumps installed around 25 per cent of the
target.
(ii) Number of traditional sources revived around 10 per cent
of the target.
(iii) Number of schools covered around 30 per cent of the target.
The Committee conclude that the position of physical
achievement is worse than the financial achievement. The
Committee are disappointed to note the physical and financial
achievement of the programme and would like an explanation from
the Government in this regard.”

14
28. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The Prime Minister’s programme has been finalized and the
guidelines issued only in July 2003. By the time the funds were
released, the time left for implementation during 2003-04 was very
little. Introducing a new scheme takes time to get actually grounded
at the functional level. It is also relevant to mention that 10 per
cent of the contribution in respect of PM’s programme has to come
from the community which also takes time in comparison to
programmes run completely out of Government funds. However,
the matter has been discussed in the review meetings held with
various States wherein the State Governments have promised to
achieve full targets by the end of 2004-05.”
Reply of the Recommendation (Para No. 2.40)
29. The Committee are not inclined to accept the explanation
furnished by the Department for the ineffective implementation of
three programmes of Prime Minister initiated with the objective to
address the problem arising out of unprecedented drought of 2002.
The programme was to be implemented in two years 2003-2005. The
target date for implementation of the programme is running out.
The Committee further find that the State Governments have
promised to achieve full target by the end of 2004-05 in the review
meetings. The Committee have their doubts on fulfillment of the
promise made by the States specially when the achievement in three
programmes as noted by the Committee while examining Demands
for Grants 2004-05 was as low as 25, 10 and 30 per cent respectively.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the names of the State
Governments who have promised fulfilment of the targets along
with the latest position of implementation of the programme so as
to review the position and comment further in this regard.
I. Concerns regarding replacement of ARWSP with Swajaldhara
Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 2.60)
30. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that as per the Union Government’s Policy
ARWSP would be replaced by Swajaldhara scheme gradually. They
also note that whereas ARWSP is applicable to each and every

15
State and district, Swajaldhara is a demand driven scheme. The
Committee appreciate the fact that sustainability of drinking water
resource can be ensured only when people realize that water is an
economic and social good and should be treated as such. Providing
drinking water free of cost has created a mindset in the rural
masses that water is a social right to be provided by the
Government. There is an urgent need to change the mindset of
the people. However, there are certain concerns as indicated below
to be addressed before ARWSP is replaced by Swajaldhara:
(i) As has been highlighted in the previous chapters, the
position of NC habitations is not clear with the Government.
Unless the results of the recent survey being undertaken by
the various States are analysed, the clear picture with regard
to NC and PC habitations would not emerge;
(ii) During Tenth Plan, Rs. 24,800 crore have already been
earmarked under ARWSP , but how the Government would
ensure utilisation of resources is not clear;
(iii) Since Swajaldhara scheme is a demand driven scheme, how
the Government would address the problems with regard
to accessibility, availability, sustainability and quality etc.
especially for the States/Districts which are not up to the
mark and could not be motivated to come forward with
the projects;
(iv) In case ARWSP is phased out, how the Government would
achieve the objective of full coverage is not clear;
(v) The position of implementation of Swajaldhara is also not
very encouraging. Excepting Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu, none of the States show
completion of even a single project taken up under the
scheme;
(vi) As per Government’s reply, there is no problem of
community contribution under Swajaldhara. However,
Swajaldhara is a demand driven scheme and hence, the
projects are demanded from areas where people have the
mindset to bear the cost of the projects and owe the
responsibilities of operation and maintenance. However, since
Swajaldhara is applicable to few of the districts and few
areas in the country what will be the position of community
contribution is not clear;

16
(vii) Under ARWSP some inter-sector allocation according to a
fixed criteria has been made. However, Swajaldhara does
not have any such prescribed weightage;
(viii) How the Government would take care of the capital
intensive complex projects costing to the tune of several
lakhs of rupees under Swajaldhara is not clear; and
(ix) Whether the rural masses have enough resources and are
ready to bear the cost of drinking water from a distant
source to the village entry point is not clear as per the
replies of the Government.
In view of the aforesaid concerns, the Committee feel that a
hurried approach to switch over to Swajaldhara mode will not be
prudent. A move with caution and introspection is necessary. A
demand driven approach by a community calls for education,
proper appraisal of the needs and clear cut understanding with
sufficient alertness and eagerness to shoulder the responsibilities
matched by adequate financial support. That Swajaldhara initiative
has not received wider acclaim from many areas shows that proper
endeavour is yet to come and as such making haste to replace
ARWSP with this initiative could be fatal. Too much haste in
reforms is not prudent. The Government should wait and watch
before arriving at any final conclusion. The Committee, would,
therefore, like that before taking any action to replace ARWSP by
the demand driven scheme of Swajaldhara, all the issues referred
to above should be addressed carefully and after interacting with
the State Governments and Gram Panchayats and thereby people
at large, the Government should carefully draft the guidelines of
Swajaldhara. The Committee should be kept informed about the
steps taken.
The Committee are also of the opinion that a streamlined
monitoring mechanism should be in place so that the implementing
agencies of Swajaldhara Projects can be made accountable.
Moreover, data should be maintained regarding the number of
DWSCs constituted in the various States of the country, the number
of projects implemented by them, the amount of fund at their
disposal, among other things. The Committee feel that adopting a
strict vigilance and monitoring mechanism on the part of the State/
Union Government would go a long way in proper implementation
of the projects while also ensuring that community contribution is
optimally utilized without any risk of its squandering.”

17
31. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The issues involved in extension of reform principles to cover the
entire sector were discussed in a two-day conference-cum-workshop
of State Secretaries held at New Delhi on 22-23rd November, 2004.
The main recommendations of the aforesaid conference-cum-
workshop are as under:
1. Almost all States felt that, rural drinking water supply and
sanitation schemes should be implemented and managed
by Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). However, the transfer
need not be done in a hurry. More time may be required
by Panchayats to accept the transfer. Transfer of water
supply schemes should be a gradual and step-by-step
process.
2. To facilitate transfer of Rural Water Supply (RWS) schemes
to PRIs, Legislative framework may be strengthened by
incorporating suitable provisions in the Panchayati Raj Acts
and Bye-Laws framed thereunder, so that PRIs manage rural
water supply schemes as their Constitutional and statutory
duty.
3. Capacity development of PRIs be undertaken on large-scale.
State representatives felt that Swajaldhara was started
hurriedly without taking up the IEC activities, which is pre-
requisite for the success of any participatory community
based programme. The concept of Communication and
Capacity Development Unit (CCDU) should have been
introduced earlier.
4. CCDUs can play an effective role in facilitating transfer of
RWS schemes to PREIs. Establishment of CCDUs is a step
in the right direction. They should be the nodal point for
capacity development of PRIs to manage RWS schemes and
building the enabling environment for the purpose. They
should also codify the best practices and success stories.
5. Multiplicity of schemes and funding pattern should be
avoided. Some States (M.P . and Arunachal Pradesh)
suggested that schemes should be transferred to Gram
Panchayats after coverage with 40 lpcd supply level is
achieved. There should not be any community contribution
in NC coverage upto 40 lpcd supply level and quality

18
schemes. Other States like Andhra Pradesh felt that principle
of ‘no community contribution’ should be applied only for
providing 10 lpcd water in water scarcity areas where relief
work is undertaken under drought relief works. Most States
felt that the principle of community contribution towards
capital cost of schemes could be introduced without being
dogmatic or rigid about 10 per cent community contribution.
6. Once a habitation is covered with 40 lpcd level, the assets
should be transferred to PRIs for O&M. For subsequent
schemes for augmenting supply level above 40 lpcd or
restoring 40 lpcd level of a “slipped-back” habitation,
community contribution in capital cost should be mandatory.
7. Source-Strengthening measures, Rain Water Harvesting and
recharge of ground water be made an integral part of the
coverage scheme.
8. Implementation of protection of Drinking Water Sources Bill
and Ground Water Exploitation Bill should be non-negotiable
principle of reforms. Central assistance to be contingent on
this.
9. Earmarking of funds by Government of India for
undertaking water quality schemes.
10. Implementation of Water Quality schemes in project mode
as was being done earlier through the Sub-Mission.
The aforesaid recommendations of the conference-cum-
workshop and the suggestions of the Committee would be kept in
view when final decision in the matter of transformation of ARWSP
into a reforms oriented programme is taken by the Union
Government.”
32. The Committee in their earlier recommendations had raised
serious concerns over the policy decision taken by the Union
Government to replace a well conceived old programme ARWSP by
a demand driven programme Swajaldhara. The various issues raised
inter alia included the fate of States and Union Territories who are
not up to the mark and do not come forward with the projects, the
fate of remaining NC & PC habitations and capital intensive complex
projects which cannot be covered by Swajaldhara. Besides, another
area of concern as pointed out by the Committee was the capacity
of the poorest of the poor in rural areas to bear the community

19
contribution. The Committee find that instead of addressing each
issue categorically, a vague and incomplete reply indicating the
recommendations of a Conference cum Workshop organized by the
Ministry has been furnished. The Committee find that the
recommendations of the aforesaid conference have nothing to do
with the various concerns expressed by the Committee. The
Committee are also confused to note the reply of the Department
according to which the recommendations of the Committee would
be kept in view when the final decision in the matter of
transformation of ARWSP is take by the Union Government. While
examining the Demands for Grants of previous year the Committee
had been informed that a policy decision to gradually replace ARWSP
by Swajaldhara has been taken. The Committee would like to be
informed clearly about the policy of the Department in this regard.
They would also like a detailed, analytical and critical response to
each of the concerns expressed by the Committee in their earlier
report so as to enable them to comment further in this regard.
J. Issue of sustainability and management of water resources
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.79 and 2.81)
33. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that after achieving substantial coverage of
habitations with provisions of drinking water, the issue of
sustainability—both of the source and system—has emerged as the
most pertinent issue. As focussed in the President’s address to the
Parliament and also in the Finance Minister’s Budget Speech,
various measures for conservation of water are the need of the
day. In this context, the Committee also feel that maximum stress
should be given to the conservation of water resources by adopting
such measures as:
1. Control on over extraction and exploitation of ground water
sources. The Committee note that a model Bill to regulate
and control the development of ground water drafted by
the Ministry of Water Resources has been circulated to all
the State Governments for enactment by their respective
legislation. The Committee strongly recommend that the
legal formalities in most of the States should be completed
expeditiously and Ground Water Model Bill with
area specific requirements should be implemented at the
earliest.

20
2. Further, the Committee feel that water harvesting schemes
should be given priority by the Department. It has been
stated by the Ministry that State Governments have been
advised that up to 5 per cent of the fund released under
ARWSP should be used for Sub-Mission on sustainability.
The Committee feel that mere allocation of funds for taking
up sustainability issues will not seve the purpose. The
Finance Minister proposed that Government would launch
a nationwide water harvesting scheme with 50 per cent
capital subsidy to NABARD by which one lakh irrigation
units at an average cost of Rs. 20,000 per unit will be
covered. The Committee would like to know the details of
the said Scheme and further recommend that such schemes
should be started in the drinking water supply sector.
Involving the community in setting up such conservation
structures will be a positive step in this direction.
3. The Committee are of the view that partial treatment of the
problem will not serve any purpose. All the issues pertaining
drinking water availability, sustainability of sources and
systems drinking water quality are interrelated and cannot
be addressed in isolation. The need of the hour is adopting
a holistic approach on water management issues. In this
context, the Committee feel that experts in the relevant fields
should be involved to discuss these issues so that an
objective and acceptable solution can be reached.”
(Recommendation (Para No. 2.79)
“The Committee feel that the most important issue that has been
more or less neglected so far is to make the masses aware about
the precious resource of water and how its wastage can bring
about acute water scarcity disturbing environmental and ecological
balance. Most disturbing is the fact that the Government do not
think it necessary to maintain any data with regard to the wastage
of water. Mismanagement of water resources and lack of proper
awareness result in the wastage of millions of gallons of water per
day. In this context, the Committee are of the view that the
Government should give focussed attention to their IEC Programme
teaching the masses about their duties to conserve water sources.
Mass media can be used extensively, like giving advertisements in
newspapers, slide shows in theaters etc. to educate the masses.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.81)

21
34. The Government in their action taken replies have stated as
under:
“This issue of sustainability of sources and systems has been
addressed extensively under reform initiatives launched by
Government of India in the rural drinking water supply in 1999
by sanctioning 67 Sector Reform Pilot projects in the country. These
were then scaled up throughout the country under Swajaldhara in
Dec. 2002. The reform initiatives involved community participation
for partial capital cost sharing and owning the assets created and
take up 100 per cent O&M responsibility leading to sustainability
of systems.
The Department of Drinking Water Supply has accorded top
most priority to water harvesting for ensuring sustainability of
sources. This Department has taken the following action so far:
(i) A CD on rain water harvesting has been got prepared by
the Department for disseminating information to the rural
masses for promoting rain water harvesting.
(ii) TV spots on Rainwater Harvesting, Water Conservation have
been got prepared and will be telecast shortly.
(iii) T echnical Manual on Water Harvesting and Artificial
recharge has been finalized and is under print.
(iv) Hydrogeomorphological maps have been prepared from
NRSA for planning water recharging structures apart from
helping the State in locating sustainable drinking water
sources.
(v) Revival of traditional rainwater harvesting is being
impressed upon.
(vi) V arious other programmes of Ministry of Rural Development
viz., DPAP , DDP , HADP , IWDP , Hariyali also aim to
sustainability of sources.
(vii) As Ministry of Water Resources is managing the Ground
Water Model Bill on control of over exploitation of ground
water, the observations of the Committee have been
communicated to them for taking further necessary action.
Also, this department is constantly reminding the Ministry
of Water Resources for furnishing the latest status.

22
(viii) The scheme announced by the Finance Minister for
launching nation-wide water harvesting scheme with
50 per cent capital subsidy by NABARD for 1 lakh irrigation
units at an average cost of Rs. 20,000 per unit is being
handled by Ministry of Water Resources. The observations
of the Committee have been conveyed to them. Further,
this Department has also formulated a scheme for NABARD
assistance for individual household, community and
institutional rainwater harvesting structures. A draft scheme
has been circulated to the States for their comments.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.79)
“(a) As per National Water Policy, management of Water Resources
is the responsibility of Ministry of Water Resources. As User
Department, we have been contributing our share by requesting
State Government’s to impress upon the community to conserve
water and avoid wastage of water. For awareness generation and
to take up State-specific IEC activities, guidelines for setting up
Communication and Capacity Development Unit at the State level
have been circulated and proposals have been invited from the
States. The status of proposals received from various States is placed
at Appendix II.
(b) As per CPHEEO Water Supply manual, a maximum of
10 per cent of the daily demand is permissible towards wastage of
water through leakages in the distribution system. State
Governments will be again impressed upon to reduce wastage/
loss of treated drinking water. State Govt.’s are also requested to
provide soakage pits to drain the waste water from all hand pumps
in the rural areas, which would act as point source recharges.
(c) Spots on water conservation, health & hygiene practices
have been prepared for airing through TV and Radio. CD has
been cut on traditional practices of rain water harvesting and
circulated to all State Governments for field application.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.81)
35. The Committee note with satisfaction the efforts made by
the Department in tackling the issue of sustainability of drinking
water sources and according priority to water harvesting measures.
The Committee would, however, appreciate elaborate information on
steps taken by the Department to ensure revival of traditional rain

23
water harvesting methods. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the current status of Model Bill on Nationwide water
harvesting scheme. The Committee would reiterate their
recommendation to the Government to maintain data with regard to
wastage of water. Besides issuing guidelines to State Governments
the Committee would like to be informed of ways of financial and
technical support provided by the Union to the State Governments
to promote rainwater harvesting schemes.
K. Provision of drinking water to rural schools
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.98 and 2.99)
36. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee in their respective reports had repeatedly been
recommending to the Government to give top most priority to
provide drinking water to schools in rural areas. In spite of that,
the physical achievement of the programme indicate that serious
attention has not been paid towards this programme. It is really a
matter of concern that even after more than five decades of planned
development, provision of drinking water to schools is a distant
dream. The Committee are really disturbed to note the position of
coverage of schools in various States. In several States, the coverage
has been indicated as zero per cent. While appreciating the fact
that the responsibility of implementation of ARWSP and of school
coverage is with the State Governments, the Committee feel that
adequate efforts to sensitize the various State Governments about
the urgency of providing drinking water to schools are not being
made by the Union Government. The Committee would like the
Department to coordinate with other Ministries/Departments
involved in this regard as well as the respective Departments of
various State Governments so that all the schools can be covered
within a stipulated timeframe. The Committee further find that
Seventh all-India Educational Survey has been completed and the
results are being compiled by the NCERT. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the results when available. Besides, they
would also like that the future planning to be made with regard
to providing drinking water to rural schools should be made
according to the recent data that would be made available as per
the Seventh all-India Educational Survey. The Committee in their
earlier Reports on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) [refer para 3.60
of 46th Report and para 25 of 52nd Report, 13th Lok Sabha] had

24
recommended that under the sector reform project of Swajaldhara
programme, guidelines should be made a little flexible regarding
school coverage. Provision should be made so that the 10 per cent
of beneficiary funds could be contributed from the MPLAD funds.
As per the action taken reply, the Government could not agree to
the recommendation on the plea that community is an essential
ingredient in the successful implementation, operation and
maintenance of rural water supply schemes, hence Swajaldhara
guidelines provide for 10 per cent contribution by the community.
The Committee, while taking up the issue again would like to
reiterate their earlier recommendation and again emphasize that
school coverage should not be treated at par with coverage of
habitations as per normal programme. So far as 10 per cent
community contribution is concerned, as a special case for school
coverage, Swajaldhara guideline should be made flexible so that
10 per cent community contribution could be provide from MPLAD
funds.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.98)
“On the issue to ensure drinking water in privately managed
schools, the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended
that Government aided schools should also be brought under the
purview of Government school coverage programme (refer para
3.60 of 46th Report, 13th Lok Sabha). The Government in their
action taken reply had stated that it is responsibility of private
management to provide drinking water in privately managed
schools. The Committee while examining the action taken reply
had desired to be apprised about the overall position of drinking
water in such Government aided schools in order to assess position
in the right perspective. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the specific steps taken by the Department with regard to
coverage of privately managed schools.
In this context, the Committee would like to recommend that
all these categories of schools, viz ., Government schools,
Government-aided and recognized schools and private schools
should be covered under the rural drinking water supply
programme, so that the supply of potable drinking water can be
made available to each and every school of the country thereby
ensuring health and well-being of school children.
Further, the Committee feel that the provision of potable
drinking water should be extended to local primary health centres
and dispensaries thus benefiting a large number of people.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.99)

25
37. The Government in their action taken replies have stated as
under:
“Provision of drinking water and sanitation facilities in all rural
schools is targeted by the end of the Tenth Plan. However,
Government of India has been impressing upon the States to draw
up a time-bound Action Plan in this regard and ensure attainment
of the target ahead of the deadline, preferably by 31 March, 2006.
A coordination panel under the chairmanship of Secretary,
Department of Drinking Water Supply has also been set up to
monitor progress in this regard. The Department has also prepared
a concept paper on School Sanitation and Hygiene Education, which
includes, inter alia , the drinking water supply component and has
forwarded the same to the Planning Commission with request for
additional funding from the Education Cess levied in current year’s
budget. Members of Parliament can also utilize funds from
MPLADS for financing schemes for providing drinking water in
rural schools.
The results of Seventh All India Educational Survey have not
yet been made available. A D.O. letter in this regard has also been
sent by Minister (RD) to Minister (HRD).”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.98)
“While the Government is taking all steps to see that all
Government schools get covered with the facility of drinking water
supply by the year 2005-06, there is no proposal to extend the
facility to private schools. Private schools generally charge fees
from the students and it is therefore incumbent upon them to
provide basic facilities like drinking water supply in the schools
run by them.
Regarding potable drinking water supply to local primary
health centres and dispensaries, it is presumed that drinking water
supply is part of the infrastructure to be provided to these Centres
as no request in this regard has been received from Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare. The factual position is being ascertained
from the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.99)

26
38. The Committee find that Union Government target to provide
drinking water and sanitation facilities in all rural schools by the
end of Tenth Plan and to achieve the objective State Governments
are being impressed upon to draw up a time bound Action Plan.
Besides, Planning Commission is also being requested to provide
additional funding from the educational cess levied in current year’s
budget. The Committee hold the view that the efforts being made
in this regard need to be vigorously pursued with the State
Governments so that the said dead-line is not shifted further.
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance should further be pursued
for adequate allocation of funds to achieve the objective.
Besides what has been stated above, the Committee in the earlier
recommendation had raised certain issues as indicated below:
(i) The efforts made by the State Governments and various
Union Ministries need to be coordinated so as to achieve
the objective of providing drinking water to all rural
schools by the stipulated time-frame;
(ii) Swajaldhara guidelines should be made flexible so that
10 per cent community contribution could be provided
from MPLAD funds.
(iii) Government/Government aided, recognized and private
schools should be covered under the rural drinking water
supply programme.
(iv) Facility of potable drinking water should be extended to
local primary health centres and dispensaries.
On item at (i) above nothing has been said in the reply of the
Government. The Committee would like the reaction of the
Department in this regard. As regards the issue raised at (ii) above,
the reply of the Department is vague. It has been stated simply that
MPs can utilise funds from MPLAD for rural drinking water schemes.
Nothing specific has been stated on the recommendation of the
Committee to make Swajaldhara guidelines flexible to allow 10 per
cent contribution to be made by the community from MPLAD funds
so that the projects of the school coverage do not suffer for want of
community contribution. The Committee desire specific reply of the
Department in this regard.
On the issue at (iii) above while acknowledging that providing
drinking water to private schools is not the sole responsibility of
the Government, the Committee feel that onus of monitoring whether

27
these schools provide the basic facilities like drinking water rests
with the Union Government. The Government should first of all
monitor the data with regard to provision of drinking water in
recognized, Government aided and private schools and place it before
the Committee to enable them to analyse the position and comment
further in this regard.
As regards provision of potable water to local primary health
centres and dispensaries, the Committee note that the position in
this regard is being ascertained from the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
status in this regard so as to analyse and comment further.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
The Committee find from the position of data as indicated above
that the Department has been allocated almost half of what has been
proposed by Planning Commission during Tenth Plan. Similar trend
has been noticed while analysing the outlay position during 2004-
2005. Out of the proposed allocation of Rs. 3,142 crore, the Department
has been sanctioned BE for Rs. 2,900 crore. Further, the Committee
find that the various aspects covered while proposing the outlay for
Tenth Plan viz. the position of slippage of FC category of habitations
into PC and PC into NC habitations has not been taken into account.
The Committee also note that the gap in the resources is proposed to
be bridged through extra budgetary assistance like World Bank
assistance. While analyzing the position of World Bank assistance
coming in the field of drinking water, the Committee note that only
in four States, one or two projects could be taken up by donor
assistance/loan. The said aspect of getting lesser outlay as proposed
by Planning Commission has repeatedly been taken up while analyzing
the Demands for Grants of previous years and the Committee have
repeatedly been emphasizing to take up the matter with the Planning
Commission in view of the top most priority accorded by the
Government to provide drinking water to rural areas. While
appreciating the resource constraints, the Committee would again like
to recommend to take up the matter with the Planning Commission
for adequate allocation for drinking water with convincing reasons
and commensurate with ground realities. Allocation of lesser amount
by Planning Commission shows that the Ministry has not been able to
plead their case forcefully for optimum amount. The Committee feel
that the Ministry has not done their homework properly before going
to Planning Commission for enhanced amount. The Ministry should
be able to convince the Planning Commission that shortfall in allocation
in such a vital area affects the quality of life and involves great risk.
The Committee also note that the Secretary of the Department has
stated that though overall allocation for rural water supply sector has
increased over the years, the actual allocation for the main programme
28

29
of ARWSP has not increased to that extent as a substantial part of the
total outlay is diverted for other programmes and activities such as
Swajaldhara, Sector Reforms, etc. In this context, the Committee
recommend that outlay for both the programmes should be increased
and fund constraint should not hinder the implementation of any of
the rural drinking water supply schemes.
The Committee appreciates that World Bank has been approached
in the field of drinking water. The Committee would like to recommend
that the Government should endeavour to get World Bank assistance
for taking up more projects in remaining States so as to bridge the
gap between the required outlay and the Government resources in
hand. The issue regarding involving corporate sector in the field of
drinking water has been analyzed in the succeeding chapters of the
Report. Here the Committee would like to emphasize that the
Government should endeavour to chalk out an effective and result
oriented strategy to motivate and convince the corporate/private sector
in fulfilling their social responsibility  i.e. providing drinking water to
rural masses.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Drinking Water Supply has been making
concerted efforts to get higher allocations for the rural water supply
sector every year. The matter has also been taken up at the level of
Minister (RD) with the Planning Commission.
The Committee’s recommendation for seeking assistance from the
World Bank and the Corporate/private sector towards providing
drinking water to rural masses has been noted. In fact the Department
had already initiated steps in this regard. Two concept papers on Water
Quality and Sustainability and Sanitation have been prepared and sent
to the Department of Economic Affairs for posing the same to External
Funding Agencies like the World Bank. A presentation on the subject
was also made by the Secretary, Department of Drinking Water Supply
to the World Bank President on 18.11.2004 at New Delhi wherein both
the Finance Minister and the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission
were present. The Department has also prepared a concept paper on
School Sanitation and Hygiene Education, which includes, inter alia ,
the drinking water supply component and forwarded the same to the
Planning Commission with request for additional funding from the
Education Cess levied in the current year’s budget. The Department
has also posed the fund requirement to XII Finance Commission
through a memorandum.

30
The Planning Commission has decided to allocate the amount of
Rs. 248 crore as additional grant for rural water supply sector during
the year 2004-05.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph number 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee are
constrained to note the position of underspending during the different
plans. Although they note that during 9th Plan the underspending
was lesser as compared to the previous plant, the Committee feel that
in this resource starved economy, every single rupee meant for such
a priority area should be timely and meaningfully utilized and the
Government should chalk out a clear cut strategy to ensure cent percent
utilization of the valuable resources. The Committee have repeatedly
been expressing their concern over the serious issue of underutilization
of resources in their previous Reports also. However, they note with
constraint that nothing fruitful has come out and this has become a
recurring feature every year. The Committee would again emphasize
that much is required to be done in this direction and they should be
informed about the concrete steps taken or proposed by the
Government in this respect.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Drinking Water Supply is making all possible
efforts to utilize the allocation made for water and sanitation sector.
The position regarding utilization of funds by the Department of
Drinking Water Supply during the last 3 years is as under:
(Rs.  in crore)
Year BE Amount Reasons for savings
utilised
12 3 4
2001-02 2160.00 2072.35 At the RE stage, the overall
plan allocation was reduced
to Rs. 2110.00 crore. Rs. 31.31
crore was transferred to Non-
Lapsable Pool of North

31
12 3 4
Eastern States and there was
unspent balance of Rs. 6.34
crore.
2002-03 2400.00 2241.80 At the RE stage, the overall
plan allocation was reduced
to Rs. 2250.00 crore, Rs. 5.98
crore was transferred to Non-
Lapsable Pool of North
Eastern States and there was
unspent balance of Rs. 2.22
crore.
2003-04 2750.00 2769.90 The overall plan allocation
was increased to Rs. 2770.00
crore. The unspent balance
was only Rs. 0.10 crore.
Thus, it can be seen that due to rigorous monitoring of the position
by Government of India, the unspent amount has decreased in the
last three years and it is the endeavour of Government of India to
ensure full utilisation of allocated funds.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.18)
The Committee further find that the Government on the one hand
claims coverage of 94 percent rural habitations. On the other hand,
they find that by their own admission 2 lakh habitations are estimated
to slip back from FC to PC and PC to NC habitations by the end of
the 10th Plan. The position may be further alarming when the survey
is completed and evaluated by the independent evaluator. Further, the
Committee also find that during every year, the Government claims to
cover all the NC habitations, but the final result is slippage of targets.
The Government propose to cover 70,484 habitations (30,423 NC +
40,061 PC) during the year 2004-2005. During the first three months of
the financial year, the Government could cover only 1,380 habitations
that speaks volume of the dim possibility of covering the target
habitations during the said year. The Committee fail to understand

32
how the Department would address the remaining issues of
sustainability, quality and sector reforms, etc. The Committee are deeply
concerned over the unrealistic projections being made by the
Department which on paper reflect a bright picture with regard to
implementation of drinking water schemes. The Committee also feel
that the ground reality in this regard is not so optimistic as could be
seen from the Budget Speech of the Finance Minister whereby he has
stated that the biggest crisis that the world will face in the 21st Century
will be crisis of water. In this scenario, the Committee would like to
strongly recommend to the Government to project realistic targets
during each plan.
Reply of the Government
The slippage of 2-lakh habitations from FC to PC/NC and from
PC to NC is based on the estimates made by the working group of
Tenth Plan. It was envisaged in the Tenth Plan to cover all the NC
and PC habitations as per the survey results of 1999 in the first two
years and cover the ‘slipped back’ habitations in the next three years.
The targets for the first two years of Tenth Plan were therefore so
fixed so as to achieve full coverage in first two years. Notwithstanding
this, the targets were fixed in consultation with the State Governments.
A fresh Habitation survey has been completed by most of the
States/UTs and the results thereof are being validated by the Indian
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA). After validation, the
Department will have a more realistic picture of coverage in rural
areas.
The Department agrees that there is need to project realistic targets.
The procedure for fixation of targets is being streamlined. It is felt
that while fixing targets, basic parameter such as status of coverage of
habitations at the beginning of the year, unit cost of installation of
water source, allocation under ARWSP and State Sector are kept in
view. The entire procedure for fixation of target was deliberated in the
Conference cum Workshop of State Secretaries held on 22-23rd
November 2004.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)

33
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25)
The Committee further find that in DDP areas in J&K, the
performance of the programme is very poor. While admitting the fact
that difficult geographical conditions and militancy hinder the
implementation of the programme, the Committee feel that the steps
taken by the Union Government and State  Governments to ensure
proper implementation of the programme are not adequate which result
in almost one-fifth physical achievement. The Committee would like
the Department to analyse the reasons and take corrective steps in
this regard. Besides the outlay earmarked should be realistic so that
huge underspending does not occur every year.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The State
Government has been asked to analyse the reasons for under-
achievement in terms of physical targets and financial expenditure and
take appropriate corrective measures to prevent recurrence of the same
in future under intimation to this Department.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.32)
The Committee find that the Government have been requesting
corporate sector to come forward in the field of drinking water supply
in rural areas in different conferences, seminars through CII and
ASSOCHAM. The Committee would like to be informed about the
reaction of the corporate sector in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department has made presentations and interacted with CII,
FICCI and ASSOCHAM on issues and strategies in rural water
management. However, no positive response has so far been received
from them.
Since drinking water is a State subject, the policy framework
providing for role of corporate sector in rural drinking water supply
will need to be evolved by the respective State Governments.
Government of India has, however, initiated discussions with the State
Governments on alternative delivery mechanisms and this was

34
discussed in the recent Conference cum Workshop of State Secretaries
organized at New Delhi on 22-23 November, 2004. State Governments
have requested Government of India to have a concept note outlining
various successfully operative models involving public-private
partnership in rural drinking water supply sector in different countries/
States prepared which could form discussion paper for initiating
suitable policy changes by the State Governments. Action has been
initiated in this regard by Government of India and it is expected that
the concept note so prepared would facilitate evolution of effective
public-private partnership in rural drinking water supply sector.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph number 26 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
The Committee further feel that adequate and effective steps to
motivate the corporate sector/private sector to fulfill their social
obligations like provision of drinking water for rural areas have not
been made by the Government. Instead of delving deep into the matter,
a very casual approach has been made through conferences and
seminars. To motivate the corporate sector, concerted efforts and skills
are essential. In this regard, the Committee feel that the Government
should explore all possibilities of involving the private/corporate sectors
in the field of rural infrastructure development like rural drinking
water supply. However, at the same time the, Committee show their
apprehension that development of such an important sector as drinking
water supply should not be left to the mercy of the private/corporate
bodies and the Government should be able to generate enough funds
for investment in the rural drinking water supply sector.
Keeping these varied aspects in view, the Committee would like
to recommend that the Government should chalk out a comprehensive
strategy so that the corporate and private sector could be convinced
and motivated to come forward for participation.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned in the reply to para No. 2.32, Government of India
will provide technical support to the State Governments in taking
appropriate policy initiative in this regard.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]

35
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph number 26 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.59)
The Committee find that the implementation of sector reform
projects and Swajaldhara Scheme is not very satisfactory . As could be
seen from the data made available to them, there is huge under-
spending under each of the programmes. They also note that some of
the projects are being closed due to variety of factors as in the case
of Sikkim reported by the Government. Further, the position is alarming
in many of the States where the expenditure has been indicated as nil
and in all the Union Territories except Dadra and Nagar Haveli where
no funds have been released so far. Further, no scheme could be
completed in Union Territories and in most of the States, no project
could be completed. The Committee also note that the Department
has initiated certain steps to ensure the implementation of the
Swajaldhara. However, they note that the steps to be initiated by the
Department at this stage like preparation of State vision statement,
detailed annual action plan by the State Governments, etc. should
have been ensured before launching of the said Scheme. It appears
that proper planning has not been made by the Department before
starting Swajaldhara.
Reply of the Government
As had been indicated in the replies furnished earlier, being reform
based programmes, the implementation of Sector Reform Project took
some time to take off in most States. The approved project outlay
indicated the upper ceiling for project expenditure in the Sector Reform
Pilot Projects. It did not imply as if schemes for such amount had
been prepared and approved by Government of India. Based on the
demand-generated, the total estimated project outlay of Sector Reform
Pilot Projects was only Rs. 1328.38 crore and Government of India
have released Rs. 1145.56 crore. Together with amount mobilized as
community contribution and amount accrued as interest, total available
funds are to the tune of Rs. 1311.91 crore against which an expenditure
of Rs. 1065.96 crore has been reported and 75,391 of 86,799 rural
drinking water supply schemes taken up have been completed. The
full details are enclosed at Appendix I.
As regards Swajaldhara, it may be noted that pace of
implementation of rural drinking water supply schemes taken up under

36
Swajaldhara 2002-03 and Swajaldhara 2003-04 has shown signs of
picking up. As per latest available reports, 1091 schemes out of 4734
schemes taken up under Swajaldhara 2002-03 have been completed
and an expenditure of Rs. 90.00 crore has been incurred against total
release of Rs. 138.83 crore by Government of India. All schemes taken
up under Swajaldhara 2002-03 are expected to be completed during
the current financial year. Details are enclosed at Appendix II.
Similarly, under Swajaldhara 2003-04, as per latest available
reports, 1192 schemes have been completed and in expenditure of
Rs. 37.34 crore has been incurred against total release of
Rs. 99.62 crore by Government of India. Most of the schemes taken up
under Swajaldhara 2003-04 are expected to be completed during the
current financial year. Details are enclosed at Appendix III.
It may also be noted that only in the year 2002-03, Swajaldhara
was implemented on ‘first come, first served’ basis when schemes
were approved by Government of India. During 2002-03, Swajaldhara
schemes could be taken up only in 15 States and one Union Territory .
After the issue of comprehensive guidelines on Swajaldhara in June
2003, Swajaldhara has become an ‘allocation based demand-driven’
programme where if any State or Union Territory does not provide
requisite information as per Para 15.6.2. of Swajaldhara Guidelines,
funds are not released. Hence, in the year 2003-04, funds under
Swajaldhara were released to 21 States and one Union Territory.
As regards the observation that proper planning has not been made
by the Department before starting Swajaldhara, it is respectfully
submitted that at that point of time it was thought that the reform
initiative should not remain confined to just 67 Sector Reform Pilot
Project districts and if any Gram Panchayat in any State or district of
the country came forward and agreed to adhere to the reform
principles, they should be allowed to take up rural drinking water
supply schemes. The MoU process relates to institutionalization of the
reform principles in the entire water and sanitation sector and address
issues confronting the sector and is not confined to implementation of
Swajaldhara alone.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.79)
The Committee note that after achieving substantial coverage of
habitations with provision of drinking water, the issue of sustainability-

37
both of the source and system—has emerged as the most pertinent
issue. As focussed in the President’s address to the Parliament and
also in the Finance Minister’s Budget speech, various measures for
conservation of water are the need of the day. In this context, the
Committee also feel that maximum stress should be given to the
conservation of water resources by adopting such measures as:—
(1) Control on over extraction and exploitation of ground water
sources. The Committee note that a model Bill to regulate
and control the development of ground water drafted by
the Ministry of Water Resources has been circulated to all
the State Governments for enactment by their respective
legislation. The Committee strongly recommend that the
legal formalities in most of the States should be completed
expeditiously and Ground Water Model Bill with area
specific requirements should be implemented at the earliest.
(2) Further, the Committee feel that water harvesting schemes
should be given priority by the Department. It has been
stated by the Ministry that State Governments have been
advised that up to 5 percent of the fund released under
ARWSP should be used for Sub-Mission on sustainability.
The Committee feel that mere allocation of funds for taking
up sustainability issues will not serve the purpose. The
Finance Minister proposed that Government would launch
a nationwide water harvesting scheme with 50 per cent
capital subsidy to NABARD by which one lakh irrigation
units at an average cost of Rs. 20,000 per unit will be
covered. The Committee would like to know the details of
the said Scheme and further recommend that such schemes
should be started in the drinking water supply sector.
Involving the community in setting up such conservation
structures will be a positive step in this direction.
(3) The Committee are of the view that partial treatment of the
problem will not serve any purpose. All the issues pertaining
drinking water availability, sustainability of sources and
systems drinking water quality are interrelated and cannot
be addressed in isolation. The need of the hour is adopting
a holistic approach on water management issues. In this
context, the Committee feel that experts in the relevant fields
should be involved to discuss these issues so that an
objective and acceptable solution can be reached.

38
Reply of the Government
This issue of sustainability of sources and systems has been
addressed extensively under reform initiatives launched by Government
of India in the rural drinking water supply in 1999 by sanctioning 67
Sector Reform Pilot projects in the country. These were then scaled up
throughout the country under Swajaldhara in Dec. 2002. The reform
initiatives involved community participation for partial capital cost
sharing and owning the assets created and take up 100% O&M
responsibility leading to sustainability of systems.
The Department of Drinking Water Supply has accorded topmost
priority to water harvesting for ensuring sustainability of sources. This
Department has taken the following action so far.
(i) A CD on rain water harvesting has been got prepared by
the Department for disseminating information to the rural
masses for promoting rain water harvesting.
(ii) TV spots on Rainwater Harvesting, Water Conservation have
been got prepared and will be telecast shortly.
(iii) Tech nical Manual on Water harvesting and Artificial recharge
has been finalized and is under print.
(iv) Hydrogeomorphological maps have been prepared from
NRSA for planning water recharging structures apart from
helping the State in locating sustainable drinking water
resources.
(v) Revival of traditional rainwater harvesting is being
impressed upon.
(vi) V arious other programmes of Ministry of Rural Development
viz., DPAP , DDP , HADP , IWDP , Hariyali also aim to
sustainability of sources.
(vii) As Ministry of Water Resources is managing the Ground
Water Model Bill on control of over exploitation of ground
water, the observations of the Committee have been
communicated to them for taking further necessary action.
Also, this department is constantly reminding the Ministry
of water Resources for furnishing the latest status.
(viii) The scheme announced by the Finance Minister for
launching nation-wide water harvesting scheme with 50%

39
capital subsidy by NABARD for 1 lakh irrigation units at
an average cost of Rs. 20,000 per unit is being handled by
Ministry of Water Resources. The observations of the
Committee have been conveyed to them.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph number 35 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.80)
The Committee in their earlier reports had drawn the attention of
the Department to the need of the hour to accept sea water for drinking
water and other purposes (refer para no. 3.108, 46th Report, 13th Lok
Sabha). They had also drawn the attention of the Department about
the need to explore cost effective technologies in this regard. The
Committee had recommended to stress that the Government should
give more thrust for exploration of sea water for drinking water and
other purposes. The Committee are pleased to note that the Government
has finally agreed to install a desalination plant with a capacity of
three hundred million per day (mld.). The approximate cost of which
is Rs. 1,000 crore as Finance Minister stated in his Budget Speech.
They also appreciate that under the Common Minimum Programme,
the Government propose to install desalination plants in States of
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Orissa.
The Committee were informed the project to install a smaller
desalination plant has been proposed for Lakshadweep. The Committee
would like to know the details of said Project. They feel that since
resource constraint is a major issue, stress should be more upon
installing such smaller plants which need lesser capital investment.
The Committee feel that the steps ensured by the Government in
this regard would go a long way in providing drinking water in coastal
areas as recommended by them in their earlier reports. The Committee
would like that more projects should be launched in other States.
Besides, as recommended by them earlier Government should pay more
attention to R&D to explore cost effective technologies in this regard.
The Committee would also like to recommend to study the technologies
used in their countries where water for drinking water and other
purposes is provided by desalination projects.

40
Reply of the Government
(a) RGNDWM has already identified electrodialysis, reverse
osmosis, thermal MSF and MED technologies and Solar stills
as potential treatment methods for conversion of sea water
to drinking water.
(b) Conversion of sea water to potable water by solar stills
was experimented by SPPERI in parts of Gujarat under R&D
project sponsored by RGNDWM. This method though does
not involve any mechanical or electrical equipment, delivers
very low output of potable water. Simple low cost treatment
technologies are being explored under R&D programme for
developing specific ion exchange technology by using ion-
selective resins.
(c) The Union Government has been requesting States to set
up desalination plants. 194 desalination plants based on
membrane technology were approved by the Mission for
various States to provide water free from excess brackishness
in the affected habitations. 150 plants have been established
out of which 77 are functional. However, State Governments
are not keep on setting up desalination plants due to high
cost and O&M problems.
(d) The details of desalination plant at Lakshadweep are as
follows: Cost = Rs. 12.70 crore, Location = Kavaratti,
Capacity = 6 lakh litres per day; Population benefited at
present = 10,113; Technology envisaged = Sea Water Reverse
Osmosis.
(e) As Countries like Israel, Maldives, Kuwait and UAE have
developed advanced technologies in the field of sea water
desalination. RGNDWM would interact with these countries
for assessing the potential of new technologies for replication
in the Indian context.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.81)
The Committee feel that the most important issue that has been
more or less neglected so far is to make the masses aware about the
precious resources of water and how its wastage can bring about acute

41
water scarcity disturbing environmental and ecological balance. Most
disturbing is the fact that the Government do not think it necessary
to maintain any data with regard to the wastage of water.
Mismanagement of water resources and lack of proper awareness result
in the wastage of millions of gallons of water per day. In this context,
the Committee are of the view that the Government should give
focussed attention to their IEC Programme teaching the masses about
their duties to conserve water sources. Mass media can be used
extensively, like giving advertisements in newspapers, slide shows in
theatres etc. to educate the masses.
Reply of the Government
(a) As per National Water Policy, management of Water
Resources is the responsibility of Ministry of Water
Resources. As User Department, we have been contributing
our share by requesting State Government’s to impress upon
the community to conserve water and avoid wastage of
water. For awareness generation and to take up state-specific
IEC activities, guidelines for setting up Communication and
Capacity development Unit at the State level have been
circulated and proposals have been invited from the States.
The status of proposals received from various States is
placed at Annexure-II.
(b) As per CPHEEO Water Supply manual, a maximum of 10%
of the daily demand is permissible towards wastage of water
through leakages in the distribution system. State
Governments will be again impressed upon to reduce
wastage/loss of treated drinking water. State Govt’s are also
requested to provide soakage pits to drain the waste water
from all hand pumps in the rural areas, which would act
as point source rechargers.
(c) Spots on water conservation, health & hygiene practices have
been prepared for airing through TV and Radio. CD
has been cut on traditional practices of rain water
harvesting and circulated to all State Governments for field
application.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph number 35 of Chapter I of the Report)

42
Recommendation (Para No. 2.82)
The Committee also feel that a holistic approach in treating the
drinking water and sanitation issues is the best solution in the modern
day context. People should be taught not to dump sewerage and other
pollution in the water sources which give rise to a vicious cycle of
pollution feeding back into the system.
Reply of the Government
A holistic approach for integrated waste supply and sanitation
management is being followed in the Department. As water quality
gets affected due to insanitation, through the National water Quality
Monitoring and Surveillance Programme to be launched, it is proposed
to conduct sanitary surveys which are economic ways of monitoring
water quality and communities will be made aware of health impact
of insanitary practices of waste disposal and pollution of water sources.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.90)
The Committee note that as per the guidelines of ARWSP ,
20 per cent of its funds are earmarked for sub-Mission activities, out
of which 5 per cent is for tackling sustainability issue sand 15 per cent
is for taking care of quality problems. Fully covered States can utilize
more than 15 per cent of the ARWSP funds with specific approval of
the Government of India. The Committee further observe that the
Government have proposed to enhance the earmarked funds for water
quality from 15 per cent to 30 per cent, which is a positive step. The
Committee feel that in the recent times, the problem of sustainability
alongwith quality has emerged as one of the challenges to be tackled
in this field, which should be given maximum priority. Earmarking of
more funds for the sector will go a long way in dealing with the
problem of drinking water quality. Further, since the Government have
identified the main causes responsible for drinking water contamination,
i.e. fluoride and arsenic, proper technical know-how should be
developed to deal with these problems and at the same time some
immediate action plan should also be drawn.
Reply of the Government
A concept paper for seeking enhanced allocation to tackle water
quality problems in all quality affected habitations in a focused manner

43
has been prepared with a total requirement of funds of Rs. 13,600
crore. 90% of the quality affected habitations (other than iron which is
70%) will be provided safe drinking water facility from alternate safe
sources which are free from contamination. 10% of water quality
problem habitations (30% for iron) would be provided safe drinking
water by installing treatment plants. It is envisaged to cover all the
quality affected habitations by 2010. The said concept paper has been
submitted to the Planning Commission and the Department of
Economic Affairs.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.104)
The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation made
in their earlier Reports (refer 3.60 of 46th Report, 13th Lok Sabha),
seven States of North East and Sikkim were requested to conduct a
fresh survey during 2003-2004 to ascertain latest status of rural
habitation and they have already furnished the data which have been
examined and evaluated by an independent agency. The Committee
also find that survey results from Sikkim are still awaited. The
committee would like to be apprised about the latest position with
regard to coverage of habitations in North Eastern States as per the
survey after valuation by an independent agency. Besides, they would
also like that Sikkim should be impressed upon to complete the survey
without any further delay. The Committee are constrained to note the
position of expenditure under ARWSP in North Eastern States. The
position of coverage in all the States is very poor. Only Mizoram and
Sikkim could achieve 60 per cent and 55 per cent coverage respectively.
The status of implementation of Swajaldhara Scheme indicate that
project proposals have been received only from Assam. All the other
North Eastern States have failed to come up with any proposed project
under the Swajaldhara Scheme. The Committee would like the
Department to interact with the North Eastern States to know about
their specific problems with regard to non-furnishing of projects under
Swajaldhara.
Reply of the Government
In the National Common Minimum Programme, one of the items
relate to addressing the special problems of hill States. We have called
for a concept paper from all the hill States (which include all the
North-Eastern States). The Department is also conducting a conference
cum workshop with all the States and during the said conference the

44
interaction will be made with the North-Eastern States on the issues
raised by the Committee. One main reason is non-existence of
Panchayats in the Scheduled tribe areas.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.109)
The Committee note that during 10th Plan period, National Human
Resource Development Progrmame (NHRDP) implementation was
discontinued. However, during the 9th Plan period when the
programme was under implementation, 24 States had set up HRD
cells. The Committee would like to know the fate of these cells on
which a large amount of funds have been spent so far. Further, it has
been stated that in the current financial year, Rs. 1,490 lakh has been
proposed to be allocated for the HRD activities. The Committee would
like to know the actual status regarding allocation, release and
expenditure of funds for HRD activities.
Reply of the Government
Government has restructured the HRD and IEC programmes and
revised guidelines for setting up Communication and Capacity
Development Unit (CCDU) have been issued. These HRD Cells will
get merged into the CCDU. As per this, the assets of the existing
HRD Cells will get transferred to CCDU. The States have been asked
to initiate proposal under CCDU for IEC and HRD activities. As soon
as the proposals are received, these will be processed and funds will
be released. In the current financial year, a provision of Rs. 14.90 crore
has been made for HRD activities against which release of fund is
‘Nil’ at present. As soon as CCDU proposals from States are received,
funds would be released to the States.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.110)
Further, the Committee note that IEC Programme has also not
received due attention from the Government. During 2002-03 and
2003-04, only Rs. 16.53 lakh was spent for IEC whereas for the current
year 2004-05, an allocation of Rs. 10.10 lakh has been made. The
Committee feel that in the prevailing scenario, when the Government’s

45
policy focus has changed to make the Schemes demand responsive
and participative, HRD&IEC Programmes should receive maximum
attention. Efforts should be made to use modern information technology
methods to promote mass awareness and also for capacity development
of the community so that they are able to participate in a more
productive manner.
Reply of the Government
The existing IEC programme has been restructured and
Communication and Capacity Development Unit (CCDU) are being
set up in the States to help create awareness for Swajaldhara and
Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) programmes. The earlier TSC
guidelines were discontinued in the 10th Plan as a result, the
expenditure incurred in the 2002-03 and 2003-04 was nominal to meet
the committed liabilities of the previous plan programme. In the current
year, budgetary allocation of Rs. 10.10 crore has been made for IEC
which will be utilized to support activities of CCDU. Proposals from
CCDUs are awaited and as soon as these are received, these will be
processed and fund released. In addition to that, a National
Communication Strategy has been developed for creating mass
awareness about sanitation and hygiene issues. A detailed media plan
has been prepared using the modern mass media tool, which will be
executed in the later part of current financial year.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.8)
The Committee have been repeatedly bringing to the notice of the
Government that the percentage coverage of rural household with
sanitation facilities show a dismal picture. The Committee note with
dismay that the Census 2001 found that only 22 per cent rural
households have been covered with sanitation facilities. Further, the
Committee find that underutilisation of funds has become a recurrent
feature. For 2002-03, the provisional expenditure figure show an
underspending of Rs. 70.68 crore while for the year 2003-04, the
provisional figure show Rs. 36.82 crore as shortfall in expenditure.
Further, the performance in both financial and physical aspects, in a
number of States show an alarming situation. In such a scenario, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Department should optimize
expenditure of the available funds. The Committee further find that
the Department is providing provisional expenditure figure even for

46
the year 2002-03 which should have been updated by mid 2004 at the
time of preparing the Performance Budget (2003-04). Further, the
Committee feel that the Government should ensure that project
proposals are forthcoming from all the States so that lopsided coverage
does not take place. Till now 398 projects in the country are under
implementation with a number of remaining districts, where such
projects under TSC have not yet taken off. The Committee would
again like to know whether these left out districts are getting any
funds for sanitation programmes especially when TSC projects are not
being forwarded by them.
Reply of the Government
It is true that as per Census 2001, only 22% rural households had
access to sanitation facilities. However, in order to accelerate the
sanitation coverage, Government of India has reoriented its policies
and accordingly Central Rural Sanitation Programme (CRSP) was
restructured to launch a demand, responsive, community led Total
Sanitation Campaign (TSC) project in selected districts initially. These
projects are implemented in campaign mode taking district as a unit
with the objective to ensure 100% coverage of both BPL and APL
households with toilet facilities using intensive Information, Education
and Communication campaigns to create demand for such facilities.
Since launching of TSC, rural sanitation coverage has increased. TSC
at present is under implementation in 398 districts of the country and
as per report received so far, about 92 lakh households have constructed
toilets under TSC. Taking this into consideration, the rural sanitation
coverage has increased to approximately 30% in 2004.
It is not correct that the funds earmarked for sanitation have been
underutilised. BE, RE and release position over the last 4 years is
given in the table below:
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl.No. Year B.E. R.E. Release
1. 2000-2001 14000.00 14000.00 13085.26
2. 2001-2002 15000.00 13500.00 13005.54
3. 2002-2003 16500.00 14000.00 14110.27
4. 2003-2004 16500.00 16500.00+ 20500.00
4000.00*
*Additional provided for sanitation programme to meet increased demand in the
supplementary demand for grants.

47
As per this, it may be seen that expenditure in rural sanitation
programme has been gradually increasing and in the year 2003-04,
Rs. 40 crore additional was allocated for the programme to meet the
increased demand. The Committee in its recommendation has
mentioned that there has been shortfall in expenditure. There was no
shortfall in release of funds by Government of India. It is worth
mentioning that TSC projects are sanctioned for a period of 4-5 years
and the fund is to be utilized during this period. The fund is not
expected to be utilized by the end of the concerned financial year.
Funds to the project districts are released as and when the proposals
are received or a new project is sanctioned which may not be
necessarily in the beginning of the year so the actual utilization on the
ground may be less than the releases made. It is further to mention
that the actual utilization has increased considerably in the last few
financial years. From 2002-03 the TSC implementation progressed well
with 24 lakh household latrines constructed during 2002-03 and
45 lakh household latrines during 2003-04.
The expenditure figure furnished for the year 2002-03 has been
the actual expenditure  i.e. Rs. 9432.45 lakh, which was indicated as
provisional figure in the performance budget.
It is true that performance in physical and financial aspects in all
the States are not uniform. Some States are implementing the
programme effectively whereas in some States the implementation is
poor. Those States where the implementation is slow, efforts are being
taken by way of organizing workshops, review meeting, sending review
missions and other kind of technical guidance to improve the
implementation.
Till now Government of India has sanctioned Total Sanitation
Campaign (TSC) projects in 398 districts and intends to extend the
projects to all the remaining districts in the country during the
10th Plan. Already proposals of 142 districts have been approved to
take up  base line survey and prepare detailed TSC project report. For
this purpose, Rs. 10 lakh has been sanctioned to these districts. Efforts
are being made to bring other left over districts also under TSC
implementation.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]

48
Recommendation (Para No. 3.9)
The Committee are concerned to note that no updation of data
regarding coverage of rural schools with sanitation facilities have been
done so far. During the examination of Demands for Grants (2003-04),
the same figures from the Sixth All India Education Survey were quoted
by the Department. The Committee feel that in the absence of regular
evaluation of the actual work done in the field, the ground reality will
not be clear. In such a scenario, the fixing of targets or its subsequent
achievement lose their meaning and the figures remain only on paper.
The Committee have been informed that the Seventh All India
Education Survey has been completed and the results are being
compiled at present. The Committee strongly recommend that the
survey results should be made available expeditiously and the statistics
emerging from it should be meaningfully used to set targets and
achievement.
Further, the Committee are of the opinion that school sanitation
should be given topmost priority with special attention for provision
of lavatory facilities for girls. It has been stated by the Department
that under TSC, 10 percent of the total funds is to be provided by the
community. The Committee urge the Government to look into the
feasibility aspect of this Scheme, and further recommend that under
this Scheme, guidelines should be made a little flexible regarding school
coverage. There should be the provision that 10 percent community
contribution of funds can be made from the MPLAD Scheme. The
Committee also feel that along with encouraging community
participation, there should be some provision for Central allocation to
be given to each State for providing sanitation facilities to rural schools.
In this context, the Committee would like to recommend that
construction of sanitary toilets in schools should be of standard quality
with provision of adequate supply of water, so that these do not fall
into disuse after a certain point of time thus rendering the entire
amount invested on these a wastage.
Further, the Committee feel that the provision of hygienic sanitation
facilities should be extended to local primary health centres and
dispensaries thus benefiting a large number of people.
Reply of the Government
In order to assess the actual status of water supply and sanitation
facilities in schools, Ministry of Human Resource Development has

49
undertaken 7th All India Educational survey . The results have not
been released by NCERT for which the matter has been taken up by
Department of Drinking Water Supply with Deptt. of Elementary
Education. Pending that, each TSC project district has been advised to
conduct detailed base line survey which also includes assessment of
the status of availability of water supply and sanitation facilities in
rural schools. Each TSC project has been advised to ensure full coverage
of schools with water supply and sanitation facilities.
Government of India is attaching very high priority to school
sanitation and hygiene education in the schools. To meet the special
needs of girl students, a provision for constructing separate toilet block
for girl students has been incorporated in the TSC guidelines and all
States have been advised accordingly. The provision of 10% of the
unit cost of toilet construction to be met by the community is
made only to ensure greater involvement of the community, Gram
Panchayat  (GP), Parents Teacher Associations (PTA), etc. in the
programme. This will enhance the effectiveness of the programme.
Where the community or the PTAs are not able to contribute, the GPs
step in to help 10% of community share, which is Rs. 2000/- only. So
far we have not received any reference from any State Government
regarding difficulties being faced in receiving community contribution
of 10% towards school toilet construction. The Committee has
recommended to make separate allocation for school toilet construction
to those districts where TSC is not being implemented. In order to
extend water supply & sanitation facilities to all rural schools in the
country, Government is working out a separate national programme,
which will be extended to all districts.
In order to ensure that construction of sanitary toilets in schools
are of standard quality and toilets constructed are put into use, special
emphasis is being given by Department of Drinking Water Supply on
these issues. For this purpose, detailed technical notes have been
developed and circulated among all TSC project districts giving toilet
design options and also highlighting important issues to be kept in
mind while constructing toilets. In order to ensure sustainability of
use, operation and maintenance of toilets, hygiene education is
emphasized for which training of the teachers is being undertaken.
The Committee has recommended that the provision of sanitation
facilities need to be extended to primary centres and dispensaries also.
Such facilities are extended under various programmes of Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare. However, there is a provision of construction

50
of community toilet blocks at public places under TSC guidelines.
Those districts where these facilities are not extended under regular
programme of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, community
sanitation facilities can be constructed in around primary health centres
if required.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.10)
The Committee find that the focus of policy in the drinking water
supply and sanitation sectors is to encourage community participation.
However, it is a matter of serious concern that no such change in
policy orientation is reflected in IEC or HRD Programmes of the
Government. The Committee feel that if the Government want to make
the demand-driven Schemes successful, proper attention should be
given to spread awareness among the rural masses with special
emphasis on educating school children regarding adoption of hygienic
sanitation habits. Involvement of NGOs/VOs in this regard will go a
long way in such interaction with the grassroots to encourage and
motivate them to take responsibility of their community assets.
The Committee find that another important issue that needs to be
addressed is the problem of open defecation. As the figure furnished
by the Department shows that 64 percent of the population in India
defecates in open, resulting in 20,000 MT of excreta everyday, the
Committee feel that alongwith providing sanitation facilities to rural
masses, awareness should be spread among them so that sanitary
latrines constructed are used to the optimum. It has been observed
though sanitary latrines/complexes are in place, those often fall into
disuse, thus rendering the entire amount spent on them a wastage.
The Committee strongly recommend that all means at the disposal of
the Government right to the grassroot level should be utilized to
educate the masses against open defecation and adopting hygienic
sanitation habits.
Reply of the Government
It is true that spreading awareness among rural masses is essential
to make the demand driven scheme successful. For this purpose,
adequate focus on IEC and HRD is required to be given. Considering
this need, Government of India has restructured its IEC and HRD
programmes and new guidelines for setting up Communication and

51
Capacity Development Unit (CCDU) has been issued. All States have
been advised to set up CCDU and submit detailed proposals for taking-
up and State specific HRD and IEC activities. In the first three years,
GOI will give financial support to the States on 100% share basis and
for the remaining 2 years 75% funding support will be given by GOI.
In order to build the capacity of implementers and all stakeholders,
guidelines for support to key resource centers have been issued. As
per this, financial support will be given to the training institutions at
the national, State and district level to carry out capacity development
activities. As per the existing guidelines, TSC projects may engage
NGOs following transparent procedures to take up IEC & HRD
activities.
It is true that a large number of rural population is to be educated
against the dangers of open defecation and for adopting hygiene
behaviour. For this purpose, various steps are being taken by
Department of Drinking Water Supply. One of the most important
activities taken is to develop National and District specific
communication strategy. As per this, focus will be given on
interpersonal communication at the district level and mass media
communication at the national level. A national level media plan has
already been prepared as part of which TV , radio and print medium
advertisements have been prepared. The media plan will be
implemented shortly. For effective communication at the district level,
various communication tools are being developed.
In addition, for giving focus to IEC under TSC, provision is made
in TSC guidelines that more than 15% of the  project funds should be
earmarked for taking up IEC activities, which includes hygiene
education in schools. The guidelines also clearly say that the project
districts can involve NGOs/voluntary organizations like self-help
groups for carrying out IEC activities, setting up of rural sanitary
marts and production centres etc. An incentive based reward scheme
called ‘Nirmal Gram Puraskar’ has been launched on 2nd October,
2003 to reward those PRI institutions, which achieve open defecation
free environment in their respective PRI areas. Individuals and
organizations which help in achieving this objective would also be
rewarded suitably.
In order to ensure that the toilets constructed are put into use and
do not fall into dis-use special emphasis is being given on monitoring.
For this purpose, greater focus is given on monitoring the process of
implementation and use of the facilities. Department is engaging

52
independent evaluators (District Level Monitoring Agencies—DLMs)
to monitor the TSC implementation.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.11)
The Committee note with appreciation that incentives in the field
of rural sanitation has been started for PRIs, individuals, organizations
for adopting hygienic sanitation practices. The Committee feel that
such incentive Schemes should be encouraged in all villages/districts
of the country so that people come forward and participate
enthusiastically in the implementation and O&M of the sanitation
projects.
Reply of the Government
An incentive based reward scheme called ‘Nirmal Gram Puraskar’
had been launched on 2nd October, 2003 to reward those PRI
institutions, which achieve open defecation free environment in their
respective PRI areas. Individuals and organizations which help in
achieving this objective would also be rewarded suitably. This Nirmal
Gram Puraskar is open to all the Panchayati Raj institutions namely at
the Gram, Block and District level. The Department is encouraging all
the PRIs to apply for this award after obtaining the distinction of
achieving open defecation free environment. The application forms
along with information on Nirmal Gram Puraskar has already been
uploaded on the Departmental website at ddws.nic.in for wider
dissemination. So far 649 applications have been received which are in
different stages of scrutiny.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
The Committee further note that the relaxed norms are applicable
on the condition that 10 per cent beneficiary contribution and
shouldering full responsibility for O&M by the community has been
achieved. They find that while under ARWSP , there is no condition of
10 per cent beneficiary contribution, the said beneficiary contribution
is applicable in case of Swajaldhara since Swajaldhara is a demand
driven scheme. The Committee fail to understand how the said criteria
would be applicable to States/Districts where although the full coverage
as per the Government’s criteria is achieved but no Swajaldhara project
is there. The Committee would like the Government to ponder over
the aforesaid position and clarify the position accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The relaxed norms under ARWSP can be applied in districts/States
which have achieved full coverage, even if there is no Swajaldhara
scheme in the district, as the Department will collect at least 10% of
the capital cost of the scheme as contribution from the community
and on completion of the rural drinking water supply scheme by the
Department, it will be handed over to the community for operation
and maintenance.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.39)
The Committee in their respective Reports have been stressing to
bring the different programmes meant for same purpose under one
umbrella. However, the Committee feel that the policy of the
Government is to start a plethora of schemes to achieve a single
objective. ARWSP covers all the aspects for which Three Programmes
of the Prime Minister were started on 15th August, 2002. The
Committee further note that as per the policy of UPA Government,
53

54
they intend to bring all drinking water schemes under the umbrella of
Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission (RGNDWM). The
Committee would like to be informed about the status of different
programmes meant for drinking water and the steps taken to bring
them under the same RGNDW Mission.
Reply of the Government
Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission (RGNDWM) is
administering all Centrally Sponsored Rural Drinking Water Supply
Schemes and will continue to do so.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.91)
The Committee further note that survey regarding quality affected
habitations with 5-10 percent stratified sampling in the first phase,
which was commissioned way back in March 2000 has not been taken
up seriously by majority of the States. Further, very few States like
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Tamil
Nadu have furnished data for the second phase of the survey. While
taking a serious note of this attitude of the State Governments, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Union Government should
take a pro-active step and issue directions to all the State Governments
to complete the aforesaid survey within a stipulated time frame.
Independent evaluators should be engaged to complete the survey
with a thorough scrutiny that it is carried out in an efficient manner.
Reply of the Government
The survey has been completed. Information received from the
State Governments has been compiled. As there are no wide variations
in the survey, it is not proposed to get it evaluated through independent
evaluators.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
The Committee find from the data made available to them that
there is a mismatch between physical and financial achievement under
ARWSP. During the year 2003-04, financial achievement has been shown
as 83.67 per cent. However, the position of achievement of NC and
PC targets indicate 35.33 per cent. The Committee also note that there
is a declining trend, if we analyse the data with regard to achievement
of NC and PC habitations. The achievement during the year 2003-04
is around 35 per cent, if compared with the achievement during the
year 1998-99. The Committee would like the Department to explain
the specific reasons for mismatch between targets and achievements
and the declining trend in achievement in the coverage of NC and PC
habitations.
Reply of the Government
The Department agrees that there had been mismatch between
physical and financial achievements. The main reason is that the
allocation of funds under ARWSP is made on the basis of criteria
wherein the weightage to different parameters is as under:
1. Rural Population — 40
2. States under DDP , DPAP , HADP and
special category hill states in terms
of rural areas — 35
3. NC/PC village (at 2:1 ratio) — 15
4. Quality affected villages — 10
Thus, in the allocation of funds, number of NC/PC habitations
has only 15% weightage. Further, slippage from ‘Fully Covered’ (FC)
to ‘Partially Covered’ (PC)/‘Not Covered’ (NC) status occurs due to,
inter alia, sources going dry, systems becoming defunct due to outliving
of their designed life span, emergence of quality problems and poor
55

56
operation and maintenance. Especially for solving water quality
problems, in 90% cases water has to be brought from an alternative
safe source which could be at a distance and hence capital intensive.
Thus, there could be a mismatch between financial allocation and
physical targets for coverage.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph Number 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
The Committee find that year after year the physical performance
of ARWSP in certain States/UTs is not up to the mark. The attention
of the Government has repeatedly been drawn towards this aspect in
the previous Reports on Demands for Grants. However, nothing
concrete seems to have been done. While admitting that implementation
of ARWSP is the responsibility of State Governments, the Committee
feel that the Union Government have to play a pro-active role so as
to ensure that different Centrally Sponsored Schemes are successfully
implemented. The Committee would like the Department to find out
State-wise/UT-wise, reasons for under achievement of physical targets
in ARWSP in certain States/UTs and inform the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The habitations yet to be covered are in difficult areas where there
are no sources or the sources are in far off places. The States explained
during the review meetings that in the absence of adequate sources in
the vicinity of habitations, they are finding it extremely difficult to
achieve coverage within the limited resources allocated to them. It is
also relevant to mention that the continuous drought for 3 years in
some States from the year 2001 onwards had its impact on the
achievement of coverage by the States. However, it would be the
endeavour of the Department to streamline the procedure for fixation
of targets with reference to the availability of resources so that there
is no under achievement of physical targets by the States.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]

57
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph Number 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)
The Committee find that the aforesaid norms with regard to supply
of drinking water in rural areas were fixed in 1977-78. They also note
that in the guidelines there is a provision for relaxation of norms to
provide for 55 litres per capita per day with a source within 0.5
kilometres in the plains and 50 metres elevation in the hills. They
further find that the said relaxed norms were applicable in case of
States where coverage of all NC and PC rural habitations have been
completed. Further relaxation is subject to 10 per cent beneficiary
contribution and shouldering full responsibility for O&M. The
Committee would like to be informed about the names of Stats/UTs
who are enjoying the relaxed norms.
Reply of the Government
The States, which have covered all NC/PC habitations, can make
use of the provision for relaxation of the norms to provide for 55 lpcd
with a source within 0.5 km in the plains and 50 metre elevation in
the hills. As per the coverage status reported by the States based on
Comprehensive Action Plan, 1999, 11 States and 3 UTs viz. Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Orissa,
Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Daman & Diu, Delhi
and Chandigarh have no NC/PC habitations. However, the position
in regard to availing of the relaxed norms under ARWSP is being
ascertained from the aforesaid States/UTs.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph Number 23 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.29)
The Committee in their preceding Chapter have analyzed the
position of slippage of FC & PC habitations into NC habitations and
had concluded that there is no clear picture available with the Union
Ministry with regard to slippage of habitations. In view of the aforesaid
position, the Committee feel that the Government should, first of all,

58
ascertain the position of full coverage in different States/UTs and then
only the revised norms to the States having full coverage should be
applied.
Reply of the Government
The results of the new all India survey are being compiled and
validated and the revised norms will be applicable only to such States/
UTs, which are found to have no NC/PC habitations.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph Number 23 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.40)
The Committee find that the three programmes of the Prime
Minister were initiated with the noble objective to address the problem
arising out of unprecedented drought of 2002. The programme was to
be implemented in two years 2003-2005 and Rs. 800 crore were
earmarked for the programme. From the financial and physical
achievements as reported above, the Committee find that there is a
huge gap between release and expenditure reported by the State
Government. Almost 70 per cent of the funds released are lying unspent
with various States Governments. The Committee are constrained to
note the position of expenditure reported by the States and would like
the Government to explain the reasons for such a huge underspending.
The Committee observe that the physical achievement in three sectors
for which the programme was meant is as below:
(i) Number of hand pumps installed around 25 per cent of the
target.
(ii) Number of traditional sources revived around 10 per cent
of the target.
(iii) Number of schools covered around 30 per cent of the target.
The Committee conclude that the position of physical achievement
is worse than the financial achievement. The Committee are
disappointed to note the physical and financial achievement of the
programme and would like an explanation from the Government in
this regard.

59
Reply of the Government
The Prime Minister’s programme has been finalized and the
guidelines issued only in July 2003. By the time the funds were
released, the time left for implementation during 2003-04 was very
little. Introducing a new scheme takes time to get actually grounded
at the functional level. It is also relevant to mention that 10% of the
contribution in respect of PM’s programme has to come from the
community which also takes time in comparison to programmes run
completely out of Government funds. However, the matter has been
discussed in the Review Meetings held with various States wherein
the State Governments have promised to achieve full targets by the
end of 2004-05.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph Number 29 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.60)
The Committee note that as per the Union Government’s Policy
ARWSP would be replaced by Swajaldhara Scheme gradually. They
also note that whereas ARWSP is applicable to each and every State
and district, Swajaldhara is a demand driven scheme. The Committee
appreciate the fact that sustainability of drinking water resource can
be ensured only when people realize that water is an economic and
social good and should be treated as such. Providing drinking water
free of cost has created a mindset in the rural masses that water is a
social right to be provided by the Government. There is an urgent
need to change the mindset of the people. However, there are certain
concerns as indicated below to be addressed before ARWSP is replaced
by Swajaldhara:
(i) as has been highlighted in the previous chapters, the position
of NC habitations is not clear with the Government. Unless
the results of the recent survey being undertaken by the
various States are analysed, the clear picture with regard to
NC and PC habitations would not emerge;
(ii) during Tenth Plan, Rs. 24,800 crore have already been
earmarked under ARWSP , but how the Government would
ensure utilisation of resources is not clear;

60
(iii) since Swajaldhara scheme is a demand driven scheme, how
the Government would address the problems with regard
to accessibility, availability, sustainability and quality etc.
especially for the States/Districts which are not up to the
mark and could not be motivated to come forward with
the projects;
(iv) in case ARWSP is phased out, how the Government would
achieve the objective of full coverage is not clear;
(v) the position of implementation of Swajaldhara is also not
very encouraging. Excepting Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu, none of the States show
completion of even a single project taken up under the
scheme;
(vi) as per Government’s reply, there is no problem of
community contribution under Swajaldhara. However,
Swajaldhara is a demand driven scheme and hence, the
projects are demanded from areas where people have the
mindset to bear the cost of the projects and owe the
responsibilities of operation and maintenance. However, since
Swajaldhara is applicable to few of the districts and few
areas in the country what will be the position of community
contribution is not clear;
(vii) under ARWSP some inter-sector allocation according to a
fixed criteria has been made. However, Swajaldhara does
not have any such prescribed weightage;
(viii) how the Government would take care of the capital intensive
complex projects costing to the tune of several lakhs of
rupees under Swajaldhara is not clear;
(ix) whether the rural masses have enough resources and are
ready to bear the cost of drinking water from a distant
source to the village entry point is not clear as per the
replies of the Government.
In view of the aforesaid concerns, the Committee feel that a hurried
approach to switch over to Swajaldhara mode will not be prudent. A
move with caution and introspection is necessary. A demand driven
approach by a community calls for education, proper appraisal of the
needs and clear cut understanding with sufficient alertness and
eagerness to shoulder the responsibilities matched by adequate financial
support. That Swajaldhara initiative has not received wider acclaim

61
from many areas shows that proper endeavour is yet to come and as
such making haste to replace ARWSP with this initiative could be
fatal. Too much haste in reforms is not prudent. The Government
should wait and watch before arriving at any final conclusion. The
Committee would, therefore, like that before taking any action to
replace ARWSP by the demand driven scheme of Swajaldhara, all the
issues referred to above should be addressed carefully and after
interacting with the State Governments and Gram Panchayats and
thereby people at large, the Government should carefully draft the
guidelines of Swajaldhara. The Committee should be kept informed
about the steps taken.
The Committee are also of the opinion that a streamlined
monitoring mechanism should be in place so that the implementing
agencies of Swajaldhara Projects can be made accountable. Moreover,
data should be maintained regarding the number of DWSCs constituted
in the various States of the country, the number of projects implemented
by them, the amount of fund at their disposal, among other things.
The Committee feel that adopting a strict vigilance and monitoring
mechanism on the part of the States/Union Government would go a
long way in proper implementation of the projects while also ensuring
that community contribution is optimally utilized without any risk of
its squandering.
Reply of the Government
The issues involved in extension of reform principles to cover the
entire sector were discussed in a two-day conference-cum-workshop
of State Secretaries held at New Delhi on 22-23rd November, 2004.
The main recommendations of the aforesaid conference-cum-workshop
are as under:—
1. Almost all States felt that, rural drinking water supply and
sanitation schemes should be implemented and managed
by Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). However, the transfer
need not be done in a hurry. More time may be required
by Panchayats to accept the transfer. Transfer of water
supply schemes should be a gradual and step-by-step
process.
2. To facilitate transfer of Rural Water Supply (RWS) schemes
to PRIs, Legislative framework may be strengthened by
incorporating suitable provisions in the Panchayati Raj
Acts and Bye-Laws framed thereunder, so that PRIs manage

62
rural water supply schemes as their Constitutional and
statutory duty.
3. Capacity development of PRIs be undertaken on large-scale.
State representatives felt that Swajaldhara was started
hurriedly without taking up the IEC activities, which is pre-
requisite for the success of any participatory community
based programme. The concept of Communication and
Capacity Development Unit (CCDU) should have been
introduced earlier.
4. CCDUs can play an effective role in facilitating transfer of
RWS schemes to PRIs. Establishment of CCDUs is a step in
the right direction. They should be the nodal point for
capacity development of PRIs to manage RWS schemes and
building the enabling environment for the purpose. They
should also codify the best practices and success stories.
5. Multiplicity of schemes and funding pattern should be
avoided. Some States (M.P . and Arunachal Pradesh)
suggested that schemes should be transferred to Gram
Panchayats after coverage with 40 lpcd supply level is
achieved. There should not be any community contribution
in NC coverage upto 40 lpcd supply level and quality
schemes. Other States like Andhra Pradesh felt that principle
of ‘no community contribution’ should be applied only for
providing 10 lpcd water in water scarcity areas where relief
work is undertaken under drought relief works. Most States
felt that the principle of community contribution towards
capital cost of schemes could be introduced without being
dogmatic or rigid about 10% community contribution.
6. Once a habitation is covered with 40 lpcd level, the assets
should be transferred to PRIs for O&M. For subsequent
schemes for augmenting supply level above 40 lpcd or
restoring 40 lpcd level of a “slipped-back” habitation,
community contribution in capital cost should be mandatory.
7. Source-Strengthening measures, Rain Water Harvesting and
recharge of ground water be made an integral part of the
coverage scheme.
8. Implementation of protection of Drinking Water Sources Bill
and Ground Water Exploitation Bill should be non-negotiable
principle of reforms. Central assistance to be contingent on
this.

63
9. Earmarking of funds by Government of India for
undertaking water quality schemes.
10. Implementation of Water Quality schemes in project mode
as was being done earlier through the Sub-Mission.
The aforesaid recommendations of the conference-cum-workshop
and the suggestions of the Committee would be kept in view when
final decision in the matter of transformation of ARWSP into a reforms
oriented programme is taken by the Union Government.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.98)
The Committee in their respective reports had repeatedly been
recommending to the Government to give topmost priority to provide
drinking water to schools in rural areas. In spite of that, the physical
achievement of the programme indicate that serious attention has not
been paid towards this programme. It is really a matter of concern
that even after more than five decades of planned development,
provision of drinking water to schools is a distant dream. The
Committee are really disturbed to note the position of coverage of
schools in various States. In several States, the coverage has been
indicated as 0 per cent. While appreciating the fact that the
responsibility of implementation of ARWSP and of school coverage is
with the State Governments, the Committee feel that adequate efforts
to sensitize the various State Governments about the urgency of
providing drinking water to schools are not being made by the Union
Government. The Committee would like the Department to coordinate
with other Ministries/Departments involved in this regard as well as
the respective Departments of various State Governments so that all
the schools can be covered within a stipulated time frame. The
Committee further find that the Seventh all-India Educational Survey
has been completed and the results are being compiled by the NCERT.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the results when available.
Besides, they would also like that the future planning to be made
with regard to providing drinking water to rural schools should be
made according to the recent data that would be made available as

64
per the Seventh all-India Educational Survey. The Committee in their
earlier Reports on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) [refer para 3.60 to
46th Report and para 25 of 52nd Report, 13th Lok Sabha] had
recommended that under the sector reform project or Swajaldhara
programme, guidelines should be made a little flexible regarding school
coverage. Provision should be made so that the 10 per cent of
beneficiary funds could be contributed from the MPLAD funds. As
per the action taken reply, the Government could not agree to the
recommendation on the plea that community is an essential ingredient
in the successful implementation, operation and maintenance of rural
water supply schemes, hence Swajaldhara guidelines provide for 10
per cent contribution by the community. The Committee, while taking
up the issue again would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation
and again emphasize that school coverage should not be treated at
par with coverage of habitations as per normal programme. So far as
10 per cent community contribution is concerned, as a special case for
school coverage, Swajaldhara guideline should be made flexible so
that 10 per cent community contribution could be provided from
MPLAD funds.
Reply of the Government
Provision of drinking water and sanitation facilities in all rural
schools is targeted by the end of the Tenth Plan. However, Government
of India has been impressing upon the States to draw up a time-
bound Action Plan in this regard and ensure attainment of the target
ahead of the deadline, preferably by 31.3.2006. A coordination panel
under the chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Drinking Water
Supply has also been set up to monitor progress in this regard. The
Department has also prepared a concept paper on School Sanitation
and Hygiene Education, which includes, inter alia , the drinking water
supply component and has forwarded the same to the Planning
Commission with request for additional funding from the Education
Cess levied in current year’s budget. Members of Parliament can also
utilize funds from MPLADS for financing schemes for providing
drinking water in rural schools.
The results of Seventh All India Educatioinal Survey have not yet
been made available. AD.O. letter in this regard has also been sent by
Minister (RD) to Minister (HRD).
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]

65
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 38 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.99)
On the issue to ensure drinking water in privately managed schools,
the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that
Government aided schools should also be brought under the purview
of Government school coverage programme (refer Para 3.60 of 46th
Report, 13th Lok Sabha). The Government in their action taken reply
had stated that it is responsibility of private management to provide
drinking water in privately managed schools. The Committee while
examining the action taken reply had desired to be apprised about the
overall position of drinking water in such Government aided
schools in order to assess position in the right perspective. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the specific steps taken
by the Department with regard to coverage of privately managed
schools.
In this context, the Committee would like to recommend that all
these categories of schools, viz., Government schools, Government-aided
and recognized schools and private schools should be covered under
the rural drinking water supply programme, so that the supply of
potable drinking water can be made available to each and every school
of the country thereby ensuring health and well-being of school
children.
Further, the Committee feel that the provision of potable drinking
water should be extended to local primary health centres and
dispensaries thus benefiting a large number of people.
Reply of the Government
While the Government is taking all steps to see that all Government
schools get covered with the facility of drinking water supply by the
year 2005-06, there is no proposal to extend the facility to private
schools. Private schools generally charge fees from the students and it
is therefore incumbent upon them to provide basic facilities like
drinking water supply in the schools run by them.

66
Regarding potable drinking water supply to local primary health
centres and dispensaries, it is presumed that drinking water supply is
part of the infrastructure to be provided to these Centres as no request
in this regard has been received from Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare. The factual position is being ascertained from the Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 38 of Chapter I of the Report)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 2.17)
The Committee in their earlier Reports on Demands for Grants
had expressed their concern over the dichotomy in the data with regard
to accessibility and availability of drinking water. The Committee have
been informed that the Government is commissioning a survey to
analyze the position with regard to slippage of habitations from FC to
PC and PC to NC categories. They note that the survey results could
be received from 24 States/UTs. Further, they also note that after the
survey results are received, the same would be re-evaluated through
an independent evaluator. The Committee find that State/UT
Governments are taking long time in finalization of the survey. They
are unable to comprehend how planning on the part of the Government
is made without having a clear picture of the slippage of habitations
thereby indicating the actual position with regard to availability of
drinking water to rural masses. In this scenario, the Committee feel
that there should be some inbuilt mechanism in the monitoring system
of the Government to know about the position of slippage of targets
at a regular interval and the same should be indicated every year in
the Performance Budget.
Reply of the Government
A mechanism for monitoring the slippage of habitations on
quarterly basis is being worked out in consultation with the State
Governments.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11011/2/2004-TM III,
dated 14.12.2004 (Department of Drinking Water Supply)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
19 March, 2005 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
67

APPENDIX I
STATUS OF SECTOR REFORM PROJECT (AS ON 30.11.2004)
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Sl.No. Name of the Estimated Total GoI Community Interest Total Reported Total No. Schemes Atmarpan
district cost of released Contribution Available Expenditure of Completed by
schemes Fund Schemes Community
12 3 4 5 678 9 1 0 1 1
1. Chittoor 3700.03 2244.00 308.44 132.57 2685.01 2684.27 1641 1209 646
2. Khammam 3753.00 3403.66 485.95 105.34 3394.95 3746.72 1601 1600 1600
3. Nalgonda 4000.00 3581.89 442.40 148.54 4172.83 2848.04 965 640 294
4. Nellore 3420.00 2244.00 237.00 100.00 2581.00 2079.03 394 320 320
5. Prakasam 4000.00 3366.00 404.62 100.60 3871.22 3305.64 504 496 496
6. Guntur 4000.00 3693.45 401.42 56.96 4151.83 3493.10 381 199 199
7. East Godavari 2749.46 1113.56 257.29 8.94 1379.79 1378.80 176 67 67
8. Lohit 281.20 252.45 25.76 27.42 305.63 281.20 79 41 41
9. West Siang 449.45 428.17 34.09 15.50 477.76 442.27 102 28 21
10. Jorhat 569.00 472.34 38.44 14.64 525.42 394.64 871 863 863
11. Kamrup 600.00 422.52 39.50 12.90 474.92 460.36 1312 719 712
12. Sonitpur 465.62 331.04 37.60 12.45 381.09 377.30 2244 2219 2219
13. Vaishali 1300.00 1122.00 107.88 99.65 1329.53 1024.37 6403 4869 4869
14. Durg 1301.00 1122.00 113.65 51.73 1287.38 1268.51 1293 1267 1267
15. Mehsana 4000.00 3708.00 607.79 32.14 4347.93 4371.00 320 320 320
16. Rajkot 3463.00 3043.23 328.00 65.00 3436.23 2702.00 272 267 97
17. Surat 4000.00 3366.00 306.00 10.37 3682.37 3620.00 343 262 0
18. Karnal 1037.49 844.71 89.28 21.79 955.78 756.12 93 55 55
19. Yamuna Nagar 601.41 546.44 54.31 12.57 613.32 493.14 252 233 233
20. Simour 784.00 607.36 78.46 38.92 724.74 643.77 193 106 0
21. Srinagar 1690.10 1384.07 84.27 51.89 1520.23 955.70 98 30 30
68

69
12 3 4 5 678 9 1 0 1 1
22. Udhampur 834.56 813.92 61.84 28.28 904.04 746.07 123 93 81
23. Dhanbad 228.23 1122.00 20.31 65.53 1207.84 130.41 141 5 5
24. Bellary 1312.00 1122.00 244.12 135.18 1501.30 1203.97 710 677 609
25. Mangalore 3900.00 3660.08 456.08 76.80 4192.96 2509.01 2243 1609 1387
26. Mysore 3997.89 3554.00 328.03 118.16 4000.19 3020.75 1124 1094 1094
27. Kasaragod 2701.00 2742.88 198.87 110.16 3051.91 1759.94 255 255 255
28. Kollam 2196.00 2244.00 134.06 114.33 2492.39 1283.71 148 120 120
29. Gwalior 543.00 821.29 44.68 70.57 936.54 587.19 968 828 828
30. Hoshangabad 1385.23 1122.00 138.52 99.76 1360.28 1217.01 1104 1057 1047
31. Narsinghpur 1247.00 1122.00 199.64 190.16 1511.80 1509.83 1139 982 952
32. Raisen 1762.41 1269.01 149.63 141.68 1560.32 1519.39 768 576 576
33. Sehore 685.11 503.44 66.22 30.75 600.41 522.58 244 163 1
34. Amravati 1478.90 1184.10 104.25 57.54 1345.89 1223.00 891 481 481
35. Dhule 2200.00 1763.43 195.47 106.33 2065.23 1528.00 191 132 8
36. Nanded 3605.53 3477.00 343.00 79.00 3899.00 2666.28 359 86 26
37. Raigad 3743.00 3439.14 379.00 87.00 3905.14 2687.00 340 146 0
38. Ri-Bhol 307.07 272.10 29.45 5.52 307.07 307.07 111 111 111
39. Sarchhip 244.15 223.35 20.80 0.00 244.15 223.35 11 11 11
40. Dimapur 594.83 333.22 20.29 8.83 362.34 342.41 7 4 4
41. Balasore 1800.00 1572.00 160.30 106.39 1838.69 1822.00 2286 2286 2286
42. Ganjam 2415.00 2244.00 239.62 59.88 2543.50 2543.50 1340 1340 1340
43. Sundergarh 2788.40 2244.00 112.69 132.36 2489.05 2487.01 2598 2502 2502
44. Bhatinda 581.28 210.28 16.64 5.39 232.31 185.85 22 0 0
45. Moga* 273.45 344.00 19.63 0.99 364.62 117.14 23 0 0
46. Muktsar 611.62 872.41 18.37 56.46 947.24 136.57 31 0 0
47. Alwar 2422.49 2319.00 357.07 61.88 2737.95 1982.61 512 205 135
48. Rajsamand 396.16 552.00 32.25 22.39 606.64 277.34 54 25 12
49. Jaipur* 3209.00 2774.00 326.39 51.12 3151.51 2930.55 391 218 126

70
12 3 4 5 678 9 1 0 1 1
50. Sikkar 1470.00 1116.62 109.69 14.21 1240.52 920.71 143 10 4
51. Sikkim South 0.00 363.02 7.97 0.00 370.99 0.00 0 0 0
52. Sikkim West 0.00 244.95 0.00 0.00 244.95 0.00 0 0 0
53. Coimbatore 3988.00 3366.00 315.00 134.00 3815.00 3844.00 1650 1650 1650
54. Cuddalore 4000.00 3366.00 411.28 99.05 3876.33 3823.69 2355 2355 2355
55. Perambalur 3472.61 2934.30 315.40 139.50 3389.20 3371.90 1184 1184 1184
56. Vellore 3934.00 3701.20 370.10 38.36 4109.88 3934.00 3411 3411 3411
57. Kancheepuram 3162.93 2855.99 297.22 8.83 3162.04 2015.50 536 536 536
58. Virudhunagar 2880.00 2764.32 288.00 10.08 3062.40 1888.86 505 505 505
59. West Tripura 2481.29 2310.21 209.86 25.14 2545.21 2164.71 15061 14710 14710
60. Agra 1416.77 897.83 109.24 101.38 1108.45 1044.16 4685 3285 3285
61. Chandauli 1600.67 1286.63 224.83 56.46 1567.92 1341.00 4222 2862 2862
62. Lucknow 1650.67 1122.00 103.35 112.53 1337.88 1201.48 4061 4017 4017
63. Mirzapur 1160.96 862.41 79.48 47.17 989.06 872.42 1015 946 946
64. Sonebhadra 1462.42 1387.69 166.16 58.43 1612.28 1239.30 6012 5705 5705
65. Midnapur 2090.50 1847.79 236.45 60.13 2144.37 1434.13 1847 1267 1267
66. N. 24 Parganas 1982.97 1749.82 199.16 42.63 1991.61 1638.62 2305 2011 2011
67. Haridwar 2368.00 1122.00 91.45 110.89 1324.34 1065.62 106 8 8
Total
132837.86 114516.32 12434.01 4201.15 131151.48 106595.92 86769 75278 72802
*Rs. 247.57 lakh has been transferred from Muktsar to Moga.
*Rs. 530.00 lakh has been transferred from Rajsamand to Jaipur.
*Rs. 75.00 lakh has been transferred from Sikar to Alwar.

APPENDIX II
STATE-WISE STATUS OF SWAJALDHARA SCHEME (2002-03)
As on 3.12.2004
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of States Financial        Physical
No. Project GOI share 1st 2nd Com. Interest Total Exp. Upto % of Total No. Schemes
Outlay instal. instal. Contribut. received Available date exp. of Completed
Fund Schemes
1. Andhra Pradesh 9082.78 7951.43 4002.56 1667.97 1102.42 10.99 6783.94 4130.22 60.88 1650 608
2. Assam 831.78 757.59 370.12 0.00 74.21 1.42 445.75 176.64 39.63 53 0
3. Chhattisgarh 283.10 263.00 131.50 0.00 20.79 0.00 152.29 105.83 69.49 102 43
4. DNH 9.98 9.48 4.74 0.00 0.50 0.00 5.24 0.00 0.00 1 0
5. Gujarat 184.42 167.97 83.99 78.55 16.05 0.00 178.59 92.92 52.03 30 0
6. Haryana 24.55 21.95 10.98 0.00 2.60 0.00 13.58 0.00 0.00 2 0
7. Himachal Pradesh 714.66 652.78 335.79 0.00 61.49 0.00 397.28 57.66 14.51 471 22
8. Karnataka 246.09 218.15 109.07 9.24 28.63 0.11 147.05 39.14 26.62 55 0
9. Kerala 616.33 535.71 272.84 0.00 80.06 0.00 352.90 106.24 30.11 116 0
10. Madhya Pradesh 563.85 529.01 264.49 0.00 57.81 0.16 322.46 202.67 62.85 87 12
11. Maharashtra 8261.52 7427.66 3722.09 121.77 832.73 1.42 4678.01 2945.26 62.96 782 0
12. Orissa 725.39 671.68 335.84 0.00 53.57 0.00 389.41 95.58 24.54 287 9
13. Rajasthan 412.52 374.52 187.26 187.26 38.81 0.00 413.33 205.68 49.76 35 10
14. Tamil Nadu 1521.08 1395.00 702.04 692.59 121.80 1.35 1517.78 838.82 55.27 389 387
15. Uttar Pradesh 1236.79 1132.05 565.98 3.44 104.77 0.19 674.38 3.10 0.46 655 0
16. West Bengal 52.19 47.76 23.88 0.00 4.43 0.00 28.31 0.00 0.00 8 0
Total
24767.01 22155.74 11123.17 2760.82 2600.67 15.64 16500.30 8999.76 54.54 4723 1091
Note: It has been reported by the State Government that 10 schemes pertaining to
Srikakulam District of Andhra Pradesh and 1 scheme of cachar district of Assam have
not been grounded. Hence these schemes have been deleted from total 4734 schemes
approved at a total cost of Rs. 24799.76 Lakh with GoI share of Rs. 22185.55 Lakh.
71

APPENDIX III
STATE-WISE STATUS OF SWAJALDHARA SCHEME
(2003-04) As on 3.12.2004
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl.No. Name of the State Financial            Physical
Allocation Ist 2nd Community Interest Total Expenditure % age No. of No. of
Instalment instalment Contribution Accrued Available incurred Schemes Schemes
(Rs. in lakh) released Fund taken up completed
1. Tamil Nadu 673.21 336.60 336.60 67.11 0.02 740.33 507.82 68.59 445 442
2. Andhra Pradesh 1616.00 808.00 0.00 182.70 1.70 994.10 564.60 56.80 360 127
3. Arunachal Pradesh 447.41 223.71 0.00 44.74 0.00 268.45 0.00 0.00 181 69
4. Assam 754.59 377.30 0.00 73.66 0.06 451.02 238.38 52.85 369 0
5. DNH 8.00 4.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 0.00 0.00 0 0
6. Gujarat 765.56 382.78 382.78 0.00 0.00 765.56 600.29 568.65 347 21
7. Haryana 234.23 117.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 117.12 0.00 0.00 0 0
8. Himachal Pradesh 680.20 340.11 0.00 0.00 0.00 340.11 0.00 0.00 0 0
9. Jammu & Kashmir 1497.90 748.95 0.00 0.00 0.00 748.95 0.00 0.00 0 0
10. Jharkhand 356.02 178.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 178.01 0.00 0.00 0 0
11. Karnataka 1397.03 698.52 55.25 31.38 0.39 785.54 175.80 22.38 0 0
12. Kerala 504.03 252.02 0.00 16.84 0.00 268.86 157.01 58.40 33 2
13. Madhya Pradesh 840.54 420.27 27.00 101.01 1.03 549.31 250.94 45.68 566 75
14. Maharashtra 2172.13 1086.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 1086.07 113.06 10.41 0 0
15. Nagaland 130.22 65.11 0.00 19.81 0.00 84.92 57.80 68.06 9 0
16. Orissa 733.28 366.64 6.39 0.00 0.00 373.03 187.60 50.29 231 46
17. Punjab 313.79 156.89 0.00 31.99 0.00 188.88 11.33 6.00 0 0
18. Rajasthan 2191.00 1095.50 0.00 354.67 0.00 1450.17 869.78 59.98 1921 410
19. Tripura 156.93 78.47 25.89 0.00 0.00 104.36 0.00 0.00 0 0
20. Uttar Pradesh 1532.91 766.46 0.00 0.00 0.00 766.46 0.00 0.00 0 0
21. Uttaranchal 364.00 182.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 182.00 0.00 0.00 0 0
22. West Bengal 943.00 471.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 471.50 0.00 0.00 0 0
Total 18311.98 9156.03 833.91 923.91 3.20 10918.75 3734.41 34.20 4462 1192
72

APPENDIX IV
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF
THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDA Y, THE 4 MARCH, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room
‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mohan Jena
3. Shri Dawa Narbula
4. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
5. Shri Mohan Singh
6. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
7. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
8. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
9. Shri Penumalli Madhu
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11.D r. Faguni Ram
12. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Secretariat
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
73

74
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee.
*** *** ***
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 4 along with the draft action taken report on
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Department of Drinking Water
Supply. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the report without
any modification.
4. *** *** ***
5. The Committee then authorized the chairman to finalise the
said draft action taken reports on the basis of factual verification from
the concerned Ministry/Department and to present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

APPENDIX V
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total Number of recommendations 31
II. Recommendations that have been accepted 19
by the Government
Para Nos. 2.15, 2.16, 2.18, 2.25, 2.32, 2.33,
2.59, 2.79, 2.80, 2.81, 2.82, 2.90, 2.104, 2.109,
2.110, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10 and 3.11
Percentage to the Total recommendations (61.29%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do 3
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies
Para Nos. 2.30, 2.39 and 2.91
Percentage to the Total recommendations (9.68%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies 8
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos. 2.19, 2.24, 2.28, 2.29, 2.40, 2.60,
2.98 and 2.99
Percentage to the Total recommendations (25.80%)
V. Recommendation in respect of which final 1
reply of the Government is still awaited
Para No. 2.17
Percentage to the Total recommendations (3.23%)
75