REPORT
CHAPTER I
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2007-2008)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Twenty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-
2008) of the Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural
Development) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 14 May, 2007.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 39 recommendations which have been categorised
as follows:—
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 3.18, 3.21, 3.22, 4.11, 4.13, 4.14, 5.10, 5.12 5.13,
5.14, 5.15, 5.16, 6.13, 6.14, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8, 7.9, 8.9, 8.10, 8.12,
8.13 and 8.14 .
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s reply:—
-NIL-
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:—
Para Nos. 3.19, 3.20, 3.23, 3.24, 4.12, 5.11, 5.17, 5.18, 5.19,
6.11, 6.12, 6.15, 8.11, 9.7, 9.8 and 9.9
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
-NIL-
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Status of coverage of habitations and the issue of slippages
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 2&3, Para Nos. 3.19 & 3.20)
4. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are dismayed to observe the results of the
Habitation Survey which was initiated in 2003 and was
subsequently revalidated by IIPA. There appears to be major
discrepancy with regard to status of coverage of habitations as
per the updated reports from States of CAP 99 habitations and
as per the data from Habitation Survey. The data as per the
reports from States as on 1.04.2006 is 3052 Not Covered (NC),
38,894 Partially Covered (PC) and 13,80,337 Fully Covered (FC)
habitations. However, the Survey results reflect glaring contrast
to the picture of coverage status projected by the States and
intimated by the Department till date. According to the Habitation
Survey there are about 2.48 lakh NC, 3.9 Lakh PC and 8.7 lakh
FC habitations, thus indicating major anomaly between the two
sets of data. Even the Secretary during the oral evidence admitted
to the grave confusion with regard to the aforesaid data. The
Committee take strong exception to the way Department has been
making tall proclamations of attaining 96 per cent coverage for
the last few years without knowing the ground reality particularly
when the survey data indicates the coverage status as merely 57
per cent and even this needs to be verified through random
survey. With the aforesaid findings of the survey results, which
have been made available after consistent recommendations of
the Committee, the entire scenario of rural drinking water sector
has undergone regression. The Committee are further unhappy
at the Department’s justification and complacent approach with
regard to the above wherein they have stated that the two sets
of figures are based on two different surveys and that coverage
status is a dynamic concept and habitations continually slip back
due to a number of reasons. While acknowledging the fact that
finally it would be the latest data made available as per the
survey results which will serve as basis for future planning and
projections, the Committee would like the Department to clarify
from the States the reasons for such blatant anomaly as reflected
above and furnish the feedback to the Committee.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.19)

3
“Further, Bharat Nirman has been conceived as a plan to build
rural infrastructure in four years period from 2005-06 to 2008-09
and under its drinking water component, it is proposed to cover
all remaining uncovered habitations of CAP 99 i.e. 55,067 NC/
PC habitations and about three lakh slipped back habitations.
The achievement with regard to coverage in two years of Bharat
Nirman period is about 20,000 habitations. However, after the
survey results, the very objectives and targets of Bharat Nirman
have become questionable, as its objectives are not in consonance
with the ground reality at hand. Even the future projections of
Bharat Nirman are being made according to the old and obsolete
CAP 99 data though basic reality in this regard is quite
contradictory. Further, the Department has requested States to
sign MoU before the commencement of the Eleventh Plan that
will commit them to meet Bharat Nirman targets. The Committee
would further like the Department to apprise them about their
concrete planning and strategies in the context of the changed
scenario with special reference to the objectives of Bharat Nirman
and Eleventh Plan targets. Also they should ask States to furnish
revised action plan framework taking into consideration the latest
position as indicated in the Habitation Survey. The Committee
would like the Department to categorically respond to each of
the issues raised by them and take the necessary action in
consultation with the State Governments/ UT Administrations
and the Committee may be kept apprised.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
5. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:—
“Coverage is a dynamic concept. The 97% coverage of habitations
with drinking water facilities was with reference to the habitation
survey conducted in early 90s and updated in 1999. Recognizing
the fact that availability of drinking water and the status of the
sources and system will change over a period of time, a fresh
survey was conducted in 2003. A number of factors affect the
status of drinking water, and some of these are—sources going
dry, sources becoming quality affected, systems outliving their
lifespan, increase in population, emergence of new habitations,
etc.
Hence, in the results of Habitation Survey 2003, the status of
habitations at that point of time was captured. As these are two

4
sets of data at different time periods, there is no anomaly between
the two. To arrive at the final status of coverage as captured in
2003 Survey, the method followed was to validate the raw data.
This was done by IIPA, and included correcting the names of
the habitations and tallying with the reports given by the States.
Thereafter, a random check of correctness of reporting was made
by the Monitoring Division of the Ministry. The data so collected
in 2003 is checked and re-checked to come to a status as close
to reality as possible. Now, with collection of this baseline data,
the Department has done away with the need for regular surveys.
The base data of 2003 will be updated online annually by the
States. Again, the status of coverage will change every year, but
the baseline data will remain the same. Now, with corrections,
the Survey 2003 data shows 8,69,997 FC, 3,89,409 PC and 2,47,943
NC as in 2003. The same data, after coverage of 3 years, is
11,21,366 FC, 2,20,615 PC and 1,65,368 NC as on 1.4.2007.
The Department has accorded top priority to sustainability of
drinking water sources and systems to prevent slippage of a
habitation once covered. Further, focused funding for addressing
water quality problems have been introduced from 2006-07
wherein upto 20% of the ARWSP allocation is being released to
States for addressing water quality problems.”
 Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.19)
“Survey 2003 refers to water availability status of all habitations
as reported by States and includes all habitations, including the
NC/PC habitations of CAP 99, quality affected habitations as
well as slipped back habitations. The Bharat Nirman target has
been set with reference to 2003 Survey data only. Under Bharat
Nirman, it was proposed to cover 55,067 uncovered habitations
of CAP–99, an estimated 3,3,1604 slipped back habitations and to
address 2,16,968 habitations which have water quality problems
as reported by States. The annual targets for each State is fixed
after due discussions with them to arrive at realistic targets.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
6. The Committee while taking note of the fact that the
Habitation Survey 2003 results were available, had stressed to do
the future planning according to the latest data. The action taken
replies indicate utter confusion in this regard. On the one hand, it

5
has been stated that Bharat Nirman targets have been set with
reference to 2003 Survey data, on the other hand the Department
has stated that Bharat Nirman propose to cover 55,067 uncovered
habitations of CAP 99 and estimated 2.8 lakh slipped back habitations
and 2,16,968 quality related habitations. The Committee note that as
per Survey results 2003, there is no category like ‘slipped back
habitations’. According to the latest survey of 2003, there are about
2.48 lakh NC and 3.9 lakh PC habitations. The Committee fail to
understand how the Survey results of 2003 are being relied on while
making projections for Bharat Nirman when the data indicated by
the Department relate to CAP 99. The Committee would like the
Department to clarify the position. They would also like to emphasize
that all future planning should be made according to the latest data
made available by 2003 Survey. Besides, the Committee find that the
latter part of the recommendation which emphasized preparation of
revised action plan framework for coverage of all Not Covered and
Partially Covered habitations has not been addressed by the
Department. The Committee would like a categorical reply in this
regard. The Committee further find that with the collection of
baseline data as per 2003 Survey, the Department has done away
with the regular survey. The base data of 2003 will be updated online
annually by the States. The Committee note that after coverage of
three years, the number of NC/PC habitations have come down from
6.37 lakh to 3.85 lakh. The Committee find that as per the present
position, the Department is totally relying on the information
furnished by the States. The Committee feel that there should be
some sort of monitoring to find about the ground reality with regard
to the data furnished by the State Governments, otherwise the same
scenario indicating the unrealistic position about the coverage of
habitations would be repeated. The Committee would like the
Department to analyse the mechanism of updation of data in view
of the aforesaid observation of the Committee and take desired action.
The Committee may be kept apprised about the action taken in this
regard.
B. Physical performance under ARWSP
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.23)
7. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“With regard to the physical performance under ARWSP , the
Committee deplore the gross under performance relating to

6
coverage of NC/ PC habitations for the years 2005-06 and 2006-
07 as indicated in the data mentioned above. Against the target
of coverage of 1,120 NC and 17,000 PC habitations in 2006-07
the achievement was as low as 472 and 6,591 habitations
respectively. The Committee strongly object to this kind of under-
achievement in such a vital area, especially keeping in view the
fact that the targets fixed are also not in consonance with the
ground reality reflected as discussed in detail in earlier
paragraphs. The Committee would like to strongly recommend
to the Government to project targets in future in accordance with
the changed scenario of coverage of habitations as reflected in
the Habitation Survey. Further, all efforts should be made to
ensure that the said targets are achieved within the stipulated
time period. The specific reasons for non-achievement of targets
may be obtained from States who may be asked to take corrective
measures accordingly . The Committee would like the Department
to ensure that such gross under achievement in such a critical
sector will not be repeated in future and necessary measures to
achieve the same may be suitably communicated to the
Committee.”
8. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“As per the reports now received from States, against the target
of coverage of 1,120 NC and 17,000 PC habitations in 2006-07
the achievement was 860 NC and 11,580 PC habitations,
respectively. The Department has been emphasizing upon the
States the need for coverage of NC and quality-affected habitations
in the stipulated time period in its review meetings with Ministers
and State Secretaries and at other fora. Targets are fixed on the
basis of coverage of habitations in the previous year by the State
Governments, fund availability during current year, cost of
coverage per habitations as indicated by the State Governments
in their Action Plan for Bharat Nirman. State/ UTs are being
urged time and again to meet the targets so as to fulfil the tasks
set forth under Bharat Nirman.”
9. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had expressed
strong displeasure on under-achievement of targets with regard to
NC and PC habitations during the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 and
had stressed the need to obtain the specific reasons for under-
achievement from the respective States and take the corrective
measures accordingly. In the action taken reply, the Department has
simply furnished the updated position with regard to NC and PC

7
habitations during the year 2006-07. The Committee find that even
the updated figure indicates that shortfall in achievement of NC
and PC targets is around 25 and 30 per cent respectively. The
Committee feel that with this kind of shortfall in achieving the
targets, the Government would not be able to achieve the targets
fixed under Bharat Nirman. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that
the State-specific problems should be found out with a view to take
the corrective action accordingly so that the fixed targets are achieved.
C. Status regarding habitations with less than hundred population
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 3.24)
10. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Further, the Committee are dismayed to learn that there are
approximately 92,084 habitations with less than 100 population
which are not even considered for the coverage under ARWSP .
The said data further indicates that the total number of NC/PC
habitations out of these 92,084 total habitations, is approximately
45,700 habitations for less than 100 population. The Department
informed that revision of norms to extend coverage of all such
habitations will be taken up after the Bharat Nirman period. The
Committee would like to know from the Department how
projections and achievements are quoted and planning is being
made without taking into account such a large number of
habitations viz. about 92,000, which have less than 100 populations
particularly when these habitations may be in backward areas
and need more Government assistance. To cover these, the
ARWSP guidelines need to be reviewed right away so that no
section of population in rural area of country is left deprived of
this basic human right. The Committee would like the Department
to indicate appropriate clarification and the strategies devised for
coverage of these habitations within a stipulated time-frame.”
11. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“To decide on projections for funding and planning, ARWSP
presently takes into account a rural habitation not having any
safe water source with a permanently settled population of 20
households or 100 persons, whichever is more. However, as rural
drinking water is a State subject, the State Government could
cover any habitation regardless of its size/ population/ number
of households with funds under the MNP . Further, DDP areas

8
and SC/ ST habitations with less than 100 persons can, however,
be covered under the ARWSP . Under Bharat Nirman, all
uncovered habitations as per ARWSP norms are envisaged to be
covered by 2008-09. Thereafter, the Department proposes to change
the norms to provide assistance to States for covering other
habitations.”
12. The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of
previous year had noted that the habitations having population less
than 100 or households less than 20 had been neglected by the
Government. Such habitations do not find any place in the most
important programme of the Government i.e. ARWSP . Even when
the Committee emphasized to cover these habitations on priority
basis, the action taken reply of the Department indicates the
insensitivity of the Government in respect of these habitations.
Instead of taking urgent action, the Department has tried to shift
the responsibility on the State Governments. The Committee fail to
understand how the Department could ignore these habitations which
may be in the most difficult backward areas, keeping in view less
number of population/families. Further, the responsibility with regard
to these habitations cannot be shifted on State Governments when
ARWSP is a Centrally-sponsored programme having coverage in all
the States/UTs.
The Committee further note that out of 92,084 such habitations
approximately 45,700 habitations i.e. around 50 per cent of the
habitations are still NC/PC. The Committee wonder how the
Government would achieve the targets of full coverage under ARWSP
while neglecting these habitations. The Committee deplore the way
the Department has addressed their recommendation. The Committee,
while reiterating their concern, would like the Department to take
urgent action for coverage of habitations having population less than
100 within a stipulated timeframe and inform the Committee
accordingly.
D. Issue of unspent balances under ARWSP
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 4.12)
13. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Another disturbing trend noted by the Committee is the issues
of under utilisation of scarce resources which have consistently

9
been communicated to the Department through various reports.
While recommending for higher outlay, the Committee are
constrained to note the under-spending in the sector especially
with respect to unspent balances by the State Governments. The
Committee while appreciating the fact that the present utilisation
for the Central sector have been improving over the years, the
under spending by the State Governments has been a major cause
of concern. So much so that for the current year  i.e. 2006-07, the
allocation was reduced at RE stage by Rs. 640 crore due to large
Opening Balance with the States. The Committee observe that
underspending of the scarce resources has become a regular
feature among many States. The Committee would like the
Department to ensure accountability from the States regarding
optimal and meaningful utilisation of funds by evolving some
mechanism such as Monthly Progress Reports etc. to that effect.
The Committee strongly recommend that the format of MPR
should also be revised to include a component wherein the States
furnish specific reasons for non-utilisation of the funds. There
should be better coordination and interaction between the Centre
and the States throughout the year to remove any bottlenecks
faced by the States. The Department should also keep track of
utilisation of funds allocated under the Twelfth Finance
Commission for the rural water supply. The Committee should
be duly informed about the specific steps taken or proposed to
be taken by the Government with regard to all the issues
discussed above.”
14. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Department has initiated a separate meeting of poor
performing States, and also a monthly meeting of NE and Hill
States to discuss and remove bottlenecks in implementation. Also,
quarterly Review meeting of all States and annual State Ministers
Conference is held. On Department’s initiative recently, a
representative of Department has been taken on the Central
Review Committee to monitor State’s expenditure for water and
sanitation under Twelfth Finance Commission grants. The subject
is also being taken up with State Secretaries during quarterly
review meetings.”
15. The Committee while examining Demands for Grants had
noted that during the year 2006-07, the allocation was reduced at RE
stage by Rs. 640 crore due to large opening balances with the States.
While expressing strong concern over unspent balances under

10
ARWSP , the Committee had recommended a mechanism to ensure
the accountability of the States. It was suggested that the format of
Monthly Progress Reports should be revised to include a component
wherein the States furnish specific reasons for non-utilisation of the
funds. The Department has avoided reply to the suggestion made
by the Committee. The information with regard to various review
meetings being held from time to time has simply been furnished
as a compliance to the recommendation. The Committee are unhappy
over the way the Department has tried to sidetrack the
recommendation. They desire that urgent action should be taken
and the format of Monthly Progress Reports revised immediately as
recommended by the Committee.
E. Implementation of Model legislation on control of ground water
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 5.11)
16. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“First and foremost, depletion of ground water table due to over
extraction of ground water has emerged as a serious challenge
threatening sustainability of resources. A number of hand pumps,
stand pipes, bore wells, ponds etc. have become defunct due to
depleting ground water table. The Committee hold that maximum
priority should be given by the Department to ensure sufficient
recharge of ground water by States. In this regard, the Committee
feel that some kind of regulatory framework to restrict unlimited
extraction of ground water should be put in place at the earliest.
Till date, only six States have enacted and implemented legislation
for regulation and control of groundwater. The Department should
not shy away from its responsibility by stating that the said
legislation is the mandate of Ministry of Water Resources, since
the ground water largely affects the drinking water scenario in
rural areas. Recently the issue has assumed more significance in
light of the over exploitation of ground water by some
Multinational Companies and the resultant problem of drinking
water caused by this which has received strong reaction from
some States. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department should aggressively interact with the State
Governments in coordination with Ministry of Water Resources
to enact and implement the aforesaid legislation expeditiously.”
17. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The matter is being pursued with the Ministry of Water
Resources. State Governments have been repeatedly requested to

11
enact the legislation for regulation and control of ground water.
However, it is the respective State legislature, who will decide
about the legislation and as such, the Department of Drinking
Water has a limited role.”
18. The Committee had earlier recommended that the Department
of Drinking Water Supply might interact with the State Governments
to ensure implementation of the model legislation on control of
ground water as circulated by the Central Ground Water Board under
Ministry of Water Resources. The Department has expressed
helplessness by stating that it has a limited role since the respective
State legislature has to decide about the legislation. The Committee
note that the mandate of the Department of Drinking Water Supply
is to ensure availability of drinking water to rural masses. However,
the availability of drinking water solely depend upon the
sustainability of resources. With the over-extraction and exploitation
of ground water resources, water table is going down in various
areas to a critical level and an immediate action needs to be taken
in this regard. While acknowledging the fact that it is only the
respective State Governments, which will be enacting the aforesaid
legislation, the Union Government too has the responsibility in this
regard. Moreover, crores of rupees are being spent on various schemes
meant to ensure the availability of drinking water to masses in rural
areas, which solely depends on the sustainability of resources. The
Committee, therefore, strongly emphasize that all efforts should be
made to persuade the State Governments to implement the aforesaid
legislation within a stipulated timeframe. The Committee should be
kept apprised about the action taken by the Department in this
regard.
F. Water conservation and water harvesting
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 17 & 18, Para Nos. 5.15 & 5.16)
19. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Besides, problems of water scarcity may be a contributing factor
for future flashpoint for international conflicts, which has led
many experts/academicians to predict that the next World War
may be fought over the issue of water. The information with
regard to threat of aforesaid water wars and need for water
conservation and other method of sustainability of sources may
be aggressively disseminated to rural communities. Further,
incentive mechanisms should be worked out to reward villages
who promote water harvesting and take up and continue with

12
sustainability schemes. Local rural marts may be organised by
District authorities wherein rural people may be sensitized about
various methods and techniques of water conservation and water
harvesting. Information on local and cost effective technologies
for the same may be disseminated to rural population through
these marts in collaboration with NGOs and VOs. The Union
Government should play the role of a facilitator through
interaction with State PHED’s and District level authorities for
information education and communication activities related to
sustainability of sources and systems of rural water supply.”
Recommendation (Para No. 5.15)
“The Committee find that at present, even in urban areas, there
is no particular agency to whom the public/Government agency
can contact for technical assistance to have rainwater harvesting
structure in residential, commercial establishments, Government
buildings, etc. The position in rural areas may further be worse.
The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to take
up this issue with the State Governments so that an exclusive
private/Government agency should be identified in each State.
Such agencies may provide all technical inputs, estimates of
required funds etc. to the private/Government agency who want
to have rainwater harvesting structure in their premises. Union
Government should formulate the Guidelines to be issued to the
State Governments advising to amend the State by-laws to include
compulsorily rain water harvesting structures in all new
constructions in rural areas so that an enduring solution to water
scarcity problem may be realised.”
Recommendation (Para No. 5.16)
20. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Department provides funds to States under CCDU to take
up state-specific IEC and HRD activities. An exhibition was
organized in New Delhi during 3-5 July 2007 during the State
Ministers conference, wherein States have displayed various
models and IEC material on rainwater harvesting and water
conservation. States have now been asked to organize exhibitions
at district headquarter.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 5.15)

13
“The model legislation on regulation of control of ground water
can be used by the State Governments for making rainwater
harvesting structures in new constructions mandatory. In the
review meetings, States have been advised to identify agencies
for providing technical inputs and estimates of funds for rainwater
harvesting structures in the premises of rural people.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 5.16)
21. The Committee appreciate that lot of efforts are being made
by the Department to persuade the State Governments to disseminate
information about rainwater harvesting. States have been asked to
organize exhibitions in district headquarters in this regard. Besides,
the issue of identification of agencies for technical inputs and
estimates of funds for rainwater harvesting structures is also being
taken up with the States in various review meetings. The Committee
recommend that efforts should be continued in this regard. Besides
the Committee also emphasize that the name of the State-wise
identified agencies for rainwater harvesting should also be hosted
on the website of the Department for more transparency. The
Committee in the earlier recommendation had also recommended
for some sort of incentive mechanism for rewarding villages to
promote rainwater harvesting. The Department has not ratified to
this part of the recommendation. The Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation and would like to be apprised about the action
taken in this regard.
G. Sustainability of sources and the systems
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 19, 20 and 21,
Para Nos. 5.17, 5.18 and 5.19)
22. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Besides, the Committee were constrained to find that the States
were not utilising the percentage of funds under ARWSP
earmarked for sustainability. The Committee in their 23rd action
taken report have already made their recommendation on the
aforesaid issue. Here again the Committee would like to reiterate
that strategic involvement of the Centre is necessary to ensure
that the States utilize the amount allocated for sustainability.
During the course of oral evidence of the Department, a
suggestion had emerged that sustainability factor and methods
should be incorporated as a precondition for fund allocation.
Another suggestion that surfaced during evidence of the

14
Department was that Centre should not release funds in second
instalment until States mandatorily spend a certain amount on
sustainability. The Committee feel that Department should
formulate appropriate framework and incorporate these proposals
to ensure accountability from States as far as utilization of funds
by States for sustainability is concerned and report to the
Committee about the concrete steps taken in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 5.17)
“Further, the Committee completely concur with the observation
of the Department that funds under different schemes of water
harvesting, recharging etc. need to be converged and coordinated.
In fact, the Committee have repeatedly been making
recommendations on coordination and convergence with various
Ministries and Departments in their respective reports. As
discussed during the evidence, lot of funds are made available
by Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Department of Rural Development for NREGA, SGRY, etc.,
Ministry of Water Resources for water conservation. Besides,
certain outlays are directly given to Panchayats under Twelfth
Finance Commission. Further, the Committee should be apprised
about how the dovetailing of funds under these schemes can be
effected and the specific initiatives taken in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 5.18)
“The Committee urge the Department to give serious thought to
all the aforesaid recommendations made by them with regard to
sustainability issue. The Department had proactively advocated
some of these issues during the course of oral evidence but the
real challenge before them is to translate the theory into
appropriate policy framework and concrete action. The Committee
would like the Department to reflect on all the aforesaid issues
in a holistic manner and keep them informed of their plan of
action in this regard. The issues raised in various paras may be
dealt with separately and the Committee may be informed of
the action taken on each of the issue in the action taken replies.”
Recommendation (Para No. 5.19)
23. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“A checklist for the use of State level Scheme Sanctioning
Committee has been prepared and circulated to bring in

15
convergence of various schemes related to water conservation, as
powers to sanction and implement schemes are with the States.”
Replies to Recommendations (Para Nos. 5.17, 5.18 and 5.19)
24. The Committee have consistently been expressing concern
over non-utilisation of 5 per cent allocation made under ARWSP for
sustainability. While examining Demands for Grants, the Committee
had again taken up the issue and recommended that Government
should consider making the utilisation of funds earmarked for
sustainability as a pre-condition for fund allocation or release of
second instalment under ARWSP . The Committee also emphasized
on dovetailing of funds made under various schemes by the different
Ministries/Departments of Union Government for sustainability and
water harvesting. Instead of taking urgent action, the Department
has simply stated that a checklist for the use of State level
sanctioning Committee has been prepared and circulated to bring
convergence of various schemes. The Committee are disappointed to
note the terse reply of the Department on such an important
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee desire a
categorical response on all the suggestions made by the Committee
in the recommendations under consideration.
H. Performance with regard to quality affected habitations
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 6.11)
25. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have repeatedly been bringing to the notice of
the Government the relevant issue of addressing quality affected
habitations in a time bound manner as it has major linkages
with the well being of the people. The Committee opine that the
entire exercise of coverage of habitations becomes inconsequential
if people do not have access to clean and safe drinking water
free from contaminants. The Committee note with distress the
under performance with regard to addressing quality affected
habitations. As explained above, for the year 2005-2006 the
achievement was less than 50 per cent. For the previous year, i.e.
2006-2007 the achievement vis-à-vis the target has been less than
20 per cent. The Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons
furnished with regard to underperformance wherein the
Department have cited late release of funds, long gestation period
of projects, etc. for the same. The Committee consider that the
Government should have a long term perspective while fixing

16
targets and there should be no excuse for under achievements in
such a vital area relating to the fundamental need of human life.
The Committee would like the Department to take necessary
corrective steps so that this kind of pathetic performance is not
repeated in future, especially in view of the fact that for the
current year, a huge target of addressing 48,613 habitations have
been fixed. Further, reiterating their earlier recommendation, the
Committee feel that in view of the enormity of the task ahead
i.e. addressing 1.95 lakh habitations, the Department should fix
targets commensurate with the mammoth task at hand to achieve
the Bharat Nirman goal.”
26. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“As per the latest reports from State Governments, 31,135 water
quality-affected habitations have been addressed with projects
during 2006-07. The performance of water quality component of
the Bharat Nirman programme is reviewed regularly. As per latest
information received from States, out of 1,95,813 water quality-
affected habitations, 48,911 habitations have been addressed with
projects. The States have been asked to complete the remaining
habitations within the Bharat Nirman period.”
27. The Committee have repeatedly been highlighting the
disappointing performance with regard to quality-affected component
of ARWSP . While reiterating their concern, the Committee in the
earlier recommendation had strongly recommended to take necessary
corrective steps so that this kind of pathetic performance is not
repeated in future. Instead of taking some concrete measures, the
Department has chosen to furnish the latest information with regard
to achievement under the quality component of ARWSP . Even the
revised data indicates that out of total 1,95,813 water quality affected
habitations, as per the Government’s data only 48,911 habitations i.e.
around 25 per cent of the work could be addressed with projects.
The Committee again emphasize that coverage of habitations becomes
meaningless without ensuring the quality of water being provided
to people. The Committee reiterate that Government should take
concrete measures in this regard and inform the Committee
accordingly.
I. Issue of quality of drinking water in rural areas
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 6.12)
28. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“ Further, as discussed above, the fund requirement for addressing
quality of 48,813 habitations for 2007-2008 has been worked out

17
to be about Rs. 3,860 crore against which funds to the tune of
Rs.1,300 crore i.e. 20 percent of total allocation of Rs. 6,500 crore
are made available to the States. The Committee would like the
Department to place the issue of adequate allocation for the year
2007-08 before the Planning Commission. While planning the
matter of adequate allocation, the Department should place the
data of total quality affected habitations to be covered and
emphatically point out the various threats, the contaminated water
pose to the health of the people. Besides, the concern of the
Committee in this regard should also be communicated to the
Planning Commission. While recommending for higher outlay
for drinking water, 20 per cent of which can be utilised for quality,
the Committee would like to be informed about the actual
position of expenditure for quality in different States during the
last three years so as to analyse the position of outlay required
and comment further in this regard.”
29. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“Funds to tackle water quality problem in affected habitations
are separately allocated since 2006-07. Details of State-wise release
of fund and expenditure reported under Sub-mission Programme
to tackle water quality problem are as under:
(Amount: Rs. in crore)
S.No Name of the State/UTs Release Expenditure
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 33.63 31.52
2. Bihar 22.46 16.11
3. Chhattisgarh 7.33 0.00
4. Gujarat 40.57 33.00
5. Haryana 0.57 0.36
6. Jharkhand 19.52 0.84
7. Karnataka 125.37 0.00
8. Kerala 3.11 0.00
9. Madhya Pradesh 22.50 11.71

18
10. Maharashtra 26.34 26.34
11. Orissa 17.47 0.00
12. Punjab 7.25 0.00
13. Rajasthan 206.00 206.00
14. Tamil Nadu 3.71 2.25
15. Uttar Pradesh 47.69 13.49
16. West Bengal 111.71 81.91
17. Arunachal Pradesh 0.52 0.00
18. Assam 35.90 35.90
19. Manipur 0.04 0.00
20. Meghalaya 0.15 0.00
21. Mizoram 0.03 0.00
22. Nagaland 0.16 0.16
23. Tripura 3.64 3.53
Total 735.67 463.11
30. The Committee note from the reply that from the year 2006
the Department has started monitoring data separately for quality-
affected habitations. The data for the year indicates very poor
performance in 9 States viz. Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Kerala, Orissa,
Punjab, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram who have
reported ‘Nil’ expenditure with regard to quality-affected habitations.
Very nominal expenditure has been made by Jharkhand. However,
Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Assam have been doing well. These States
have reported 100 per cent utilisation of the releases made separately
for quality problem. The Committee express serious concern over
almost nil expenditure reported by some of the States. The Committee
reiterate their concern over the issue of contamination of water in
various areas and would like the Department to analyse the position,
State-wise and furnish to them the reasons for such a poor
performance by most of the States. The Committee would also like
the Department to take all the desired steps to ensure that more
stress is given by States on the issue of quality.
12 3 4

19
J. Training of grass root level workers for PRI’s
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 6.14)
31. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee further appreciate the objectives of the National
Rural Drinking Water Quality and Monitoring Surveillance
(NRDWQMS) Programme which aims at testing of all drinking
water sources by the grass root level workers in each Panchayat
by simple use of field test kits. However out of a total of 2,33,334
Gram Panchayats in the country, only 16,880 field test kits have
been provided. The Committee feel that in order to make this
programme a success, the Union Government should play a more
positive role as far as IEC and HRD activities for Gram
Panchayats and training of grass root level workers are concerned.
Though the States have committed to complete the training of
grass root levels workers by July, 2007, the Centre must shun all
complacency in this regard and pursue the States vigorously to
complete the aforesaid training within the deadline.”
32. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:—
“As per reports available, 1,23,667 grass root workers in villages
have been trained in 8 States. 10,221 chemical field test kits and
14,36,374 number of bacteriological kits have been supplied to
GPs as reported by States. In the review meeting held in April
2007, the States have informed that the training for grass root
workers would be completed by December, 2007.”
33. The Committee find that the deadline of July, 2007 for
completing the training of grass root level workers in the use of
field test kits provided to PRIs under National Rural Drinking Water
Quality and Monitoring Surveillance (NRDWQMS) Programme has
now been extended to December 2007. The Committee hope that the
target of training has been completed by the extended deadline. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the final position in
this regard.
K. Involvement Of NGOs/VOs regarding information about water
contamination
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 6.15)
34. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“As per the earlier recommendation of the Committee with regard
to sustainability, the Committee strongly urge the Centre to

20
suggest States to set up rural and local marts with the aid of
district authorities wherein simple to use techniques for
addressing water contamination can be disseminated and
marketed. They should also identify NGOs/VOs who have
substantial expertise/experience in the field for providing
necessary inputs to Panchayat and Block level functionaries, which
may be used to sensitize the rural people on the aforesaid aspect.
The Committee maintain that the human and economical costs
of providing people with contaminated and infected water are
immense and hence would like a categorical reaction from the
Department on each of the issues discussed above along with
the initiatives and policy interventions made in this regard.”
35. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“Some of the States are already marketing “simple to use
household filters” for addressing water quality problems through
rural marts and other agencies including NGOs/ VOs.”
36. The Committee are unhappy to note the vague reply of the
Department in response to their recommendation with regard to
(i) setting-up rural and local marts with the aid of district authorities
wherein simple to use techniques can be disseminated and marketed;
and (ii) to identify NGOs/VOs having expertise/experience in the
field for providing necessary inputs to Panchayat and Block level
functionaries. Instead of analyzing State-wise position and taking
concrete action, the Department has simply stated that some of the
States are already marketing ‘simple to use household filters’ for
addressing water quality problems through rural marts and other
agencies including NGOs/VOs. While expressing concern over the
vague reply, the Committee desire that the Department should take
concrete action on the suggested lines and inform accordingly.
L. IEC activities related to rural sanitation
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 8.11)
37. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Again, with regard to indicators used for sanitation, the
Department informed that availability and accessibility of
sanitation toilets in each household, school and anganwadi,
elimination of open defecation and availability of solid and liquid
waste management in houses at community level are the

21
components of sanitation. Reiterating their earlier
recommendation, the Committee would like to state that mere
construction of sanitary toilets, IHHL etc. will not improve the
sanitation scenario in the country. Rather, the functional status of
these is of crucial importance. Therefore, strict monitoring of TSC
projects by District Level Monitoring agencies and National Level
Monitors should be ensured and status as regards use of these
by rural masses should be obtained from States. Besides, the
Department should consider the aforesaid data regarding unspent
balances before sanctioning amount to States for projects under
TSC. The Committee should be informed about specific initiatives
and IEC activities undertaken by the Department for States who
are lagging behind in implementation of TSC projects”.
38. The Government in the Action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Committee may note that TSC projects are approved for a
district and not for a State. IEC activities are targeted at
individuals and community, to generate a demand for toilet
construction. The Department brings out generic IEC materials,
which are then translated by States into the local language. Also,
the Department produces technical notes and manuals for use by
officials, PRIs and community leaders. Such notes and manuals
are also put on the Departments website for free and wider access.
The IEC material and technical notes produced in the last one
year are:
(a) Flip charts on hygiene education for school teachers
(b) TV and radio spots to promote clean village
(c) Technical note on Solid and Liquid Waste Management
(d) Technology options for toilet design
The material being worked for forthcoming months are:
(a) Technology options for toilets for schools and anganwadis
(b) Manual for masons
(c) Designs for ECOSAN toilets
(d) Radio & TV spots for personal hygiene.”
39. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had
emphasized on strict monitoring of use of the sanitary toilets by

22
rural masses by District Level Monitoring agencies and National
Level Monitors. The Department has not addressed to this part of
the recommendation at all in the action taken reply. The Committee
find that merely construction of toilets in rural areas would not
serve the purpose. There is an urgent need to ensure usage of these
toilets to achieve the objective of elimination of open defecation,
which threaten the ecology as well as contaminate water. The
Committee would like the Department to take concrete action on
the recommendation of the Committee and inform accordingly.
The Committee had also recommended to consider the position
of unspent balances before sanctioning outlay to States for projects
under TSC. The Department has not addressed to this part of the
recommendation too. The Committee would like a categorical reply
of the Department in this regard.
M. Coverage of rural schools with drinking water and sanitation
facilities
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 37, 38 and 39,
Para Nos. 9.7, 9.8 and 9.9)
40. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“After analyzing the position as reflected above, the Committee
find that a dismal scenario exists with regard to drinking water
and sanitation facilities in various Government Schools in rural
areas in the country. As regards the position of drinking water,
1.32 lakh rural schools out of a total of 8.45 lakh rural schools
have not been provided drinking water facilities as per
Government’s own data. The position may be worse if the ground
situation is analysed along with the scenario of slippages due to
problems related to sustainability of resources and systems. As
regards the position of achievements of targets during different
years of Tenth Plan there is gross under achievement of targets.
During 2005-2006 against a target of 1,40,000, actual coverage
was 72,464 rural schools thereby indicating only 50 per cent
achievement. During 2006-2007 the Department has informed that
no targets have been fixed due to priority for covering of rural
habitations under Bharat Nirman Programme. Further, the
coverage during 2006-07 is 44,397 which is only about 60 per
cent of the achievement of the previous year. The Committee
feel that specific targets for coverage of schools with drinking
water facility should be fixed keeping in view the ground
situation in this regard and a plan of action be formulated to
achieve cent percent coverage within a stipulated time frame.”
Recommendation (Para No. 9.7)

23
“With regard to sanitation, the Department has not furnished
any data for number of schools which could not be provided
toilet facilities so far. However, while examining Demands for
Grants (2004-2005), the Committee have been informed that out
of total number of 5,07,581 rural primary and 1,29,246 upper
primary schools as per Sixth All India Educational Survey, 32,463
rural primary and 25,812 upper primary schools which is only
about 20 percent, were covered with sanitation facilities. As
regards the achievement of targets under sanitation there is gross
under performance. Out of a target of 9,57,240 school toilets only
3,37,502 was the achievement in this regard. The Committee
maintain that besides construction of toilets, the Department
should also ensure that the toilets are provided with adequate
water availability, so that these do not become dysfunctional over
a period of time thereby defeating the very purpose of the entire
exercise undertaken by the Department. Further, the Committee
feel that due to strong inter linkages between sanitation and water
availability, it is imperative that rain water harvesting structures
should be compulsorily installed in all rural schools, so that
sufficient water availability for drinking water as well as sanitation
purposes can be ensured. The Committee take strong exception
to school drinking water and sanitation component of ARWSP
getting the backseat under Bharat Nirman Programme. The
Committee would like the Department to furnish categorical
explanation with regard to such miserable achievements made
vis-a-vis the targets for both drinking water and sanitation in
rural schools.”
Recommendation (Para No. 9.8)
“The Committee conclude from the aforesaid analysis of the
performance of ARWSP and CRSP that with particular reference
of schools, the performance is even worse than the other
components of these programmes. It is really reprehensible that
the Government cannot ensure drinking water and sanitation
facilities to various Government Schools in rural areas even after
almost six decades of planned development, particularly when
the Indian economy is making giant strides world wide. The
Committee strongly recommend that sanitation and drinking
water in rural schools should be accorded topmost priority by
the Government and time bound action plan needs to be devised
to achieve 100 per cent coverage of rural schools with toilets
(separate toilets for boys and girls) and safe drinking water in
accordance with India’s commitment to meet Millennium

24
Development Goal. The Committee may be suitably apprised
about all the concrete steps taken in this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 9.9)
41. The Government in the Action taken replies have stated as
under:
“During 2006-07, a total of 71,498 schools have been reported to
be covered with drinking water facilities and Rs. 22,839.40 lakh
were released as special assistance for coverage of schools.
Likewise under TSC, the States are being urged to ensure coverage
of all schools with toilets and sanitation facilities. However, the
States have to achieve these by mobilization of resources available
with various schemes like SSA etc.
The Department strives to encourage States and PRIs community
participation in planning and impress upon States and also
involve stakeholders in the process inculcate community
participation in management and decision making process of the
schemes. Since water is a State subject it is up to State
Government to generate creative ways of improving resources
and service delivery.
(a) Under Total Sanitation Programme, a total 4,33,985 toilets
have been constructed in schools till date. The goal is to
cover all the schools by end of 2007.
(b) The Department is actively working for convergence with
Sarva Sikhsa Abhiyan (SSA) to cover all schools for
provisions of toilets. New schools are to be provided toilets
from SSA funds while the old schools from TSC funds.
Technology manual for school toilets is under preparation.”
Replies to Recommendation (Para Nos. 9.7 and 9.8)
“During 2006-07, a total of 71,498 schools have been reported to
be covered so far with drinking water facilities. During 2006-07,
Rs. 22,839.40 lakh were released as special assistance for coverage
of schools. Under TSC, the goal is to provide toilets in all schools
by end of 2007. During review meetings, most States have
indicated that this target can be met. Some States may complete
the target by March, 2008.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 9.9)

25
42. The Committee have repeatedly been expressing concern over
the miserable position with regard to drinking water and sanitation
in rural schools. While examining Demands for Grants of the
previous year, the Committee had noted the pathetic performance
during the year 2005-06 and 2006-07 and had made a series of
recommendations, besides emphasizing on time-bound action plan
for coverage of rural schools with drinking water and sanitation, the
Committee had stressed that toilets be provided with adequate water
availability. The Committee also recommended for provision of
rainwater harvesting structures in the schools to ensure the adequate
water availability. The reply of the Department does not address to
the issues raised by the Committee categorically. Not only that, there
is utter confusion in the stand taken by the Government on the
issue. On the one hand, it has been stated that water is a State
subject and on the other hand targets of school coverage by providing
toilets by the end of 2007 have been indicated in response to the
recommendation. The Committee express apprehension over the
achievement of said targets in view of the poor performance as the
data indicates. The Committee reiterate that it is a matter of shame
for the country to have our schools without drinking water and
sanitation facilities even after more than five and half decades of
planned development in the country. The Committee, therefore,
emphasize the need for concrete action by the Government in this
regard, so that the various deadlines fixed for coverage are actually
met.

26
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 3.18)
The Committee believe that the issues of providing clean, accessible
and affordable water is a human right and one of the foundations for
the economic and social development of the country. Even after more
than five decades of planned development and an investment of
approximately Rs. 68,430 crore in the sector, the Committee are stunned
to know the ground position of drinking water scenario as revealed
by the results of the Habitation Survey according to which there are
about 6.37 lakh uncovered habitations. Given the bleak scenario, the
Committee feel that the Government need to devise new initiatives,
beyond the traditional financial aid framework and innovate specific
policies and strategies in the light of diverse challenges confronting
the sector.
Reply of the Government
While appreciating the concern of the Committee in providing safe
and clean drinking water in adequate quantity to the people of rural
areas and considering the large incidence of slippage as revealed in
the results of the habitation survey - 2003 conducted by States, the
Department has accorded highest priority to sustainability of drinking
water sources and systems to prevent the slippages. In this regard,
certain measures initiated by the Department are:
(a) A theme document on Water Sustainability–Bringing
Sustainability in Drinking Water Schemes in Rural India has
been prepared for wide dissemination, which was released
Hon’ble Prime Minister during the inauguration of the two-
day conference of Ministers in-charge of rural drinking water
supply and rural sanitation in States and Union Territories
held on 4th-5th July, 2007
(b) An exhibition on “Sustainability of water sources” was held
during 3-5 July, 2007 to create awareness amongst people
about various technology options and best practices to
improve access to drinking water and sanitation facilities

27
which provided an opportunity to show case the initiatives
taken by various State Governments, central ministries and
organizations. In this exhibition, eleven States and
organizations (Vivekanand Kendra - Kanya Kumari, Rama
Krishna Mission Lok Shiksha Parishad, Ishwar Bhai Patel
Environmental Sanitation Institute, Ahmedabad, and Sheetal
Ceramics – Ahmedabad, UNICEF etc.) participated.
(c) In the 11th Plan, focus is proposed to be accorded to
sustainability of sources and further promotion of
decentralization for service delivery by capacity building of
Panchayati Raj Institutions.
(d) A workshop on sustainability of drinking water supply
schemes was conducted in 16th May 2007 wherein it has
been emphasized to bring in sustainability component into
all the drinking water projects/ schemes sanctioned by the
government and judicious planning, and an approach that
combines the traditional wisdom of water management at a
local level with scientific knowledge to make government
interventions sustainable.
(e) The Department is constantly making efforts to sensitize
and urge the States to integrate the concept of sustainability
while planning their water supply systems as well as to
seek convergence with other programmes.
(f) A checklist for the use of State level Scheme Sanctioning
Committee has been prepared and circulated to bring in
convergence of various schemes related to water
conservation.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007 of
Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 3.21)
Another disturbing fact is the issue of approximately 2.52 lakh
slipped back habitations as per the latest estimate by the Department.
Although for the years 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, the achievements have
surpassed the targets for addressing slipped back habitations, still a
large number of habitations chronically slip back due to various reasons
as quoted by the Department. The Committee, while reiterating their
observations made in previous Reports would like to mention that the
issue of slippages has emerged as a very serious concern which has

28
negated all the progress made in respect of coverage position of NC/
PC habitations. The Committee would like the Department not to be
contended with identifying reasons but also to explore the solutions
for addressing and arresting the problem of slippages.
Reply of the Government
The Department has given highest priority to sustainability of
drinking water sources and systems to prevent slippages. In this regard,
certain measures initiated by the Department are:
(a) A theme document on Water Sustainability – Bringing
Sustainability in Drinking Water Schemes in Rural India has
been prepared for wide dissemination, which was released
by Hon’ble Prime Minister during the inauguration of the
conference of Ministers in-charge held on 4th - 5th July,
2007
(b) An exhibition on “Sustainability of water sources” was held
during 3-5 July, 2007 to create awareness amongst people of
the various technology options and best practices for
bringing better access to water and sanitation facilities which
provided an opportunity to show case the initiatives taken
by various States, central ministries and organizations. In
this exhibition eleven States and organizations (Vivekanand
Kendra—Kanya Kumari, Rama Krishna Mission Lok Shiksha
Parishad, Ishwar Bhai Patel Environmental Sanitation
Institute- Ahmedabad, and Sheetal Ceramics – Ahmedabad,
UNICEF etc.) participated.
(c) In the 11th Plan, focus is proposed to be accorded to
sustainability of sources and further promotion of
decentralization for service delivery by capacity building of
Panchayati Raj Institutions.
(d) A workshop on sustainability of drinking water supply
schemes was conducted in 16th May,2007 wherein it has
been emphasized to bring in sustainability component into
all the drinking water projects/schemes sanctioned by the
government and judicious planning, and an approach that
combines the traditional wisdom of water management at a
local level with scientific knowledge to make government
interventions sustainable.
(e) The Department is constantly making efforts to sensitize
and urge the States to integrate concept of sustainability

29
while planning their water supply systems as well as to
seek convergence with other programmes.
(f) A checklist for the use of state level Scheme Sanctioning
Committee has been prepared and circulated to bring in
convergence of various schemes related to water
conservation.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 3.22)
Further, to assess the exact data with respect to slippages, the
Department has initiated on line data entry system wherein State
Secretaries have been asked to periodically update the data and also
to enter the reasons for slippages online to enable them to take
necessary preventive measures. The Centre should provide direction
and guidance to the States with regard to the same once they start
indicating reasons for slippages in the online data entry system. Efforts
should also be made to ascertain the status of slippages from States
through the Monthly Progress Reports. Further, the online monitoring
system should be strengthened and all necessary steps such as training,
persuasion with the States, review meetings etc should be undertaken
to ensure that the States update the data regularly and current data of
coverage status and slipped back habitations is periodically updated.
Besides, the monitoring division of the Department should keep a
vigil on the aforesaid data and the Committee be regularly apprised
about the specific measures and outcomes achieved with respect to
periodic updating of data. Further, the Committee would like to
recommend that to ensure appropriate data management, some
mechanism of incentives/disincentives may be evolved. The Committee
may be suitably apprised of the specific steps with regards to all the
issues raised above.
Reply of the Government
The Department had discussed with the States regarding the
updation of the status of habitations and it was decided to do it on
an ‘annual basis’ only. The base data for updation is the corrected
data of Habitation Survey-2003. To facilitate the States in online
updation, a manual containing guidelines and instructions for online
data entry has been prepared and sent to State/ UT governments. The
same has also been hosted on Department’s website. Necessary training

30
for familiarization of the software has also been imparted to the States/
UTs Government officials. A demonstration-cum-training for State Nodal
Officers was also conducted in the month of May 2007. In addition, as
and when requested by the States/UTs, NIC officials have imparted
training in the respective States/UTs also. Besides, a help-desk for
regular technical assistance is also available in the Department. The
urgency of online data reporting has also been emphasized during
periodic review meetings, regional review meetings and the annual
State Minister’s Conference. The Monitoring Division also takes monthly
review meetings of all State Nodal Officers on monthly data entry
status.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Para No. 4.11)
The Committee in their previous reports have persistently been
recommending to the Department to seek and ensure enhanced funds
for the sector since, as per the present level of funding, not even 0.1
per cent of GDP is being allocated for the drinking water which is the
basic necessity of all human beings. The Human Development Report
2006 has rightly pointed out that drinking water is under-financed in
many developing countries. The same report further highlights that
too often bold water plans suffer from ‘targets without finance’
syndrome. The Committee note that allocation for the sector have
consistently been increasing for the last few years. However, as
explained above, there is huge shortfall between the requirement to
meet the Bharat Nirman targets and the Eleventh Plan strategies and
funds actually provided for the sector. To meet the objectives of Bharat
Nirman, fund requirement of about Rs. 10,000 crore per year for the
remaining two years of Bharat Nirman have been assessed. However,
the actual allocation against this has been comparatively much less as
explained above. Against the projected outlay of Rs. 9,632 crore for
2007-08, the amount allocated was only Rs 6,500 crore thus marking a
resource gap of approximately Rs. 3,000 crore. In view of this scenario,
the Committee would like to reiterate that the Department should
make all out efforts to seek enhanced allocation for the sector in
consonance with the fund requirement for Bharat Nirman and the
ground reality of addressing about 6.37 lakh NC/PC habitations as
per the recent survey revelation. The Committee recognize that the
allocation has been steadily increasing over the last few years. However,
in the view of enormous task of addressing the aforesaid number of

31
NC/PC habitations, addressing the problems of slippages and quality,
providing technical and financial support to States, implementing the
strategies of Eleventh Plan etc., the inadequate allocation may pose a
serious hurdle. The Committee would like to recommend to the
Department to convey the aforesaid concerns of the Committee to the
Planning Commission.
Reply of the Government
Planning Commission has been approached for enhanced
allocations. They have communicated a tentative allocation of Rs. 39,490
crore Central share, at current prices for rural drinking water.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Para No. 4.13)
Further, in view of the resource constrains, the Department has
informed that the Government of India recommends proposals of States
for external aid. Further, certain amount of funds under the project
loans from external agencies such as IDA are earmarked for the sector.
The Committee recommend that the Department should seriously
consider bridging resource gaps through external aid and involvement
of corporate sector. International aid to achieve the Millennium
Development Goal (MDG) should be aggressively sought and suitable
endeavors should be made in this regard. The Department should
apprise the Committee about the details of projects undertaken by
States with external funding.
Reply of the Government
As the loan from external agencies is taken by States, it is decided
by them in consultation with Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry
of Finance, based on their respective financial position and sectoral
needs. The two recent States that have taken external assistance are:
(i) Uttaranchal Rural Water Supply and Environmental
Sanitation Project (Swajal follow-on) of the proposed credit
of US $ 120 million has been approved by World Bank in
September, 2006. The project duration is 6 years i.e.
September 2006 to June, 2012.

32
(ii) Punjab Rural Water Supply and Environmental Sanitation
Project of the proposed credit of US $ 154 million has been
approved by World Bank in February 2007. The project
duration is 5 years i.e. March, 2007 to March, 2012.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 4.14)
The Committee further emphasise that accelerated progress in water
provision have been made with concerted efforts and partnerships
between international and regional institutions, the National
Governments, private sector and civil society in various developing
countries. Therefore, in this era of public private community partnership
and corporate social responsibility in various fields of social and
economic life, the Government should seriously consider exploring
similar options and devising appropriate strategies in this field and
acquaint the Committee about concrete endeavours undertaken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department strives to encourage States and PRIs to involve
various stakeholders in the process of planning, implementation and
management of the water supply schemes through enhanced
community participation and decentralized planning. Since water is a
State subject it is up to State Government to generate creative ways of
improving resources and service delivery by soliciting support of
various institutions and sections of civil society.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 5.10)
The Committee in their respective Demands for Grants reports
have been stressing upon the need for a comprehensive strategy by
the Government for sustainability of sources and systems. The
Committee maintain that all investments in the sector and progress
made with respect to coverage of habitations will be rendered futile
till long term sustainability of resources and systems is ensured. A
multiplicity of interlinked issues are involved in this such as regulation
on over extraction of ground water, recharging ground water, rain
water harvesting, local and cost effective technologies, community

33
participation, revival of traditional sources such as ponds, wells etc.,
convergence of efforts, dovetailing of funds given under similar schemes
of water harvesting and conservation and last but not the least a
proactive role by States to ensure a long term and lasting solution to
the issues of rural drinking water supply. All these issues need to be
addressed with a holistic and integrated approach. The various issues
in this regard have been addressed in the following paras.
Reply of the Government
In this regard, certain measures initiated by the Department are:
(a) A theme document on Water Sustainability – Bringing
Sustainability in Drinking Water Schemes in Rural India has
been prepared for wide dissemination, which was released
by Hon’ble Prime Minister during the inauguration of the
Conference of Ministers in-Charge held on 4th–5th July, 2007
(b) An exhibition on “Sustainability of water sources” was held
during 3-5 July, 2007 to create awareness amongst people of
the various technology options and best practices for
bringing better access to water and sanitation facilities which
provided an opportunity to show case the initiatives taken
by various State Governments, central ministries and
organizations. In this exhibition eleven States and
organizations (Vivekanand Kendra – Kanya Kumari, Rama
Krishna Mission Lok Shiksha Parishad, Ishwar Bhai Patel
Environmental Sanitation Institute, Ahmedabad, and Sheetal
Ceramics – Ahmedabad, UNICEF etc.) participated.
(c) In the 11th Plan, focus is proposed to be accorded to
sustainability of sources and further promotion of
decentralization for service delivery by capacity building of
Panchayati Raj Institutions.
(d) A workshop on sustainability of drinking water supply
schemes was conducted in 16th May, 2007 wherein it has
been emphasized to bring in sustainability component into
all the drinking water projects/schemes and judicious
planning, and an approach that combines the traditional
wisdom of water management at a local level with scientific
knowledge to make Government interventions sustainable.
(e) The Department is constantly making efforts to sensitize
and urge the States to integrate Concept of Sustainability

34
while planning their water supply systems as well as to
seek convergence with other programmes.
(f) A checklist for the use of State level Scheme Sanctioning
Committee has been prepared and circulated to bring in
convergence of various schemes related to water
conservation
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 14, Para No. 5.12)
Recently media is playing a proactive role in particularly reporting
on social issues. Water is the basic necessity of life and the issues
related to over exploitation of groundwater by some Multinational
Companies and other issues related to contamination etc are frequently
being reported by the media in the reports. The Committee recommend
that the Department should evolve a mechanism to suo-moto take note
of these reporting and take the required action after getting the factual
information from the concerned agency/company/affected people etc.
in consultation with various Union Government Departments and
concerned State Governments.
Reply of the Government
Whenever any article appears in Media on water contamination or
any other related problem, the concerned State Government is being
requested to look into the matter and report the facts to the
Department. If required, an officer from the Department is also deputed
to verify the facts published.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 5.13)
Another correlated issue is conjunctive use of surface and ground
water, and recharge of ground water leading to sustainability of sources.
The States should be advised to include components for surface water
storage in their water supply schemes through check dams, tanks and
other such techniques so that dependence on ground water for water
consumption may be reduced. The States need to be given technical
guidance and engineering designs so that the extraction of ground

35
water is continuously replenished through recharge mechanisms. The
Committee are happy to note that Department have engaged services
of NGOs like Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) and Tarun
Bharat Sangh to get their inputs and formulate new methods for
increasing source sustainability. The inputs should be suitably
incorporated in water supply schemes of various State Governments
and the Union Government should undertake specific interventions in
this direction.
Reply of the Government
After taking  inputs from reputed voluntary agencies viz. Tarun
Bharat Sangh (TBS) and Centre for Science & Environment (CSE) and
various State Governments and their agencies, various Central
Ministries/ Departments viz. Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Finance, Department of Rural Development
and other central agencies viz. CGWB, CAPART, etc., a document on
“Bringing Sustainability to drinking water systems in Rural India” was
brought out and the same was released by Hon’ble Prime Minister on
4th July, 2007. The document contains technical details and engineering
designs of various rainwater harvesting structures viz. check dams,
percolation tanks, village pond, Ooranies, roof-top rain-water harvesting,
etc. The said document has been made available to all the States for
reference and implementation of rainwater harvesting in the field. States
have already been informed that including sustainability component is
mandatory for all water supply projects/ schemes.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 5.14)
Besides, as far as rainwater harvesting models are concerned the
Committee feel that Department’s responsibility is not fulfilled by
simply circulating manuals on rainwater harvesting. As Secretary also
admitted, the main point is that this needs to be demystified and put
to use. The Department should follow up with the States regarding
the utilization of the said manual. The Committee feel that a generic
model of rainwater harvesting can not be applied throughout the
country. Most of the times the problems faced with respect to drinking
water sources are unique to a particular village depending on their
specific location, soil, weather etc. The Department should regularly
provide technical know how to States faced with peculiar problems

36
and sensitize the States who are lagging behind about the imperative
need for sustainability to ensure lasting solution to drinking water
problem.
Reply of the Government
Recognizing that a generic model cannot be applied to all parts of
the country, the Department continues to provide State-specific solutions
if asked for. Further, new publications like the Sustainability Document,
referred in the above-said replies, included suitability of rainwater
harvesting structures on agro-climatic zones. In the last year, specific
team of experts was constituted for Arunachal Pradesh for the purpose.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 5.15)
Besides, problems of water scarcity may be a contributing factor
for future flashpoint for international conflicts, which has led many
experts/academicians to predict that the next World War may be fought
over the issue of water. The information with regard to threat of
aforesaid water wars and need for water conservation and other
method of sustainability of sources may be aggressively disseminated
to rural communities. Further, incentive mechanisms should be worked
out to reward villages who promote water harvesting and take up
and continue with sustainability schemes. Local rural marts may be
organised by District authorities wherein rural people may be sensitized
about various methods and techniques of water conservation and water
harvesting. Information on local and cost effective technologies for the
same may be disseminated to rural population through these marts in
collaboration with NGOs and VOs. The Union Government should
play the role of a facilitator through interaction with State PHED’s
and District level authorities for information education and
communication activities related to sustainability of sources and systems
of rural water supply.
Reply of the Government
The department provides funds to States under CCDU to take up
state-specific IEC and HRD activities. An exhibition was organized in
New Delhi during 3-5 July 2007 during the State Ministers conference,

37
wherein States have displayed various model and IEC material on
rainwater harvesting and water conservation. States have now been
asked to organize exhibitions at district headquarter.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 5.16)
The Committee find that at present, even in urban areas, there is
no particular agency to whom the public/Government agency can
contact for technical assistance to have rainwater harvesting structure
in residential, commercial establishments, Government buildings, etc.
The position in rural areas may further be worse. The Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to take up this issue with the
State Governments so that an exclusive agency private/Government
should be identified in each State. Such agencies may provide all
technical inputs, estimates of required funds etc to the public/
Government agency who want to have rainwater harvesting structure
in their premises. Union Government should formulate the Guidelines
to be issued to the State Governments advising to amend the State
by-laws to include compulsorily rain water harvesting structures in all
new constructions in rural areas so that an enduring solution to water
scarcity problem may be realised.
Reply of the Government
The model legislation on regulation of control of ground water
can be used by the State Governments for making rainwater harvesting
structures in new constructions mandatory . In the review meetings,
States have been advised to identify agencies for providing technical
inputs and estimates of funds for rainwater harvesting structures in
the premises of rural people.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)

38
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 6.13)
Further, the Department should identify States that are faced with
major water contamination problem and encourage them to undertake
more number of sub-missions on quality with the technical and
financial support of the Centre. The Committee would like to
recommend to the Department to ensure that implementing agencies
of rural supply programme at State and district level employ more
and more local and cost-effective techniques to treat contaminated
water. With focused funding by the Centre, the Committee feel that
the Centre is in a better position to see to it that large projects with
enhanced funds are not launched by States when there is any possibility
of treating contaminated water with local/regional solutions.
The Centre, after the revised guidelines, should ask States to explore
all possibilities for addressing quality with local solutions before
sanctioning funds for sub-missions. The Centre should also be
forthcoming to provide technical guidance on low cost technique
options and engineering designs to the States to address the problem
of water contamination and turbidity.
Reply of the Government
The Revised Guidelines on Sub-Mission on Water Quality has been
issued, which inter-alia, has the following provisions:
The State Governments shall devise an integrated approach for
technology options covering single village schemes, comprehensive
piped water supply schemes, low cost treatment plants, domestic filters,
roof-top rain water harvesting, in-situ water conservation, etc., For
treatment of water contamination, the ratio of affected habitations to
be provided with alternate safe source based drinking water supply
scheme and in-situ treatment technology based drinking water supply
scheme should be, as far as possible, as follows:
S. No. Type of Problem Alternate Safe Source
V/s In-situ Treatment
(i) Arsenic, fluoride and salinity 90:10
(ii) Iron affected habitations 30:70
(iii) Nitrate affected habitations 100:00
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

39
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 6.14)
The Committee further appreciate the objectives of the National
Rural Drinking Water Quality and Monitoring Surveillance
(NRDWQMS) Programme which aims at testing of all drinking water
sources by the grassroot level workers in each Panchayats by simple
use of field test kits. However out of a total of 2,33,334 Gram
Panchayats in the country, only 16,880 field test kits have been
provided. The Committee feel that in order to make this programme
a success, the Union Government should play a more positive role as
far as IEC and HRD activities for Gram Panchayats and training of
grass root level workers are concerned. Though the States have
committed to complete the training of grassroot levels workers by
July, 2007, the Centre must shun all complacency in this regard and
pursue the States vigorously to complete the aforesaid training within
the deadline.
Reply of the Government
As per reports available, 1,23,667 grassroot workers in villages have
been trained in 8 States. 10,221 chemical field test kits and 14,36,374
number of bacteriological kits have been supplied to GPs as reported
by States. In the review meeting held in April 2007, the States have
informed that the training for grassroot workers would be completed
by December, 2007.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 33 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 7.6)
The Committee express their strongest concern on the way reforms
initiative were undertaken in the name of Swajaldhara scheme, which
was launched in 2002 to institutionalise community participation by
incorporating the principles of demand driven approach, empowerment
of user groups/Gram Panchayats and inculcating a sense of ownership
of assets through partial cost sharing either in cash or kind or both.
The Committee in their previous Demands for Grants reports i.e. 1st,
11th and 20th Reports and their respective action taken reports (14th
Lok Sabha) have repeatedly been expressing apprehensions about the

40
feasibility of the Swajaldhara scheme. Some of the important
recommendations of the Committee in the aforesaid reports relating to
unsatisfactory performance of Swajaldhara Scheme are reproduced
below:
(a) inadequate planning such as States vision statement, detailed
annual action plan etc. were not ensured before launching
the scheme;
(b) the strategy of the Department to motivate States/Districts
to come forward with projects given the fact that it is a
demand driven scheme has not been effective;
(c) inordinate delay and under performance of projects
implemented under Swajaldhara;
(d) problem were being faced on the issue of community
contribution for Swajaldhara project ;
(e) concerns regarding haste to replace ARWSP with
Swajaldhara;
(f) under-utilisation of funds under Swajaldhara by various
State Governments;
(g) weak monitoring and reporting system for Swajaldhara
Projects; and
(h) inequitable distribution of funds among States since due to
demand driven approach, better performing States were able
to corner more funds from the Centre.
Pursuant to the consistent concerns expressed by the Committee
with regard to serious problems in implementation of Swajaldhara
and their strong recommendation to the Department to review the
Swajaldhara principles, the Department has finally decided to
discontinue the scheme hereafter. As a result, from Eleventh Plan there
will be only one scheme ARWSP which will have an element of
community participation but may not insist on community contribution.
For the same, the States have been asked to sign Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) with the Centre and prepare Action Plan, which
will entail, apart from other things, capacity building programmes for
PRIs, empowerment of PRIs to levy user charges for O&M, set their
own time-table to achieve decentralisation to PRIs as considered feasible
by the States. So far, only States of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh,
Jharkhand and Gujarat have prepared the aforesaid action plan as
informed by the Department. The Department should pursue with the
remaining State Governments to take action in this regard.

41
Reply of the Government
The Department is following up with other States on the issue of
entering into MoU.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 28, Para No. 7.7)
In the Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants Reports (refer
Para 18 of 23rd Report), Committee had noted that the Department
continued to justify the under performance of the scheme by stating
that the performance of the scheme is improving and the extent of
community contribution has been varying among States in spite of the
serious problems detected in the implementation of Swajaldhara which
include community contribution amounting to 10/20 percent based on
the cost of projects to be taken under Swajaldhara.
Recommendation (Serial No. 29, Para No. 7.8)
The Committee further note that there may be cases where
community may have provided their due contribution as stipulated
under Swajaldhara component for various projects ongoing/proposed
to be taken. Since the Swajaldhara is now out, the community may
now demand back their contribution which may create serious
problems. The Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Government to address these issues carefully after consulting the State
Governments. Besides, the Committee recommend that liabilities for
ongoing projects under Swajaldhara should also be addressed carefully.
The incomplete works under Swajaldhara should be given priority
under ARWSP .
Reply of the Government
Recommendation No. 16 and 17
The Department has conveyed its commitment to States to provide
resources for completion of ongoing projects/ schemes under
Swajaldhara.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

42
Recommendation (Serial No. 30, Para No. 7.9)
The Committee would further like to maintain that some of the
principles of Swajaldhara such as community participation, empowering
people and Panchayats and decentralised approach rather than a top
down delivery model are extremely relevant for a developing country
like India. However these principles can not be created and practised
in a vacuum, divorced from the social and political reality of rural
India. One very important precondition for success of such reforms is
strengthening the PRIs and grassroot structures for which devolution
of funds, functions and functionaries is a fundamental obligation of
the Government. The Committee would like the Department to
seriously consider the aforesaid observation of the Committee before
launching the reforms in Eleventh Plan and inform the Committee
about their specific views and line of action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In the 11th Plan period the funds would be provided to the States
on 50:50 GoI: State Government for rural drinking water schemes under
ARWSP . Each State Government is to be provided with liberty to
involve PRIs in planning and execution of the projects and also to
enlist community contribution as a part of the State contribution
depending upon the local conditions, including the prevailing social
and political situation.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 31, Para No. 8.9)
The Committee have repeatedly been observing that percentage
coverage of rural population with sanitation facilities reflects a dismal
scenario. The Committee note with concern the information provided
by the Department that still more than 5.53 crore APL and 5.73 crore
BPL households need toilets in rural areas. It is a matter of national
disgrace that even after six decades of planned development, more
than half the rural population i.e. 59 per cent as per the Department’s
estimate, does not have access to basic sanitation facilities, an aspect
so crucial to growth and development of rural India. The Committee
recommend to the Department to formulate new initiatives and
play a more proactive role to improve the pace of implementation of
TSC.

43
Reply of the Government
The concern of the Committee is accepted and the Department
endeavours to provide for complete sanitation in rural areas. Since the
last two years the rate of coverage has been on increasing. In the
year 2005, the coverage was 32.4%, which increased to 38% in 2006
and in October 2007, it is above 48%. This has been possible due to
new initiatives taken in the last 2-3 years. These initiatives are:
(a) Total Sanitation Campaign to promote Information Education
& Communication (IEC).
(b) Nirmal Gram Puraskar.
(c) Solid Liquid Waste Management.
(d) Provision of Revolving funds.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 32, Para No. 8.10)
The Committee note that though the allocation for the sector has
been improving over the years as elucidated above, the coverage
position is not commensurate with the increase in allocation. Further,
the amount allocated is not completely and meaningfully utilised as is
clear from the large unspent balances with the State Governments.
The Committee would like to know what efforts are being made by
the Department to ensure that low performing States come forth with
project proposals and utilise the amount earmarked for the sector.
Reply of the Government
The total projects cost of 578 projects is Rs. 13,423.97 crore, with
a central share of Rs. 8,445.89 crore. Of this central share, Rs. 2,566.07
crore has been released till date, accounting for 30.38% of central share.
The expenditure reported against this release is Rs. 1,787.90 crore, which
is 21.17% of central share. The physical achievement under the
programme is 30.14% for individual household toilets (IHHL) till date.
Also, the programme guidelines provide for release of next installment
only on expenditure of 60% of available funds. Thus at any given
time, 40% or less of the release will be shown as unspent and available
with the projects authorities.

44
However, the Department continues to pursue with the districts
not up to the mark. These have been identified to follow up especially
with them for speeding up the work. The coverage and physical
progress is also reviewed regularly in meetings with the State Officials.
All States have also been asked to monitor progress block-wise and
panchayat-wise. CAPART has also started supporting some NGOs in
select districts to help them for awareness generation. Special meetings
of poor performing States is being conducted to discuss their problems
in implementation.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 34, Para No. 8.12)
Besides, after the mid term evaluation of TSC by Agricultural
Finance Corporation Limited (AFCL) in 2004, which recommended for
revision of unit cost for toilets, the unit cost of toilet for BPL families
have been raised from Rs. 265 to Rs. 1,500 and from Rs. 1,000 to
Rs. 2,000 including a provision of Rs. 650 as cost of superstructure.
The Committee feel that even the revised amount is not sufficient
taking into account the inflation in last few years and other factors.
Thus, the Committee recommend that the Department should consider
revising the ceiling where by upto Rs. 4,000 may be utilised for
construction of a unit toilet under TSC projects.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee are accepted and have also been
reiterated by States. A revision of costs and subsidy is under
consideration.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 35, Para No. 8.13)
Further, on the recommendation of the Committee, for the first
time solid and liquid waste management has been included as a part
of TSC for which 10 per cent funds of TSC can be utilised. The
Committee would like a feedback from the Department regarding the
utilisation of these funds. Moreover, the Committee believe that in
view of the vast diversity of our country, especially in rural areas, a

45
standard criteria for construction of toilets should not be applied while
undertaking TSC projects. The Committee suggest that a technical
officer or any such functionary may be appointed in each block/village
to suggest pattern of toilet designs which would be specific to regional
conditions, local community skills and technologies and availability of
funds etc. for TSC projects. The Department should also consider taking
services and expertise of Sulabh for providing technical inputs related
to low water, low cost solutions for the problem of rural sanitation.
The Committee would like a categorical reaction from the
Department on the aforesaid issues to enable comprehensive
understanding of the sanitation scenario for further analysis of the
situation.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Committee not to have common design of
toilets for the whole country are accepted. The Department is
considering changing the cost options for toilets to provide flexibility
to districts to take up suitable toilet designs. The components of solid
& liquid waste were only included in 2006 and funds being released
only in the current financial year. The Committee is requested to allow
one more year for obtaining feedback on utilization of these funds.
Also, regarding appointment of technical officers, the matter has been
communicated to all States.
Services of organizations working in the filed is regularly taken
for training, preparation of technical manuals etc. Some such
organizations are Gandhigram University; Sulabh International; SCOPE;
Centre for Science & Environment; Environment and Sanitation Institute;
Ram Krishna Lok Shiksha Parishad.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Recommendation (Serial No. 36, Para No. 8.14)
The Committee note with appreciation the initiative taken by the
Department to recognize and reward the villages, PRIs and Individuals
who have contributed to ensuring full sanitation coverage in their
area of operation through Nirman Gram Puraskar. The Committee are
pleased to learn about the magnificent performance of the Nirmal
Gram Puraskar wherein the number of villages qualifying and applying
for the award has been increasing in huge proportions thereby

46
indicating open defecation free environment and improved sanitation
scenario for rural areas in the country. Further, the Committee would
like the Department to undertake strict monitoring and vigilance of
the rewarded villages so that after getting recognition, these do not
revert to their earlier position.
The Committee, therefore, recommend to continue with their efforts
in this direction and keep the Committee informed of specific steps
undertaken for monitoring of the aforesaid rewarded villages.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee are accepted for
continuation of NGP . The Committee will be informed of the results
of monitoring the said villages.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]

47
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

48
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 3.19)
The Committee are dismayed to observe the results of the
Habitation Survey which was initiated in 2003 and was subsequently
revalidated by IIPA. There appears to be major discrepancy with regard
to status of coverage of habitations as per the updated reports from
States of CAP 99 habitations and as per the data from Habitation
Survey. The data as per the reports from States as on 1.04.2006 is 3052
Not Covered (NC), 38,894 Partially Covered (PC) and 13, 80,337 Fully
Covered (FC) habitations. However, the Survey results reflect glaring
contrast to the picture of coverage status projected by the States and
intimated by the Department till date. According to the Habitation
Survey there are about 2.48 lakh NC, 3.9 Lakh PC and 8.7 lakh FC
habitations, thus indicating major anomaly between the two sets of
data. Even the Secretary during the oral evidence admitted to the
grave confusion with regard to the aforesaid data. The Committee
take strong exception to the way Department has been making tall
proclamations of attaining 96 per cent coverage for the last few years
without knowing the ground reality particularly when the survey data
indicates the coverage status as merely 57 per cent and even this
needs to be verified through random survey. With the aforesaid findings
of the survey results which have been made available after consistent
recommendations of the Committee, the entire scenario of rural drinking
water sector has undergone regression. The Committee are further
unhappy at the Department’s justification and complacent approach
with regard to the above wherein they have stated that the two sets
of figures are based on two different surveys and that coverage status
is a dynamic concept and habitations continually slip back due to a
number of reasons. While acknowledging the fact that finally it would
be the latest data made available as per the survey results which will
serve as basis for future planning and projections, the Committee would
like the Department to clarify from the States the reasons for such
blatant anomaly as reflected above and furnish the feedback to the
Committee.

49
Reply of the Government
Coverage is a dynamic concept. The 97% coverage of habitations
with drinking water facilities was with reference to the habitation
survey conducted in early 90s and updated in 1999. Recognizing the
fact that availability of drinking water and the status of the sources
and system will change over a period of time, a fresh survey was
conducted in 2003. A number of factors affect the status of drinking
water, and some of these are—sources going dry, sources becoming
quality affected, systems outliving their lifespan, increase in population,
emergence of new habitations, etc.
Hence, in the results of Habitation Survey 2003, the status of
habitations at that point of time was captured. As these are two sets
of data at different time periods, there is no anomaly between the
two. To arrive at the final status of coverage as captured in 2003
Survey, the method followed was to validate the raw data. This was
done by IIPA, and included correcting the names of the habitations
and tallying with the reports given by the States. Thereafter, a random
check of correctness of reporting was made by the Monitoring Division
of the Ministry. The data so collected in 2003 is checked and re-checked
to come to a status as close to reality as possible. Now, with collection
of this baseline data, the Department has done away with the need
for regular surveys. The base data of 2003 will be updated online
annually by the States. Again, the status of coverage will change every
year, but the baseline data will remain the same. Now, with corrections,
the Survey 2003 data shows 8,69,997 FC, 3,89,409 PC and 2,47,943 NC
as in 2003. The same data, after coverage of 3 years, is 11,21,366 FC,
2,20,615 PC and 1,65,368 NC as on 1.4.2007.
The Department has accorded top priority to sustainability of
drinking water sources and systems to prevent slippage of a habitation
once covered. Further, focused funding for addressing water quality
problems have been introduced from 2006-07 wherein upto 20% of the
ARWSP allocation is being released to States for addressing water
quality problems.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report)

50
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 3.20)
Further, Bharat Nirman has been conceived as a plan to build
rural infrastructure in four years period from 2005-06 to 2008-09 and
under its drinking water component, it is proposed to cover all
remaining uncovered habitations of CAP 99 i.e.  55,067 NC/PC
habitations and about three lakh slipped back habitations. The
achievement with regard to coverage in two years of Bharat Nirman
period is about 20,000 habitations. However, after the survey results,
the very objectives and targets of Bharat Nirman have become
questionable as its objectives are not in consonance with the ground
reality at hand. Even the future projections of Bharat Nirman are being
made according to the old and obsolete CAP 99 data though basic
reality in this regard is quite contradictory. Further, the Department
has requested States to sign MoU before the commencement of the
Eleventh Plan that will commit them to meet Bharat Nirman targets.
The Committee would further like the Department to apprise them
about their concrete planning and strategies in the context of the
changed scenario with special reference to the objectives of
Bharat Nirman and Eleventh Plan targets. Also they should ask States
to furnish revised action plan framework taking into consideration the
latest position as indicated in the Habitation Survey.
The Committee would like the Department to categorically respond
to each of the issues raised by them and take the necessary action in
consultation with the State Governments/UT Administrations and the
Committee may be kept apprised.
Reply of the Government
Survey 2003 refers to water availability status of all habitations as
reported by States and includes all habitations, including the NC/PC
habitations of CAP 99, quality affected habitations as well as slipped
back habitations. The Bharat Nirman target has been set with reference
to 2003 Survey data only. Under Bharat Nirman, it was proposed to
cover 55,067 uncovered habitations of CAP–99, an estimated 3,31,604
slipped back habitations and to address 2,16,968 habitations which
have water quality problems as reported by States. The annual targets
for each State is fixed after due discussions with them to arrive at
realistic targets.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report)

51
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.23)
With regard to the physical performance under ARWSP , the
Committee deplore the gross under performance relating to coverage
of NC/PC habitations for the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 as indicated
in the data mentioned above. Against the target of coverage of 1,120
NC and 17,000 PC habitations in 2006-07 the achievement was as low
as 472 and 6,591 habitations respectively. The Committee strongly object
to this kind of under achievement in such a vital area, especially
keeping in view the fact that the targets fixed are also not in
consonance with the ground reality reflected as discussed in detail in
earlier paragraphs. The Committee would like to strongly recommend
to the Government to project targets in future in accordance with the
changed scenario of coverage of habitations as reflected in the
Habitation Survey. Further, all efforts should be made to ensure that
the said targets are achieved within the time period. The specific
reasons for non-achievement of targets may be obtained from States
who may be asked to take corrective measures accordingly. The
Committee would like the Department to ensure that such gross under
achievement in such a critical sector will not be repeated in future
and necessary measures to achieve the same may be suitably
communicated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
As per the reports now received from States, against the target of
coverage of 1,120 NC and 17,000 PC habitations in 2006-07 the
achievement was 860 NC and 11,580 PC habitations, respectively . The
Department has been emphasizing upon the States the need for
coverage of NC and quality-affected habitations in the stipulated time
period in its review meetings with Ministers and State Secretaries and
at other fora.
Targets are fixed on the basis of coverage of habitations in the
previous year by the State Governments, fund availability during
current year, cost of coverage per habitations as indicated by the State
Governments in their Action Plan for Bharat Nirman. State/UTs are
being urged time and again to meet the targets so as to fulfill the
tasks set forth under Bharat Nirman.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report)

52
Recommendation (Serial No. 7, Para No. 3.24)
Further, the Committee are dismayed to learn that there are
approximately 92,084 habitations with less than 100 populations which
are not even considered for the coverage under ARWSP . The said data
further indicates that the total number of NC/PC habitations out of
these 92,084 total habitations, is approximately 45,700 habitations for
less than 100 population. The Department informed that revision of
norms to extend coverage of all such habitations will be taken up
after the Bharat Nirman period. The Committee would like to know
from the Department how projections and achievements are quoted
and planning is being made without taking into account such a large
number of habitations viz about 92,000 which have less than
100 populations particularly when these habitations may be in
backward areas and need more Government assistance. To cover these,
the ARWSP guidelines need to be reviewed right away so that no
section of population in rural area of country is left deprived of this
basic human right. The Committee would like the Department to
indicate appropriate clarification and the strategies devised for coverage
of these habitations within a stipulated timeframe.
Reply of the Government
To decide on projections for funding and planning, ARWSP
presently takes into account a rural habitation not having any safe
water source with a permanently settled population of 20 households
or 100 persons, whichever is more. However, as rural drinking water
is a State subject, the State Government could cover any habitation
regardless of its size/ population/number of households with funds
under the MNP . Further, DDP areas and SC/ST habitations with less
than 100 persons can, however, be covered under the ARWSP . Under
Bharat Nirman, all uncovered habitations as per ARWSP norms are
envisaged to be covered by 2008-09. Thereafter, the Department
proposes to change the norms to provide assistance to States for
covering other habitations.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)

53
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Para No. 4.12)
Another disturbing trend noted by the Committee is the issues of
under utilisation of scarce resources which have consistently been
communicated to the Department through various reports. While
recommending for higher outlay, the Committee are constrained to
note the under-spending in the sector especially with respect to unspent
balances by the State Governments. The Committee while appreciating
the fact that the present utilisation for the Central sector have been
improving over the years, the under spending by the State
Governments has been a major cause of concern. So much so that for
the current year  i.e. 2006-07, the allocation was reduced at RE stage by
Rs. 640 crore due to large Opening Balance with the States. The
Committee observe that underspending of the scarce resources has
become a regular feature among many States. The Committee would
like the Department to ensure accountability from the States regarding
optimal and meaningful utilisation of funds by evolving some
mechanism such as Monthly Progress Reports etc. to that effect. The
Committee strongly recommend that the format of MPR should also
be revised to include a component wherein the States furnish specific
reasons for non-utilisation of the funds. There should be better
coordination and interaction between the Centre and the States
throughout the year to remove any bottlenecks faced by the States.
The Department should also keep track of utilisation of funds allocated
under the Twelfth Finance Commission for the rural water supply.
The Committee should be duly informed about the specific steps taken
or proposed to be taken by the Government with regard to all the
issues discussed above.
Reply of the Government
The Department has initiated a separate meeting of poor performing
States, and also a monthly meeting of NE and Hill States to discuss
and remove bottlenecks in implementation. Also, quarterly Review
meeting of all States and annual State Ministers Conference is held.
On Department’s initiative recently , a representative of Department
has been taken on the Central Review Committee to monitor State’s
expenditure for water and sanitation under XIIth Finance Commission
grants. The subject is also being taken up with State Secretaries during
quarterly review meetings .
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report)

54
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Para No. 5.11)
First and foremost, depletion of ground water table due to over
extraction of ground water has emerged as a serious challenge
threatening sustainability of resources. A number of hand pumps, stand
pipes, bore wells, ponds etc. have become defunct due to depleting
ground water table. The Committee hold that maximum priority should
be given by the Department to ensure sufficient recharge of ground
water by States. In this regard, the Committee feel that some kind of
regulatory framework to restrict unlimited extraction of ground water
should be put in place at the earliest. Till date, only six States have
enacted and implemented legislation for regulation and control of
groundwater. The Department should not shy away from its
responsibility by stating that the said legislation is the mandate of
Ministry of Water Resources, since the ground water largely affects
the drinking water scenario in rural areas. Recently the issue has
assumed more significance in light of the over exploitation of ground
water by some Multi-national Companies and the resultant problem of
drinking water caused by this which has received strong reaction from
some States. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
should aggressively interact with the State Governments in coordination
with Ministry of Water Resources to enact and implement the aforesaid
legislation expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The matter is being pursued with the Ministry of Water Resources.
State Governments have been repeatedly requested to enact the
legislation for regulation and control of ground water. However, it is
the respective State legislature, who will decide about the legislation
and as such, the Department of Drinking Water has a limited role.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 5.17)
Besides, the Committee were constrained to find that the States
were not utilising the percentage of funds under ARWSP earmarked
for sustainability. The Committee in their 23rd action taken report have

55
already made their recommendation on the aforesaid issue. Here again
the Committee would like to reiterate that strategic involvement of
the Centre is necessary to ensure that the States utilize the amount
allocated for sustainability. During the course of oral evidence of the
Department, a suggestion had emerged that sustainability factor and
methods should be incorporated as a pre-condition for fund allocation.
Another suggestion that surfaced during evidence of the Department
was that Centre should not release funds in second installment until
States mandatorily spend a certain amount on sustainability. The
Committee feel that Department should formulate appropriate
framework and incorporate these proposals to ensure accountability
from States as far as utilization of funds by States for sustainability is
concerned and report to the Committee the concrete steps taken in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
A checklist for the use of State level Scheme Sanctioning Committee
has been prepared and circulated to bring in convergence of various
schemes related to water conservation.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Para No. 5.18)
Further, the Committee completely concur with the observation of
the Department that funds under different schemes of water harvesting,
recharging etc need to be converged and coordinated. In fact, the
Committee have repeatedly been making recommendations on
coordination and convergence with various Ministries and Departments
in their respective reports. As discussed during the evidence, lot of
funds are made available by Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of
Environment and Forest, Department of Rural Development for
NREGA, SGRY, etc., Ministry of Water Resources for water conservation.
Besides, certain outlays are directly given to Panchayats under Twelfth
Finance Commission. Further, the Committee should be apprised about
how the dovetailing of funds under these schemes can be effected and
the specific initiatives taken in this regard.

56
Reply of the Government
A checklist for the use of State level Scheme Sanctioning Committee
has been prepared and circulated to bring in convergence of various
schemes related to water conservation, as powers to sanction and
implement schemes are with the States.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 21, Para No. 5.19)
The Committee urge the Department to give serious thought to all
the aforesaid recommendations made by them with regard to
sustainability issue. The Department had proactively advocated some
of these issues during the course of oral evidence but the real challenge
before them is to translate the theory into appropriate policy framework
and concrete action. The Committee would like the Department to
reflect on all the aforesaid issues in a holistic manner and keep them
informed of their plan of action in this regard. The issues raised in
various paras may be dealt with separately and the Committee may
be informed of the action taken on each of the issue in the action
taken replies.
Reply of the Government
A checklist for the use of state level Scheme Sanctioning Committee
has been prepared and circulated to bring in convergence of various
schemes related to water conservation.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 22, Para No. 6.11)
The Committee have repeatedly been bringing to the notice of the
Government the relevant issue of addressing quality affected habitations

57
in a time bound manner as it has major linkages with the well being
of the people. The Committee opine that the entire exercise of coverage
of habitations becomes inconsequential if people do not have access to
clean and safe drinking water free from contaminants. The Committee
note with distress the under performance with regard to addressing
quality affected habitations. As explained above, for the year
2005-2006 the achievement was less than 50 per cent. For the previous
year, i.e. 2006-2007 the achievement vis-à-vis the target has been less
than 20 per cent. The Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons
furnished with regard to underperformance wherein the Department
have cited late release of funds, long gestation period of projects, etc.
for the same. The Committee consider that the Government should
have a long term perspective while fixing targets and there should be
no excuse for under achievements in such a vital area relating to the
fundamental need of human life. The Committee would like the
Department to take necessary corrective steps so that this kind of
pathetic performance is not repeated in future, especially in view of
the fact that for the current year, a huge target of addressing 48,613
habitations have been fixed. Further, reiterating their earlier
recommendation, the Committee feel that in view of the enormity of
the task ahead i.e. addressing 1.95 lakh habitations, the Department
should fix targets commensurate with the mammoth task at hand to
achieve the Bharat Nirman goal.
Reply of the Government
As per the latest reports from State Governments, 31,135 water
quality-affected habitations have been addressed with projects during
2006-07. The performance of water quality component of the Bharat
Nirman programme is reviewed regularly. As per latest information
received from States, out of 1,95,813 water quality-affected habitations,
48,911 habitations have been addressed with projects. The States have
been asked to complete the remaining habitations within the Bharat
Nirman period.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report)

58
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 6.12)
Further, as discussed above, the fund requirement for addressing
quality of 48,813 habitations for 2007-2008 has been worked out to be
about Rs. 3,860 crore against which funds to the tune of Rs.1,300 crore
i.e. 20 per cent of total allocation of Rs. 6,500 crore are made available
to the States. The Committee would like the Department to place the
issue of adequate allocation for the year 2007-08 before the Planning
Commission. While planning the matter of adequate allocation, the
Department should place the data of total quality affected habitations
to be covered and emphatically point out the various threats the
contaminated water pose to the health of the people. Besides, the
concern of the Committee in this regard should also be communicated
to the Planning Commission. While recommending for higher outlay
for drinking water, 20 per cent of which can be utilised for quality,
the Committee would like to be informed about the actual position of
expenditure for quality in different States during the last three years
so as to analyse the position of outlay required and comment further
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Funds to tackle water quality problem in affected habitations are
separately allocated since 2006-07. Details of State-wise release of fund
and expenditure reported under Sub-mission Programme to tackle water
quality problem is as under:
(Amount: Rs. in crore)
S. No Name of the Release Expenditure
States/UTs
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 33.63 31.52
2. Bihar 22.46 16.11
3. Chhattisgarh 7.33 0.00
4. Gujarat 40.57 33.00
5. Haryana 0.57 0.36
6. Jharkhand 19.52 0.84
7. Karnataka 125.37 0.00

59
12 3 4
8. Kerala 3.11 0.00
9. Madhya Pradesh 22.50 11.71
10. Maharashtra 26.34 26.34
11. Orissa 17.47 0.00
12. Punjab 7.25 0.00
13. Rajasthan 206.00 206.00
14. Tamil Nadu 3.71 2.25
15. Uttar Pradesh 47.69 13.49
16. West Bengal 111.71 81.91
17. Arunachal Pradesh 0.52 0.00
18. Assam 35.90 35.90
19. Manipur 0.04 0.00
20. Meghalaya 0.15 0.00
21. Mizoram 0.03 0.00
22. Nagaland 0.16 0.16
23. Tripura 3.64 3.53
Total 735.67 463.11
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 6.15)
As per the earlier recommendation of the Committee with regard
to sustainability, the Committee strongly urge the Centre to suggest
States to set up rural and local marts with the aid of district authorities
wherein simple to use techniques for addressing water contamination
can be disseminated and marketed. They should also identify NGOs/

60
VOs who have substantial expertise/experience in the field for
providing necessary inputs to Panchayat and Block level functionaries
which may be used to sensitize the rural people on the aforesaid
aspect.
The Committee maintain that the human and economical costs of
providing people with contaminated and infected water are immense
and hence would like a categorical reaction from the Department on
each of the issues discussed above along with the initiatives and policy
interventions made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Some of the States are already marketing “simple to use household
filters” for addressing water quality problems through rural marts and
other agencies including NGOs/VOs.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 36 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 33, Para No. 8.11)
Again, with regard to indicators used for sanitation the Department
informed that availablility and accessibility of sanitation toilets in each
household, school, and anganwadi, elimination of open defecation and
availability of solid and liquid waste management in houses at
community level are the components of sanitation. Reiterating their
earlier recommendation, the Committee would like to state that mere
construction of sanitary toilets, IHHL etc. will not improve the
sanitation scenario in the country. Rather, the functional status of these
is of crucial importance. Therefore, strict monitoring of TSC projects
by District Level Monitoring Agencies and National Level Monitors
should be ensured and status as regards use of these by rural masses
should be obtained from States. Besides, the Department should
consider the aforesaid data regarding unspent balances before
sanctioning amount to States for projects under TSC. The Committee
should be informed about specific initiatives and IEC activities
undertaken by the Department for States who are lagging behind in
implementation of TSC projects.

61
Reply of the Government
The Committee may note that TSC projects are approved for a
district and not for a State. IEC activities are targeted at individuals
and community, to generate a demand for toilet construction. The
Department brings out generic IEC materials, which are then translated
by States into the local language. Also, the Department produces
technical notes and manuals for use by officials, PRIs and community
leaders. Such notes and manuals are also put on the Departments
website for free and wider access. The IEC material and technical
notes produced in the last one year are:
(a) Flip charts on hygiene education for school teachers
(b) TV and radio spots to promote clean village
(c) Technical note on Solid and Liquid Waste Management
(d) Technology options for toilet design
The material being worked for forthcoming months are::
(a) Technology options for toilets for schools and anganwadis
(b) Manual for masons
(c) Designs for ECOSAN toilets
(d) Radio & TV spots for personal hygiene
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
of Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 39 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 37, Para No. 9.7)
After analyzing the position as reflected above, the Committee
find that a dismal scenario exists with regard to drinking water and
sanitation facilities in various Government schools in rural areas in
the country. As regards the position of drinking water, 1.32 lakh rural
schools out of a total of 8.45 lakh rural schools have not been provided
drinking water facilities as per Government’s own data. The position
may be worse if the ground situation is analysed along with the
scenario of slippages due to problems related to sustainability of
resources and systems. As regards the position of achievements of

62
targets during different years of Tenth Plan there is gross under
achievement of targets. During 2005-2006 against a target of 1,40,000,
actual coverage was 72,464 rural schools thereby indicating only
50 per cent achievement. During 2006-2007 the Department has
informed that no targets have been fixed due to priority for covering
of rural habitations under Bharat Nirman Programme. Further, the
coverage during 2006-07 is 44,397 which is only about 60 per cent of
the achievement of the previous year. The Committee feel that specific
targets for coverage of schools with drinking water facility should be
fixed keeping in view the ground situation in this regard and a plan
of action be formulated to achieve cent per cent coverage within a
stipulated time frame.
Recommendation (Serial No. 38, Para No. 9.8)
 With regard to sanitation, the Department has not furnished any
data for number of schools which could not be provided toilet facilities
so far. However, while examining Demands for Grants (2004-2005), the
Committee have been informed that out of total number of 5,0,7581
rural primary and 1,29,246 upper primary schools as per Sixth All
India Educational Survey, 32,463 rural primary and 25,812 upper
primary schools which is only about 20 per cent, were covered with
sanitation facilities. As regards the achievement of targets under
sanitation there is gross under performance. Out of a target of 9,57,240
school toilets only 3,37,502 was the achievement in this regard. The
Committee maintain that besides construction of toilets, the Department
should also ensure that the toilets are provided with adequate water
availability, so that these do not become dysfunctional over a period
of time thereby defeating the very purpose of the entire exercise
undertaken by the Department. Further, the Committee feel that due
to strong inter linkages between sanitation and water availability, it is
imperative that rain water harvesting structures should be compulsorily
installed in all rural schools, so that sufficient water availability for
drinking water as well as sanitation purposes can be ensured. The
Committee take strong exception to school drinking water and
sanitation component of ARWSP getting the backseat under Bharat
Nirman Programme. The Committee would like the Department to
furnish categorical explanation with regard to such miserable
achievements made vis-a-vis the targets for both drinking water and
sanitation in rural schools.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation (Serial No. 37 and 38)
During 2006-07, a total of 71,498 schools have been reported to be
covered with drinking water facilities and Rs. 22,839.40 lakh were

63
released as special assistance for coverage of schools. Likewise under
TSC, the States are being urged to ensure coverage of all schools with
toilets and sanitation facilities. However, the States have to achieve
these by mobilization of resources available with various schemes like
SSA etc.
The Department strives to encourage States and PRIs community
participation in planning and impress upon States and also involve
stakeholders in the process inculcate community participation in
management and decision making process of the schemes. Since water
is a state subject it is up to State Government to generate creative
ways of improving resources and service delivery.
(a) Under Total Sanitation Programme, a total 4,33,985 toilets
have been constructed in schools till date. The goal is to
cover all the schools by end of 2007.
(b) The Department is actively working for convergence with
Sarva Sikhsa Abhiyan (SSA) to cover all schools for
provisions of toilets. New schools are to be provided toilets
from SSA funds while the old schools from TSC funds.
(c) Technology manual for school toilets is under preparation.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 42 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 39, Para No. 9.9)
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid analysis of the
performance of ARWSP and CRSP that with particular reference of
schools, the performance is even worse than the other components of
these programmes. It is really reprehensible that the Government cannot
ensure drinking water and sanitation facilities to various Government
Schools in rural areas even after almost six decades of planned
development, particularly when the Indian economy is making giant
strides world wide. The Committee strongly recommend that sanitation
and drinking water in rural schools should be accorded topmost
priority by the Government and time bound action plan needs to be
devised to achieve 100 per cent coverage of rural schools with toilets
(separate toilets for boys and girls) and safe drinking water in

64
accordance with India’s commitment to meet Millennium Development
Goal. The Committee may be suitably apprised about all the concrete
steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
During 2006-07, a total of 71,498 schools have been reported to be
covered so far with drinking water facilities. During 2006-07,
Rs. 22,839.40 lakh were released as special assistance for coverage of
schools. Under TSC, the goal is to provide toilets in all schools by end
of 2007. During review meetings, most States have indicated that this
target can be met. Some States may complete the target by March,
2008.
[O.M. No. H-11011/2/2007-DWS III dated: 26/10/2007
Department of Drinking Water Supply
(Ministry of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 42 of Chapter-I of the Report)

65
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
 7 March, 2008 Chairman,
17 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

66
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 18 FEBRUARY, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room
No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh  — Chairman
MEMBERS
 Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri A.F.G. Osmani
7. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Balihari Babu
11. Shri Jayantilal Barot
12. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
13. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
14. Dr. Chandan Mitra
15. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
16.  Shrimati Kanimozhi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary-II
3. Shri Hoti Lal — Deputy Secretary-II

67
2. **** **** ****
3. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 3 regarding draft action taken report on Twenty-eighth report of
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development). The
Committee after deliberations adopted the draft report without any
modification.
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft action taken report on the basis of factual verification
from the concerned Department/Ministry and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
5. **** **** ****
6. The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 25 February,
2008 at 1500 hrs. onwards for consideration and adoption of draft
action taken reports of Department of Rural Development (Ministry of
Rural Development) and Ministry of Panchayati Raj on Demands for
Grants (2007-08).
****Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately .

68
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY
EIGHTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 39
II. Recommendations which have been accepted 23
by the Government :
Para Nos. 3.18, 3.21, 3.22, 4.11, 4.13, 4.14, 5.10,
5.12 5.13, 5.14, 5.15, 5.16, 6.13, 6.14, 7.6, 7.7,
7.8, 7.9, 8.9, 8.10, 8.12, 8.13 and 8.14 .
Percentage to the total recommendations (58.97 %)
III. Recommendation which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply: NIL
Percentage to the total recommendations (NIL)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee : 16
Para Nos. 3.19, 3.20, 3.23, 3.24, 4.12, 5.11, 5.17,
5.18, 5.19, 6.11, 6.12, 6.15, 8.11, 9.7, 9.8 and 9.9
Percentage to the total recommendations (41.03 %)
V. Recommendation in respect of which final
reply of the Government is still awaited : NIL
Percentage to the total recommendations (NIL)

THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Twenty-eighth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 038
Price : Rs. 75.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2007-08) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government .................................................. 26
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 47
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 48
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 65
APPENDICES
I. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 18 February, 2008................ 66
II. Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Eighth Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)....................................................... 68
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2007-2008)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri George Fernandes
6. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari*
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri D. Narbula
10. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
11. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
12. Adv. Tukaram Ganpatrao Renge Patil
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
14. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
15. Shri Sita Ram Singh
16. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
17. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
18. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
#
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari, MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 30 August, 2007, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4022
dated August 30, 2007.
#Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri Tarit Baran Topdar, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Energy to Standing Committee on Rural Development w.e.f.
12 December, 2007 as intimated  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, Para No. 4366
dated 12 December, 2007.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari Babu
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Dr. Ram Prakash
28. Shri P .R. Rajan
29. Shri Bhagwati Singh
30. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
31. Shrimati Kanimozhi
@
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
@Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha nominated Shrimati Kanimozhi, MP , (RS) to Standing
Committee on Rural Development w.e.f. 15 September, 2007  vide Lok Sabha Bulletin
Part-II, Para No. 4096 dated 19 September, 2007.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-Second Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural
Development (2006-07) on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the
Department of Drinking Water Supply (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
14 May, 2007. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 26 October, 2007.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
18 February, 2008.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report of the
Committee is given in Appendix II.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
 7 March, 2008 Chairman,
17 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

32
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER SUPPLY)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Twenty-eighth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI