8
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.3.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 19.3.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 01 1
Price : Rs. 45.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE (2004-2005) .................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ....................................................... 31
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .......................................................................... 66
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which  replies
of the  Government have not  been accepted
by the Committee .................................................... 69
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect  of  which  final
replies of the Government are still awaited .... 88
APPENDICES
I. Financial  performance  of major  rural develo-
pment programmes in North-Eastern  States
and Sikkim ................................................................ 93
II. Opening Balance under SGRY as on 1.4.2004 ... 98
III. Minimum wages  fixed  by  the  State/Union
Territory Government under the SGRY ............. 99
IV . Performance of Pradhan Mantri  Gram  Sadak
Yojana .......................................................................... 100
V. Extracts  of  minutes  of  the  sitting  of  the
Committee held on 4.3.2005 ................................. 102
VI. Analysis of Action taken by  the  Government
on the recommendation contained in the Third
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ..... 104

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
12. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
14. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
15. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
24. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
25. Shri Penumalli Madhu
26. Shri Stephen Marandi
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
(iii)

(iv)
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Shri Keshubhai S. Patel
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Sundar Prasad Das — Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Eighth Report on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2004-2005)
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development).
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 August, 2004.
The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained
in the Report were received on 29 December, 2004.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
4 March, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Committee is
given in Appendix-VI.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
18 March, 2005 Chairman,
27 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2004-2005)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Third Report on the subject Demands for Grants
(2004-2005) of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural
Development), which was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 August 2004.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 58 recommendations, which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.3, 2.4, 2.18, 2.21, 2.25, 2.31, 2.39, 3.27, 3.30, 3.31,
3.32, 3.33, 3.36, 3.42, 3.45, 3.59, 3.70, 3.71, 3.91, 3.102, 3.110,
3.125, 3.126, 3.127, 3.135, 3.148, 3.160, 3.167, 3.178, 3.180,
3.183, 3.190 and 2.191.
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 3.34, 3.58 and 3.74.
(iii) Recommendation in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.19, 2.20, 3.14, 3.26, 3.28, 3.29, 3.35, 3.40, 3.47,
3.50, 3.61, 3.65, 3.76, 3.93, 3.94, 3.105 and 3.141.
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 3.80, 3.92, 3.100, 33.133 and 3.179.
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. The late release of Central share of funds
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.19 and 2.20)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find from the data indicated above that there are
huge opening balances with the State Governments under the major
Schemes of the Department, viz. SGRY, SGSY, IAY and DRDA
Administration. The Committee are distressed to note that Rs.
2,295.38 crore i.e. 18.71 per cent of BE 2002-03 remained unspent
with the States and the Union territories administration. Not only
that under-spending is a recurrent feature during each of the
financial year as is evident from the information furnished by the
Department. While appreciating the fact that utilization certificates
have to be furnished by the State Government before seeking the
second installment under different schemes, the Committee find
that even the first installment is released very late. When the
Department was asked about the date of release of first installment
under different schemes, they have indicated the position only
with regard to SGSY. It can be seen that under SGSY, the first
installment could be released on 16 June in 2003 and on 15 April
in 2004. Thus, during 2003, there was delay of 46 days and during
2004, there was delay of 15 days. The Committee would like to
know the information on date of release of funds for all the central
sector and Centrally sponsored Schemes of the Department. The
Committee find that late release of outlay is the main reason of
under spending and thereby resulting in unspent balances with
the State Governments. The Department consider the releases as
the position of expenditure and reflect a very bright picture before
the Committee but there are serious problems in the implementation
of several schemes which have been analyzed in the subsequent
chapters of the report. Here, the Committee would like to highlight
that the outlay during a particular year should be released in a
phased manner as per the formula evolved by the Department
and there should not be rush of release at the fag end of the
financial year, i.e. March. The Committee, however, desire that only
10 per cent of funds be released during the month of March, if
proposal to this effect is received.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
“The Committee further find that late release of funds by the Union
Government further encourages the State Government to delay their

3
share of outlay, thereby hampering the implementation of the
programme. To motivate the State Governments, the Union
Government has to set good precedents. In view of this, the
Committee would like that the Union Government should ensure
that the first installment is released in the very first week of the
financial year.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
6. The Government in their action taken replies have stated as
under:
“While the Ministry of Rural Development shares the concern
expressed by the Committee on the large amounts of unspent
balances that remain with the Programme Implementing Agencies/
State Governments, there are certain practical difficulties, which
have to be taken into account. Till 1997-98, there was a provision
to allow 25 per cent of the allocation for a particular year to carry
over to the next year. The idea was to allow the Programme
Implementing/Executive Agencies to have sufficient funds to
implement the programmes of this Ministry during the first quarter
of the year, which is considered to be the best period for
implementing various programmes. This permissible limit to carry
over balances was reduced to 20 per cent of the annual allocation
w.e.f. 1 April, 1999 and on the suggestion of Ministry of Finance,
it was further reduced to 15 per cent w.e.f. 1 April, 2000.
This permissible limit of carry over balances is quiet reasonable
and it helps the Programme Implementing Agencies to ensure
adequate flow and utilization of funds for implementation of the
programmes. However, in some States the Programme
Implementing Agencies fail to fully utilize the funds due to various
reasons which include the limited availability of working season
because of weather conditions, or due to natural calamities such
as floods, droughts etc. which are a frequent phenomena. In
addition to above, it is also pertinent to mention here that the
programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development are implemented
at the village level and it takes sometime to flow the information
from the village to the district and onward to the Ministry. Under
the wage-employment programmes, the wages are paid in cash as
well as in the form of foodgrains. Lifting of matching share of
food grains also takes time. Due to these difficulties, the Programme
Implementing Agencies sometimes are not able to claim the second

4
installment at an early date. The late release of second installment
and also the late release of matching share by the State
Governments reuslts in excessive opening balances. However, the
Ministry has introduced a strict monitoring system to maintain the
financial discipline and a proportionate cut is imposed on release
of Central funds if the proposals for release of second installment
are received late in the Ministry. In the normal course, the first
installment of Central allocation is released to the DRDAs
automatically if the second installment received by them during
the previous financial year is without any condition. The release
of first installment of the Central funds to the Programme
Implementing Agencies starts immediately after the receipt of the
approved budget allocation from the Ministry of Finance. For
instance, during the current financial year, the Ministry started
releasing the first installment in April, 2004 itself. During 2003-
2004, there was some delay in release of Central funds because of
some procedural issues such as routing the Central funds to DRDAs
through the State Governments. The Ministry of Rural Development
felt that such a procedure would result in delay of release of funds
to the Programme Implementing Agencies. This issue was resolved
on 11 June, 2003 and the Ministry started releasing the funds from
the same day.”
Reply to recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
“The funds under major rural development programmes are
released to DRDAs in two installments. The first installment is
released to the DRDAs automatically if the second installment in
the previous year is received by the DRDAs without any condition
immediately after the approval of budget allocation is received
from the Ministry of Finance. All possible steps will be taken in
the Ministry of release the first installment of Central funds at the
earliest possible.”
Reply to recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
7. The Committee in their earlier recommendations while
expressing their concern on the huge unspent balances had
desired:
(i) the information indicating the date of release of first
installment for all Central Sector and Centrally sponsored
schemes should be furnished;

5
(ii) outlay should be released in a phased manner as per the
formula evolved by the Department; and
(iii) as per the formula (refer Para 2.17 of 3rd Report—14th
Lok Sabha) 20 per cent of allocated funds can be released
in March. The Committee had desired that only 10 per
cent of funds be released during the month of March
subject to proposals received from State Governments.
Instead of addressing the aforesaid issues categorically, the
Department has tried to justify the position by furnishing several
general reasons for huge unspent balances. Further delay in release
of first installment under SGSY during 2003-04 has been stated to
be due to certain procedural difficulties i.e. releasing the funds to
DRDAs through State Governments. Even when the position was
rectified, and the funds were released direct to DRDAs during 2004-
05, again there was delay of 15 days as cited in the earlier
recommendation. The Committee would like the Department to
furnish the position regarding the date of release of first installment
under all the centrally sponsored schemes so as to enable them to
analyse the reasons for underspending in a better way. The
Committee feel that 18.71 per cent of unspent outlay in a year i.e.
2002-2003 under four main schemes, viz. SGRY, SGSY, IAY and
DRDA Administration, as indicated in their earlier recommendations
is a matter of serious concern and there is a need for an in depth
analysis. The Committee would desire that instead of furnishing the
general position, the Government should strive to analyse the
position State/Union-territory wise and take the corrective action
accordingly. The steps taken in the direction should be intimated to
the Committee.
B. Discrepancy in the data indicating the number of Swarozgaries
vis-a-vis the number of beneficiaries assisted under SGSY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that SGSY was launched in the place of
IRDP and its allied Programmes which lays stress on the formation
of Self Help Groups. However, the Committee note that upto 2003-
04, number of individual Swarozgaris assisted under SGSY was
significantly more than the Swarozgaris who were assisted in
Groups. Since each Self Help Group should assist at least

6
10 persons belonging to families Below Poverty Line which might
be reduced to 5 persons in hilly and difficult areas, the Committee
are unable to understand as to how 17.35 lakh Self Help Groups
reportedly formed during this period could assist only 20.21 lakh
Swarozgaris which should have been about 85 to 170 lakh. Keeping
in view the information on the number of SHGs  and the number
of Swarozgaris, the Committee have come to a conclusion that the
performance of SGSY in this regard is not satisfactory. They would
like the Department to explain the reasons to the Committee.”
9. The Government in their reply have stated as under:
“Under the programme, emphasis is on the group approach
through social mobilisation because if the poor are properly
organized and supported, they can become self-sufficient. Since
group approach is process oriented, it takes some time for a group
to mature. To make a group viable for taking up economic
activities, the process involves training of members in group
behaviour, development of their technical and managerial skills
including rudiments of accounting procedures. The group formation
stage depend on the literacy, awareness levels, socio-economic
background of the people being organized as well as capacity of
the facilitators involved in the process of social mobilization.
Realising this, a provision of grading system has been kept under
the SGSY guidelines. Only after successful Ist grading which is
done after six months of formation of a group, it becomes eligible
for assistance through revolving fund. Same is not the case with
an individual swarozgary. This may be a reason for more individual
swarozgaries assisted than group swarozgaries in the initial years
of the implementation of the programme. However, with the
passage of time, it is expected that more number of groups will be
eligible for financial assistance as they will reach the level of
maturity.
So far financing of SHGs are concerned only those SHGs can
be financed which have passed Grade II test. Against 18.88 lakhs
group formed, since the inception of the scheme in April 1999 and
up to September, 2004, only 4.74 lakhs groups qualified for
financing and 2 lakhs of the later have been financed for economic
activities. The lesser number of groups have been able to take up
economic activities mainly due to non-cooperation of the banks
that are responsible for providing the credit to the SHGs a major
component of the scheme. To address this issue, the matter has

7
been taken up with the Ministry of Finance and Chief Executives
of the banks. Also, there is a provision under the guidelines that
a maximum of 20-30 per cent members of a group may be from
families marginally above the Poverty Line (APL) if they are
acceptable to BPL members of the group but these APL members
of the group will not be eligible for subsidy under the scheme. All
these factors including low awareness among the people about the
scheme might have been the reasons for not achieving the expected
level of performance. Since the number of members in a group
widely varies (10-20 in normal case and 5-20 in difficult areas like
deserts, hills and sparsely populated areas) it would not be logical
to arrive at any average figure assisted per group.
However, the percentage of SHG swarozgaris assisted has
increased from 37.25 per cent (in 1999-2000) to 50.16 per cent (in
2002-2003). During 2003-2004, the percentage of SHG swarozgaries
assisted to total swarozgaries assisted has gone up to 64.33 per
cent. This means the performance of the SGSY to some extent is
satisfactory.”
10. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had indicated
the discrepancy in the data of number of SHG assisted vis-a-vis the
number of swarozgaries assisted. The number of swarozgaries assisted
so far under SGSY was 20.21 lakh whereas the number of SHGs
was 17.35 lakh as indicated by the Department. The Committee had
felt that the number of beneficiaries assisted was quite lesser in
view of the fact that each SHG consisted of an average 15 persons.
The Committee express their deep concern on the further data
furnished by the Department according to which there is a wide
variation between the number of SHGs formed, SHGs qualified for
assistance and those finally assisted. The Committee feel that there
are serious problems in implementation of one of the major
programme of Rural Development i.e. SGSY. Further disturbing fact
is the complacency factor in the Ministry of Rural Development.
Inspite of all this disturbing data, the Department has tried to justify
the success of programme by stating that the number of the
percentage of SHG swarozgaries assisted is increasing year by year.
The Committee are unhappy to note this and would like the
Department to analyse the position of implementation of scheme
critically and take some corrective action in consultation with banks,
State Governments, NGOs, District level officers, PRIs and all other
concerned and inform the Committee accordingly.

8
C. Findings of concurrent evaluation
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are disturbed to note that serious lacunae in the
implementation of SGSY has been found in the Concurrent
Evaluation. They are further disturbed to find that the Zamindars,
their servants and labourers constitute self-help groups and the
benefits were taken away by the Zamindars who are above the
Poverty Line and who are otherwise not eligible for it. Equally
disturbing is the fact that Bank officials are worried about the
non-performing assets and they sanction loans only to those people
who have either not availed the loan before or have repaid the
first loan. Despite the existing guidelines, finding of a number of
serious flaws in the implementation of the Scheme is nothing but
regrettable. The Committee hope that the Government will give a
serious thought to this and take necessary steps during the current
financial year to bring about significant changes in the guidelines
of the Scheme, so that the flaws noticed in the Concurrent
Evaluation are eradicated and the avowed objectives of the Scheme
are achieved.”
12. The Government in their reply have stated as under:
“There may be some cases of the ineligible person taking benefits
under the scheme but this is not certainly a general practice. Efforts
are on for still better targeting under the scheme. In order to
achieve the fruitful results of the programme and effective and
efficient implementation of the SGSY, various committees from
Central Level down to grass roots have been constituted. These
committees include representatives of public (MPs/MLAs/PRI
representatives), bankers, rural development officials, NGOs,
representatives of line departments etc. These committees are Block
Level SGSY Committee, District Level SGSY Committee, State Level
SGSY Committee, Central Level Coordination Committee and
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees at State/District/Block Level.
Regular efforts are being made to improve programme performance
in terms of subsidy credit ratio, number of families assisted, total
investment etc. and to remove lacunae in the implementation of
SGSY as and when came to the notice of the Ministry through
meetings at various fora and field visits. At Central Level, the
performance is regularly reviewed with the bankers, State

9
Governments and other Departments through the mechanism of
CLCC and through the performance review committee meetings.
The Minister of Rural Development and the Ministers of State for
Rural Development visit States/Union territories and review the
performance of the programme under SGSY with the Chief
Ministers, Ministers and officials of the State Governments
concerned. Such review meetings provide the much needed impetus
in the implementation of the programme by energizing and
motivating the implementation agencies.
To address the issues relating to the credit to swarozgaries,
some of the measures taken are indicated below:
The Central Level Co-ordination Committee under SGSY is the
main fora in which all bottlenecks/shortcomings in the
implementation of the programme are discussed. The Committee
consists of members drawn from RBI, NABARD, Banking Division
of the Ministry of Finance and all CMDs of Commercial Banks.
The last meeting of the Committee was held in June 2004.
A meeting was held with Secretary (Banking) on 21 February,
2003 to have a detailed discussion of different credit related issues
under SGSY. The issues discussed were under financing, higher
interest rates on loans provided to swarozgaries, repayment of
loans, issue of mortgages for sanction of loans, absence of bank
branches, pendency of applications, relocation of bank branches in
North Eastern Regions.
At the instance of the Ministry, a joint meeting by the Ministers
of Rural Development and Minister of State for Finance was held
in October, 2003 with the Chief Executive of the Banks. There was
concern of large scale rejection of loan applications, delay in
processing of applications and regular participation of bankers in
Block Level SGSY Committee meetings.
Instructions were issued by RBI, NABARD & IBA to Chief
Executive/MDs of Banks with advice to monitor the scheme at
their own level to achieve the targets set under the SGSY scheme.
The problems associated with credit were also discussed with
the bankers in the Project Director Conference held in September,
2004.
The banking division of the Ministry of Finance holds quarterly
meetings under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Banking)
to review the credit flow. These meetings are attended by
representatives of RBI, NABARD etc.”

10
13. The Committee are distressed to note the reaction of the
Department on such a serious findings of the concurrent evaluation.
One of the lacunae noticed in the concurrent evaluation is taking
away the benefits meant for the poorest of the poor in rural areas
by the affluent persons of society such as Zamindars. The Department
has simply stated that the findings are isolated cases and not a
general practice. The Committee fail to understand the utility of the
concurrent evaluation if its findings are not deeply probed and
corrective action taken immediately. The Committee are not convinced
with the general reply of the Department. While reiterating their
earlier recommendation, the Committee desire that the findings of
concurrent evaluation should be seriously evaluated and ameliorating
action taken and the Committee be informed accordingly.
D. Shortfall in credit targets, achievements and disbursement by
banks and cooperation between bank officials for implementation
of the Programme
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.28 and 3.29)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:
“Another lacuna noticed by the data furnished by the Department
is that there is serious shortfall in credit targets, achievements and
credit disbursements. In view of this scenario, the Committee fail
to understand how the objective of bringing BPL persons above
the poverty line could be achieved. The Committee feel that the
Department should take up this matter with Reserve Bank of India
so that necessary instructions would be issued to banks for their
cooperation in implementation of the programme. Not only that,
there should be regular meeting with the representatives of banks
as well as RBI and monitoring of the programme should be
regularly done. Further the Committee also like to ensure that
only the eligible beneficiaries are assisted in the programme the
selection of beneficiaries should be done in Gram Sabha only. The
bank officials should be directed to be present in Gram Sabha
meetings so that the process of selection of beneficiaries and
completion of formalities, etc. is completed at one go.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
“Another corrective step to be taken by the Department is to ensure
proper coordination between bank officials and block level
government representative and the Panchayats. The Committee

11
would like the Department to take corrective steps on the various
aspects as raised by the Committee in the aforesaid para and
intimate the Committee accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 3.29)
15. The Government have replied as under:
“The progress of credit mobilisation vis-a-vis targets is periodically
reviewed by the Central Level Coordination Committee chaired by
Secretary (RD) in which RBI, NABARD and Public Sector Banks
are represented. Specific issues and problems with regard to credit
delivery are discussed in these meetings. Wherever necessary,
instructions are issued by RBI to all banks to smoothen the process
of sanction and disbursement of loans.
The banks are closely involved with Government agencies in the
planning and implementation of the Scheme. They are associated
with preparation of projects, identification of Swarozgaris, capacity
building and selection of activity. Banks are also represented in
the block and district level SGSY Committees. RBI has issued
instructions to all banks to ensure their participation in these
Committees.
According to the SGSY guidelines, the list of BPL households
identified through BPL census duly approved by the Gram Sabha
will form the basis for identification of families for assistance under
the Programme. The Self-Help Groups should also be drawn from
the BPL list approved by the Gram Sabha.
At the instance of the Ministry, a joint meeting by the Ministers
of Rural Development and Minister of State for Finance was held
in October, 2003 with the Chief Executive of the Banks. There was
concern of large scale rejection of loan applications, delay in
processing of applications and regular participation of bankers in
Block Level SGSY Committee meetings.
Instructions were issued by RBI, NABARD & IBA to Chief
Executive/MDs of Banks with advice to monitor the scheme at
their own level to achieve the targets set under the SGSY scheme.
The problems associated with credit were also discussed with
the bankers in the Project Director Conference held in September,
2004.

12
The Banking Division of the Ministry of Finance holds quarterly
meetings under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Banking)
to review the credit flow. These meetings are attended by
representatives of RBI, NABARD etc. The problems relating to credit
delivery under SGSY are posed for discussion at these meetings.
Target fixed for credit mobilization and actual achievement in
the previous years are as follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Credit Target Credit Mobilised
1999-2000 3205.00 1056.46
2000-2001 3205.00 1459.44
2001-2002 3200.87 1329.68
2002-2003 2525.21 1184.30
2003-2004 2129.33 1301.21
(May 04, Prov.)
2004-2005 2507.67 370.83
(Up to Sept., 04)
The significant shortfall in credit mobilization in spite of
lowering the targets has been brought to the notice of the Minister
of Finance by the Minister of Rural Development vide letter
dated 30th November, 2004 for appropriate action. It has also been
pointed out that the reasons for total non-performance of some of
the banks need to be probed by RBI and NABARD.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
“Instructions have been already issued by the Ministry to all
State/Union territory Governments and by the RBI to All banks to
ensure participation of the Service Area Banks in all district/block
level SGSY Committees. These instructions will be reiterated.
At the instance of the Ministry, a joint meeting by the Minister
of Rural Development and Minister of State for Finance was held
in October, 2003 with the Chief Executive of the Banks. There was
concern of large scale rejection of loan applications, delay in
processing of applications and regular participation of bankers in
Block Level SGSY Committee meetings.

13
Instructions were issued by RBI, NABARD & IBA to Chief
Executive/MDs of Banks with advice to monitor the scheme at
their own level to achieve the targets set under the SGSY scheme.
The problems associated with credit were also discussed with
the bankers in the Project Director Conference held in September,
2004.
The Banking Division of the Ministry of Finance holds quarterly
meetings under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Banking)
to review the credit flow. These meetings are attended by
representatives of RBI, NABARD etc. The problems relating to credit
delivery under SGSY are posed for discussion at these meetings.
The significant shortfall in credit mobilization in spite of
lowering the targets has been brought to the notice of the Minister
of Finance by the Minister of Rural Development vide letter
dated 30 November, 2004 for appropriate action. It has also been
pointed out that the reasons for total non-performance of some of
the banks need to be probed by RBI and NABARD.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 3.29)
16. The Committee while noting the details of the review
meetings held at various level with a view to addressing specific
issues and problems with regard to implementation of SGSY, would
like to have the details of the outcome of the aforesaid meetings.
The Committee further find that the part of the recommendation
i.e.  the bank officials should be directed to be present in
Gram Sabha meetings so that the process of selection of beneficiaries
and completion of formalities etc. is completed at one go has not
been addressed in the action taken reply. The Committee would like
the reaction of the Department in this regard.
F. Elevation of SHGs from consumption or production credit to
starting of micro enterprises
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee would like to know from the Department, the
number of SHGs who could graduate from consumption or
production credit to starting micro-enterprises since the inception

14
of the scheme so as to enable the Committee to know about the
real impact of the programme. They would also like to be apprised
about the number of SHGs who could be credit linked by different
agencies like NABARD, SIDBI and banks.”
18. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“Since inception of SGSY, 1,82,992 SHGs have taken up economic
activities. This implies that these SHGs have graduated from
consumption or production credit to starting micro-enterprises. As
reported above, there is no physical targets fixed under the SGSY.
The trend of group financing is, however, on the increase over the
years which is a positive sign as far as the fulfilment of the
programme objective of the SGSY is concerned.”
19. The Committee find that as per reply of the Department a
SHG taking up economic activity is considered to be a group which
could graduate from consumption or production credit to starting
micro enterprises. The Committee are unhappy to note the reply of
the Department which is based on presumptions. They feel that a
group taking up economic activity may not always be a group which
could after taking credit start a micro-enterprise thus indicating the
real success of the programme. The Committee would also like to
add that the Finance Minister in the Budget Speech while presenting
the Budget of 2004-05 had stated that the Government had set certain
targets of credit linking of 5.85 per cent of SHGs during the period
up to March 31, 2007 for NABARD, SIDBI (refer para 3.29 of 3rd
Report-14th Lok Sabha). No effort seems to have been made to
monitor the data in this regard inspite of the fact that certain targets
were fixed and achievement of which was promised by the
Government. The Committee would like the Department to consider
the recommendations in the right perspective and furnish a
categorical reply in this regard.
G. Defunct SHGs under SGSY in States and Union territories
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are unhappy to note that the Department is yet
to receive the information regarding existing or defunct Self Help
Groups from the States/Union territories. They also note that all

15
the States and Union territories have been requested to furnish the
information in this regard from 2003-04. The Committee in their
earlier Report (48th Report-13th Lok Sabha, Para No. 3.25 refers)
had desired to maintain the information on the number of defunct
Self Help Groups which the Government had agreed to provide.
It appears that the Government has not given any serious thought
as to why SHGs becoming defunct after a certain period. They
also do not maintain information regarding existing/defunct SHGs.
This is a glaring lapse and needs to be addressed seriously. The
success of the Scheme depends on proper review of its functioning
and the lacunae detected in its functioning which is required to be
done by the Government and expected. The Committee, therefore,
desire that Ministry of Rural Development should expedite the
requisite information from the States and Union territories without
any further delay. The Committee should be kept informed about
the steps taken.”
21. The Government in their reply have stated as under:
“Earlier the information regarding defunct Self Help Groups was
not being monitored by the Ministry. As per the Standing
Committee vide its earlier Report (48th Report-13th Lok Sabha),
the Ministry has already requested all the State Governments to
expedite this information and this information is still awaited.
However, it is proposed to take up this matter with the States/
Union territories at a higher level for early furnishing of the
required information.”
22. The Committee had desired maintenance of data with regard
to the number of defunct groups under SGSY in their earlier Report
(48th Report-13th Lok Sabha, Para No. 3.25 refers). Although the
Department had agreed in principle with the recommendation of
the Committee, serious efforts do not seem to have been made in
this regard. States and Union territories were requested by the
Department to furnish the data but even after the lapse of about
two years, not even a single State/Union territory Government has
furnished the information. The Committee feel that the status of
different groups need to be monitored on a regular basis to know
about the various problems being faced by SHGs. This information
is all the more crucial when there is large scale difference between
the number of groups formed and finally assisted by Banks as stated
in the earlier recommendation para of this report. The Committee
would further like to add that the information regarding defunt

16
groups should be included in the regular monitoring proforma. This
information should also be included in the Budget documents i.e.
Performance Budget and Annual Report.
I. Justification for involving Nehru Yuvak Kendras (NYKs) in the
implementation of SGSY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.47)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are unable to find the reasons as to why Sikkim
is excluded from implementing Special Projects Component of
SGSY. They find that in addition to other States, Nehru Yuvak
Kendras (NYKs) have also been given the task of implementing
Special SGSY Projects. The Committee, would like to know the
reasons for exclusion of Sikkim, the justification of involving the
NYKs as well as the success of SGSY Special Projects.”
24. The Government have replied as under:
“Proposals for special projects are initiated from the States to
promote novel self-employment initiatives for the rural poor. The
objective of each Special Project is to ensure a time bound
programme for bringing a specific number of BPL families above
the poverty line through self employment. The project may involve
different strategies to provide long term sustainable self-
employment opportunities either in terms of organisation of
rural poor, provision of support infrastructure, technology,
marketing, training etc. or a combination of these. Project can be
proposed by Government, Semi-Government and International
Organisations.
Till date 168 proposals have been sanctioned to the States.
No proposal has been received from the State Government of
Sikkim”.
25. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had desired
to know the justification of involvement of Nehru Yuvak Kendras
in the special projects as well as the success of these special projects
implemented under SGSY. The said part of the recommendation has
not been addressed in the action taken reply. The Committee would
like the Department to respond to the said recommendation.

17
J. Frequency of meetings of State, District and Block Level
Coordination Committee under SGSY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.50)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:
“While noting that the prescribed frequency of CLCC is generally
maintained, the Committee find that as has been pointed out by
Concurrent Evaluation, many State Governments like Bihar and
Meghalaya do not hold SLCC meeting regularly. Further, the
Department of Rural Development also do not monitor the
meetings of SLCC, DLCC and BLCC which according to the
Department are required to be monitored by the respective State
Governments. The Committee desire that the Government should
obtain quarterly and six monthly reports from the State
Governments on the information of meeting held by SLCC, DLCC
and BLCC and pressurize all the States to adhere to the prescribed
frequency to the extent possible.”
27. The Government have replied as under:
“Efforts are being made to streamline the frequency of SLCC/
DLCC/BLCC meetings and State Governments have been advised
to adhere to the procedures outlined in the guidelines”.
28. The Committee find the reply of the Department on such a
serious issue of adhering to the prescribed frequency of meetings of
SLCC, DLCC and BLCC as incomplete and vague. The Committee
would like the categorical reply stating the details of the efforts
made by the Department alongwith the outcome of the said
initiatives.
K. Practice of demanding money through Supplementary Grants
under SGRY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.61)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that Rs. 5,220 crore was obtained through
Supplementary Grants during 2003-2004 over and above the Budget
estimate of Rs. 4,900 crore. The Committee are disturbed to find
that only a token amount is provided at the BE 2004-2005 stage,
which has already been exhausted and the Ministry has committed

18
liabilities of 5,111 crore under SGRY and Rs. 6,900 crore for the
Special Component of SGRY. Thus, the practice of demanding more
funds in the Supplementary Grants is likely to continue in this
year also. Persistent demands of Supplementary Grants is not a
healthy sign as it does not give the implementing agencies in
different districts the idea about the amount of allocations
earmarked for effective implementation of the scheme. The
implementing agencies should be well aware of the provisions well
ahead of time i.e. at the beginning of the financial year. Therefore,
the Committee recommend that the Government should find out
ways and means to overcome this impasse and take suitable steps,
so that Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance are persuaded
to provide adequate necessary funds for SGRY at the beginning of
the financial year.”
30. The Government have replied as below:
“The Supplementary Grants to the tune of Rs. 5200 crore was
obtained during 2003-04 to meet the requirement for payment of
foodgrains to Food Corporation of India (FCI). FCI release food-
grains based on authorization by this Ministry. However, this
Ministry releases funds to FCI for quantity of foodgrains lifted by
Implementing Agencies on receipt of Bills duly verified by the
District Panchayat/DRDA. Based on outstanding Bills received from
FCI, additional grants are obtained through Supplementary Grants.
As such, Supplementary Grants have no bearing with the allocated
funds to implementing agencies under the Scheme and it will not
affect implementation of the Scheme.
From time to time, this Ministry has been requesting the
Ministry of Finance as well as the Planning Commission to allocate
adequate funds for payment to FCI at BE stage itself. However,
due to scarcity of resources, funds for payment of FCI Bills are
being allocated through Supplementary Grants out of overall
savings of the Central Government.”
31. While appreciating the fact that supplementary grants are
being obtained to meet the requirement for payment of foodgrains
to Food Corporation of India (FCI), the Committee are not inclined
to accept the plea made by the Department that the said practice
will not affect the implementation of SGRY. The Committee find
that the practice of not allocating adequate outlay to such an
important programme like SGRY at the Budget estimate stage will
always lead to uncertainty and hamper the implementation of the

19
programme. Allocating a huge outlay of Rs. 5,200 crore, as
supplementary grants, as was done during 2003-04, is not a healthy
practice. The Committee would, therefore, like that their concern in
this regard should be brought in the knowledge of the Ministry of
Finance/Planning Commission. The Department should also pursue
the matter with them to ensure that during 2005-06 the allocation
under SGRY is made at the Budget Estimate stage.
L. Wide spread variation in Minimum wages paid to beneficiaries
of SGRY in different States and Union territories
Recommendation (Para No. 3.65)
32. The Committee had recommended as under:
“It is highly disappointing to note that the Government could
provide the information on minimum wages paid to the
beneficiaries of the SGRY only in respect of 19 States. While
glancing through the limited information available, the Committee
find that there is wide variation in the minimum wages paid to
the beneficiaries, for example the highest minimum wage, was
paid in the State of Kerala, which was Rs. 91, whereas its adjoining
State Karnataka paid minimum wage of Rs. 46.25 per day. Similarly
variations are found in many major States including Andhra
Pradesh, Orissa, Chhattisgarh etc. Even in some States like Andhra
Pradesh, the minimum wage rate varies from District to District.
The Committee are of the view that widespread variation in
minimum wages leads to rapid migration, which hampers better
implementation of SGRY. They, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry of Rural Development should impress upon all the States/
Union territories to have to the extent possible a uniform wage
rate in all the Districts of a particular State and also there should
not be much different in the minimum wages in different States so
that the SGRY scheme can be implemented effectively. Further the
Committee desire that relevant information from the remaining
States and Union territories should be obtained expeditiously and
they be apprised accordingly.”
33. The Government has replied as under:
“Anybody who desires to do unskilled work under this Programme
can opt for wage employment. The main effort under this
Programme is to generate maximum number of mandays work
and to cover maximum number of workers. Thus, to provide

20
maximum flexibility tot he Implementing Agencies, States/Union
territory have been authorized to fix minimum wage rates for
payment of wages under the Programme. Since cost of living varies
from State to State, region to region and even within a State, it
would not be advisable to fix any uniform rate for minimum wage
throughout the country.
Out of defaulting 9 States and 5 Union territories, relevant
information has since been received from 8 States and 3 Union
territories. However, the same is still awaited from the State of
Goa and Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman
and Diu.”
34. The Committee are not able to appreciate the arguments put
forth by the Department to justify variation in minimum wages being
paid to the manual labourers under SGRY. The variation is noted
by the Committee are not inter-State but also inter-District. The
Committee find that difference in wage rate within districts leads to
rapid migration. The Committee feel that this is an urgent issue and
would like the Department to discuss further with the Ministry of
Labour and the concerned States/Union territories and the Committee
be apprised about the outcome of the deliberations so as to enable
them to appreciate the stand taken by the Department in this regard.
M. Evaluation Study of Programmes of the Ministry by NIRD and
SIRDs
Recommendation (Para No. 3.76)
35. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that the Evaluation Study of SGRY has been
commissioned in September 2003 in which 44 reputed institutions
have been involved of which 21 are based in Delhi or New Delhi.
They also note that neither National Institute of Rural Development
(NIRD) nor any of the State Institute of Rural Development (SIRD)
are involved in the said study. The Committee desire that as far
as possible, the Ministry of Rural Development should try to
involve one reputed institution of each State in the Evaluation
Study of the Schemes. The possibility of involving NIRD and some
of the SIRDs should be explored in this regard.”

21
36. The Government have replied as under:
“The Ministry of Rural Development had drawn a panel of reputed
Agencies having the requisite experience and technical competence
who are willing to undertake research and evaluation studies of
social sector schemes especially the rural development programmes.
Such panel is drawn by a Technical Advisory Committee headed
by Professor T.S. Papola of Institute of Studies in Industrial
Development while other members are from reputed Institutions
like IIM, Planning Commission, NSSO, etc. The panel of reputed
Agencies is redrawn from time to time. Recently, the Ministry had
issued an open advertisement in all the leading national and
regional newspapers for empanelment of such Agencies. No SIRD
has expressed their interest in taking up such assignment. The
NIRD and SIRDs are already preoccupied with other research and
training programmes.”
37. The Committee are unable to comprehend the reply furnished
by the Department stating that NIRD and SIRD are already
preoccupied with other research and training programmes. Further
non-response of NIRD and SIRD to an open advertisement issued
in all the national daily newspapers for empanelment of agencies
involved in the evaluation of SGRY, was the sufficient reason for
the Department to conclude that these agencies are too busy to show
any interest for such studies. The Committee are unhappy to note
the way the reply has been furnished. They feel that NIRD and
SIRDs are premier institutions for rural development and their
experience and expertise would go a long way if they are involved
in the evaluation of the important rural development programmes
like SGRY. The Committee would like that these institutions should
be formally consulted on this issue and Committee be apprised of
their response to enable them to comment further in this regard.
N. Delay in meeting formalities for releasing foodgrains under SGRY
in States/Union territories affected by natural calamities
Recommendation (Para No. 3.80)
38. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note with concern that the possibility of
considerable delay in meeting the formalities for release of food-
grains under Special Component of SGRY to deal with calamities
such as drought, earthquake, cyclone, flood etc. cannot be ruled

22
out due to the existing long procedural formalities. The Committee
presume that this has resulted in accumulation of unlifted
(authorized quantity of) food grains with the State Governments
which has been reported to be as high as 16.18 lakh metric tones
as on 31 March 2004. They, therefore, desire that the Ministry of
Rural Development should in consultation with the Ministry of
Agriculture and Ministry of Home Affairs, who are the nodal
Ministries for drought and other calamities like flood, earthquake
etc. respectively, initiate suitable measures, so that considerable time
is not wasted between the occurrence of a calamity and release of
food grains under Special Component of SGRY”.
39. The Government have recommended as under:
“The observation of the Committee was forwarded to the Ministries
of Home Affairs and Agriculture for comments. The comments
from both the Ministries are still awaited.”
40. The Committee note that the comments from Ministries of
Agriculture and Home Affairs on the issue of considerable delay in
release of foodgrains for the calamity affected areas due to procedural
difficulties are still awaited. The Committee would like that the
matter may further be pursued with the said Ministries and they be
apprised accordingly.
O. Achievement of targets under IAY and demands for additional
funds under the scheme.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.92)
41. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee further note that as per the estimates of Census
2001, there is a shortage of about 149 lakh houses in the country.
At the present level of resources available, only about 15 lakh
houses can be constructed every year, whereas about 10 lakh
additional houses are added annually to existing shelterlessness
which aspect also needs to be looked in to. Keeping in view the
pace at which the houses are constructed, the Committee are
apprehensive about how the Government will achieve the aim to
end shelterlessness in rural India. The Committee regret that while
there is acute shortage of houses, the funds correspondingly have
not been increased to meet the huge gap between demand and
supply. They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take

23
appropriate steps to achieve the targets set and also request the
Planning Commission to re-allocate additional funds to meet the
acute shortage of rural housing.“
42. The Government have replied as under:
“To end the shelterlessness in rural areas of the country, more
funds are required for rural housing. Accordingly, Planning
Commission was requested for an amount of Rs. 3,460 crore for
the year 2004-2005, but the budget estimate is only for Rs. 2,500
crore in the current financial year. The proposal for Tenth Plan
outlay was for Rs. 13,040 crore but the allocation approved by the
Planning Commission is only Rs. 8,603 crore. It is also worth
mentioning here that the per unit ceiling of assistance for IAY
house has been increased from Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 25,000 for plain
areas and from Rs. 22,000 to Rs. 27,500 for hilly/difficult areas
with effect from 1 April, 2004. Similarly, assistance for upgradation
has also been increased from Rs. 10,000 to Rs. 12,500 for all areas.
More funds will be needed now.“
43. While noting the position of the gap between the requisite
outlay and the actual allocation being made to end the shelterlessness
in rural areas in the country, the Committee would like that the
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission should further be pursued
and the concerns of the Committee be apprised to them so that
sufficient outlay is provided under IAY.
P. Verification of all the houses reportedly built under IAY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.93)
44. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that so far no attempt has been made to
verify all the 1.16 crore houses reportedly built under IAY since
inception. They also note that periodical verification is being done
by the Ministry by way of taking Concurrent Evaluation and
periodical visits by Area Officers. In this scenario, the Committee
fail to understand as to what can be the use of taking Concurrent
Evaluation if the Department has not monitored the status of the
existence of houses. They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
of Rural development should initiate a study to verify all the
houses constructed under IAY without further wastage of time.”

24
45. The Government have replied as under:
“Indira Awaas Yojana (IA Y) is being implemented for rural areas
by the States/Union territories Governments through their District
Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs). Ministry of Rural
Development generally go by the reports furnished by the State
Governments. Concurrent Evaluation is undertaken by the Ministry
to get a feel as to how the programme is implemented. District
Level Monitors are verifying the construction of IAY houses in 130
selected districts on 100 per cent basis. To get a survey in respect
of all houses constructed so far will be a costly proposition and
may not be feasible.”
46. The Committee do not agree with the view put forth by the
Department that monitoring of physical verification of IAY houses
is an expensive proposition. The Committee feel that monitoring of
the aspect that the benefits reach the intended beneficiaries is the
biggest area of concern so far as the implementation of the rural
development programmes is concerned. Since substantial allocation
is being made by the Union Government for such a big programme
like IAY, the accountability of ensuring that the benefits reach the
targeted poorest of the poor lies more with the Union Government.
Irrespective of the cost considerations, more emphasis needs to be
given on the monitoring aspect. The Committee would like to
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Department to
re-consider and take the necessary action and apprise them
accordingly.
Q. Constitution of Disaster resistant durable houses under IAY
Recommendation (Para No. 3.94)
47. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that several parts of the country are prone
to various natural calamities such as flood, cyclone, earthquake
etc. They further note that the houses constructed under IAY are
being constructed by the beneficiaries themselves who are expected
to use available local materials and low cost disaster resistant and
environment friendly technologies. However, no separate provision
for retrofitting the existing houses against natural calamities has
been provided under the guidelines. Therefore, the Committee
desire that in order to achieve construction of durable houses,
some provision in the guidelines should be made for retrofitting
of IAY houses in the natural calamity prone areas.”

25
48. The Government have replied as below:
“The assistance provided for construction of houses under the
scheme is not the full cost of the house. It is expected from the
beneficiary that they would meet the balance of the cost and to
the extent possible they are also expected to make use of available
low cost and disaster resistant technologies. Number of RBCs have
been established all over the country to provide guidance in this
regard.”
49. The Committee are constrained to note the casual way in
which the Department has responded to such a serious issue of
retrofitting of IAY houses in disaster-prone areas. The Committee
may like to add that the recent destruction caused by tsunami in
coastal areas further emphasises the need for Government’s effort
for providing disaster proof houses and retrofitting of existing houses
in calamity prone areas of the country. The Committee would like
to stress upon the Department to discuss this matter with the other
concerned Ministries of Union Government, HUDCO, State
Governments and all other concerned with R&D in Housing so that
whatever number of houses are being built with Government
assistance are built with disaster proof technology.
R. Equity support to HUDCO and additional resources raised by
HUDCO from open market
Recommendation (Para No. 3.100)
50. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that equity support is provided to HUDCO
by Department of Rural Development who garner and provide
additional resources i.e. approximately eight times the size of equity
contribution from the market. The Committee are disturbed to note
that as HUDCO is under aegis of the Ministry of Urban
Development and Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, the
Ministry of Rural Development does not monitor the performance
of HUDCO in rural housing. The Department of Rural Development
does not maintain and thus could not provide information relating
to the actual houses constructed out of the dwelling units
sanctioned under the Two Million Housing Programme of the
Department of Rural Development. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should obtain the performance of
HUDCO on as yearly basis so that they could have a clear cut

26
picture of the role of HUDCO in the field of Rural Housing. In
case the performance of HUDCO is found unsatisfactory, the
Ministry should take suitable corrective and ameliorative measures
so that rural families do not suffer.”
51. The Government have replied as below:
“HUDCO has been requested to made available the requisite
information relating to the actual houses constructed out of the
dwelling units sanctioned by the HUDCO under the two million
housing programme. Ministry of Urban Development is also being
requested to instruct the HUDCO for supplying us this
information.”
52. While noting that HUDCO and the Ministry of Urban
Development have been requested to furnish the requisite
information regarding actual houses constructed under ‘Two Million
Houses Programme’ the Committee would like the Department to
pursue the matter further and apprise them about their response in
this regard.
S. Obtaining a copy of the West Bengal law regarding title of Land
Recommendation (Para No. 3.105)
53. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Finance Minister in his Budget speech has stated that a major
impediment to credit for rural housing is absence of proper title
for the land. He also stated that West Bengal has made a law to
simplify the creation of security, which deserve to be emulated by
other States. The Ministry has informed that West Bengal State
Government has been asked to provide a copy of West Bengal
law. The Committee hope that the Government after studying the
said law extensively and expeditiously, would issue the guidelines
to other State Governments to enact similar laws so that the benefit
of different rural development schemes could be extended to rural
poor.
54. The Government have replied as under:
“The requisite information relating to the West Bengal law is being
pursued with the State Government of West Bengal. Necessary
action will be initiated after the receipt of the State’s Act.”

27
55. The Committee feel that it is a pity that in the age of internet
and faster connectivity, the Government has not been able to collect
a copy of the law from the West Bengal Government in the last six
months. This shows the indifferent attitude of the Government
towards solving the existing bottlenecks in the implementation of
rural housing schemes. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
said West Bengal law be obtained immediately and subsequent
necessary action be undertaken without further wastage of time.
T. Implementation of PMGSY in Delhi
Recommendation (Para No. 3.133)
56. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find that as per the information provided by the
Ministry the implementation of rural development programmes in
Delhi was discontinued on the specific request of the
Administration because the rural development schemes are not
being implemented in Delhi. Further it has been stated that there
are no unconnected habitations in Delhi. The Committee are
surprised to find that during 2001-2002, Rs. 5 crore were released
to Delhi Government under PMGSY. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the clear position of Centrally Sponsored
Schemes of the Ministry of Rural Development in Delhi. They
would also like to be apprised of the physical and financial
achievement with regard to the money released to Delhi during
2001-2002. Further, the Committee would like that the Department
should recover the funds, if the released amount during 2001-02
has not so far been spent.”
57. The Government have replied as below:
“The schemes of the Ministry of Rural Development are not
implemented in the NCT of Delhi. However, an amount of Rs. 5
crore was released during 2001-02 to NCT of Delhi for taking up
a road work under the PMGSY. The NCT of Delhi has already
been advised to either show progress in execution of the works or
refund the funds released along with interest accrued on it.”
58. While noting that the National Capital Territory (NCT) of
Delhi has been advised to show progress or refund the funds released
during 2001-2002 along with the interest accrued, the Committee
would like to know the reply of the Government of NCT of Delhi
and subsequent action taken by the Union Government in  this
regard.

28
U. Uniformity in model staffing structure and broad personnel
policies of DRDA’s
Recommendation (Para No. 3.141)
59. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee are surprised to find that all the districts of the
country do not have a District Rural Development Agency (DRDA)
as on 31 March, 2004. They are equally surprised to find that all
the 576 established DRDAs do not receive the funds under the
DRDA Administration Scheme. Even though guidelines have been
prescribed for a model staffing structure and broad personnel
policies for four different types of DRDAs, there is no uniformity
in this regard. They feel that the Ministry of Rural Development
has minimized its role only to release the funds under DRDAs
and be a silent spectator in this regard. Further the Government
are not aware of the priorities set by DRDAs as if these are not
required to be forwarded to the Ministry. They have their own
doubts as to how the Government can ensure efficient
implementation of Rural Development Programmes without
obtaining the annual reports. They, therefore, recommend that
model staffing structure, broad personnel policies and furnishing
of annual reports of all DRDAs be done without any further delay.”
60. The Government have replied as under:
“There were 578 DRDAs as on 31 March, 2004. With the merger
of 9 districts in U.P . with other districts in the State, the Govt. of
U.P . had requested that the allocation for 2004-05 should be
distributed among DRDAs in 61 districts. A new district also came
into existence in Tamil Nadu effective from 1 April, 2004. The
total number of DRDAs receiving grants under the scheme as on
1 April, 2004 was therefore 570. All the 570 DRDAs are receiving
grants under the DRDA Administration Scheme.
Although the DRDA Administration Scheme provides for a
model and indicative staff structure, the actual creation of posts
and placement of people is a matter lying within the domain of
the State Government on which this Ministry has no control. The
Ministry has, however, been impressing upon the State

29
Governments to provide necessary staff in DRDA establishments
to enable them to function effectively. The release of grants under
the Scheme is also limited to expenditure on personnel actually in
position. Although the Annual Plans of the DRDAs are approved
by their Governing Bodies, who also review and monitor the
implementation of the Plan, the Ministry also obtain monthly,
quarterly and annual reports from each DRDA on the physical
and financial performance of each Scheme. There are also other
mechanisms like District Level Monitoring, Concurrent Evaluation,
field visits of Area Officers etc. to evaluate and monitor
implementation of Rural Development Programmes on a regular
basis.”
61. While appreciating the fact that the actual creation of posts
and placement of people is a matter lying within the domain of the
State Government, the Committee find that DRDA in a State
Government is a crucial agency involved in the implementation of
various rural development schemes/programmes. Not only that,
substantial Central allocation is being made for strengthening these
DRDAs under ‘The DRDA Administration Scheme’. In this
background, the Committee are not inclined to accept the plea of
the Department that Central Government have no control on staff
matters. They find that certain model guidelines to be formulated
by DRDAs had been issued by the Union Government, the details
of which are given in para 3.139 of the 3rd report (14th Lok Sabha).
Since the guidelines were issued by the Union Government, the
implementation of the guidelines has also to be ensured through
various reviews and other mechanism. The Committee would like to
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire a categorical
response of the Government in this regard.
W. Establishment of Regional Committee of CAPART at the State
Level
Recommendation (Para No. 3.179)
62. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee are not happy with the establishment of Regional
Committee of CAPART in the places where the Schemes of
Department of Rural Development were not being implemented
viz. Chandigarh and Delhi. They also note that Regional Committees
have been set up and are functioning in 9 different places. The
Committee, would like to know the jurisdiction of States and Union

30
territories under each of these Regional Committees. They feel that
the said jurisdiction should not be administered from a distant
area. For example, to oversee the performance of NGOs of Jammu
and Kashmir at Chandigarh, is neither justifiable nor practical.
They, therefore, recommend that CAPART should consider
establishment of Committees at the State level”.
63. The Government have replied as under:
“The names of the RCs and their jurisdiction are as under:
Sl.No.  Name of the RC Jurisdiction of States
1. Ahmedabad Maharashtra, Gujarat, Goa, Daman &
Diu, Dadar and Nagar Haveli
2. Bhubaneswar Orissa, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh,
Andaman & Nicobar Island
3. Chandigarh Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Chandigarh and Punjab
4. Dharwad Karnataka, Kerala & Lakshadweep
5. Guwahati Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Manipur, Nagaland, Mizoram, Tripura &
Meghalaya
6. Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and
Pondicherry
7. Jaipur Delhi, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh
8. Lucknow Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal
9. Patna Bihar, Jharkhand
Regarding opening of Regional Committees in other states, the
matter will be put up for consideration of Executive Committee.”
64. While noting the reply of the Government that the matter
regarding opening of State Level Regional Committees, will be put
up for consideration of executive committee of CAPART, the
Committee would like to know the final decision thereon and the
necessary action taken by the Government in this regard.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.3)
The Committee note that the Department has got less than half of
what was proposed to Planning Commission during 10th Plan. Besides
the Department was allocated Rs. 56,748 crore against the expenditure
of Rs. 40,435.22 crore during 9th Plan. Therefore the Department has
got Rs. 16312.78 crore more than what was the actual expenditure
during 9th Plan. They also find that during 9th Plan the Department
got Rs. 40,435.22 crore against the outlay of Rs. 32869.87 crore i.e. Rs.
7566.35 crore more than the outlay. The Committee note that although
the Department has got Rs. 16312.78 crore more during the 10th Plan
as against the previous Plan, it is difficult to analysis the hike or
decrease in view of the fact that some of the Schemes being
implemented during 9th Plan like NSAP and Annapoorna have been
transferred to State Governments. Further the Scheme-wise analysis of
the data indicate that under one of the major Schemes of the
Department i.e. SGSY, there is drastic reduction of Rs. 735 crore in
10th Plan as compared to previous Plan. The Committee also note that
under IAY Rs. 1318 crore have been allocated more whereas for
CAPART the allocation has been enhanced from Rs. 60 crore to Rs.
200 crore. On monitoring, although the Department has got 1/3rd of
what was provided during 10th Plan, the allocation has been
considerably enhanced i.e. from Rs. 5 crore in 9th Plan to Rs. 100
crore. The details of Scheme-wise analysis has been made in the
subsequent chapters of the Report. However the Committee would
like to highlight here that there is no planning on the part of the
Government. The Schemes, like NSAP and Annapoorna started with
the laudable objectives of providing social security, after investment of
several crore, were hurriedly transferred from one Ministry/Department
to other, or to State Governments. Further there is drastic reduction in
the outlay of SGSY, one of the important Schemes of Self-employment
in rural areas. In this scenario, the Committee final to understand
how the objectives of providing employment, housing and infrastructure
in rural areas would be achieved. In view of the above, the Committee
strongly recommend that adequate outlay under the different Schemes
to meet the set objectives should be made. Not only that, the enhanced
31

32
allocation should be meaningfully utilized by improving the delivery
mechanism and taking all the corrective desired steps.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.4)
The Committee further find that under Schemes like IAY, CAPART
the allocation has been increased. Similarly, for monitoring the allocation
has been enhanced considerably. The Committee hope that the increased
allocation for monitoring would ensure effective implementation of
the Programme. They further hope that the enhanced allocation under
the respective Schemes of the Department would result in better
implementation and fulfilment of the desired objectives.
Reply of the Government to Recommendation
(Para No. 2.3 and 2.4)
The Ministry of Rural Development shares the concerns expressed
by the Committee especially because of the dimension of the problem
of rural poverty . In view of the above, the Ministry has approached
the Planning Commission for an additional outlay of Rs. 27193.88 crore
for the current financial year to meet the total funds requirements.
The Ministry has developed a comprehensive system of Monitoring
the implementation of the programmes to ensure full utilization of
funds through various mechanisms such as regular visits to the field
by Officers and the Area Officers of the Ministry of Rural Development,
Meetings of the Performance Review Committee, Periodic Progress
Reports from State Governments and a detailed scrutiny of progress
before release of funds. Vigilance & Monitoring Committees, with
greater role for Members of Parliament, are also reconstituted at State
and District levels, to make them vital instruments of effective
monitoring of the implementation of the programmes of the Ministry,
so that the benefits of the Rural Development Schemes reach the
targeted persons in all the States/UTs. The Union Ministers also review
the Programmes with the Chief Ministers and other State Government
Ministries and officials.
A new initiative of District Level Monitoring of the Rural
Development Programmes in 130 districts in 27 States has also been
taken. With a view to ensuring transparency and efficacy in the
implementation of Rural Development Programmes, the Ministry has
prepared a panel of National Level Monitors involving Senior Retired
Civil and Defence Service Officers to Monitor the policy and
implementation environments of the programmes at grass root level.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]

33
Recommendation (Para No. 2.18)
The Committee note that during 2003-2004 in the first six months,
the Department of Rural Development could spend 26.49 per cent of
the Plan funds, whereas in the first nine months 67.34 per cent of the
allocated funds were spent. On the other hand during the same period,
53.94 and 68.55 per cent. respectively of Non-Plan funds were spent.
The Committee feel that this uneven spending especially of Plan funds
during the year adversely affects the implementation of the Schemes.
The Committee, therefore, urge that adequate steps in the coming years
should be taken so that the expenditure of Plan as well as Non-Plan
funds is conveniently and uniformly spread throughout the year. The
Government should therefore, plan ahead to ensure uniform spending
throughout the year and in a phased manner.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development makes all out efforts to ensure
that the implementation of the programmes is smooth through out the
year by taking up this issue from time-to-time with the State
Governments and the Programme Implementing Agencies. However,
due to certain practical difficulties the expenditure under rural
development programmes is not evenly distributed over the year. As
the rural development programmes are implemented at the village
level, it takes time to flow the information of expenditure which is
required to be collected from different Agencies. This results in late
submission of proposals by the Programme Implementing Agencies
for claiming the second instalment. Some States face unfavourable
weather conditions and natural calamities such as droughts, floods
which occur very often. This leaves a very limited working season for
the Progrmame Implementing Agencies in these States and consequently
there is an uneven distribution of expenditure under the rural
development programmes. In addition to above, the elections process
in the States for various elected bodies also slows down the
implementation of rural development programmes. However, the
Ministry of Rural Development will continue its efforts to impress
upon the Programme Implementing Agencies to ensure uniform
spending of funds for the implementation of the rural development
programmes through out the year.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]

34
Recommendation (Para No. 2.21)
The Committee have examined the scheme “monitoring” in the
subsequent chapter of the report but here the Committee would like
to strongly recommend to the Department to gear up the implementing
agencies and strengthen the monitoring mechanism so as to ensure
cent-percent utilization of scarce resources.
Reply of the Government
The implementing agencies are impressed upon, from time to time,
to gear up the programme implementation. Review meetings are held
periodically with the implementing agencies to accelerate the pace of
scheme implementation. The Performance Review Committee Chaired
by Secretary (RD) while reviewing the progress of work also call for
gearing up the implementation machinery at the State level so as to
optimally utilize the scarce resources. Periodic Conference of Project
Directors of DRDAs are also held during which the need for
accelerating the pace of programme implementation is stressed.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25)
The Committee find that the Department has been making
contribution to various International organisations such as AARDO
since 1962 and CIRDAP since 1979. Since the Department of Rural
Development has been contributing to AARDO, a programme of the
Ministry of External Affairs for the last 42 years, the Committee feel
that there is a need to review the matter in order to examine the need
for continuing this contribution.
The Committee would like to be apprised how far the aforesaid
contribution could help the Department of Rural Development in
developing understanding among member countries by way of
promoting welfare, eradication of thirst, hunger and poverty among
rural people and in assisting member countries in obtaining financial
and technical assistance for rural development programme to
comprehend the need for continuing said assistance.
Reply of the Government
AARDO is an Inter-Governmental, International Organization with
its headquarters in New Delhi. It is not a programme of Ministry of

35
External Affairs as observed by the Committee and the need for
continuation of membership of such organisation is reviewed at the
time of release of their annual contributions.
This Ministry recently reviewed the need for continuation of
AARDO’s membership in consultation with Ministry of External Affairs.
It was noted that AARDO is a body, which symbolizes the solidarity
of the two Continents. It is a forum with which India is closely
associated so as to further cooperation in the field of Rural
Development in the Member Countries. The fact that it is an initiative
by India to show solidarity with countries of Asia and Africa was
taken cognizance of and the continuation of membership, it was felt
fitted in well with our policy to place emphasis on South South
Cooperation. Dissociation from the Organisation might put in question
not only our policy on South South Cooperation, but will be detrimental
to the bilateral relations of the country with the member countries as
it might result in the winding up of the organization from New Delhi
and its relocation to another country. The Ministry of External Affairs
also strongly supported the continuation of the membership.
As regards developing understanding among member countries
by way of our contribution, it may be mentioned that India is the
second largest contributor to the AARDO after Japan. The organization
has been able to sustain its activities largely due to our contributions.
Its main activities are human resource development and development
of pilot projects through partnership with the rural beneficiaries,
addressing the basic physical and social infrastructure, transfer of
technology and poverty alleviation programmes through income and
employment generating activities.
The Ministry of External Affairs in collaboration with AARDO has
organised various training courses with the participation from different
countries on subjects such as (i) Promotion of Micro Enterprises
(ii) Assessment and Transfer of Indian Technology (iii) Information
Storage and Retrieval System (iv) Small Enterprises Management
Consultancy (v) Small Enterprises policy and promotion (vi) Total
Quality Management and ISO 9000/QS 9000 (vii) Empowerment of
Women through Enterprises (viii) Rural Industry Promotion in
Developing Economies (ix) Data Warehousing and Data Mining
(x) Adoption of Indian Technologies for sustainable Industrial
Development (xi) Training Methods and skill for managers
(xii) Promotion of Export oriented Agro Industries (xiii) Small Industry
Financing—Approaches and Strategies (xiv) Strategies for Sustainable

36
Agriculture and Rural Development (xv) Textile Training Quality
Control, Textile Extension etc.
AARDO has held meetings with officials of the African
Development Bank, United Nation Conference on Trade and
Development Commission (UNCTAD), in pursuance of one of the
functions of the Organization, to assist the member countries in
obtaining financial and technical assistance for their Rural Development
Programmes.
The financial resources required to operate CIRDAP and implement
its programmes and projects are obtained from two major sources viz.
the annual contributions of the member countries, which are utilized
mainly for meeting the establishment costs, and the project funds
provided by donor countries and international agencies. The
Government of India (Ministry of Rural Development) in collaboration
with CIRDAP has recently organised the following three training
courses at NIRD, Hyderabad for the member countries of CIRDAP for
promoting Rural Development and developing understanding by way
of promoting welfare, eradication of thirst, hunger and poverty among
rural people of the member countries:
(i) Capacity building on Rural Development Functionaries for
various Anti-Poverty Programmes (August, 2004).
(ii) Training Programmes on Technologies for Rural
Development and Integrating them in Rural Development
Schemes (September, 2004).
(iii) Regional Training Programmes on Strategies and
Programmes for Reducing Poverty in Asia Pacific Region.
(October, 2004)
CIRDAP had collaborated with FAI, Commonwealth, JICA, FIDA
and other international specialised bodies of UN in promoting People’s
participation, good governance, gender development, self help project
management and other aspects relating to sustainable Rural
Development.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.31)
The Committee note that in North Eastern Area, 10% allocation of
the total outlay of the Department is earmarked since 2000-01. They

37
are constrained to note the expenditure position since 2002-2003. In
2002-2003, the expenditure position is stated to be nil and from
2003-04 to 2004-05, the position has been stated to be not available.
Further the Committee find that there are certain problems in
implementation of different schemes of the Department in North
Eastern area as is evident from the information given above. They
have some problems in allocating the States share besides inadequate
presence of banks for credit delivery under SGSY and limited working
season due to weather conditions, etc., have been stated to be major
reasons which hamper the progress of implementation of schemes and
thereby result in under-utilization of outlay in North Eastern Areas. In
view of the scenario, the Committee recommend to the Government
to find out the position of utilization of resources in each of the North
Eastern Area under each of the schemes since 2000-01 and submit the
same before the Committee so as to enable the Committee to come to
the right conclusions. Besides they would also like that State-wise
reasons for the problems of various States in implementation of the
schemes should be analysed and corrective action taken so that the
scarce resources in the starved economy of the country do not remain
unutilized thereby affecting the other schemes of the Government.
Reply of the Government
In the detailed Demands for Grants (2004-05), the Actuals for
2002-03 was shown as ‘nil’ because of the fact that though the B.E.
and R.E. for the year equal to 10% of the total plan allocation is
distinctly shown under this head, the expenditure is not booked under
this head but under the respective Programme Heads. While booking
expenditure under the Programme Heads, the required amount of funds
are re-appropriated from the lump sum provision for NE States to the
respective Programme Head. This position also holds good for the
year 2004-05.
Statements indicating the State-wise release of funds and
expenditure incurred under each Scheme by the North Eastern States
under major RD Programmes from 2000-2001 onwards are enclosed at
Appendix-I.
The issue of opening of new bank branches in the unbanked areas
of North Eastern States and expanding the service area of existing
banks with a view to facilitate availability of credit for the SGSY
Swarozgaris has been already taken up with the RBI at high levels. As

38
stated in earlier reply, the largest State in North East namely, Assam
has been released funds under various programmes without insisting
on payment of State share for previous years as a special case, keeping
in view the State’s financial problems. The State of Arunachal Pradesh
has also been allowed, as a special case, to receive cash funds under
SGRY without minimum lifting and utilization of foodgrains. Unlike
other States, cost of transportation of foodgrains under SGRY in North
Eastern States is now being re-imbursed at fixed rates. The Ministry
has also taken up a proposal to modify the funding pattern for Rural
Development Programmes in North Eastern States between Centre and
State from the existing ratio of 75 : 25 to 90 : 10. This proposal is
presently under consideration of the Planning Commission.
The problems of North Eastern States are thus adequately being
analysed and addressed from time to time to facilitate implementation
of the Rural Development programmes.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.39)
The Committee find that the Department has released Rs. 75.96
crore to the States and Union Territories for conducting BPL census,
2002. The Committee would like to know the expenditure made by
different States and Union Territories out of the releases made so far.
The Committee have been informed that the latest Reports regarding
completion of spadework and tabulation plans are yet to be received
from the States and Union territories. They presume that in the absence
of the results of BPL Census, 2002, different State Governments must
have been relying on the results of the previous BPL Census, which
is too old. Therefore, they recommend that while awaiting the
judgement of Supreme Court, the Department of Rural Development
should impress upon the States/Union territories that the tentative
BPL Census 2002 should be ready without any further delay so that
no further time is wasted in identifying the BPL families who are in
real need of the anti-poverty Programmes of the Department.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development is already seized of the issue
and the position in this regard has been reviewed with the States/UTs

39
very recently in four regional meetings. Instructions have been issued
to all the States/UTs to take all necessary steps so that the BPL lists
are made operational immediately after getting a direction from the
Hon’ble Supreme Court. The States and UTs have also been asked to
furnish the statement of accounts with respect to the funds released
by this Ministry for the purpose of BPL Census 2002.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.27)
While analysing the position of involvement of banks in the
implementation of SGSY, the Committee note that there are serious
problems regarding involvement of banks. As pointed out by concurrent
evaluation there is complaint of non-cooperation from banks by district
authorities. Further there is delay in banking procedure, delay in
disbursement of assistance and problem of cooperation with the
coordination among banks. Another serious lacuna pointed out by the
evaluation is that banks prefer sanctioning of loans to individuals only
and release loans individually to members of SHGs for greater
accountability. Another problem being faced is banks release only the
subsidy portion and thus withholding the credit portion. The
Committee feels that in the absence of providing credit, the money
given as subsidy would have been used by the beneficiary for their
consumption needs and thereby resulting in failure of the achievements
of the scheme that is to bring the beneficiaries above the poverty line.
Not only that there is lack of cooperation between bank officials and
officials of block.
Reply of the Government
There are certain problems in the smooth delivery of bank credit
for implementation of the programme. These problems are discussed
with the bankers from time to time in the Central Level Coordination
Committee meetings. The RBI has issued instructions that the service
area banks should ensure participation of bankers in the District/Block
Level SGSY Committee meetings. The position regarding credit
mobilisation is also required to be reviewed by the Chief Exeuctives
of the respective banks on a monthly basis.

40
As regards preference of banks for individual financing vis-a-vis
group financing, there is a shift in position in favour of group financing
during the last two years, as reflected in the following table.
(Rs. in crore)
Year Credit to Credit to % age credit
Group Individual to Group
2002-03 459.08 725.21 38.60
2003-04 769.42 593.41 56.45
2004-05 104.76 38.65 73.04
(upto August, 2004)
Since the subsidy component is back-ended, there is no possibility
of this being used by the beneficiary for consumption needs.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.30)
The Committee are constrained to note that efforts made by the
Department under SGSY have not culminated into the desired results
as even after 5 years of implementation of SGSY Scheme, credit flow
to the beneficiaries has not reached the desired level. The Committee
would like the Government to go deeply into the methodology and
find out the reasons which preclude in obtaining the desired result.
The Committee are informed that the scheme was launched with great
optimism with an end to having every assisted family above poverty
line within three years. However, this appears to have remained a
distant dream. The Government should take all ground realities and
possibilities into account. The Committee feel that the Department
should not merely be a silent spectator in this regard but should
seriously introspect on the lacunas detected and come out with
ameliorative measures. While setting up the target hyperboles do not
help and lead to confusion. The Government should point out
serious flaws noticed in the implementation of the Scheme to the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Ministry of Finance. They urge the
Government to take suitable measures in this regard and apprise them
accordingly.

41
Reply of the Government
The Central Level Coordination Committee (CLCC) set up under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Rural Development) already provides
a forum for continuous interaction with banks to come out with
workable salutations. Major decisions taken by Central Level
Coordination Committee (CLCC) in its meeting held on 18.6.2004 in
regard to credit related issues are:
1. RBI should expedite decision for opening new bank branches
in unbanked areas.
2. All loan applications pending at the close of the year should
be brought forward to the next year and decided upon.
3. Banks should do detailed analysis of the pattern of disposal
of loan applications and take necessary steps to avoid delay
in disbursal of loan and pendency of loan application.
4. Emphasis should be laid on simplifications of procedure.
5. The Chief Executive Officer of banks will monitor the credit
disbursement every month.
A meeting was also held with CMDs of banks by the Minister of
State for Finance and the Minister (RD) in October, 2003. Another high
level meeting with Bankers is scheduled to be held on 27th September,
2004 as part of the agenda for the Annual Conference of the Project
Directors of DRDAs.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.31)
The Committee find from the information provided by the
Department that there are certain problems being faced in the
implementation of SGSY as pointed out in the concurrent evaluation
for the period of 1st April, 1999 to 2001. It has been stated in the
findings of said evaluation that only 27 per cent of SHGs could
purchase the assets in the first month after the release of loan amount.
Another problem indicated in the evaluation seems to be lack of
forward and backward linkages. It has been indicated that 42 per cent
of SHGs market their products/services on their own. Another
disturbing feature noticed by the evaluation is that people who are
not eligible for the benefits under SGSY have become beneficiaries

42
including people belonging to non BPL category and those who are
influential. The Committee further note that the objective of SGSY is
to provide self employment to BPL persons so as to enable them to
cross poverty line even by giving the multiple doses of assistance.
They are disturbed to know as pointed out by the concurrent evaluation
only 15.9 per cent of SHGs could cross poverty line. By analyzing all
these factors, the Committee have come to the conclusion that there
are serious problems in the implementation of the programme. The
issues related to involvement of banks have been analysed separately
in the succeeding paras of the Report.
Reply of the Government
As per the SGSY guidelines, the swarozgaries have freedom to
procure the assets themselves. They shall procure the asset within one
month from the date of release of money by the bank. As per Para
4.54 of concurrent evaluation report, about 37.66% of the groups have
said that the procurement of assets is not applicable to them and
27.92% of the sample groups did not respond. On the basis of limited
information available, it is difficult to say anything about the delay in
procurement of assets.
SGSY is a process oriented scheme. In the initial years, it was not
practicable to achieve high degree results of the achievements of the
programme. As per one of the findings of the concurrent evaluation,
it is clearly reflected that in 48.53% of SHGs, an increase in the income
is observed as per the impact of the SGSY activities. So long as groups
are not available for financing the States can continue to finance
individual swarozgaries. Hence, the prime objective of SGSY in bringing
BPL families above poverty line is satisfied to some extent as most of
groups have just started their economic activities and may take a year
or two more to stabilize.
The survey findings also reveals that a very good percentage
(87.37%) of the sample individual swarozgaries were of the opinion
that a good market exists for their goods or services. Majority of groups
(55.43%) reveal that there is no problem in marketing their products/
services. As per the SGSY guidelines, there is a provision that an
amount of Rs. 5.00 lakh annually may be spent from funds available
under the scheme on management of professional input related to
marketing resource, value addition or product diversification. The State
Government have regularly been advised to use this provision for
improving marketing of products.

43
Generally, members of the group formed under SGSY should belong
to BPL families. However, if necessary, a maximum of 20% and in
exceptional cases, where essentially required, upto a maximum of 30%
of the members in a group may be taken from families marginally
above the poverty line leaving continuously with BPL families and if
they are acceptable to the BPL members of the group. This will help
the families of occupational groups like agricultural labourers, marginal
farmers and artisans marginally above the poverty line or who have
been excluded from the BPL list to become members of the SHG.
Relaxation in the becoming members of APL of a SHG is made for
providing guidance to the members (BPL) of SHG who are generally
either illiterate or just literate. However, the APL members will not be
eligible for subsidy under the scheme.
As per SGSY guidelines, multiple doses means assisting a
swarozgaries over a period of time with second and subsequent dose(s)
enabling him/her to access higher amount of credit so that a
swarozgaries cross the poverty line and not cross the poverty line
marginally.
SGSY is a process oriented scheme and much of the time during
first few years of implementation was utilized to evolve initial
preparatory works like consultation with the State Governments, RBI,
NABARD and Bankers for finalization of the guidelines and
sensitization of the implementing agencies including bankers of local
branches. In addition, in the initial years, it also took some time to
complete the work such as training, sensitization, identification of key
activities, social mobilization of rural poor etc. It has been pointed out
in Para 5.11 of the concurrent evaluation report that among the total
swarozgaries (individual and groups) who have reported income
generation from their SGSY activities, 37.24% individuals and 15.09%
SHGs have crossed the poverty line due to the SGSY activities. It has
also been mentioned in the report that even thought he share of such
swarozgaries is very less as compared to the total number of SGSY
beneficiaries, this achievement is remarkable during the initial stages
of the implementation of the scheme. The picture of percentage of
SHGs who have crossed the poverty line may be picked up steadily
in the coming years.
These issues are discussed in the Central Level Coordination
Committee from time to time and banks have been advised through
RBI to follow the instructions being given to them from time to time
in order to sort out the credit related problems in the implementation
of the scheme.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]

44
Recommendation (Para No. 3.32)
From the data provided by the Department, regarding financial
achievement during the year 2003-04, the Committee find that in as
many as 8 States, the performance was less than 50 per cent. These
States are Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Jharkhand, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Nagaland and Rajasthan. Further in 3 Union territories the
performance was stated to be nil. As regards, the physical achievement,
the Committee find that there was declining trend from 1997-98 to
1999-2000. The number of Swarozgaries increased in the year 2000-
2001 which further decreased in the following years i.e. 2001-2002,
2002-2003. In 2003-04 although the data has been provided provisional,
there is slight increase in the number of Swarozgaries assisted as
compared to that of 2002-03.
In view of the aforesaid scenario, the Committee feel that the
Government has to analyse critically the performance of SGSY which
is one of the oldest and important schemes of the Department after
interacting with the respective State Governments, PRIs. Besides the
steps to provide forward and backward linkages to the self help groups,
should be undertaken so that the viability of the self help groups
could be ensured.
Reply of the Government
The funds are released to the DRDAs in two instalments. Ist
instalment is released to DRDAs provided the DRDAs have taken 2nd
instalment of funds during previous year unconditionally. However,
funds to those DRDAs who had not taken 2nd instalment during
previous year are released only after receipt of complete proposals
from them. 2nd instalment of funds are released to the DRDAs only
when 60% of total available funds is utilized by them and accordingly
proposals along with utilization certificate and audited statement of
expenditure are submitted by them. Some of the North-eastern States
such as Manipur and Meghalaya could not avail the central share
mainly because of low utilization of funds, non-release of State
matching share and non-receipt of project proposals in spite of repeated
reminders. Some N-E. States have difficulty in proper implementation
of the scheme due to poor/inadequate banking facilities. Financial
performance of States like Assam, Goa and Rajasthan during 2003-04
has been reasonably good. Daman & Diu, D&N Haveli, A&N Island
and Lakshadweep have problems in formation of Self Help Groups of
BPL families. They have been advised to take assistance of facilitators
in formation and nurturing of SHGs.

45
The Ministry has a regular system for analyzing/assessing the
progress of the programme in terms of financial and physical and
identifying reasons for lack of adequate progress. The programme is
monitored at various levels. At the Central level, there is Central Level
Coordination Committee (CLCC) headed by Secretary (RD) comprising
members from the different Ministries of the Govt. of India, State
Secretaries of Rural Development and representatives of various
commercial banks. The CLCC has been meeting twice a year to review
the programme. Besides this, the programme is also reviewed in the
Performance Review Committee of the Deptt. of RD as part of the
overall review of the programmes of the Deptt. The programme is
also monitored through the monitoring mechanism of the Ministry
namely Impact Assessment Studies, National Level Monitoring, District
Level Monitoring, Area Officers Scheme etc. The Ministers of RD and
Sr. Officers of the Ministry review the programme during their visits
to States/UTs.
SGSY lays stress on the cluster approach. Keeping in view this,
SGSY guidelines provides that instead of funding diverse activities,
each block should concentrate on a few selected activities (key activities)
and to attend all aspects of these activities, so that the swarozgaries
can draw sustainable incomes from their investments. These key-
activities should preferably be taken up in clusters so that the forward
and backward linkages can be effectively established, after obtaining
more importantly provision of various services required by the
swarozgaries, these would facilitate SHGs to establish their viability.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.33)
The Committee further find that most of the Swarozgaries have to
sell their products in the market on their own because there is lack of
institutional arrangements being made for the aforesaid schemes. The
Committee feels that the profits of Swarozgaries are considerably
reduced if they resort to self-marketing. Another area of concern is the
competitiveness in the market. The Government has to think of all
these aspects seriously and provide the protection to the self-help
groups. Besides to enable the self-help groups to face the competition
in the market the stress need to be given to training aspects so that
the products produced by the beneficiaries are competitive in the
market. More and more Gramshree melas like SARAS organized during

46
the India international trade fair in Delhi and Delhi Haat should be
organized in other States of the country so as to enable Swarozgaries
to sell their products in such melas. More and more NGOs should be
involved in the programme.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development since 1999, through various
schemes and programmes like IRDP , SGSY is encouraging SHG
members to take up sustainable group activities that could give them
some incremental income. This approach by the Ministry is aimed at
higher economic of scale of enterprise operation leading to better
competitive products, collective bargaining power, market accessibility
etc. through higher level of accessibility to credit, infrastructure and
other necessary linkage.
These workshops were organized during SARAS fairs which help
in creating awareness among craftsmen for improved products. In these
workshop both the producers, exporter and experts on the specific
sector were present. These workshops have now become an integral
part of all SARAS Fairs. These workshops exposure the crafts person
specializing in a particular craft to the technological advancement,
innovations and processes in their specific sector. These help them to
unleash the latent potential of their craft to its maximum limit, at the
same time, also providing an opportunity to the industrial sector to
ascertain the magnitude of the qualitative and quantitative skill for
harnessing manpower resources.
From 2002-2004, 2 workshops on leather by Rural Non Farm
Development Agency (RUDA) and Central Leather Research Institute
(CLRI) (Chennai); A cane and bamboo diversification workshop by
National Institute of Design, IIT, Mumbai and Cohands; A Workshop
on packaging by Institute of Packaging, New Delhi, a workshop on
processed Foods by Central Food Technological Research Institute
Mysore have been organized. In order to impart specialized training
in certain sectors Project for establishment of Training and Marketing
Development Facilities in Assam, Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal have
also been sanctioned.
In order to provide a forum to sell their wares, large number of
exhibitions has been organized by Ministry of Rural Development under
SGSY Programme.

47
IITF SARA fair is being organized since 1999. Till 2002 this was
the only fair organized by the Ministry of Rural Development. But
since April 2003 the concept of the Regional SARAS fairs has taken
roots. This enables the States to actively involve themselves in the
process of holding fairs and get acquainted with beneficiaries from all
parts of the country.
During the year 2003-04 six Regional SARAS fairs were organized
at New Delhi (twice), Hyderabad, Guwahati, Mumbai, Bhubaneshwar.
In these fairs, on an average in each fair a sale of Rs. 1.5 crore was
recorded besides bulk orders. Ministry has also participated in two
International Fairs one at Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) and one at Milan
(Italy) in which States of Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, J&K, Orissa and
Rajasthan participated.
During the current year, i.e. 2004-05, besides IITF SARAS 2004,
Ministry has proposed to organize nine Regional SARAS fairs at
Hyderbaad, Bangalore, Jaipur, New Delhi (Twice), Ahmedabad,
Mumbai, Bhubaneshwar, Lucknow and Bhopal.
CAPART in order to support NGOs has also been organizing Gram
Shree Melas in various parts of India. 12 Gram Shree Melas are
proposed to be organized by CAPART during 2004-05. In all these
fairs, SGSY beneficiaries of DRDAs would also participate.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.36)
Keeping in view the aforesaid, the Committee concludes that there
are some serious problems in implementation of the Programme. They
would like the Department to take corrective steps immediately, after
consultation with State Governments, Panchayats, Banks and all
concerned with the implementation of the programme and apprise the
Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The shortcomings in the implementation of the SGSY as and when
comes to the notice of the Ministry are taken up with State
Governments, Banks etc. for immediate corrective steps. Moreover, the
specific problems are also discussed in the CLCC forum from time to
time.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]

48
Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)
The Committee are dismayed to note that performance of SGSY in
several Union Territories and in the State of Manipur is close to nil,
as no Central funds have been released to them during 2003-04 and
2004-05. They feel that as the Union Territories get cent-percent Central
assistance, the performance of SGSY should have been better as there
is no States share involved. The Committee desire to know the specific
reasons as to why these Union Territories and the State of Manipur
have been deprived of the assistance under SGSY. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that monitoring of all the Schemes shall further
be strengthened in the current financial year and suitable corrective
measures be initiated so that funds under the scheme are released to
these Union Territories and Manipur without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
As per the SGSY guidelines, the funds are released to the DRDAs
in two equal instalments. 1st instalment is automatically released to
DRDAs provdied the DRDAs have taken 2nd instalment without any
condition during the previous year. The 2nd instalment is released on
the request of the DRDAs on fulfilment of the following conditions:
1. Information about budget provision of the State for meeting
the State share.
2. The States should have released its contribution during the
previous year. In case any deficiency in release of its share,
the central share is to be deducted from the 2nd instalment.
3. Opening balance should not exceed 15% of the District
allocation in the previous year. In case this limit is exceeded,
the central share of the amount by which it exceeds this
limit is deducted at the time of 2nd instalment.
4. Available funds including carry forward funds should have
been utilized at least to 60%.
5. Audit Report and Utilisation Certificate for the previous
year should be furnished.
6. Any other terms and conditions imposed at the time of the
last release should have been met.
As regards Manipur State, despite repeated requests for furnishing
the Monthly Progress Report (MPR), no MPR since inception of the

49
scheme of SGSY has been received. During 2003-04, only two districts
out of nine were able to avail the central share towards 1st instalment
of SGSY. Due to non-fulfilment of certain conditions for release of
funds as mentioned above particularly matching share, the State
Government has not been able to avail central share under the SGSY.
So far no central share is released during the current year. As regards
Union Territories, no MPR has been received from Daman & Diu and
Nagar Haveli as on date.
A Review Meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Union
Minister (Rural Development) with the Rural Development Ministers
of North Eastern States at Guwahati on 30th November, 2004 to discuss
and review the status of implementation of various rural health
programmes. Issues discussed in the meeting inter-alia , include,
enhancement of Central share in various rural development schemes,
relaxation in provisions of guidelines, mode of release of funds. N-E
States have been requested to frame specific proposals in respect of
SGSY scheme for its efficient and effective implementation in the region.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.45)
The Committee are shocked to notice that credit mobilisation target
has never been achieved by the Commercial, Cooperative and Regional
Rural Banks since 2001-2002. Further, the Ministry of Rural
Development does not monitor the performance of Commercial,
Cooperative and Regional Rural Banks as is being done by RBI/
NABARD. They, therefore, urge the Department to monitor credit
mobilisation targets vis-a-vis achievement separately by Commercial,
Cooperative and Regional Rural Banks. It should also be seen that the
information in this regard is collected from the DRDAs.
Reply of the Government
Progress reports are presently being received by the Ministry from
States/UTs on disbursement of credit and subsidy under the Scheme.
These progress reports will be modified to reflect credit mobilisation
vis-a-vis target set for Commercial, Co-operative and Regional Rural
Banks separately.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]

50
Recommendation (Para No. 3.59)
The non-availability of information on the total expenditure from
13 States and 3 Union Territories as requested by the Government
speaks a lot about the inadequate monitoring of the Scheme. Despite
having the existing monitoring mechanism, the Department has failed
to obtain the information from all the States/Union territories. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the existing monitoring of the Scheme
should further be strengthened and these States and Union territories
to be persuaded to submit the total expenditure incurred during 2003-
2004 without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
As per SGRY Guidelines, States/UTs. will submit consolidated
Monthly Progress Report (MPR) every month. At the time of submitting
the requisite information in the month of July, 2004, Monthly Progress
Report (MPR) for the month of March, 2004 was not received from
12 States and 3 UTs. Perhaps, due to their pre-occupation for General
Election, 2004, these States/UTs could not collect data in time from all
the implementing agencies at the levels of village, block and district
under the SGRY. There is no failure of existing monitoring mechanism
under the programme. In the meantime, nine more States have
furnished their Reports. The State Governments of Bihar, Tamil Nadu
and Sikkim, and the Union Territory Administrations of A&N Islands,
D&N Haveli and Daman & Diu, who have not yet furnished MPR for
March, 2004, have been requested to expedite it. Based on the latest
information received from States/UTs, a statement showing opening
balance under the programme on 1 April 2004 is enclosed at
Appendix II. The requisite information for remaining States/UTs will
be furnished later.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.70)
The Committee find that Food Corporation of India (FCI) has been
given mandate to procure foodgrains from the States having surplus
foodgrains for distributing throughout the country as per the demand.
The Committee desire that FCI should be impressed upon to provide
as far as possible the surplus foodgrains procured from the adjoining
States or the same State so as to reduce the transportation cost as well
as the time taken for delivering the foodgrains to the barest minimum.

51
Reply of the Government
The Food Corporation of India (FCI) was requested to comply
with the suggestion of the Standing Committee. They have intimated
that FCI has been performing on the same line as desired by the
Committee.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.71)
The Committee also find that there is no provision in the guidelines
for receiving back the payment made to FCI for foodgrains of bad
quality. The Committee desire the Ministry to look into these aspects
and make the necessary provisions in the guidelines to ensure that in
case of supply of foodgrains of bad quality, payment made to FCI is
received back. The Committee also desire that the Department of Rural
Development should take necessary steps, so that for supply of bad
quality foodgrains under SGRY, the responsibility should be fixed on
the officials involved and action initiated accordingly.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry has already advised the Food Corporation of India
(FCI) to provide ‘Fair Average Quality (FAQ)’ foodgrains to District
Panchayats, intermediate Panchayats and Gram Panchayats under the
SGRY. The concerned officials of District Panchayat/DRDA are required
to conduct joint inspection of the stocks before taking delivery of
foodgrains to ensure that foodgrains below the FAQ are not accepted.
For lifting bad quality foodgrains from FCI Godowns, individual officers
will be held responsible and such foodgrains can not be returned to
the FCI. However, if any specific instance is quoted, action could be
taken to fix the responsibility for lifting bad quality foodgrains.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.91)
The Committee note that the Government has been setting targets
for providing houses to the needy in the rural areas time and again
without achieving them. For example in the ‘Campaign for Housing
for All’, it was decided to construct additional 2 million houses, out

52
of which 13 lakh houses were required to be contruced in the rural
areas through various Schemes, such as IAY, Credit-cum-Subsidy
Scheme, Housing and Urban Development (HUDCO) Scheme, State
Governments’ Schemes and National Housing Bank/Commercial Banks
etc. The Committee, however, not that though 7 to 8 lakh additional
houses were admitted to have been constructed over and above the
targets of 1999-2000, the actual figure is only 5.43 lakhs. The
Department proposed to constructed additional houses for the poor
under the Credit-cum-Subsidy Scheme also which remained a non-
starter which according to Department was due to the reasons that
neither any BPL family came forward nor the Banks were committal.
The Committee are dismayed to conclude that the targets of number
of houses set under IAY during the years 1999-2000 to 2003-2004 except
during the year 2002-2003, were not achieved.
Reply of the Government
Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) is a continuing scheme and the assistance
is provided as per the fixed ceiling per unit. Therefore, the targets are
fixed against the allocation. The targets are not as per the requirement
of the houses but these are fixed according to the allocation made for
the scheme. The achievement of targets is generally satisfactory which
is around 90 per cent. However, efforts would be made to achieve 100
per cent targets every year. The achievement of targets since 1999-2000
is as under:
Year Target Achievement Percent
Achievement
1999-2000 1271619 925679 72.79
2000-2001 1244320 1170926 94.10
2001-2002 1293753 1171081 90.52
2002-2003 1314431 1548641 117.82
2003-2004 1484554 1269267 85.50
As far as the target fixed for the year 1999-2000 is concerned, the
targets were 1271619 and the achievement has reported 925679. The
figure of 5.43 lakh houses is in respect of those houses only which
were under construction during the year 2003-2004 and these were not
additional houses.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]

53
Recommendation (Para No. 3.102)
While nothing that the States of Jharkhand, Manipur and Nagaland
have not submitted their Monthly Progress Reports regularly for the
year 2003-2004, the Committee find that the Union territory of Dadra
& Nagar Haveli has not submitted the same since November, 2002. As
a long time has elapsed since the Monthly Progress Reports were
obtained from the above mentioned States and Union territory, the
Committee would like the Department to state the reasons as to why
the Reports were not obtained from these States and the Union
territories, despite Area Officers Scheme in operation.
Reply of the Government
 The matter was taken up with the State Governments concerned.
The information has now been received from the States of Jharkhand
and Nagaland. State Government of Manipur and UT Administration
of Dadra Nagar Haveli have been reminded to arrange to send their
reports immediately. Area Officers of these State/UT have also been
requested to take up this issue with the State/UT concerned.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.110)
The Committee are disturbed to find that out of 85 Rural Building
Centres (RBCs) approved, only 35 have become functional so far. On
the one hand, the Department has stated that RBCs are expected to be
completed within a period of two years by utilizing the funds released
in three instalments, on the other hand, it has been stated that no
such deadline has been fixed for construction and functioning of all
RBCs approved so far. The Committee also note that out of all the 85
approved RBCs, which were to get assistance through HUDCO, only
25 were released the second instalment, whereas the third instalment
had been released only to 6 of them. The Committee, therefore, doubt
as to how all the RBCs will become functional without receiving the
second and the third instalments. Being critical of the poor functioning
of RBCs, the Committee hope that the Department will impress upon
HUDCO to get the pending work of approval of RBCs completed
expeditiously, so that all the approved RBCs become functional at the
earliest.

54
Reply of the Government
The Scheme of setting up of Rural Building Centres (RBCs) has
been discontinued from 1.4.2004. However, HUDCO has already been
requested to get all the ongoing RBCs completed and functional at the
earliest. The progress of all the sanctioned RBCs has been reviewed in
a meeting held with the Officials of HUDCO. Efforts would be made
to get the maximum RBCs functional within this financial year.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.125)
The Committee note that out of Rs. 9793 crore allocation,
Rs. 7321.53 crore have been released under the PMGSY to the States
upto March 2004. Further out of 21461 number of roads cleared, only
8260 roads have reportedly been completed. The Committee feel that
performance of a number of States is dismal so far as completion of
road work is concerned. Keeping in view the variation in the estimates
of construction cost indifferent States, the Committee feel that almost
double the length of roads can be constructed with the available funds.
Reply of the Government
As regards completion of works, it may be mentioned that out of
the 21,461 works only 11,103 were due for completion by march 2004.
Road works cleared in 2003-04 and under clearance in 2004-05 would
take 3 months or so for tendering and award and another 9-12 months
for execution (18 months for hill areas) as mentioned in para 3.122. As
such, it is submitted that the completion percentage in relation to
works expected to be complete is assessable only in respect of the
Phase II works and the percentage i.e. 72.25% is prima-facie reasonable.
As regards cost of construction, it is submitted that PMGSY roads
are constructed as all-weather roads with a 5 year performance
guarantee. Design and quality are as per the Indian Roads Congress
specifications (IRC: SP: 20-2002). In addition to other features, cross
drainage works have to be provided and as such, it may not be possible
to compare the cost with costs under other programmes. However, the
Committee’s concern is being addressed and States have been requested
to start the use of technologies like soil stabilisation to reduce cost for
low volume roads.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]

55
Recommendation (Para No. 3.126)
The Committee note with concern that Rs. 76000 crore would be
needed to cover road connectivity to all habitations of 500 plus
population and with current allocation rate, it will take over 30 years
to complete the new connectivity. They also note that allocation of
PMGSY is dependent upon the cess amount collected through the
Central Road Fund. They are astonished to find that even though the
cess on High Speed Diesel has been increased from Rupee 1 to
Rs. 1.50, the Department is not getting the additional funds. Rather
the allocation is being reduced in the last couple of years. As the road
connectivity is a pre-requisite for rural development and thereby the
reduction of rural poverty, the Department should have started the
projects only after reassuring themselves about the availability of funds.
They are equally surprised to find that between launching of the
Scheme and results of core net work, the number of unconnected
habitations, increased from 50,600 to 54,800, cost per kilometre increased
from Rs. 4.7 lakh to Rs. 19 lakh and average distance per habitation
enhanced from 1.26 km. to 2.1 km. The Committee therefore, are
inclined to conclude that most of the calculations at the launch of the
programme on 24.12.2000 were unrealistic. While recommending for
the demand of more allocation under the scheme, they desire that the
Department of Rural Development should ensure that these parameters
like the number of unconnected habitations, cost per kilometre, average
distance between habitations, etc. do not enhance further.
Reply of the Government
While it is true that despite increase in diesel cess from Re 1/litre
to Rs. 1.50/litre the budgetary provision has not increased, it is
submitted that the matter has been taken up with the Ministry of
Finance for the purpose. Since cess funds can only be used for the
purpose legislated, the availability of the fund itself is not in doubt.
As regards change in the number of habitations, construction cost
per Km. and lead distance for connectivity, it is submitted that as
given in para 3.117 the cost per Km was earlier estimated at Rs. 14.7
lakh per Km. Rural roads being a State subject, till recently aggregated
data provided by the State was relied upon. As a result of
implementation of PMGSY, the concept of Core Network has been
accepted in all States, which provides a uniform definition besides
ensuring greater accuracy through a physical survey. As regards increase
in number of habitations, this is largely attributable to the fact that

56
earlier figures were based on 1991 Census, whereas in the Core
Network 2001 Census figures have been used.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.127)
The Committee note with concern that even though the Budget
allocation for PMGSY remained same during 2000-2001, 2001-2002, the
number of roads cleared came down from 11103 to 1939 in 2004-2005.
They are equally surprised to find that even though execution of road
works should take 9 to 12 months from actual award, nearly 6 per
cent of the road work started in 2000-2001 and 28 per cent of the road
works started in 2001-2002, are yet to be completed. Being critical of
the way the Government have spent the scarce resources provided
under PMGSY, they recommend that Department of Rural Development
in consultation with NRRDA should ensure that all the works taken
up does not take more than 12 months from actual award as envisaged.
Reply of the Government
Clearance of proposals is an on-going process and is spread
throughout the year. At the time of furnishing information, 1939 road
works of 2004-05 had been cleared up to 30.09.04. The figure is now
2577, and as proposals of States are received and cleared, the figure
will correspondingly increase.
As regards the number of road works, it is submitted that in
2000-01 a portion of the funds were used to complete on going BMS
road works. Similarly, the figures of 1939 road works for 2004-05 does
not represent the final cleared road works for the year as State
Governments bring their proposals as and when they complete the
DPR proposals.
The progress in construction of the roads are reviewed in Regional
Review Meetings. Instructions have also been issued to States to have
Quarterly Meeting of the State Level Standing Committee for PMGSY
under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary to review the progress of
works. All the States were also intimated that the time period of
completion shall be nine working months or twelve calendar months
including monsoon or other seasonal effects and they are expected to
complete the tendering process within 75 days so that all cleared works
can be reported as completed at the end of fifteenth month from
clearance by the Empowered Committee.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]

57
Recommendation (Para No. 3.135)
The Committee are surprised to find that both the physical and
financial performance of PMGSY in Union territories, except in case of
Pondicherry, is either nil or close to nil. The Committee would like to
know as to why less importance is given for the performance of the
Scheme in the Union territories, despite having a multi-faceted
monitoring. They hope that the reasons for poor performance of the
Scheme in the Union territories will be looked into without delay so
that these places do not remain unconnected in the years to come.
Reply of the Government
Union territories of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Daman & Diu
and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, where progress has been far below
expectation, have been requested on 24th Sept. 2004 to take concrete
and visible action in implementation of PMGSY. They have been
requested to respond with the latest reports on physical and financial
progress.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.148)
The Committee note that a new scheme ‘Provision for Urban
Amenities in Rural Areas’ (PURA) with the objective of providing
physical and social infrastructure in the identified 3,130 rural clusters
was approved by Cabinet. The Committee have been apprised that
during 2003-2004, an amount of Rs. 5.78 crore was spent by
reappropriation of different schemes of the Department of Rural
Development. The Committee also note that Finance Minister in his
Budget speech has indicated that additional funds would be provided
for the Scheme. The Committee deplore the way the planning for new
schemes is being made without ensuring for the outlay. Besides, the
Committee fail to understand how Rs. 5.78 crore could be utilized
during 2003-2004, when the scheme is still in the process of finalization.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the detail guidelines
alongwith the details of the expenditure made during 2003-2004.
The Committee further note that Credit-cum subsidy scheme
launched since 1999 and Samgra Awas Yojana have been merged with
IAY w.e.f. 1.4.2004 as these schemes did not pick-up. The Committee
are constrained to note the way the Department is hurriedly starting

58
new schemes to achieve the objectives for which comprehensive
schemes already exist. The schemes are being started without planning
and then merged with other schemes when these schemes could not
pick-up. The Committee would like that the approach of the
Government should be to provide additional funds to the existing
schemes and improve the delivery mechanism by proper monitoring
so as to have tangible impact on the lives of rural poor.
Reply of the Government
In the meeting of State Secretaries of Rural Development under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (RD) on 7th January 2004 to discuss
the scheme of Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA),
it was decided that a Detailed Project Report (DPR) for each of the
clusters selected by Planning Commission would be prepared and a
sum of Rs. 2 lakh would be paid for each DPR. Accordingly a sum
of Rs. 577.35 lakh was released to 47 districts in 19 States for
preparation of DPRs by reappropriation of savings under different
schemes of the Ministry.
During the current year a Budget provision of Rs. 10 crore has
been made under PURA. It has been decided in consultation with the
Planning Commission to start a pilot phase of implementation of PURA
by taking up one cluster each in 7 States. A Steering Committee has
been constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (RD) to examine,
sanction and monitor the implementation of projects under PURA.
Based on the experience of the pilot phase, the detailed guidelines of
the scheme will be worked out.
The Credit-cum-Subsidy Scheme and Samgra Awas Yojana (SAY)
were launched in the year 1999-2000. The Samgra Awas Yojana was
launched on pilot basis in one block each of 25 districts of 24 States
and 1 Union territory. The objective of the Samgra Awaas Yojana was
to provide sufficient infrastructure by converging all the other schemes
such as Housing, Sanitation, Drinking Water etc. at the village level.
However, the pilot project could not be implemented satisfactorily and
accordingly the Scheme was discontinued on 1.04.2004. The Credit-
cum-Subsidy Scheme has been merged with the main Scheme of Indira
Awaas Yojana and flexibilities provided to the State Government either
they can spent the entire allocated amount on Indira Awaas Yojana or
upto 20% can be spent on Credit-cum-Subsidy Scheme. The Ministry
of Rural Development agree with the observation of the Committee
and accordingly the programme has been restructured from 1.04.2004.

59
At present, only one programme  i.e.  Indira Awaas Yojana is
implemented to provide assistance for construction of houses for the
BPL families in the rural areas so that maximum funds can be provided
for the construction of rural houses.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.160)
The Committee find during 2003-2004, Rs. 6.13 crore plan and
Rs. 9.12 crore non-plan outlay was spent for the purpose of
administrative expenditure and promotion of study of rural
development and social change. The Committee are surprised to note
that when asked for the status of said study they were informed that
no such study is underway. The Committee fail to understand how
the expenditure was made for the study which was never made. By
noting the data furnished by the Department the Committee find that
major expenditure of NIRD is for imparting training whereas NIRD
was established with objectives to undertake research and studies on
Panchayati Raj Institutions and rural development programmes for
continuous policy and programmes upgradation and dissemination
information through publication. The Committee feel that the said
objectives are not being fulfilled. While the Committee appreciate
conducting training programmes they feel that more stress need to be
given to research in policy and programmes so as to bring improvement
in implementation of various programmes of rural development.
Reply of the Government
The expenditure was made for conducting a study named
“Monitoring Rural Change” during 1991-96 and series of seven reports
were prepared. Though NIRD has not taken up a research study with
the specific title “Rural Development and Social Change”, almost all
studies of NIRD focus on certain aspects/facts of the subject.
Programme Based Research Projects undertaken during 2003-04 like
Impact of Road Improvement on the Tribal Economy in the selected
States, Community Based Drinking Water and Sanitation Management,
Study on Revolutionary process in PRIs and ‘Development model plan
for Flood Disaster Management and Mitigation at Gram Panchayat
level’ dealt with some selected aspects of rural development. Similarly
the Thrust Area Based Projects such as “Initiatives for Reduction of
Gender and Social Disparities in Rural Literacy” and “Empowerment
of women through PRIs” mainly focus on the social change that is

60
taking place in Rural India. However, NIRD will soon undertake a
specific research study under the banner, “Rural Development and
Social Change”. The broad objective of the National Institute of Rural
Development is promotion of the study of community/rural
development, the objective is being sought to be achieved by
undertaken and assisting in the organization of training, study courses,
seminars etc. However, as per Clause 3 of Memorandum of Association
of the NIRD, the Institute is formed to meet the following objectives:
(a) to undertake and assist in the organization of training and
study-courses, conferences, seminars and lectures,
incorporating latest methodologies of the Training and
instruction including distance education methodologies;
(b) to undertake, aid, promote and coordinate training, research
and action research through its own or other agencies
including non-governmental organizations, universities and
other academic institutions and training centres including
those established by or with the aid of the Government of
India;
(c) to establish schools/centers for (i) study and orientation,
(ii) training and instruction, and (iii) Research and
Evaluation, and such others activities as may be necessary
to achieve the objects of the Society;
(d) to analyse specific problems encountered in the planning
and implementation of community development, panchayati
raj and other rural development programmes, especially
those designed to promote the interest of vulnerable sections
including women, and propose solutions thereto;
(e) to follow up in a manner to be mutually agreed upon, the
training programmes organized by the Training Centres
referred to in (b) above and to advise the Ministry of Rural
Areas and Employment (now Ministry of Rural
Development) and subject again to mutual agreement, any
other Ministries of authorities on their training programmes.
(f) to prepare, print and publish papers, periodicals and books
in furtherance of the objects of the society;
(g) To establish and maintain Libraries and information services,
and information clearing house in all matters relating to
rural development, it will also function as National
Repository in rural development literature;

61
(h) To collaborate with other institutions, associations and
societies in India and abroad interested in similar objects;
(i) To offer Fellowships, Scholarships, Prizes and stipends in
furtherance of the objects of the society; and
(j) To promote application of science and technology in the
development of rural areas through training, research and
action research.
Further, clause 3 of the Memorandum of the Association of NIRD
containing the preamble states that NIRD will be an apex institute of
training and research in the field of rural development. This being so,
training has been given an important role in the activity of the NIRD.
Policy recommendations are being given by NIRD by bringing out
recommendations of each National Workshop or Seminar on various
important topics pertaining to rural development. The recommendations
are being shared from time to time with the concerned central Ministry
and Department of State Governments. However, keeping in view the
recommendations of the Standing Committee to accord more stress to
research in policy and programmes so as to bring improvement in
implementation of various programmes of rural development, the
following measures are proposed to be adopted:
(i) A periodical review of recommendations emerging out of
field studies, workshops and seminars will be done and
respective Government Ministries/Departments would be
intimated on possible policy measures.
(ii) Whenever NIRD organizes “study forum” or otherwise
organizes presentation on research findings, concerned
officers of the Ministry would be invited to participate and
interact.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.167)
The Committee note that three SIRDs are yet to be established in
Bihar, Chhattisgarh and Uttaranchal. They are surprised to note that
several States like Goa, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttaranchal do not have
a single ETC. They hope that steps will be taken by Government to
establish SIRDs and ETCs without further delay. They also observe
that reappropriation from savings of other Schemes is being widely

62
practiced by the Department. As reappropriation is not a healthy
practice, the Committee feel that it should be discouraged and desire
that utilization of savings from the same Scheme be made to meet
higher demands of SIRDs, ETCs and OTCs to the extent possible.
Reply of the Government
The SIRDs in the States of Chhattisgarh and Uttaranchal are already
functioning. The Ministry of Rural Development has, however, released
funds to these two States during 2003-2004 for construction of buildings
for these SIRDs. The Ministry has also requested the Government of
Bihar to set up a new SIRD in the State and this is likely to be
established shortly.
88 Extension Training Centres (ETCs) have been established all
over the country. Out of this, 5 ETCs at Rudrapur, Hawalbagh,
Haldwani, Haridwar and Pauri Garhwal are in existence in Uttaranchal.
No proposals for establishing ETCs from the State of Goa, Sikkim and
Tripura have been received. The observations of Committee to avoid
re-appropriation from savings of other Schemes have been noted for
future compliance.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.178)
The Committee note with concern that although more than Rs. 71
crore has been released to CAPART which has further been released
to the Voluntary Organisations, the CAPART has received utilisation
Certificate of Rs. 10 crore only. The Committee are not satisfied with
the monitoring of activities of CAPART. As more and more Voluntary
Organisations are being black listed by CAPART, the Committee desire
that proper scrutiny of V oluntary Orgnisations be made before releasing
the funds. They recommend that the monitoring of the funds so
released be done on a monthly basis so that chance of having
blacklisted VOs are minimised. They also desire that the existing
monitoring of different activities of CAPART and its regional
committees be further strengthened so that the funds released are
meaningfully utilised.
Reply of the Government
Prior to 1995-96, CAPART adopted an ad-hoc monitoring system
and projects were sanctioned mostly based on trust and fulfillment of

63
the requirements to become eligible for funding. The schematic funding
& ad-hoc monitoring system adopted by CAPART resulted in improper
implementation of the projects to some extent, which led to blacklisting
of some organizations. With the introduction of three stage monitoring,
i.e. pre-funding, mid term, & post evaluation CAPART has been able
to monitor the implementation of its schemes in a much better manner.
The Committee’s recommendation to monitor utilization of funds on a
monthly basis has been noted. The activities of various wings of
CAPART and its RCs are being reviewed quarterly by the Director
General, CAPART. Besides, the Ministry also periodically reviews
various activities of the organization. However, in view of the
observation of the Committee to strengthen the existing monitoring
system in the organization, monthly review meetings of the activities
of the project divisions and the RCs will be held by Deputy Director
General/HoDs on a regular basis.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.180)
The Committee also note that existing guidelines of submission
and approval of project does not categorically mention a fixed
percentage for smaller NGOs. They presume bigger and established
NGOs are getting more benefits at the cost of smaller NGOs. They,
therefore, recommend that it should be ensured that smaller NGOs at
least get 50 percent of assistance in each scheme being financed by the
CAPART. Necessary changes in the guidelines of CAPART be made in
this regard and Committee be apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
There is no fixed percentage stipulated for assisting smaller NGOs.
In order to reach unserved & undeserved areas in the country and to
assist smaller organizations, nine Regional Offices of CAPART were
opened in the years 1994, 1997 & 1999. The Regional Committees have
been delegated financial powers to sanction projects upto twenty lakhs
so as to render help to smaller and less established grassroot level
NGOs working in remote areas. It is generally seen that about 50% of
the organizations assisted by the Regional Committees are first timers
and are small, community based organizations. Thus the Committee’s
recommendation in this regard has already been implemented in
CAPART.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]

64
Recommendation (Para No. 3.183)
The Committee note with concern that the expenditure on IEC
activities has been reduced by more than half in two years starting
from 2001-2002. They observe that the rural poor is not yet aware of
different activities of the Ministry being implemented for their
development. They, therefore, desire that both allocation and utilization
of funds for the IEC activities be substantially stepped up so that
different schemes of the Ministry are given wide publicity. The rural
poor need to be enlightened about the activities being taken up under
IEC. Awarness campaign should be stepped up to involve the rural
poor. The Committee should be kept informed about the steps taken
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Expenditure on IEC activities has increased to Rs. 26.05 crores in
2003-04 as against Rs. 16.78 crores in 2002-03. In the current financial
year i.e. 2004-05 the BE under communication cell has gone up to
Rs. 20 crores against Rs. 10 crores in 2003-04. In addition to BE of
Rs. 20 crores under communication cell Rs. 14.90 crores are also
available under different programmes of Rural Development. Besides,
broadcast/telecast of sponsored programmes recently, outdoor publicity
works are also undertaken through Bus back Panels, Panels on MEMU
trains, installation of hoardings in the States where the implementation
of the programmes of the Ministry is not par with the other States.
Booklets titled ‘Gram Vikas—Programmes at a Glance’ is also under
printing which will be distributed up to the Gram Panchayat level to
every Panchayat member. During 2003-04, the Ministry has instituted
‘Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay Fellowship for Journalism in Rural
Development’ in order to encourage and build up a core group of
journalists particularly in Rural Development as also correct the
imbalance noticed in the media coverage of Rural Development issues.
The Action Plan of IEC activities for this year (2004-05) is designed to
ensure optimum utilization of potential of available modes of
communications such as Electronic Media (Radio & T.V .), print and
outdoor publicity.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.190)
The Committee note with concern that Area Officers Scheme in its
10 years of existence has not been very useful in obtaining utilization

65
of funds certificates from there States/Union territories. As the coverage
of 16 and 11 States in 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 respectively by the
Area Officers is too low, they desire that the Government should take
adequate steps to ensure that all the State and Union Territories are
covered under the Scheme during each couple of years.
Reply of the Government
Government will take necessary action to ensure that all States
and Union territories are visited under the Area Officers Scheme. The
Area Officers also will be advised to obtain fund utilization certificate
from the State Authorities.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.191)
The Committee feel that there is a need to expand District Level
Monitoring (DLM) to all the districts. They also feel that similar stress
should be given to village based impact assessment studies. The
Government should try to cover all the villages from where starvation
deaths have been reported in the media recently, under village based
impact assessment study, on a priority basis.
Reply of the Government
The District Level Monitoring (DLM) System was first introduced
in December, 2001 in 60 districts of 18 States of the country which
was subsequently extended to 126 districts in 25 States. With effect
from 1.7.2004, the DLM system has been extended to 130 Districts of
27 States. During the current year, the districts under DLM have been
changed. Efforts will be made to progressively expand the DLM to all
the districts in the country. Village based impact assessment studies
are also being taken up in different districts during successive years
and all the districts are planned to be covered over a period of time.
The villages from where starvation deaths have been reported also
will be taken up for impact studies.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 3.34)
The Committee further find that Finance Minister has indicated
that mature SHGs may be in a position to graduate from consumption
or production credit to starting micro enterprises. The Committee find
that Finance Minister has indicated an indicative target of credit linking
5.85 lakh SHGs during the period upto March 2007 has been set for
NABARD, SIDBI and other agencies. The Committee fail to understand
how the Government would achieve the aforesaid targets in the absence
of any planning being made in one of the biggest programmes of Self
Help Groups i.e. SGSY.
Reply of the Government
The target of credit linking 5.85 lakh SHGs during the period upto
March, 2007 set for NABARD, SIDBI and other agencies doe not pertain
to SGSY. This is the target set for SHG Bank Linkage Programme of
NABARD and SIDBI which is not confined to BPL families. The SGSY
programme covers only BPL families. Under SGSY over 9,47,463 SHGs
have passed the Grade I so far and they have been linked to Banks.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.58)
The Committee note that although the Cash Component of SGRY
during 2004-2005 has been increased from Rs. 4,125 crore to Rs. 4,500
crore, the physical target of generating 100 crore mandays annually
during the 10th Five Year Plan has not been achieved so far. The
Committee feel that besides increasing the funds, additional steps need
to be taken by the Department to achieve the set target. The Committee
hope that suitable measures to meet the physical performance of SGRY,
will be put in place to achieve the targets.
66

67
Reply of the Government
Under the SGRY, 5 kg foodgrains are provided to the labourer per
manday as part of wages while the balance is to paid in cash to
ensure prevailing minimum wage in the State. Average Minimum Wage
for unskilled work in the country is Rs. 60-of which cost of foodgrains
at average BPL rate of foodgrains is Rs. 30 for 5 kg foodgrains. If the
ratio of wages and material is 60:40, the cash component for part
wage payment and material cost for 100 crore mandays will be
Rs. 7000 crores ( i.e. cash component of waters—Rs. 3000/-crores and
material cost—Rs. 4000/-crores) per year. As against requirement of
cash component of Rs. 7,000/-crores per year, an amount of
Rs. 4500/-crores has been allocated during the current year. The State
share of the cash component is another Rs. 1500/-crores. The total
cash availability for the year is Rs. 6000/-crores. As such with the
present allocation, it will never be possible to achieve creation of
100 crores additional mandays under the SGRY.
During the year 2002-03, as reported by the States/UTs expenditure
of Rs. 5000.01 crores ( i.e. 77.95% of available funds) was incurred which
generated 74.93 crores mandays. Similarly, during the year 2003-04, an
amount of Rs. 5886.74 crores ( i.e. 84.67% of available funds) has been
incurred to generate 86.87 crores mandays. As per existing guidelines,
15% of available funds is permissible to be carried forward to next
financial year to maintain the continuity of works started under the
programme. Thus, the unspent amount over and above the permissible
limit is very negligible amount. It is the endeavour of this Ministry to
ensure that available funds under the SGRY are used to optimum to
generate maximum number of mandays. The cost of inputs and wages
are also increasing. If the resources under the SGRY are increased, the
generation of mandays under the programme will be increased
proportionately .
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.74)
The Committee find that the Finance Minister has indicated in the
budget speech that the work has begun on the National Employment
Guaranty Act which aims to guarantee 100 days of employment in a
year to one able bodied person in every poor household. The
Committee hope that the said legislation would be finalised
expeditiously in consultation with the Ministries of Rural Development,

68
and Labour and Employment. They also hope that provisions of the
said legislation, when enacted would also be applicable to the SGRY
and other related Schemes of the Department.
Reply of the Government
A National Employment Guarantee Act to provide a legal guarantee
for at least 100 days of employment in every year per family to every
rural/urban poor household is to be enacted. In his Budget Speech,
2004, the Finance Minister has stated that a suitable legislation in this
regard will be enacted by the Ministry of Labour and Employment.
However, the Prime Minister has now desired that the Ministry of
Rural Development will be the nodal Ministry for piloting the Bill on
the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act. This Ministry will
prepare a draft legislation in this regard in consultation with the
Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Labour,
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
The Committee find from the data indicated above that there are
huge opening balances with the State Governments under the major
Schemes of the Department, viz. SGRY, SGSY, IAY and DRDA
Administration. The Committee are distressed to note that Rs. 2,295.38
crore i.e. 18.71 per cent of BE 2002-03 remained unspent with the
States and the Union territories administration. Not only that under-
spending is a recurrent feature during each of the financial year as is
evident from the information furnished by the Department. While
appreciating the fact that utilization certificates have to be furnished
by the State Government before seeking the second instalment under
different schemes, the Committee find that even the first instalment is
released very late. When the Department was asked about the date of
release of first instalment under different schemes, they have indicated
the position only with regard to SGSY. It can be seen that under
SGSY, the first instalment could be released on 16 June in 2003 and on
15 April in 2004. Thus, during 2003, there was delay of 46 days and
during 2004, there was delay of 15 days. The Committee would like
to know the information on date of release of funds for all the central
sector and Centrally sponsored Schemes of the Department. The
Committee find that late release of outlay is the main reason of under
spending and thereby resulting in unspent balances with the State
Governments. The Department consider the releases as the position of
expenditure and reflect a very bright picture before the Committee but
there are serious problems in the implementation of several schemes
which have been analyzed in the subsequent chapters of the report.
Here, the Committee would like to highlight that the outlay during a
particular year should be released in a phased manner as per the
formula evolved by the Department and there should not be rush of
release at the fag end of the financial year, i.e. March. The committee,
however, desire that only 10 per cent of funds be released during the
month of March, if proposal to this effect is received.
69

70
Reply of the Government
While the Ministry of Rural Development shares the concern
expressed by the Committee on the large amounts of unspent balances
that remain with the Programme Implementing Agencies/State
Governments, there are certain practical difficulties, which have to be
taken into account. Till 1997-98, there was a provision to allow
25 per cent of the allocation for a particular year to carry over to the
next year. The idea was to allow the Programme Implementing/
Executive Agencies to have sufficient funds to implement the
programmes of this Ministry during the first quarter of the year, which
is considered to be the best period for implementing various
programmes. This permissible limit of carry over balances was reduced
to 20 per cent of the annual allocation w.e.f. 1 April, 1999 and on the
suggestion of Ministry of Finance, it was further reduced to
15 per cent w.e.f. 1 April, 2000.
This permissible limit of carry over balances is quite reasonable
and it helps the Programme Implementing Agencies to ensure adequate
flow and utilization of funds for implementation of the programmes.
However, in some States the Programme Implementing Agencies fail
to fully utilize the funds due to various reasons which include the
limited availability of working season because of weather conditions,
or due to natural calamities such as floods, droughts etc. which are a
frequent phenomena. In addition to above, it is also pertinent to
mention here that the programmes of the Ministry of Rural
Development are implemented at the village level and it takes sometime
to flow the information from the village to the district and onward to
the Ministry. Under the wage-employment programmes, the wages are
paid in cash as well as in the form of foodgrains. Lifting of matching
share of foodgrains also takes time. Due to these difficulties, the
Programme Implementing Agencies sometimes are not able to claim
the second instalment at an early date. The late release of second
instalment and also the late release of matching share by the State
Governments results in excessive opening balances. However, the
Ministry has introduced a strict monitoring system to maintain the
financial discipline and a proportionate cut is imposed on release of
Central funds if the proposals for release of second instalment are
received late in the Ministry. In the normal course, the first instalment
of Central allocation is released to the DRDAs automatically if the
second instalment received by them during the previous financial year
is without any condition. The release of first instalment of the Central
funds to the Programme Implementing Agencies starts immediately

71
after the receipt of the approved budget allocation from the Ministry
of Finance. For instance, during the current financial year, the Ministry
started releasing the first instalment in April, 2004 itself. During
2003-2004, there was some delay in release of Central funds because
of some procedural issues such as routing the Central funds to DRDAs
through the State Governments. The Ministry of Rural Development
felt that such a procedure would result in delay of release of funds to
the Programme Implementing Agencies. This issue was resolved on
11 June, 2003 and the Ministry started releasing the funds from the
same day.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
The Committee further find that late release of funds by the Union
Government further encourages the State Government to delay their
share of outlay, thereby hampering the implementation of the
programme. To motivate the State Governments, the Union Government
has to set good precedents. In view of this, the Committee would like
that the Union Government should ensure that the first instalment is
released in the very first week of the financial year.
Reply of the Government
The funds under major rural development programmes are released
to DRDAs in two instalments. The first instalment is released to the
DRDAs automatically if the second instalment in the previous year is
received by the DRDAs without any condition immediately after the
approval of budget allocation is received from the Ministry of Finance.
All possible steps will be taken in the Ministry to release the first
instalment of Central funds at the earliest possible.”
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report).

72
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
The Committee find that SGSY was launched in the place of IRDP
and its allied Programmes which lays stress on the formation of Self
Help Groups. However, the Committee note that upto 2003-04, number
of individual Swarozgaries assisted under SGSY was significantly more
than the Swarozgaries who were assisted in Groups. Since each Self
Help Group should assist at least 10 persons belonging to families
Below Poverty Line which might be reduced to 5 persons in hilly and
difficult areas, the Committee are unable to understand as to how
17.35 lakh Self Help Groups reportedly formed during this period
could assist only 20.21 lakh Swarozgaries which should have been
about 85 to 170 lakh. Keeping in view the information on the number
of SHGs  and the number of Swarozgaries, the Committee have come
to a conclusion that the performance of SGSY in this regard is not
satisfactory. They would like the Department to explain the reasons to
the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Under the programme, emphasis is on the group approach through
social mobilisation because if the poor are properly organized and
supported, they can become self-sufficient. Since group approach is
process oriented, it takes some time for a group to mature. To make
a group viable for taking up economic activities, the process involves
training of members in group behaviour, development of their technical
and managerial skills including rudiments of accounting procedures.
The group formation stage depends on the literacy , awareness levels,
socio-economic background of the people being organized as well as
capacity of the facilitators involved in the process of social mobilization.
Realising this, a provision of grading system has been kept under the
SGSY guidelines. Only after successful Ist grading which is done after
six months of formation of a group, it becomes eligible for assistance
through revolving fund. Same is not the case with an individual
swarozgary. This may be a reason for more individual swarozgaries
assisted than group swarozgaries in the initial years of the
implementation of the programme. However, with the passage of time,
it is expected that more number of groups will be eligible for financial
assistance as they will reach the level of maturity.
So far financing of SHGs are concerned only those SHGs can be
financed which have passed Grade II test. Against 18.88 lakh groups
formed, since the inception of the scheme in April 1999 and up to

73
September, 2004, only 4.74 lakhs groups qualified for financing and
2 lakhs of the later have been financed for economic activities. The
lesser number of groups have been able to take up economic activities
mainly due to non-cooperation of the banks that are responsible for
providing the credit to the SHGs a major component of the scheme.
To address this issue, the matter has been taken up with the Ministry
of Finance and Chief Executives of the banks. Also, there is a provision
under the guidelines that a maximum of 20-30 per cent members of
a group may be from families marginally above the Poverty Line (APL)
if they are acceptable to BPL members of the group but these APL
members of the group will not be eligible for subsidy under the
scheme. All these factors including low awareness among the people
about the scheme might have been the reasons for not achieving the
expected level of performance. Since the number of members in a
group widely varies (10-20 in normal case and 5-20 in difficult areas
like deserts, hills and sparsely populated areas) it would not be logical
to arrive at any average figure assisted per group.
However, the percentage of SHG swarozgaries assisted has
increased from 37.25 per cent (in 1999-2000) to 50.16 per cent (in
2002-2003). During 2003-2004, the percentage of SHG swarozgaries
assisted to total swarozgaries assisted has gone up to 64.33 per cent.
This means the performance of the SGSY to some extent is satisfactory.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26)
The Committee are disturbed to note that serious lacunae in the
implementation of SGSY has been found in the Concurrent Evaluation.
They are further disturbed to find that the Zamindars, their servants
and labourers constitute self help groups and the benefits were taken
away by the Zamindars who are above the Poverty Line and who are
otherwise not eligible for it. Equally disturbing is the fact that Bank
officials are worried about the non-performing assets and they sanction
loans only to those people who have either not availed the loan before
or have repaid the first loan. Despite the existing guidelines, finding
of a number of serious flaws in the implementation of the Scheme is
nothing but regrettable. The Committee hope that the Government

74
will give a serious thought to this and take necessary steps during the
current financial year to bring about significant changes in the
guidelines of the Scheme, so that the flaws noticed in the Concurrent
Evaluation are eradicated and the avowed objectives of the Scheme
are achieved.”
Reply of the Government
There may be some cases of the ineligible person taking benefits
under the scheme but this is not certainly a general practice. Efforts
are on for still better targeting under the scheme. In order to achieve
the fruitful results of the programme and effective and efficient
implementation of the SGSY, various committees from Central Level
down to grass roots have been constituted. These committees include
representatives of public (MPs/MLAs/PRI representatives), bankers,
rural development officials, NGOs, representatives of line departments
etc. These committees are Block Level SGSY Committee, District Level
SGSY Committee, State Level SGSY Committee, Central Level
Coordination Committee and Vigilance and Monitoring Committees at
State/District/Block Level. Regular efforts are being made to improve
programme performance in terms of subsidy credit ratio, number of
families assisted, total investment etc. and to remove lacunae in the
implementation of SGSY as and when came to the notice of the
Ministry through meetings at various fora and field visits. At Central
Level, the performance is regularly reviewed with the bankers, State
Governments and other Departments through the mechanism of CLCC
and through the performance review committee meetings. The Minister
of Rural Development and the Ministers of State for Rural Development
visit States/Union territories an review the performance of the
programme under SGSY with the Chief Ministers, Ministers and officials
of the State Governments concerned. Such review meetings provide
the much needed impetus in the implementation of the programme
by energizing and motivating the implementation agencies.
To address the issues relating to the credit to swarozgaries, some
of the measures taken are indicated below:
The Central Level Co-ordination Committee under SGSY is the
main fora in which all bottlenecks/shortcomings in the implementation
of the programme are discussed. The Committee consists of members
drawn from RBI, NABARD, Banking Division of the Ministry of Finance
and all CMDs of Commercial Banks. The last meeting of the Committee
was held in June 2004.

75
A meeting was held with Secretary (Banking) on 21 February, 2003
to have a detailed discussion of different credit related issues under
SGSY. The issues discussed were under financing, higher interest rates
on loans provided to swarozgaries, repayment of loans, issue of
mortgages for sanction of loans, absence of bank branches, pendency
of applications, relocation of bank branches in North Eastern Regions.
At the instance of the Ministry, a joint meeting by the Ministers of
Rural Development and Minister of State for Finance was held in
October, 2003 with the Chief Executive of the Banks. There was concern
of large scale rejection of loan applications, delay in processing of
applications and regular participation of bankers in Block Level SGSY
Committee meetings.
Instructions were issued by RBI, NABARD & IBA to Chief
Executive/MDs of Banks with advice to monitor the scheme at their
own level to achieve the targets set under the SGSY scheme.
The problems associated with credit were also discussed with the
bankers in the Project Director Conference held in September, 2004.
The banking division of the Ministry of Finance holds quarterly
meetings under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Banking) to
review the credit flow. These meetings are attended by representatives
of RBI, NABARD etc.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
Another lacuna noticed by the data furnished by the Department
is that there is serious shortfall in credit targets, achievements and
credit disbursements. In view of this scenario, the Committee fail to
understand how the objective of bringing BPL persons above the
poverty line could be achieved. The Committee feel that the Department
should take up this matter with Reserve Bank of India so that necessary
instructions would be issued to banks for their cooperation in
implementation of the programme. Not only that, there should be
regular meeting with the representatives of banks as well as RBI and

76
monitoring of the programme should be regularly done. Further the
Committee also like to ensure that only the eligible beneficiaries are
assisted in the programme the selection of beneficiaries should be done
in Gram Sabha only. The bank officials should be directed to be present
in Gram Sabha meetings so that the process of selection of beneficiaries
and completion of formalities, etc. is completed at one go.
Reply of the Government
The progress of credit mobilisation vis-a-vis targets is periodically
reviewed by the Central Level Coordination Committee chaired by
Secretary (RD) in which RBI, NABARD and Public Sector Banks are
represented. Specific issues and problems with regard to credit delivery
are discussed in these meetings. Wherever necessary, instructions are
issued by RBI to all banks to smoothen the process of sanction and
disbursement of loans.
The banks are closely involved with Government agencies in the
planning and implementation of the Scheme. They are associated with
preparation of projects, identification of Swarozgaries, capacity building
and selection of activity. Banks are also represented in the block and
district level SGSY Committees. RBI has issued instructions to all banks
to ensure their participation in these Committees.
According to the SGSY guidelines, the list of BPL households
identified through BPL census duly approved by the Gram Sabha will
form the basis for identification of families for assistance under the
Programme. The Self-Help Groups should also be drawn from the
BPL list approved by the Gram Sabha.
At the instance of the Ministry, a joint meeting by the Ministers of
Rural Development and Minister of State for Finance was held in
October, 2003 with the Chief Executive of the Banks. There was concern
of large scale rejection of loan applications, delay in processing of
applications and regular participation of bankers in Block Level SGSY
Committee meetings.
Instructions were issued by RBI, NABARD & IBA to Chief
Executive/MDs of Banks with advice to monitor the scheme at their
own level to achieve the targets set under the SGSY scheme.
The problems associated with credit were also discussed with the
bankers in the Project Director Conference held in September, 2004.

77
The Banking Division of the Ministry of Finance holds quarterly
meetings under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Banking) to
review the credit flow. These meetings are attended by representatives
of RBI, NABARD etc. The problems relating to credit delivery under
SGSY are posed for discussion at these meetings.
Targets fixed for credit mobilization and actual achievement in the
previous years are as follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year Credit Target Credit Mobilised
1999-20000 3205.00 1056.46
2000-2001 3205.00 1459.44
2001-2002 3200.87 1329.68
2002-2003 2525.21 1184.30
2003-2004 2129.33 1301.21
(May 04, Prov.)
2004-2005 2507.67 370.83
(Upto Sept., 04)
The significant shortfall in credit mobilization in spite of lowering
the targets has been brought to the notice of the Minister of Finance
by the Minister of Rural Development vide letter dated 30th November,
2004 for appropriate action. It has also been pointed out that the reasons
for total non-performance of some of the banks need to be probed by
RBI and NABARD.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 (Department of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.29)
Another corrective step to be taken by the Department is to ensure
proper coordination between bank officials and block level government
representative and the Panchayats. The Committee would like the
Department to take corrective steps on the various aspects as raised

78
by the Committee in the aforesaid para and intimate the Committee
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Instructions have been already issued by the Ministry to all State/
Union territory Governments and by the RBI to All banks to ensure
participation of the Service Area Banks in all district/block level SGSY
Committees. These instructions will be reiterated.
At the instance of the Ministry, a joint meeting by the Ministers of
Rural Development and Minister of State for Finance was held in
October, 2003 with the Chief Executive of the Banks. There was concern
of large scale rejection of loan applications, delay in processing of
applications and regular participation of bankers in Block Level SGSY
Committee meetings.
Instructions were issued by RBI, NABARD & IBA to Chief
Executive/MDs of Banks with advice to monitor the scheme at their
own level to achieve the targets set under the SGSY scheme.
The problems associated with credit were also discussed with the
bankers in the Project Director Conference held in September, 2004.
The Banking Division of the Ministry of Finance holds quarterly
meetings under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Banking) to
review the credit flow. These meetings are attended by representatives
of RBI, NABARD etc. The problems relating to credit delivery under
SGSY are posed for discussion at these meetings.
The significant shortfall in credit mobilization inspite of lowering
the targets has been brought to the notice of the Minister of Finance
by the Minister of Rural Development vide letter dated 30 November,
2004 for appropriate action. It has also been pointed out that the reasons
for total non-performance of some of the banks need to be probed by
RBI and NABARD.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 (Department of Rural Development)]
Comments of the Committee
(Plase See Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)

79
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35)
The Committee would like to know from the Department, the
number of SHGs who could graduate from consumption or production
credit to starting micro-enterprises since the inception of the scheme
so as to enable the Committee to know about the real impact of the
programme. They would also like to be apprised about the number of
SHGs who could be credit linked by different agencies like NABARD,
SIDBI and banks.
Reply of the Government
Since inception of SGSY, 1,82,992 SHGs have taken up economic
activities. This implies that these SHGs have graduated from
consumption or production credit to starting micro-enterprises. As
reported above, there is no physical targets fixed under the SGSY. The
trend of group financing is, however, on the increase over the years
which is a positive sign as far as the fulfilment of the programme
objective of the SGSY is concerned.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40)
The Committee are unhappy to note that the Department is yet to
receive the information regarding existing or defunct Self Help Groups
from the States/Union territories. They also note that all the States
and Union territories have been requested to furnish the information
in this regard from 2003-04. The Committee in their earlier Report
(48th Report—13th Lok Sabha, Para No. 3.25 refers) had desired to
maintain the information on the number of defunct Self Help Groups
which the Government had agreed to provide. It appears that the
Government has not given any serious thought as to why SHGs become
defunct after a certain period. They also do not maintain information
regarding existing/defunct SHGs. This is a glaring lapse and needs to
be addressed seriously. The success of the Scheme depends on proper
review of its functioning and the lacunae detected in its functioning
which is required to be done by the Government and expected. The
Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry of Rural Development should

80
expedite the requisite information from the States and Union territories
without any further delay. The Committee should be kept informed
about the steps taken.
Reply of the Government
Earlier the information regarding defunct Self Help Groups was
not being monitored by the Ministry. As per the Standing Committee
vide its earlier Report (48th Report—13th Lok Sabha), the Ministry has
already requested all the State Governments to expedite this information
and this information is still awaited. However, it is proposed to take
up this matter with the States/Union territories at a higher level for
early furnishing of the required information.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.47)
The Committee are unable to find the reasons as to why Sikkim
is excluded from implementing Special Projects Component of SGSY.
They find that in addition to other States, Nehru Yuvak Kendras (NYKs)
have also been given the task of implementing Special SGSY Projects.
The Committee, would like to know the reasons for exclusion of Sikkim,
the justification of involving the NYKs as well as the success of SGSY
Special Projects.
Reply of the Government
Proposals for special projects are initiated from the States to
promote novel self-employment initiatives for the rural poor. The
objective of each Special Project is to ensure a time bound programme
for bringing a specific number of BPL families above the poverty line
through self employment. The project may involve different strategies
to provide long term sustainable self-employment opportunities either
in terms of organisation of rural poor, provision of support
infrastructure, technology, marketing, training etc. or a combination of
these. Project can be proposed by Government, Semi-Government and
International Organisations.

81
Till date 168 proposals have been sanctioned to the States. No
proposal has been received from the State Government of Sikkim.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.50)
While noting that the prescribed frequency of CLCC is generally
maintained, the Committee find that as has been pointed out by
Concurrent Evaluation, many State Governments like Bihar and
Meghalaya do not hold SLCC meeting regularly. Further, the
Department of Rural Development also do not monitor the meetings
of SLCC, DLCC and BLCC which according to the Department are
required to be monitored by the respective State Governments. The
Committee desire that the Government should obtain quarterly and
six monthly reports from the State Governments on the information of
meeting held by SLCC, DLCC and BLCC and pressurize all the States
to adhere to the prescribed frequency to the extent possible.
Reply of the Government
Efforts are being made to streamline the frequency of SLCC/DLCC/
BLCC meetings and State Governments have been advised to adhere
to the procedures outlined in the guidelines.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.61)
The Committee find that Rs. 5,220 crore was obtained through
Supplementary Grants during 2003-2004 over and above the Budget
estimate of Rs. 4,900 crore. The Committee are disturbed to find that
only a token amount is provided at the BE 2004-2005 stage, which has
already been exhausted and the Ministry has committed liabilities of
5,111 crore under SGRY and Rs. 6,900 crore for the Special Component

82
of SGRY. Thus, the practice of demanding more funds in the
Supplementary Grants is likely to continue in this year also. Persistent
demands of Supplementary Grants is not a healthy sign as it does not
give the implementing agencies indifferent districts the idea about the
amount of allocations earmarked for effective implementation of the
scheme. The implementing agencies should be well aware of the
provisions well ahead of time  i.e. at the beginning of the financial
year. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Government should
find out ways and means to overcome this impasse and take suitable
steps, so that Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance are persuaded
to provide adequate necessary funds for SGRY at the beginning of the
financial year.
Reply of the Government
The Supplementary Grants to the tune of Rs. 5200 crores was
obtained during 2003-04 to meet the requirement for payment of food
grains to Food Corporation of India (FCI). FCI release foodgrains based
on authorization by this Ministry. However, this Ministry releases funds
to FCI for quantity of foodgrains lifted by Implementing Agencies on
receipt of Bills duly verified by the District Panchayat/DRDA. Based
on outstanding Bills received from FCI, additional grants are obtained
through Supplementary Grants. As such, Supplementary Grants have
no bearing with the allocated funds to implementing agencies under
the Scheme and it will not affect implementation of the Scheme.
From time to time, this Ministry has been requesting the Ministry
of Finance as well as the Planning Commission to allocate adequate
funds for payment to FCI at BE stage itself. However, due to scarcity
of resources, funds for payment of FCI Bills are being allocated through
Supplementary Grants out of overall savings of the Central
Government.
[Ministry of Rural Development, O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005, Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.65)
It is highly disappointing to note that the Government could
provide the information on minimum wages paid to the beneficiaries
of the SGRY only in respect of 19 States. While glancing through the

83
limited information available, the Committee find that there is wide
variation in the minimum wages paid to the beneficiaries, for example
the highest minimum wage, was paid in the State of Kerala, which
was Rs. 91, whereas its adjoining State Karnataka paid minimum wage
of Rs. 46.25 per day. Similar variations are found in many major States
including Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Chhattisgarh etc. Even in some States
like Andhra Pradesh, the minimum wage rate varies from District to
District. The Committee are of the view that widespread variation in
minimum wages leads to rapid migration, which hampers better
implementation of SGRY. They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
of Rural Development should impress upon all the States/Union
territories to have to the extent possible a uniform wage rate in all the
Districts of a particular State and also there should not be much
difference in the minimum wages in different States so that the SGRY
scheme can be implemented effectively. Further the Committee desire
that relevant information from the remaining States and Union
Territories should be obtained expeditiously and they be apprised
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Anybody who desires to do unskilled work under this Programme
can opt for wage employment. The main effort under this Programme
is to generate maximum number of mandays work and to cover
maximum number of workers. Thus, to provide maximum flexibility
to the Implementing Agencies, States/Union territory have been
authorized to fix minimum wage rates for payment of wages under
the Programme. Since cost of living varies from State to State, region
to region and even within a State, it would not be advisable to fix
any uniform rate for minimum wage throughout the country .
Out of defaulting 9 States and 5 Union territories, relevant
information has since been received from 8 States and 3 Union
territories. However, the same is still awaited from the State of Goa
and Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.
A revised statement indicating minimum wages fixed by States/UTs is
enclosed at Appendix-III.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter I of the Report)

84
Recommendation (Para No. 3.76)
The Committee note that the Evaluation Study of SGRY has been
commissioned in September 2003 in which 44 reputed institutions have
been involved of which 21 are based in Delhi or New Delhi. They
also note that neither National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD)
nor any of the State Institute of Rural Development (SIRD) are involved
in the said study. The Committee desire that as far as possible, the
Ministry of Rural Development should try to involve one reputed
institution of each State in the Evaluation Study of the Schemes. The
possibility of involving NIRD and some of the SIRDs should be
explored in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development had drawn a panel of reputed
Agencies having the requisite experience and technical competence who
are willing to undertake research and evaluation studies of social sector
schemes especially the rural development programmes. Such panel is
drawn by a Technical Advisory Committee headed by Professor
T.S. Papola of Institute of Studies in Industrial Development while
other members are from reputed Institutions like IIM, Planning
Commission, NSSO, etc. The panel of reputed Agencies is redrawn
from time to time. Recently, the Ministry had issued an open
advertisement in all the leading national and regional newspapers for
empanelment of such Agencies. No SIRD has expressed their interest
in taking up such assignment. The NIRD and SIRDs are already
preoccupied with other research and training programmes.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.93)
The Committee note that so far no attempt has been made to
verify all the 1.16 crore houses reportedly built under IAY since
inception. They also note that periodical verification is being done by
the Ministry by way of taking Concurrent Evaluation and periodical
visits by Area Officers. In this scenario, the Committee fail to
understand as to what can be the use of taking Concurrent Evaluation

85
if the Department has not monitored the status of the existence of
houses. They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Rural
Development should initiate a study to verify all the houses constructed
under IAY without further wastage of time.
Reply of the Government
Indira Awaas Yojana (IA Y) is being implemented for rural areas by
the States/Union territory Governments through their District Rural
Development Agencies (DRDAs). Ministry of Rural Development
generally go by the reports furnished by the State Governments.
Concurrent Evaluation is undertaken by the Ministry to get a feel—as
to how the programme is implemented. District Level Monitors are
verifying the construction of IAY houses in 130 selected districts on
100 per cent basis. To get a survey in respect of all houses constructed
so far will be a costly proposition and may not be feasible.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 46 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.94)
The Committee note that several parts of the country are prone to
various natural calamities such as flood, cyclone, earthquake etc. They
further note that the houses constructed under IAY are being
constructed by the beneficiaries themselves who are expected to use
available local materials and low cost disaster resistant and environment
friendly technologies. However, no separate provision for retrofitting
the existing houses against natural calamities has been provided
under the guidelines. Therefore, the Committee desire that in order to
achieve construction of durable houses, some provision in the guidelines
are made for retrofitting of IAY houses in the natural calamity prone
areas.
Reply of the Government
The assistance provided for construction of houses under the
scheme is not the full cost of the house. It is expected from the
beneficiary that they would meet the balance of the cost and to the
extent possible they are also expected to make use of available low

86
cost and disaster resistant technologies. Number of RBCs have been
established all over the country to provide guidance in this regard.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 49 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.105)
The Finance Minister in his Budget speech has stated that a major
impediment to credit for rural housing is absence of proper title for
the land. He also stated that West Bengal has made a law to simplify
the creation of security, which deserve to be emulated by other States.
The Ministry has informed that West Bengal State Government has
been asked to provide a copy of West Bengal law. The Committee
hope that the Government after studying the said law extensively and
expeditiously, would issue the guidelines to other State Governments
to enact similar laws so that the benefit of different rural development
schemes could be extended to rural poor.
Reply of the Government
The requisite information relating to the West Bengal law is being
pursued with the State Government of West Bengal. Necessary action
will be initiated after the receipt of the State’s Act.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 55 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.141)
The Committee are surprised to find that all the districts of the
country do not have a District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) as
on 31 March, 2004. They are equally surprised to find that all the 576
established DRDAs do not receive the funds under the DRDA
Administration Scheme. Even though guidelines have been prescribed
for a model staffing structure and broad personnel policies for four
different types of DRDAs, there is no uniformity in this regard. They

87
feel that the Ministry of Rural Development has minimized its role
only to release the funds under DRDAs and be a silent spectator in
this regard. Further the Government is not aware of the priorities set
by DRDAs as if these are not required to be forwarded to the Ministry.
They have their own doubts as to how the Government can ensure
efficient implementation of Rural Development Programmes without
obtaining the annual reports. They, therefore, recommend that model
staffing structure, broad personnel policies and furnishing of annual
reports of all DRDAs be done without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
There were 578 DRDAs as on 31 March, 2004. With the merger of
9 districts in U.P . with other districts in the State, the Govt. of U.P .
had requested that the allocation for 2004-05 should be distributed
among DRDAs in 61 districts. A new district also came into existence
in Tamil Nadu effective from 1 April, 2004. The total number of DRDAs
receiving grants under the scheme as on 1 April, 2004 was therefore
570. All the 570 DRDAs are receiving grants under the DRDA
Administration Scheme.
Although the DRDA Administration Scheme provides for a model
and indicative staff structure, the actual creation of posts and placement
of people is a matter lying within the domain of the State Government
on which this Ministry has no control. The Ministry has, however,
been impressing upon the State Governments to provide necessary
staff in DRDA establishments to enable them to function effectively.
The release of grants under the Scheme is also limited to expenditure
on personnel actually in position.
Although the Annual Plans of the DRDAs are approved by their
Governing Bodies, who also review and monitor the implementation
of the Plan, the Ministry also obtain monthly, quarterly and annual
reports from each DRDA on the physical and financial performance of
each Scheme. There are also other mechanisms like District Level
Monitoring, Concurrent Evaluation, field visits of Area Officers etc. to
evaluate and monitor implementation of Rural Development
Programmes on a regular basis.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 61 of Chapter I of the Report)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 3.80)
The Committee note with concern that the possibility of
considerable delay in meeting the formalities for release of foodgrains
under Special Component of SGRY to deal with calamities such as
drought, earthquake, cyclone, flood etc. cannot be ruled out due to
the existing long procedural formalities. The Committee presume that
this has resulted in accumulation of unlifted (authorized quantity of)
foodgrains with the State Governments which has been reported to be
as high as 16.18 lakh metric tones as on 31 March, 2004. They, therefore,
desire that the Ministry of Rural Development should in consultation
with the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Home Affairs, who
are the nodal Ministries for drought and other calamities like flood,
earthquake etc. respectively, initiate suitable measures, so that
considerable time is not wasted between the occurance of a calamity
and release of foodgrains under Special Component of SGRY.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee was forwarded to the Ministry
of Home Affairs and Ministry of Agriculture for comments. The
comments from both the Ministries are still awaited.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 40 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.92)
The Committee further note that as per the estimates of Census
2001, there is a shortage of about 149 lakh houses in the country. At
the present level of resources available, only about 15 lakh houses can
be constructed every year, whereas about 10 lakh additional houses
are added annually to existing shelterlessness which aspect also needs
88

89
to be looked in to. Keeping in view the pace at which the houses are
constructed, the Committee are apprehensive about how the
Government will achieve the aim to end shelterlessness in rural India.
The Committee regret that while there is acute shortage of houses, the
funds correspondingly have not been increased to meet the huge gap
between demand and supply. They, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should take appropriate steps to achieve the targets set and
also request the Planning Commission to re-allocate additional funds
to meet the acute shortage of rural housing.
Reply of the Government
The end the shelterlessness in rural areas of the country, more
funds are required for rural housing. Accordingly, Planning Commission
was requested for an amount of Rs. 3460 crore for the year 2004-2005,
but the budget estimate is only for Rs. 2500 crore in the current
financial year. The proposal for 10th Plan outlay was for Rs. 13040
crore but the allocation approved by the Planning Commission is only
Rs. 8603 crore. It is also worth to mentioning here that the per unit
ceiling of assistance for IAY house has been increased from Rs. 20,000/- to
Rs. 25,000/- for plain areas and from Rs. 22,000/- to Rs. 27,500/- for
hilly/difficult areas with effect from 1.4.2004. Similarly, assistance for
upgradation has also been increased from Rs. 10,000/- to Rs. 12,500/- for all
areas. More funds will be needed now.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 43 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.100)
The Committee note that equity support is provided to HUDCO
by Department of Rural Development who garner and provide
additional resources i.e. approximately 8 times the size of equity
contribution from the market. The Committee is disturbed to note that
as HUDCO is under aegis of the Ministry of Urban Development and
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, the Ministry of Rural
Development does not monitor the performance of HUDCO in rural
housing. The Department of Rural Development does not maintain
and thus could not provide information relating to the actual houses
constructed out of the dwelling units sanctioned under the Two Million

90
Housing Programme of the Department of Rural Development. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should obtain the
performance of HUDCO on as yearly basis so that they could have a
clear cut picture of the role of HUDCO in the field of Rural Housing.
In case the performance of HUDCO is found unsatisfactory, the Ministry
should take suitable corrective and ameliorative measures so that rural
families do not suffer.
Reply of the Government
HUDCO has been requested to made available the requisite
information relating to the actual houses constructed out of the dwelling
units sanctioned by the HUDCO under the 2 million housing
programme. Ministry of Urban Development is also being requested
to instruct the HUDCO for supply us this information.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 52 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.133)
The Committee find that as per the information provided by the
Ministry the implementation of rural development programmes in Delhi
was discontinued on the specific request of the Administration because
the rural development schemes are not being implemented in Delhi.
Further it has been stated that there are no unconnected habitations in
Delhi. The Committee are surprised to find that during 2001-2002
Rs. 5 crore was released to Delhi Government under PMGSY. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the clear position of
Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Ministry of Rural Development in
Delhi. They would also like to be apprised of the physical and financial
achievement with regard to the money released to Delhi during
2001-2002. Further, the Committee would like that the Department
should recover the funds, if the released amount during 2001-02 has
not so far been spent.
Reply of the Government
The schemes of the Ministry of Rural Development are not
implemented in the NCT of Delhi. However, an amount of Rs. 5 crore

91
was released during 2001-02 to NCT of Delhi for taking up a road
work under the PMGSY. The NCT of Delhi has already been advised
to either show progress in execution of the works or refund the funds
released along with interest accrued on it.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 58 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.179)
The Committee are not happy with the establishment of Regional
Committee of CAPART in the places where the Schemes of Department
of Rural Development were not being implemented viz. Chandigarh
and Delhi. They also note that Regional Committees have been set up
and are functioning in 9 different places. The Committee, would like
to know the jurisdiction of States and Union territories under each of
these Regional Committees. They feel that the said jurisdiction should
not be administered from a distant area. For example, to oversee the
performance of NGOs of Jammu and Kashmir at Chandigarh, is neither
justifiable nor practical. They, therefore, recommend that CAPART
should consider establishment of Committees at the State level.
Reply of the Government
The names of the RCs and their jurisdiction are as under:—
Sl.No.   Name of the RC Jurisdiction of States
12 3
1. Ahmedabad Maharashtra, Gujarat, Goa Daman & Diu,
Dadar and Nagar Haveli
2. Bhubaneshwar Orissa, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Andaman
& Nicobar Island
3. Chandigarh Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Chandigarh and Punjab
4. Dharwad Karnataka, Kerala & Lakshadweep
5. Guwahati Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam Manipur,
Nagaland, Mizoram, Tripura & Meghalaya

92
12 3
6. Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry
7. Jaipur Delhi, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh
8. Lucknow Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal
9. Patna Bihar, Jharkhand
Regarding opening of Regional Committees in other States, the
matter will be put up for consideration of Executive Committee.
[Ministry of Rural Development O.M. No. H-11020/2/2004-GC
dated the 6th January, 2005 Department of Rural Development]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 64 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
18 March, 2005 Chairman,
27 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

93
APPENDIX I
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MAJOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMMES IN NORTH-EASTERN STATES AND SIKKIM
(Rs. in lakh)
Year : 2000-2001
Programme Arunachal Pradesh Assam Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Sikkim Tripura
Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. T otal Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 21 31 41 5 1 61 7
JGSY 612.05 428.11 2,487.00 1,426.61 762.10 108.36 1244.92 811.86 280.30 330.54 624.98 807.16 30.67 248.45 1915.98 1908.67
EAS 1,274.12 1,064.19 8,086.60 5,880.31 697.76 308.27 736.63 420.90 552.29 517.00 1040.94 1025.17 625.5 625.09 1616.3 1401.74
SGSY 362.90 179.93 2,209.46 2,071.74 24.94 N/R 364.80 88.94 154.50 110.48 348.85 143.4 216.71 151.69 1301.13 1231.26
DRDA Admn. 351.21 351.21 534.24 534.24 208.74 208.74 146.40 146.40 195.78 195.78 200.65 200.65 44.89 44.89 115.07 115.07
IAY 939.20 875.29 15,532.56 11,991.24 490.81 104.34 844.03 804.58 407.91 412.96 991.12 682.67 287.23 273.06 2263.92 2271.35
NFBS 18.92 10.19 1,271.03 853.54 57.43 40.39 71.08 53.80 20.16 20.16 33.92 24.67 6.59 6.52 114.62 97.19
NMBS 6.92 0.21 334.29 139.31 43.21 30.04 41.31 23.98 15.12 15.11 34.86 26.42 7.14 7.08 69.85 54.77
NOPAS 68.98 25.77 2,539.86 1,620.27 284.45 210.41 350.00 239.37 91.66 91.61 230.92 169.06 94.57 94.56 516.51 464.48

94
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 21 31 41 5 1 61 7
IWDP 0.00 0.00 520.01 520.01 368.91 368.91 142.28 142.28 451.32 451.32 992.00 992.00 203.00 203.00 0.00 0.00
RWS 2,206.50 2,163.45 7,407.96 6,053.00 329.88 76.36 2122.93 1519.67 1176.65 1175.80 1324.33 1195.54 1351.12 513.18 1521.00 1580.00
Total 5840.8 5098.35 40923.01 31090.27 3268.23 1455.82 6064.38 4251.78 3345.69 3320.76 5822.57 5266.74 3141.42 2167.52 9434.38 9124.53
Abbreviations:—
1. JGSY—Jawahar Gram Samridhi Yojana
2. EAS—Employment Assurance Schemes
3. SGSY—Swarnjayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana
4. DRDA—Administration—District Rural Development Agency Administration
5. IAY—Indira Awas Yojana
6. NFBS—National Family Benefit Scheme
7. NMBS—National Maternity Benefit Scheme
8. NOPAS—National Old Age Pension Scheme
9. IWDP—Integrated Wastelands Development Programme
10. RWS—Rural Water Supply
11. NR—Not Reported

95
Year : 2001-2002 (Rs. in lakhs)
Programme Arunachal Pradesh Assam Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Sikkim Tripura
Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. T otal Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp.
JGSY 937.77 733.83 18,435.00 11,145.93 639.56 287.16 1505.11 1281.81 411.36 331.42 1049.22 324.39 452.22 279.75 2778.13 2166.52
EAS 892.00 298.20 17,934.38 12,103.40 523.72 N/R 1233.71 974.54 574.95 475.54 811.54 413.22 387.58 170.00 2436.14 2396.72
SGSY 356.55 185.57 4,553.28 2,989.44 13.02 N/R 485.61 305.43 111.51 101.77 266.46 337.85 156.02 231.06 1183.92 1170.46
DRDA Admn. 385.39 385.39 1030.79 1030.79 108.01 108.01 65.59 65.59 160.43 198.01 198.01 198.01 47.13 47.13 136.71 136.71
IAY 1048.29 822.02 15,675.78 10,974.00 502.32 293.45 760.62 754.91 243.02 223.78 824.38 648.52 240.30 237.31 2225.35 1713.38
NFBS 19.32 5.59 1,519.00 1063.73 59.75 43.26 78.20 68.03 17.69 17.69 30.39 20.73 5.87 0.95 114.05 105.97
NOPAS 63.87 27.81 2,754.01 2,542.72 328.43 278.10 399.85 425.12 91.67 91.62 247.95 197.16 102.31 45.47 660.04 573.66
IWDP 85.86 85.86 1619.93 1619.93 327.99 327.99 53.37 53.37 481.91 481.91 1162.69 1162.69 371.91 371.91 160.23 160.23
RWS 2,474.96 2,365.67 6,712.63 5,125.00 1075.02 517.23 1672.00 1518.38 1634.95 1255.48 1700.40 1700.40 696.80 696.80 2026.70 1578.94
Total 6264.01 4909.94 70234.98 48594.94 3577.82 1855.20 6254.06 5447.18 3727.64 6291.04 3139.64 5002.97 2460.14 2080.38 11721.27 10002.59
Abbreviations:—
 1. JGSY —Jawahar Gram Samridhi Yojana
 2. EAS —Employment Assurance Schemes
 3. SGSY —Swarnjayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana
 4. DRDA Administration —District Rural Development Agency Administration
 5. IA Y —Indira Awas Yojana
 6. NFBS —Natiional Family Benefit Scheme
 7. NOPAS —National Old Age Pension Scheme
 8. IWDP —Integrated Wastelands Development Programme
 9. RWS —Rural Water Supply
10. NR —Not Reported
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MAJOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
IN NORTH-EASTERN STATES AND SIKKIM

96
Year : 2002-2003 (Rs. in lakh)
Programme Arunachal Pradesh Assam Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Sikkim Tripura
Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. T otal Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp.
SGRY-I 907.27 798.29 19,746.95 16,049.33 997.12 N/R 1423.36 877.68 542.50 448.43 556.21 600.26 332.42 138.10 2711.24 1831.63
SGRY-II 810.11 312.34 17,123.01 12,679.74 386.00 N/R 1447.65 531.98 446.48 420.98 352.57 286.8 329.28 230.70 2523.20 2379.85
SGSY 279.37 162.5 4,885.00 3,587.09 0.00 0.00 235.97 86.88 107.06 84.03 192.71 184.01 161.78 129.80 843.16 975.63
DRDA Admn. 516.53 516.53 1183.37 1251.60 115.27 115.27 119.97 119.97 159.67 159.67 222.29 222.29 49.50 49.50 179.81 179.81
IAY 1237.18 665.38 16,976.83 10,433.62 489.58 551.34 1267.16 362.08 257.46 231.06 519.32 653.83 219.44 155.17 3056.41 1953.96
IWDP 553.4 458.54 1440.19 1440.19 642.18 642.18 23.68 23.68 1156.16 1156.16 1740.56 1740.56 184.12 184.12 0.00 0.00
RWS 3,759.29 2,597.79 6,840.13 6,096.34 1504.79 1193.41 3089.12 1635.32 2484.47 1773.69 2573.40 1628.40 1100.92 597.06 2875.36 1558.04
Total 8063.15 5511.37 68195.48 51537.91 4134.94 2502.20 7606.91 3637.59 5153.08 4274.02 6157.06 5316.15 2377.46 1484.45 12189.18 8878.92
Abbreviations:—
1. SGRY—Sampurna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
2. SGSY—Swarnjayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana
3. DRDA Administration—District Rural Development Agency Administration
4. IAY—Indira Awas Yojana
5. RWS—Rural Water Supply
6. NR—Not Reported
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MAJOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
IN NORTH-EASTERN STATES AND SIKKIM

97
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MAJOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES
IN NORTH-EASTERN STATES AND SIKKIM
Year : 2003-2004 (Rs. in lakh)
Programme Arunachal Pradesh Assam Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Sikkim Tripura
Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp. T otal Funds Total Exp. Total Funds Total Exp.
SGRY-I 1001.49 523.30 21,477.61 19,324.61 897.29 396.37 1643.47 974.95 509.67 457.66 679.61 531.21 668.36 393.00 3666.15 2707.01
SGRY-II 1,199.13 734.44 18,899.23 22,098.53 577.48 179.29 1611.27 1082.71 485.71 344.02 646.98 481.72 521.34 367.00 2777.61 1767.29
SGSY 265.12 164.75 6,419.72 7,417.91 56.75 NR 354.96 161.90 147.57 138.00 257.73 105.63 201.18 230.30 962.45 967.15
DRDA Admn. 600.66 N/R 1216.35 1450.74 386.91 NR 135.51 NR 403.30 NR 342.19 NR 51.96 NR 188.69 NR
IAY 1496.64 1215.55 21,787.38 14,318.27 654.55 188.70 797.68 1147.50 433.80 390.72 960.29 412.04 297.94 308.97 2697.69 2749.89
IDWP 351.89 N/R 1729.91 NR 313.25 NR 443.65 NR 612.44 NR 1868.31 NR 268.98 NR 31.61 NR
RWS 5,112.84 2,878.86 7,766.26 5,490.00 1955.53 11.1 3268.92 2119.7 2088.78 2085.52 2571.35 1671.12 1019.44 1005.32 3462.48 2438.07
Total 10027.77 5516.90 79296.46 70100.06 4841.76 775.46 8255.46 5486.76 4681.27 3415.92 7326.46 3201.72 3029.20 2304.59 13786.68 10629.41
Abbreviations:—
1. SGRY—Sampurna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
2. SGSY—Swarnjayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana
3. DRDA Administration—District Rural Development Agency Administration
4. IAY—Indira Awas Yojana
5. RWS—Rural Water Supply
6. NR—Not Reported

APPENDIX II
OPENING BALANCE AS ON 1.4.2004 UNDER THE SGRY
(PROVISINAL)
(Rs. in Lakh)
Sl.No. State/UTs Opening Balance
1. Andhra Pradesh 1538.98
2A runachal Pradesh 952.08
3. Assam 14045.22
4. Bihar N.A.
5. Chhattisgarh 1094.51
6. Goa 71.78
7. Gujarat 2043.82
8. Haryana 151.88
9. Himachal Pradesh 1920.00
10. Jammu & Kashmir 8495.64
11. Jharkhand 5485.68
12. Karnataka 3159.16
13. Kerala 3925.44
14. Madhya Pradesh 249.88
15. Maharashtra 2176.02
16. Manipur 874.28
17. Meghalaya 801.58
18. Mizoram 196.42
19. Nagaland 54.05
20. Orissa 1778.69
21. Punjab 865.16
22. Rajasthan 289.33
23. Sikkim NA
24. Tamil Nadu 0.00
25. Tripura 640.68
26. Uttaranchal 1314.15
27. Uttar Pradesh 14313.24
28. West Bengal 12961.20
29. A&N Islands N.A.
30. Dadra and Nagar Haveli N.A.
31. Daman & Diu N.A.
32. Lakshadweep 41.14
33. Pondicherry 98.17
All India 79538.18
98

APPENDIX III
(Vide reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.65)
MINIMUM WAGES FIXED BY THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
UNDER THE SGRY
(in Rupees)
S.No. Name of States/UTs Rate of Minimum Wage
1. Andhra Pradesh* 80.00
2A runachal Pradesh 35.00
3. Assam 48.00
4. Bihar 58.64
5. Chhattisgarh 52.66
6. Goa —
7. Gujarat 61.00
8. Haryana 80.00
9. Himachal Pradesh 60.00
10. Jammu & Kashmir 60.00
11. Jharkhand 64.61
12. Karnataka 46.25
13. Kerala 134.00
14. Madhya Pradesh 54.56
15. Maharashtra 47.00
16. Manipur 44.65
17. Meghalaya 50.00
18. Mizoram 84.00
19. Nagaland 25.00
20. Orissa 50.00
21. Punjab 84.00
22. Rajasthan 60.00
23. Sikkim 50.00
24. Tamil Nadu 54.00
25. Tripura 50.00
26. Uttar Pradesh 58.00
27. Uttaranchal 58.00
28. West Bengal 62.00
29. A & N Islands 60.00
30. Dadra and Nagar Haveli —
31. Daman & Diu —
32. Lakshadweep 50.00
33. Pondicherry 80.00
*Minimum wage rate varies from district to district. Rs. 80.00 is average wage rate for
the State as a whole.
99

APPENDIX IV
PRADHAN MANTRI GRAM SADAK YOJANA (PMGSY)
Sl.No. State Value of Amount No. of No. of road Expenditure
proposals released road works completed (up to August, 04)
(Rs. in Crore) (Rs. in Crore) works (up to August, 04) (Rs. in Crore)
12 3 4 5 6 7
Phase I (2000-2001)
1. Arunachal Pradesh 40.95 40.95 202 202 40.95 (100.00)
2. Assam 75.00 75.00 212 211 70.77  (94.40)
3. #Manipur 40.00 40.00 663 404 31.33  (78.33)
4. Meghalaya 34.95 34.95 208 208 34.95 (100.00)
5. Mizoram 23.12 23.12 19 19 19.93 (100.00)
6. Nagaland 19.75 19.75 127 127 19.75 (100.00)
7. Sikkim 13.16 13.16 30 30 13.16 (100.00)
8. Tripura 24.75 24.75 194 194 31.03 (125.40)
Phase II (2001-2002)
1. Arunachal Pradesh 86.51 86.51 137 108 79.67 (92.1)
2. Assam 154.92 154.92 294 237 137.11 (88.5)
3. #Manipur 80.71 40.00 127 0 0.00  (0.0)
4. Meghalaya 80.72 80.72 109 40 41.27 (51.1)
5. Mizoram 49.38 49.38 26 26 48.20 (97.6)
6. Nagaland 47.76 47.76 27 27 46.07 (96.5)
7. Sikkim 37.81 37.81 30 8 28.64 (75.7)
8. Tripura 51.85 51.85 54 1 14.09 (27.2)
Figures in breckets are percentages
#upto September, 2003
100

101
12 3 4 5 6 7
Phase III (2003-2004)
1. Assam 399.83 100.00 107 0 38.22 (38.2)
2. Mizoram 48.81 48.81 21 0 29.09 (59.6)
3. Nagaland 21.44 21.44 22 1 9.45 (44.1)
4. Sikkim 35.30 20.00 21 0 0.53  (2.7)
Figures in breckets are percentages
Phase IV (2004-2005)
1. Assam 244.46 122.09 195 0 0
2. Mizoram 83.40 0.00 12 0 0
3. Nagaland 37.51 0.00 9 0 0

APPENDIX V
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF
THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDA Y, THE 4 MARCH, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mohan Jena
3. Shri Dawa Narbula
4. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
5. Shri Mohan Singh
6. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
7. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
8. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
9. Shri Penumalli Madhu
10. Dr. Chandan Mitra
11.D r. Faguni Ram
12. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Secretariat
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee.
102

103
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum
No. 5 alongwith the draft action taken report on Demands for Grants
(2004-2005) of the Department of Rural Development. After discussion,
the Committee adopted the draft report without any modification.
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
said draft action taken reports on the basis of factual verification from
the concerned Ministry/Department and to present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Relevant portions of the minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

APPENDIX VI
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 58
II. Recommendations that have been accepted 33
by the Government
Para Nos. 2.3, 2.4, 2.18, 2.21, 2.25, 2.31,
2.39, 3.27, 3.30, 3.31, 3.33, 3.36, 3.42, 3.45,
3.59, 3.70, 3.71, 3.91, 3.102, 3.110, 3.125,
3.126, 3.127, 3.135, 3.148, 3.160, 3.167,
3.178, 3.180, 3.183, 3.190 and 3.191
Percentage of the Total recommendations (56.90%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do 3
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies
Para Nos. 3.34, 3.58 and 3.75
Percentage of the Total recommendations (5.17%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies 17
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos. 2.19, 2.20, 3.14, 3.26, 3.28, 3.29,
3.35, 3.40, 3.47, 3.50, 3.61, 3.65, 3.76, 3.93,
3.94, 3.104 and 3.141
Percentage of the Total recommendations (29.31%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final 5
replies of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos. 3.80, 3.92, 3.100, 3.133 and 3.179
Percentage of the Total recommendations (8.62%)
104