26
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-first Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty-first Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.3.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 16.3.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 032
Price : Rs. 71.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2006-2007) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government .......................................................... 18
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ............................................................................ 34
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ...................................................... 35
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ....... 46
APPENDICES
I. Bhubaneshwar Declaration:—Meeting of the
Council of State Ministers of Panchayati Raj
at Bhubaneshwar, 15-16 June, 2006 ....................... 51
II. Statement showing release of grants of 12th
Finance Commission as on 05-12-2006 ................. 60
III. Extracts of Minutes of the sitting of the
Committee held on 1 March, 2007 ........................ 62
IV. Analysis of action taken by the Government
on the recommendation contained in the
Twenty-First Report of the Committee
(14th Lok Sabha) ........................................................ 64
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shrimati Susmita Bauri
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri George Fernandes
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann
8. Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
9. Shri Hannan Mollah
10. Shri D. Narbula
11. Shri A. F. G. Osmani
12. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy
13. Adv. Renge Patil Tukaram Ganpatrao
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shrimati Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
16. Shri Sita Ram Singh
*17. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
18. Shri Bagun Sumbrui
19. Shri Chandramani Tripathi
20. Shri Beni Prasad Verma
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri D.C. Srikantappa, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Urban Development to Committee on Rural Development vice
the vacancy caused due to change of nomination of Shri Srichand Kriplani MP (LS)
from Standing Committee on Rural Development to Standing Committee on Chemical
and Fertilizers vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, para no. 2847 dated August 31, 2006.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Balihari
23. Shri Jayantilal Barot
24. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra
27. Shri P .R. Rajan
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh
29. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Director
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Deputy Secretary Grade-II

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty-Sixth Report on the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Twenty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj.
2. The Twenty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 May,
2006. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 18 August, 2006 and revised
replies were received on 9 January, 2007.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
1 March, 2007.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report of the Committee
is given in Appendix IV .
   N EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 March, 2007 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2006-2007) deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recomme ndations contained in their Twenty-First 
Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 18 May, 2006. 
 
2. Action taken notes have been received fr om the Government in respect of all the 
35 recommendations which have been categorised as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos.: 2.5, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.18, 2.48, 2.51, 2.57, 2.64, 3.3, 
3.9, 3.13, 3.23, 3.31, 3.36, 3.42, 3.50 and 3.54.   
(ii) Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies: 
 
Para No.: 3.4 
(iii) Recommendations in re spect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Government: 
 
Para Nos.: 2.17, 2.25, 2.26, 2.27, 2.29, 2.45, 2.46, 2.47, 3.17 and 3.30. 
 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of whic h final replies of the Government are 
still awaited: 
 
Para Nos.: 2.28, 2.30, 2.52, 3.20, 3.21 and 3.48. 
 
3. The Committee note that action with regar d to the specific issues raised under 
the following recommendations has been assured/being taken by the Ministry as 
stated in the respective action taken repli es.  The said recomm endations have been 
categorized under the interim category by the Committee.  The Committee would like 
the Ministry to expedite the proposed action  and final replies in this regard should be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of the Report.   
 
(i) Augmenting infrastructure for training to elected representatives of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs): 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 10, (Para No. 2.28), 
 
(ii) Using satellite communication for interaction and training of elected 
representatives of PRIs on the pattern of Karnataka. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 12, ( Para No. 2.30), 

 2
(iii) Need for giving central role to PRIs under ‘Bharat Nirman Programme’. 
Recommendation Serial No. 18, (Para No. 2.52), 
(iv) Making optional utilisation of In formation Technology for promotion of 
PRIs. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 26, ( Para No. 3.20), 
 
(v) Exploring sources other than D oordarshan and DAVP for promotion of 
PRIs. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 27, ( Para No. 3.21), and 
 
(vi) Expeditious guidelines for New Scheme for Media Publicity. 
Recommendation Serial No. 33, ( Para No. 3.48). 
4. The Committee with now deal with acti on taken by the Government on some of 
these recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 

 3
A Central role of Panchayati Raj Institutions in the implementation of Centrally 
Sponsored/Central Schemes 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5, (Para No. 2.17) 
5. The Committee had noted as below: 
 “The Committee note that the National Co mmon Minimum Programme (NCMP) of 
the UPA Government has given a prominent pla ce to Panchayats and stressed on the need 
for devolution of funds, functions  and functionaries to Panchayati Raj Institutions in the 
true spirit of article 243 G of the C onstitution.  The NCMP has stressed on Activity 
mapping spelling out clearly the f unctional domain of the three ti ers of the Panchayats viz. 
Gram Panchayat, Intermediate Panchayat and District Panchayat.  Besides, it has also 
stressed that the transfer of functions s hould be matched by tr ansfer of funds and 
functionaries. In this regard the initiative wa s taken by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for 
creation of the data base of  Panchayat Bank accounts so th at the funds under Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme can be electronically tr ansferred to Bank accounts of all 2,40,000 
Panchayati Raj Institutions.  To examine the feasibility in this regard a Committee was set 
up under the Chairmanship of Additional Secret ary of the Ministry, which found that said 
electronic transfer of outlay was possible.   
 
As a further initiative some of the scheme s particularly the wage employment and 
drinking water and sanitation schemes of the Mi nistry of Rural Development were initially 
selected.  The initiative taken by the Ministry was not successful as the concerned 
Ministries have certain reserv ations and want to continue with the existing system of 
transfer of funds.  Though the Ministry of Finance is agreeable in principle and has stressed 
that administrative arrangement and flow of funds should be in consonance, it has also 
shifted the onus of getting the various Ministri es agree to the proposed  way of transfer of 
funds on the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.   
 
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry to get the funds 
under different Central and Centrally Sponsored  Schemes transferred electronically to the 
Bank accounts of Panchayats.  However, the Comm ittee feel that the said  transfer of funds 
to Panchayats is feasible only in case of the schemes which are currently being 
implemented by the Panchayats.  The Committ ee agree with the views expressed by the 
Ministry of Finance that administrative arra ngements and flow of funds should be in 
consonance.  Besides, another major area of concern is the need to empower the 
Panchayats for enabling them  to shoulder the responsibilit ies of handling schemes for 
which huge outlays are being provided by the Ce ntral Government.  In view of this, the 
Committee feels that the transfer of implementation of various schemes should be done in 
phases.   First of all, the Ministry should ensure that the funds for the scheme, for which the 
PRIs are directly responsible for iden tification, execution a nd implementation, are 
transferred electronically to Bank accounts.  Mo reover the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has 
to work in tandem with the concerned Ministries .  Thus the challenge is great to make the 
Ministries agreeable for which the Ministry has to work in mission mode. 
 
The Committee further appreciate the initia tives of the Ministry to empower Gram 
Sabhas.  While reviewing the Centrally Sponsor ed Schemes, it is being insisted that the 

 4
Gram Sabhas should have a major role to play in selection of beneficiaries, works 
monitoring of programmes and approving the utilisation certificate etc.  Besides, during the 
visits to States by the Minister of Panchayati  Raj also the role of Gram Sabhas is being 
emphasise.  The Committee would like the Minist ry to continue the said initiatives and 
keep the Committee informed about the fu rther progress made with regard to 
implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes in this regard.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5, (Para No. 2.17) 
 
6. The Ministry in their action ta ken reply have stated as under: 
 “The directions of the Standing Committee have been noted. The Ministry has been 
actively pursuing with the State Governme nts for operationalising the Fund Transfer 
Software for transfer of 12 th Finance Commission grants to the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
through banking channels. The States have been  requested to enter the details of bank 
accounts of all the Panchayats, online, in th e Fund Transfer Software which has been 
uploaded on the National Panchayat Portal.  States such as Orissa have already initiated this 
process. Some States such as Haryana, Goa, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh have 
provided details of the bank accounts of Pa nchayats in which the Twelfth Finance 
Commission grants are being de posited.  These details are being uploaded on the National 
Panchayat Portal by the Minist ry of Panchayati Raj.  Th e Committee would be kept 
informed of further developments in the matter from time to time. 
  
The Ministry is continuing it s initiatives to br ing about significan t changes in the 
guidelines of Centrally Sponsored Schemes in li ne with the provisions of Article 243G of 
the Constitution.  The latest position about the progress made in this regard has been given 
in the State of the Panchayats Report which ha s recently been published by the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and copies of the same have al so been laid in the Parliament.  Sufficient 
number of copies of the Report are also being enclosed with the Action Taken Report” 
 
Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 5, (Para No. 2.17) 
 
7. The Committee in their ea rlier recommendation had analyzed in detail the 
various initiatives being taken by the newly created Ministry of Panchayati Raj with 
specific reference to transfer of the responsib ility of execution and implementation of 
various Central/Centrally Sponsored Programmes to Panchayati Raj Institutions. The 
Committee had recommended transfer of impl ementation of various schemes in 
phases in view of the limited resources with PRIs. As regards the issue of transfer of 
funds electronically to bank accounts of Panchayati Raj Institutions, the Committee 
had recommended that the funds for the schemes for which Panchayati Raj 
Institutions are directly responsible for id entification, execution and implementation 
should first be transferred electronically  to bank accounts.  The Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in the action taken note  has although duly acknowledged the 
recommendations of the Committee, yet it does not address to the aforesaid issues 
categorically.  It has simply been stated that the latest position about the progress 

 5
made with regard to transfer of various Centrally Sponsored Schemes to Panchayati 
Raj Institutions has been indicated in th e State of the Panchayats report which has 
recently been published by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and laid in Parliament.  
After analyzing the aforesaid document, the Committee find that there is not much 
progress made in this regard.  Some sort of  centrality on the role of Panchayats could 
be ensured in three programmes viz Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana, the 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Ac t (NREGA) and Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan.  
In other schemes like Mid-Day Meal, National Rural Health Mission etc., efforts are 
being made by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to ensure centrality of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions.  In this regard, the Commi ttee note that under the Sampoorna Grameen 
Rozgar Yojana already the funds were directly transferred to Panchayats and as such 
centrality of Panchayats was already there.   With regard to the National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, as per the provisi ons made under this legislation, 50 per 
cent of the schemes/programmes would have to be implemented by the Panchayats.  
As such, the Committee note that sufficient progress has not been made in this regard.  
The Committee in the earlier recommendation had made various suggestions in this 
regard.  
In view of the aforesaid position, th e Committee reiterate that the challenge 
before the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to ma ke the various Ministries responsible for 
implementation of various schemes agreeable is great and the Ministry has to work in 
tandem with the concerned Ministries. The Committee hope that the Ministry would 
act on the suggested lines.  The Committee sh ould be kept apprised accordingly about 
the progress made in this regard.  Besi des the Committee do not appreciate the way 
the issues raised in the earlier recommendati on has been responded to in the action 
taken replies.  Instead of furnishing the rep ly, it has been stated that the position 
regarding the transfer of execution of Cent rally Sponsored/Central Schemes to PRIs 
is contained in a document of the Ministry.  The Committee strongly recommend that 
the action taken reply should be self containe d.  In case some document is referred to 
in the replies the gist indicating the re quisite information should invariably be 
indicated in the action taken replies. 
  
B Greater attention for training to th e elected representatives of PRIs in the 
country with emphasis on regular and longer duration of training. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7, 8 and 9 (Para Nos. 2.25, 2.26 and 2.27) 
8. The Committee have noted as below: 
“The Committee find from the data made available by the Ministry that at present 
there are 21,95,610 elected repres entatives spread over three tiers of Panchayats.  The 
training of large number of representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions alongwith a large 
number of Panchayati Raj functionaries is an  immense challenge before the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj.  The review of the scheme  related to Panchayati Raj training of the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj in the context of Demands for Grants (2006-2007) has been 
done in the succeeding chapter of the report.  As regards the overall scenario, the 
Committee find that a lot still needs to be done in this regard.” 
Recommendation Serial No. 7(Para No. 2.25) 

 6
 “The Committee further observe that elec tion of PRIs is a Constitutional process 
and every year a number of newly elected representatives may add to the persons requiring 
training making the task rather more difficult.  In  view of this scenario, there is an urgent 
need to have a regular system of training.  In  this direction certain  initiatives are being 
taken by the Ministry.  The Committee would recommend for early finalisation of the 
strategy for imparting training to such a la rge numbers of PRIs.  The Committee may be 
kept apprised of the status of finalisation of the issue as stated above in due course” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No. 2.26) 
 “The Committee further find that at present the period of training imparted to PRIs 
is between 2-5 days.  The Committee appreciate th e fact that different days of training may 
be required for different  levels of PRIs.  For example, for a newly elected representative, 
there is need of exhaustive training, but for an  old representative who has the experience of 
holding such office, the training period may be  for fewer days.  Still the Committee are of 
the firm opinion that two to five days are insufficient to impart training which includes a lot 
of issues like transparency, accountabilit y, PESA, Right to Information Act and the 
knowledge of the important Centrally Spons ored Schemes/Programmes.  Even the 
Secretary, Panchayati Raj has also agreed that the said period of training is not adequate.  
The Committee therefore recommend that while deciding the module for training, it should 
be ensured that sufficient time period is allo cated for a particular level of Panchayati Raj 
representative/functionary.  While deciding the strategy for training, the Ministry may take 
into consideration the concerns of the Committee in this regard.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 (Para No. 2.27) 
9. The Ministry in their action take n replies have stated as under: 
 
 “The directions of the Committee have b een noted.  The National Institute of Rural 
Development has prepared a National Capabili ty Building Framework for Panchayati Raj 
Elected Representatives and Functionaries.  This has been considered by the Ministry 
which has further refined its contents and ha s come out with a modified version of the 
National Capability Building Framework.  It  is proposed to utili ze the existing State 
Institutes of Rural Development and netw ork of Voluntary Orga nisation to have a 
comprehensive programme for training including dimensions like Satellite based training.” 
 
Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 7 & 8 (Para Nos. 2.25 and 2.26) 
 “The concerns of the Committee have been noted.  The Ministry has already 
proposed a National Capability Building Framework for Panchayati Raj Elected 
Representatives and Functionaries.  In this design differentiated st ructures have been 
proposed for different Panchayats Representati ves – the first – time representatives, the 
elected women representatives, the illiter ate representatives and so on.  These are 
Facilitation Course, Basic F oundational course, Functional Literacy Course, Centrally 
Focused Training Programme, Computer Training etc.” 
Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 9 (Para No. 2.27) 

 7
10. The Committee had earlier recommended as under: 
(i) Government should evolve a regular  system of training of the elected 
representatives of PRIs by finalising a strategy as large number of such 
representatives are added every year. 
 
(ii) While deciding module for training of elected representatives of PRIs 
Government should give sufficient time period for training at every 
level as against the existing 2-5 days training. 
 
 
The Ministry in action taken replies has informed about the action being taken 
by them on various issues raised in th e aforesaid recommendations.  As regards a 
regular mechanism to impart training to Panchayati Raj functionaries, the Ministry is 
working with the National Institute of Ru ral Development (NIRD), State Institute of 
Rural Development (SIRD) and network of Voluntary Organizations.  The Committee 
appreciate the work being done by the Ministry and hope that the strategy for having 
a regular mechanism to impart training to  elected representatives of the PRIs would 
be evolved.  The Committee should be kept informed about the progress made in this 
regard. 
 
As regards the concerns of the Committee with regard to sufficient time period 
for training to elected representatives of the  PRIs the Ministry has informed that 
differentiated structure for diff erent Panchayats representatives viz. the first time 
representative, the elected women representatives, the illiterate representatives and so 
on have been proposed.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of 
the different courses designed in  this regard.  Besides, the time period for each of the 
course should also be intimated to the Committee. Besides aforesaid courses should be 
finalized expeditiously and permanent mech anism for training of PRIs should be 
evolved.  
 
C System of tutoring the trainers of elected representatives of PRIs 
Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 2.29) 
11. The Committee have noted as below: 
 “As regards, the issue of trainers, the Committee feel that NIRD and SIRD may not 
be equipped sufficiently to meet the need for a large number of trainers.  The Ministry has 
informed that they have a system of traini ng of tutors which can address the problem of 
paucity of trained tutors.  The Committee would like to be informed about the details of the 
system indicating how the trainers are being tutored.  Besides the da ta as to how many 
trainers could be tutored and the field to which these trained tutors belong may be furnished 
to the Committee to enable them to analyse the system.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 11( Para No. 2.29) 

 8
12. The Ministry in their action take n replies have stated as under: 
 “The concerns of the Committee have  been noted.  A good deal of training 
capability has already been created in States like Karnataka, Kerala etc.  This expertise and 
experience is sought to be disseminated to the rest  of the country.  As pa rt of the initiatives 
for training of PRIs cascade trai ning is being mooted at crea ting pools of resource persons 
at each level from the National to the Block le vel who would be a lasting investment in the 
training chain.  Care will be taken to specially identify people with the right mindset, 
commitment and drive as Resource persons.  These could be drawn from Panchayat 
Members themselves (or ex-members), NGOs or could be Government Servants, both 
serving or retired.  These trained tutors w ould need not only to have experience in 
Panchayati Raj System as a desirable qualific ation, but also more importantly they should 
have the ability to sympathetically communicate, possess multi tasking skills and 
commitment to the tasks.” 
 
Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 11 (Para No. 2.29) 
13. The Committee find that issues raised in their earlier recommendation have 
not been answered properly.  The Committ ee had desired the details of system 
indicating trainers to be tutored and number of trainers that would be needed for 
imparting training.  The Committee have b een  informed that training capability 
created from the States like Karnataka and Kerala would be disseminated to the rest 
of the country besides creation of resou rce persons drawn from Panchayat Members 
themselves, NGOs or from Government Serv ant both serving or retired.  Instead of 
addressing the issues categorically the vague and incomplete replies have been 
furnished.  Nothing has been said as to how trainers are being tutored.  Moreover the 
estimated number of trainers needed for th e purpose alongwith their fields have not 
been made available to the Committee.  The Committee, therefore reiterate that 
details as desired by them be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
D Progress with regard to devolutions of f unctions, functionaries and finances by 
different State Governments/Union territory Administrations to Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
 
Recommendation Serial Nos. 13,14 & 15 
( Para Nos. 2.45, 2.46 and 2.47). 
 
14. The Committee have noted as below: 
 
“The Committee find that the overall aim of Part IX is to endow the Panchayats 
with such powers and responsibilities as may be necessary to enable them to function 
successfully as institutions of self-government , as per Article 243G of the Constitution.  
State Legislatures have been empowered to endow Panchayats by law with such powers 
and authority as may be necessary to en able them to prepare plans for economic 
development and social justice and implement schemes for economic development and 
social justice, including those in relation to the matters contained in the Eleventh 
Schedule.” 
Recommendation Serial No. 13 (Para No. 2.45) 

 9
“The Committee in their reports have rep eatedly been expressing concern about the 
slow progress of devolution of funds, func tions and functionaries to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions.  Besides, the Committee feels that endowing Panchayats with certain functions 
is fruitful only if the Panchayats are equi pped with trained functionaries and adequate 
finances are also made available to them.  T hus devolution of functions has to be matched 
by devolution of funds and functiona ries.  The Committee in their 37 th Report have 
reviewed the position in  detail in this regard and found that only one State viz. Karnataka 
has transferred funds, functions  and functionaries for all th e 29 subjects enlisted in the 
Eleventh Schedule.  Other States like Kerala and West Bengal are doing well.  To have an 
exact idea of the work done with regard to devolution of funds, functions and functionaries, 
the Ministry should furnish to the Committee the latest status in this regard. The Committee 
further appreciate the work done by the Ministry to ensure the devolution in the true spirit 
of Article 243G of the Constitution, whereby a lot of work by way of high level interaction 
with the State Governments has been done by th e Ministry  In spite of this, there is not 
considerable improvement in the number of subjects devolved by the various State 
Governments  as could be seen from the co mparison of Appendices I & II( which indicate 
the status of devolution as on 15.03.2006 and 29.06.2005).  There is improvement in the 
number of subjects devolved in the States of  Gujarat and Maharashtra.  But the devolution 
by some of the States such as Haryana wher e the number of functions has decreased from 
16 to 10 and Madhya Pradesh where the number of subjects decreased from 25 to 23 is a 
major area of concern.  The Committee find that  one of the resoluti ons adopted in the 
Round Table Conference was that devolution coul d be routed through legislative measures 
or alternatively by providi ng a strong legislative fram ework for devolution through 
executive orders.  The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to ensure that the 
various resolutions adopted in different Round Table C onferences where the State 
Governments are also represen ted are strictly implemented.  The Ministry should motivate 
the State Governments as well as take some strict actions in this regard.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 14( Para No. 2.46) 
“The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development in their 37 th Report 
(13th Lok Sabha) had noted that a Task Force was constituted by the Ministry to prepare an 
activity mapping with re gard to responsibilit ies to be devolved to the three-tiers of 
Panchayats.  The Committee had noted that State Governments/Union territories 
administrations had been advised to complete devolution of powers upon Panchayats by 31 
March, 2002.  Further it has been mentioned by the Ministry that a deadline for States to 
complete the activity mapping was set for 31 March, 2005 and later extended to 30 June, 
2005.  The current status of activity mapping indicat es that only four States i.e. the States 
of Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal and Manipu r have managed to satisfactorily complete 
the task of activity mapping.  Though the States of Gujarat, Haryana and Chhattisgarh have 
achieved some progress in respect to activity  mapping, yet a large number of States are 
lagging behind.  While expressing their concer n at the slow pace of activity mapping, the 
Committee urged the Government to impres s upon the State Governments the need to 
complete this important task with a sense of urgency.”    
 
Recommendation Serial No. 15( Para No. 2.47) 
 

 10
15. The Ministry in their action take n replies have stated as under: 
“The directions of the Committee have been  noted for further action.  The Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj is continually interacting with the State Governments and impressing 
upon them to devolve functions, funds and functi onaries to the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
as also implement the relevant recommendations of the Round Tables.  The matter was also 
reviewed in the Sixth Meeting of th e Committee of Chief Secretaries and 
Secretaries(Panchayati Raj) of States/UTs and the Second meeting of the Council of 
Ministers of Panchayati Raj held at Bhubaneswar from 13 th to 16th June, 2006.  A copy of 
the Bhubaneswar Declaration which was issued after the meeting of Council of Ministers is 
enclosed as Appendix-I. 
 
The directions of the Committee have been noted for further action.  The Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj is continually interacting with the State Governments and impressing 
upon them to devolve functions, funds and functi onaries to the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
as also to implement the relevant recomme ndations of the Round Tables.  The matter was 
also reviewed in the seventh meeting of the Committee of Chief Secretaries and Secretaries 
(Panchayati Raj) of States/U Ts. This matter is also being pursued by the Empowered Sub 
Committee of the National Development Council on Financial and Administrative 
Strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institu tions.  In its meetings held on 12 th June, 2006 and 
13th September, 2006, the Sub Committee reviewed  the matter and the position regarding 
implementation of its decisions.  The next m eeting of the Sub Committee is scheduled for 
4.1.2007. 
  
As a part of interactions with the State Governments, the Minister of Panchayati Raj 
has been undertaki ng tour to different States and Union territories for interacting with the 
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions  and to impress upon the State Governments 
to undertake measures for strengthening of PR Is in a time bound manner .  So far, he has 
undertaken tours to 18 States and 2 Union te rritories.  Each visit is concluded with a 
Statement of Conclusions jointly signed with the Chief Minister of the State concerned, 
highlighting the key points of action on which the State would move to operationalise the 
recommendations of the Round Ta bles. All these efforts are bearing fruit and definite 
progress is being made by the States who were  earlier lagging behind.  After the Minister’s 
visits, States like Punjab, Sikkim, Haryana, Uttaranchal etc. have prepared detailed activity 
maps which are in the process of being notifie d after approval of th e Cabinet.  Assam and 
Manipur have agreed to revisit their activity mapping done earlier and are taking necessary 
steps in this regard.” 
 
Reply to Recommendation Serial Nos.13 and 14( Para Nos. 2.45 & 2.46) 
“The concerns of the Committee have been noted.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
is continually interacting with the State Governments and impressing upon them to 
complete the Activity Mapping exercise at the earliest.  This was also reviewed in the Sixth 
Meeting of the Committee of Chief Secretar ies and Secretaries(Panchayati Raj) of 
States/UTs and the Second meeting of the Counc il of Ministers of Panchayati Raj held at 
Bhubaneswar from 13th to 16th June, 2006.”   
 
The directions of the Committee have been noted for further action.  The Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj is continually interacting with the State Governments and impressing 

 11
upon them to devolve functions, funds and functi onaries to the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
as also to implement the relevant recomme ndations of the Round Tables.  The matter was 
also reviewed in the seventh meeting of the Committee of Chief Secretaries and Secretaries 
(Panchayati Raj) of States/UTs.  This matter is also being pursued by the Empowered Sub 
Committee of the National Development Council on Financial and Administrative 
Strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institu tions.  In its meetings held on 12 th June, 2006 and 
13th September, 2006, the Sub Committee reviewed  the matter and the position regarding 
implementation of its decisions.  The next m eeting of the Sub Committee is scheduled for 
4.1.2007. 
 As a part of interactions with the State Governments, the Minister of Panchayati Raj 
has been undertaki ng tour to different States and Union territories for interacting with the 
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions  and to impress upon the State Governments 
to undertake measures for strengthening of PR Is in a time bound manner .  So far, he has 
undertaken tours to 17 States and 2 Union te rritories.  Each visit is concluded with a 
Statement of Conclusions jointly signed with the Chief Minister of the State concerned, 
highlighting the key points of action on which the State would move to operationalise the 
recommendations of the Round Ta bles. All these efforts are bearing fruit and definite 
progress is being made by the States who were  earlier lagging behind.  After the Minister’s 
visits, States like Punjab, Sikkim, Haryana, Uttaranchal etc. have prepared detailed activity 
maps which are in the process of being notifie d after approval of th e Cabinet.  Assam and 
Manipur have agreed to revisit their activity mapping done earlier and are taking necessary 
steps in this regard. 
Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 15 (Para No. 2.47) 
16.  The Committee in the earlier recommenda tions had dealt in detail with  the 
issue regarding endowment of Panchayats with such powers and responsibilities as 
may be necessary to enable them to functi on successfully as in stitutions of self-
Government as per Article 243(G) of the Constitution.  The series of 
observations/recommendations were made by the Committee in this regard.  While 
noting the various efforts being made by the Ministry since its creation, the 
Committee had desired the following:- 
 
(i) the latest position with regard to devolution of funds, functions and 
functionaries should be furnished for information of the Committee; 
 
(ii) the Committee felt that the various  resolutions adopted with regard to 
devolution of PRIs in different Round Table Conferences where the 
State Governments are also represented should be strictly implemented.  
The Ministry should motivate the State Governments as well as take 
some strict actions in this regard; 
 
(iii) the Committee expressed concerns ov er the reversal of subjects by some 
of the State Governments viz. Haryana and Madhya Pradesh have been 
indicated as the States where the number of subjects devolved to 
Panchayati Raj Institutions have decreased; and 
 
 
(iv) the various deadlines of the Ministry to complete the activity mapping 
could not be met.  The progress of ac tivity mapping was very slow.  The 

 12
Committee desired to complete the activity mapping with a sense of 
urgency. 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that none of the issues raised above have 
been addressed categorically in the action  taken replies.  The Ministry has simply 
indicated the details of various Round Table Conferences/seminars etc. done to 
achieve the objective of devolution.   The Committee note that such 
conferences/seminars are urgently required for wider consultations with the State 
Governments.  However, such efforts should  result in achievement of the desired goal 
to some extent.  While reiterating the concerns expressed by the Committee earlier 
with regard to the slow progress of acti vity mapping, the Committee would like the 
detailed response to each of the issues a ddressed in the aforesaid recommendations so 
that the status of devolution could be examined in detail and various suggestions 
could be made in this regard.   
E Need for evolving a mechan ism for direct interaction with people at micro level 
through Conferences/Seminars/Workshops. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Para No. 3.17) 
17. The Committee have noted as below: 
 
“The Committee note that out of the allo cation of Rs.2 crore under the component 
of Conferences/Seminars/Workshops, Rs.1.3 crore i.e. 67 per cent of the allocation was 
utilised during 2005-2006.  The Committee also not es that this amount was utilized in high 
level meetings and Conferences (represented by State Ministers of Panchayati Raj, Chief 
Secretaries of States and State Panchayati Raj Secretaries).  Though Panchayats exist at the 
grass roots level no interaction of the higher officials with th e Panchayats appear to have 
taken place.  Besides no workshop where the gra ss roots level Panchayati Raj functionaries 
could represent were undertaken during this pe riod.  Since all actions of the Government 
are eventually implemented and aimed at the mi cro level, interaction between officials and 
grass roots level functionaries should be more vigorous.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Ministry should evolve a mechanism whereby they can have direct 
inter-action with people at micro level at regular intervals of time.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 25 ( Para No. 3.17) 
 
18. The Ministry in their action take n replies have stated as under: 
 
“With a view to interact with elected representatives including elected women 
representatives the Ministry ha s organized Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyans at Udaipur 
and Patiala on 24th – 25th April, 2006 and 17 th – 18th July respectively.  The Ministry plans 
to organize more such Sammel ans in other states.”  To in itiate awareness campaign for 
gender empowerment, the Panchayat Mahila Shak ti Abhiyan has been c onceptualized.   A 
Core Group of eminent activists is formed fo r every state to spearhead the Abhiyan.  So, 
far, conferences of elected women represen tatives, activists, NGOs, eminent personalities 
have been held as under:- 
 
Udaipur (Rajasthan) - 24th & 25th April, 2006, 
Patiala (Punjab) – 17th & 18th July, 2006, 

 13
Manipur - 4th & 5th October, 2006, and 
Goa - 19th October, 2006.   
 
Such conferences will be held in other states also. 
 
Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Para No. 3.17) 
 
19. The Committee in their earlier  recomm endations had desired to evolve a 
mechanism for direct and vigorous interact ion with the representatives of the  
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) at  grass roots level through Conferences/Seminars 
and workshops to be organised by the Minist ry of Panchayati Raj.  The Ministry has 
informed that they have organised Abhiyans and Sammelans involving participation 
of elected women representatives of PRIs, NGOs, eminent personalities in Udaipur, 
Patiala, Manipur and Goa during 2006 and more such Sammelans are to be organised 
in different States.  The Committee find that  the reply of the Government nowhere 
addresses the issue of evolving a mechanis m for direct and vigorous interaction with 
representatives of PRIs at grass roots level in the country. Organizing such 
Abhiyans/Sammelans at State level would no t be adequate for ensuring complete 
participation of PRIs.  To realize the obje ctive of capacity building of PRIs it is 
utmost necessary that such Sammelans/Abhi yans are organised at grassroot levels i.e. 
Gram and Intermediate and District Panc hayat level.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate that there is  a need to evolve a mechanism fo r direct interactions of PRIs of 
grass roots level in the country through Conferences/Seminars and workshops. 
 
F Need for transferring of entire amount  of Rs. 5000 crore of Backward Regions 
Grant Fund (BRGF) to Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
  
Recommendation Serial No. 29 (Para No. 3.30) 
 
20. The Committee have noted as below:  
 “The Committee note from the position as indicated above that Rashtriya Sam 
Vikas Yojana, a scheme meant for the upliftment of backward districts was approved in the 
year 2004-05 and was actually implemented during the year    2005-06.  The scheme was 
under the administrative control of Planning Commission.  During 2005-06 the releases for 
Rs. 3,257 crore were made to 147 districts identified as backward districts.  The criteria for 
allocation to each district were   Rs.45 crore pe r district.  The allocation was to be made at 
the rate of Rs.15 crore per year.  It seems from the data that the first installment of Rs. 15 
crore to 147 districts has been released by the Planning Commission under RSVY.  Further 
the Committee notes that RSVY now has been subsumed into `Backward Regions Grant 
Fund’ which is under the admini strative control of Ministry of  Panchayati Raj.  Hon’ble 
Finance Minister in his Budge t speech for the y ear 2006-07 has informed that Rs. 5,000 
crore is being allocated for Backward Regi ons Grant Fund during the year 2006-07 and the 
amount would be released in th e coming four years.  The Mini stry of Panchayati Raj has 
further clarified that out of Rs. 5,000 cror e, Rs. 3,750 crore are under the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and the remaining provision of Rs. 1,250 crore is meant for the special 
plans for Bihar and KBK distri cts of Orissa to be handled  by the Planning Commission.  

 14
The Committee disapproves of th e fragmented approach of the Government in handling 
one of the important schemes meant for the backward distri cts and shifting it from one 
Ministry to the other.  The Committee w ould like to strongly recommend to the 
Government that the scheme should be transferred wholly to one Ministry.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 29 (Para No. 3.30) 
 
21. The Ministry in their action take n replies have stated as under: 
 
“The Planning Commission have been consulted in the matter. They have expressed 
the view that it may not be   appropriate to transfer the Special Plans for Bihar and the 
KBK districts of Orissa to th e Ministry of Panchayati Ra j and should appropriately be 
handled by the Planning Commission only as these programmes are continuing 
programmes and include multi-sectoral schemes implemented by various Central/State 
Government agencies.” 
 
Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 29 (Para No. 3.30) 
 
 
22. The Committee in their earlie r recommendation had strongly 
recommended that entire Scheme of Ba ckward Regions Grant Fund of Rs. 5,000 
crore as announced by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech for 2006-2007 
should be transferred to Ministry of Panchayati Raj for development  of backward 
districts in the country instead of hand ling a part thereof by Planning Commission 
under special plans for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa and the remaining by the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  The Ministry in  their action taken reply has stated that 
the matter was taken up with Planning Commission and Planning Commission had 
informed that it may not be proper to tr ansfer the Special Plans for Bihar and KBK 
districts of Orissa to Mi nistry of Panchayati Raj on the ground that these 
programmes are continuous programmes and include multi sectoral schemes 
implemented by various Cent ral/State Government agencie s. The Committee fail to 
understand how the mechanism of assisting the backward districts other than KBK 
districts of Orissa and backward district s of Bihar could be different from the 
remaining backward districts in other Stat es. The Committee at the first hand would 
like to know the di fference between the two viz. backward districts of Orissa and 
Bihar and other districts so that the issue can be examined in detail by the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 15
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1  (Para No. 2.5) 
 
The Committee note that the primary objec tive of inserting direction 73A in the 
Directions by the Speaker was to make  the Government more accountable for 
implementation of the various recommendati ons of the Committee. The Committee are 
concerned to note that even after elapse of around six months when the statement on 
Twelfth Report has fallen due and about three months when the Ministry was requested for 
making the revised statement in respect of Fourth Report, the statements are yet to be made 
by the Hon’ble Minister.  The Committee find that  the Ministry is taking the desired action 
to make the statements in the Second part of the Seventh Sessi on.  The Committee would 
like to recommend to the Ministry to ensure th at the statements are made at the earliest 
during the Second part of the Seventh Session. The Committee further strongly recommend 
to the Ministry to ensure th at the statements on each of th e reports are made within the 
specified period i.e. six months after the presentation of  the Report to Parliament as per 
direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker, in future.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Hon’ble Minister of Panchayati  Raj has made statements on the 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report and Twelfth Report in both the Houses of 
Parliament on 18.5.2006. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj shall ensure that the statements of 
the Hon’ble Minister on each of the reports ar e made within the specified period, i.e. six 
months after the presentation of the Report to Parliament. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2. (Para No. 2.9) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry  of Panchayati Raj was created on                  
27 May, 2004 to oversee the implementation of various provisions made under Part IX of 
the Constitution by way of the 73 rd Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992.  The Committee 
further note that till  2005-2006 the Ministry of Panchaya ti Raj was administering only one 
scheme namely, ‘Panchayat Development an d Training’. The detailed component wise 
analysis of this scheme has been dealt with  in the next chapter of this Report. The 
Committee while analysing the overall position of  allocation and utilisation under the 
scheme as indicated above find that during 2004-05, i.e. the first year of the newly created 
Ministry, the Ministry was able to utilise onl y about 84 per cent of the total allocation even 
though the initial allocation made at the Budge t Estimates stage was reduced to Rs. 10.24 
crore at the Revised Estimate stage.  The dela y in the operationalisa tion of the account of 

 16
the Ministry  (which became functional only in November 2004) has been given as the 
reason for the low rate of utilisation.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation being in nature of an observation, it does not call for any 
reply. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3  (Para No. 2.10) 
 
 The Committee further note that duri ng the year 2005-2006 the Ministry was 
allocated Rs. 50.44 crore out of which Rs.50 crore was plan outlay and Rs.44 lakh was 
non-plan outlay.  The Revised Estimates remained  unchanged at Rs.50 crore.  Out of this 
the total utilisation wa s to the tune of Rs 48.71 crore. Thus there has been an overall 
utilisation of more than 97 percent. Excep t in the utilisation for the components of 
Conferences, Seminars, Workshops and for Mana gement Cell (the detailed analysis of 
which has been done in the succeeding chapter of the Report), the Ministry has managed to 
utilise more than 95 per cent of outlay. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation being in nature of an observation, it does not call for any 
reply. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 (Para No. 2.11) 
 
 The Committee find that huge added respons ibilities have been entrusted to the 
Ministry by way of new schemes.  The alloca tion of the Ministry ha s substantially been 
enhanced from Rs.50.44 crore to Rs.3825.7 3 crore during the year 2006-07.  The 
Committee hope that the initial teething problems involved with the setting up of the new 
Ministry would have been solved by now.  Th ey, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should now gear themselves up, to shoulder the added responsibilities.   
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and will be implemented 
with all sincerity.  The Ministry is taking se veral steps for effective implementation of the 
new Schemes.  The Committee would be kept apprised of the further developments in due 
course.  

 17
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is making all out efforts to ensure effective 
implementation of the Plan Schemes.  All th e Schemes of the Ministry are operative and 
assistance is being provided to States on their request for different purposes as per the 
components of the Schemes. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 (Para No. 2.18) 
 
The Committee further note that with regard to the electronic tran sfer of funds to 
PRIs in respect of Twelfth Finance Commission f unds some progress has been made.  A 
data base has been prepared by NIC and the system is being prepared for implementation at 
the State level onwards to Panchayats.  The Committee would like the Ministry to continue 
the efforts more vigorously and keep the Committee informed about the results achieved in 
this regard.        
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The directions of the Standing Committee ha ve been noted.  The Ministry has been 
actively pursuing with the State Governme nts for operationalising the Fund Transfer 
Software for transfer of 12 th Finance Commission grants to the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
through banking channels. The States have been  requested to enter the details of bank 
accounts of all the Panchayats, online, in th e Fund Transfer Software which has been 
uploaded on the National Panchayat Portal.  States such as Orissa have already initiated this 
process. Some States such as Haryana, Goa, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh have 
provided details of the bank accounts of Pa nchayats in which the Twelfth Finance 
Commission grants are being de posited.  These details are being uploaded on the National 
Panchayat Portal by the Ministry of Panc hayati Raj. The Committee would be kept 
informed of further developments in the matter from time to time. 
 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is actively pursuing the transfer of funds from the 
Consolidated Funds of the State to Panchaya ts through electronic means and to the use of 
the Fund Transfer Monitoring Software deve loped by the NIC wing of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj.  This is al so being emphasized in all the Joint Statement of Conclusions 
being signed with the State Governments afte r the Panchayati Raj tours being undertaken 
by the Union Minister of Panchayati Raj to different States. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation No. 16  (Para No. 2.48) 
 
 The Committee find that inspite of holdi ng as many as 7 Round Table Conferences 
and adopting as many as 150 action points pert aining to 18 dimensions of Panchayati Raj 
unanimously at the conclusion of the last Round Table Conference in  Jaipur, the way the 
Ministry has tried to respond to certain issues is far from sa tisfactory.  At many places the 
Ministry has attributed the r easons for slow progress with re gard to devolu tion of funds, 
functions and functionaries and activity mapping to the Panchayati Raj being a State 

 18
subject.  While appreciating the fact that va rious State Governments have to implement the 
provisions in pursuance of Article 243G in th eir respective laws, the Committee wish to 
emphasise that implementation of Part IX of the Constitution is the responsibility of the 
Union Government.  The Committee therefore recommend for more serious and concerted 
initiatives by the Ministry to give focused attention to the impleme ntation of the various 
provisions of Part IX of the Constitution. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is fu lly aware of its obl igations in the 
implementation of the Part IX of the Constitution which is the basis of its very existence.  
However, the directions of the Committee have been noted for further action.   
 
 [Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.17  (Para No. 2.51) 
 
The Committee note that the ‘Bharat Ni rman Programme’ seeks to build an 
effective rural infrastructure in which the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is an important 
partner. The Ministry outlined the role it c ould play to the National Committee on Rural 
Infrastructure chaired by the Prime Minist er.  The Committee note that this body has duly 
recognized the significance of Panchayats in the implementa tion of the Bharat Nirman 
Programme.  The Committee on Rural Infrastructu re has asked the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj to discuss and receive the feedback re garding this aspect from other concerned 
Ministries. The Ministry accordingly in consu ltation with the concerned Ministries worked 
out the details of the institutional structure proposed for involvement of Panchayats in 
respect of each item in Bharat Nirman Scheme. Specific formulation that emerged from the 
discussion with the Ministries were discus sed in the group of Secretaries chaired by 
Member Secretary, Planning Commission on 1 March, 2006.  The outcome of these 
deliberations has been placed before the National Committee on Rural Infrastructure for 
consideration. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation being in nature of an observation, it does not call for any 
reply. 
 
 [Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.19              (Para No. 2.57) 
 
The Committee find that the constitution of Di strict Planning Committees is a mandatory 
provision of Part IX of the Constitution.  Even after elapse of more than 14 years of the 
enactment of Part IX of the Cons titution, in as many as 10 States viz Andhra Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh and Uttaranchal, DPCs have not been constituted.  Besides in Assam and Manipur, 
the DPCs have not been constituted for all th e districts.  Not only that, the Committee are 
surprised to observe from the information pr ovided by the Ministry that no legal provision 

 19
with regard to constitution of DPCs exist in the States of Gujarat, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Tripura and Orissa.  The Committee would like to stress that  District Planning Committees 
are an important mechanism enshrined in Part  IX of the Constitution to consolidate the 
plans prepared by Panchayats and Municipalitie s.  As per strategy worked out for the 11 th 
Plan it is proposed to reorient  the planning process to ensure that plans are built from the 
level of each Gram Panchayat upwards in a pa rticipative manner.  In view of this the 
Committee fail to understand how th e objectives set by the Minist ry would be achieved in 
the absence of constitution of  District Planning Committ ees by many of the State 
Governments.  The Committee, therefore, stro ngly recommend to the Government to find 
out ways and means whereby State Governments could be impressed upon to implement 
the various provisions of Part IX of the Constitution so that the objective of 
decentralization as envisaged in the Constitution can be achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The following steps have been taken by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj since April 
2006 to impress upon the State Governments the need to constitute District Planning 
Committees at the earliest :- 
 
 (i)          The Ministry  of Panchayati Raj had set up an Expert Group on Grass roots Level 
Planning.  The Group submitted its Report on  28.3.2006, which has been accepted by the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  Based on the Terms of Refere nce of the Expe rt Group, the 
Planning Commission issued a circular to the Planning Secretaries of the State 
Governments in October 2005 in which the State Governments were advised to constitute 
District Planning Committees before their A nnual Plan proposals could be considered. The 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj held a Workshop in  collaboration with the National Institute of 
Public Finance & Policy (NIPFP) on 8-9 May, 06 to operationalise the recommendations of 
the Report. The representatives of the Pla nning Commission and the State Governments 
were invited to this Workshop.  The join t conclusions of the Workshop included the 
provision of constitution of DPCs in States where District Planning Committees (DPCs) are 
not constituted, in accordance with the provisions of Article 243 ZD of the Constitution, by 
15 June 2006. States that did not have legal provisions in place for the constitution of DPCs 
were requested to constitute these immediately through executive orders, pending the 
enactment of statutory provisions in this regard. 
 
 (ii)      It was decided during the meeting of the Empowered Sub-Committee of National 
Development Council held on 12.6.2006 that the States  should constitute District Planning 
Committees  immediately by 15
th July, 2006, or as soon as possible, in accordance with the 
provisions of Article 243 ZD of the Constitutio n. Wherever States do not have appropriate 
legal backing in place for the constitution of DPCs, they may be constituted immediately 
through executive orders, pending the enactment of statutory provisions in this regard; 
 
 (iii) During the meeting of the Council of the State Ministers in char ge of   Panchayati 
Raj held in Bhubaneshwar on 14-15 June, 2006, the State Governments have again been 
exhorted to set up DPCs and to issue guidelines for the Operationalisation of DPCs.  
 (iv) The above decisions have been disseminated to the States.  Letters have also been 
sent by Minister of Panchayati Raj on 19 April, 2006, and by the Deputy Chairman, 
Planning Commission, to the Chief Ministers of States on 24 May 06 to persuade the States 

 20
to constitute DPCs and issue guidelines for preparation of plans by Panchayats and their 
consolidation through DPCs according to the Constitutional mandate.    
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 20 (Para No. 2.64) 
 
The Committee notes that Rs. 20,000 crore payable during 2005-2010 has been 
recommended by the 12 th Finance Commission to supple ment the resources of the 
Panchayati Raj Institutions.  Whereas one y ear has already passed since the grants were 
due, the Ministry is encountering obstacles in the way of releas e of funds as the States are 
delaying details of allocation of these funds at all three levels as aggregated up to district 
level as required in the guidelines.  A Monitoring Committee has been set up to supervise 
the monitoring of the releases of local body grants to Pancha yats.  The said Committee is 
holding meetings.  Besides the Ministry has al so taken up the matter individually with all 
Chief Secretaries of States requesting them to forward the requisite information to the 
Ministry of Finance so as to ensure that funds are released to the local bodies. 
   
The Committee would like the Ministry to further pursue with the State 
Governments so that the grants envisaged by the 12 th Finance Commission could be 
released to supplement the resources of Panchayati Raj Institutions.  The Committee further 
note that the first and second installments  of Twelfth Finance Commission outlay was 
released to the State Governments.  The Mini stry has also stated that the details of 
utilisation of funds is not avai lable as of now.  The Committee would like the Ministry to 
get the information from the State Governments and furnish to the Committee.  Further, the 
Committee would also like to be apprised of  the name of State Governments which are 
delaying the information with regard to the al location of these funds at all three level as 
aggregated up to the district level due to which the release of funds is being delayed by the 
State Governments.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The latest position about the release of the 12 th Finance Commission grants to State 
Governments for supplementing the resources of  Panchayati Raj Institutions is given at 
Appendix-II.  It would be observed that most of the States have drawn both the 
installments of the first year i.e. 2005-06 and Himachal Pradesh has also drawn the first 
installment for the year 2006-07.  The States wh ich are yet to draw the second installment 
and the reasons for the same are listed at Annex-III. 
 
 Information about the utilization of th e grants would be submitted before the 
Committee after obtaining the same from States. 
 
The latest position about the release of th e Twelfth Finance Commission grants to 
State Governments for supplementing the resources of Panchayati Raj Institutions is give at 
Appendix-II.  It would be observed that most of  the States have drawn both the 
installments of the first year i.e. 2005-06 and several States have secured the first 
installment for the year 2006-07 which became due in July, 2006.  Only a few States are 
yet to secure the second installment for 2005-06.  The Ministry has taken up the matter 

 21
with the States concerned for providing the requ isite details to the Ministry of Finance at 
the earliest.  In the case of A ssam and Manipur, this matter was also raised with the State 
Governments during the recent visit of the Minist er of Panchayati Raj to the States.  It was 
also included in the Joint Statement of Conclusions signed with the Chief Minister after the 
visits.  The details of States which are ye t to draw the second installment along with 
reasons for the same are listed at Appendix II.   
 
 Information about the utilization of th e grants would be submitted before the 
committee after obtaining the same from States. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 21 (Para No.3.3) 
 
The Committee find that out of allocat ion of Rs. 19.40 crore for the scheme 
Panchayat Development and Training’ during the year  2005-2006 Rs. 19.36 crore has 
already been utilised.  This training involves the component s of various schemes of the 
different Ministries.  Besides NIRD and SIRD have been id entified as the main institutions 
for imparting training.  For these institutions also the Department of Rural Development 
has certain specific allocations.  Besides this , certain State Governments may also have 
some training schemes.  If the allocation of all these schemes of di fferent Ministries and 
State Governments are added to gether, the allocation for trai ning may be immense.  In 
view of this scenario, the Committee feel that the resource constraint for training is not the 
major area of concern.  Rather there is an  urgent need for having some coordinated 
approach with regard to providing training to  Panchayati Raj Institutions.  While noting 
that training is the basic input for the successful implementation of different Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes, the Committee strongly reco mmend to the Ministry to find out ways 
and means how the funds allocated for trai ning under various schemes of the different 
Ministries can be coordinated and apprise the Committee accordingly alongwith the 
mechanism for training to PRIs. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The directions of the Committee have been noted.  The National Capability 
Building Framework for Panchayati Raj Elec ted Representatives and Functionaries has 
been so designed whereby Training Programme  Management shall be decentralized and 
adapted for local needs.  Against the backgr ound illustrated by the Committee, it is now 
necessary for the Central Government to ensure  that instead of assigning separate funds for 
training to the Ministry, it would immediately irrevocably promote the agenda on capability 
building if 1 per cent of public expenditures on all Centrally Sponsored Schemes are placed 
in a non-lapsable consolidated corpus, and as signed exclusively for implementation of the 
National Capability Framework.  This will facilitate smooth and contin uous training of PRI 
elected representatives and Functionaries at all levels.  It would also enable the Central 
Government to issue consolidated sanction in toto for any State specific project for 
implementing the Framework.  
 

 22
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 23 (Para No.3.9) 
 
The Committee is glad to note that the entire outlay of Rs. 9.20 crore for the scheme 
of giving awards to best Panchayats was utilize d. They also find that the States of Kerala, 
Karnataka and Sikkim have been awarded the Fi rst, Second and Third prizes respectively 
during the year 2005-2006.This is in recognition of their having achieved the parameters 
set for this award satisfactorily. The Committ ee recommend that greater publicity be given 
to this scheme so that Panchayats at all levels are encouraged to strive for these awards.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Scheme has been subsumed in the Panchayat Empowerment and Incentive 
Scheme in the current year. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 24 (Para No.3.13) 
 
The Committee notes that under ‘Panchayat  Development and Research’ out of an 
allocation of Rs.2 crore for 2005-06, the Ministry has show ed a utilization of Rs. 1.91 
crore.  During the said period the Training  and Research Advisory Committee of the 
Ministry is stated to have considered 54 pr oposals out of which 23 were approved.  All the 
approved projects are at various stages of im plementation.  On receipt of the reports, the 
Ministry would undertake impact assessment studies.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the follow up of these proj ects and also the outcome of the impact 
assessment study in due course.  The Commi ttee further find that the Ministry has 
identified certain thrust areas to prioritize studies.  The Committee recommends that studies 
on the prioritized areas should be taken up at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The concerns of the Committee have been noted.  The directions of the Committee 
would be implemented in commissioning of  studies under the Scheme which is a 
component of the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana during the current year. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 28 (Para No.3.23) 
 
The Committee notes that out of the a llocation of Rs 5 cr ore under `Projects 
Assisted by UN Agencies’, the Ministry ha s managed to utilize Rs 4.7 crore during 2005-
2006. The Committee further notes that the Mini stry in collaboration with the UNDP is 
undertaking several projects with  a view to improving the Panchayati Raj system.   UNDP 

 23
has also funded a study on jurisprudence of Panchayati Raj Institutions which is being 
implemented by Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra (RLEK) and the Institute of 
Social Studies  (ISS) New Delhi.  The Re port of the study has been reviewed by the 
Ministry and the task force on Jurisprudence is examining the report.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the main findings  of the said study and the views of the task 
force therein.  Further the Ministry with the assistance of UNFPA (United Nations 
Population Fund) is also assisting one study on gender sensitization and reproductive health 
etc.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the findings of the said study. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The studies entrusted to RLEK and ISS and funded by the UNDP submitted their 
reports containing discussions on the following:- 
 
(i) Empowerment of Gram Sabha 
(ii) Clear demarcation of functions 
(iii) Setting up of Vigilance Committee to surprise the works, schemes and other 
activities of the PRIs. 
 
The reports reviewed the situations wher ein the State Panchayati Raj Acts/ Laws 
and also the Central Acts had been requir ed to be brought in harmony with the 73 rd 
Amendment Act of the Constitution and PESA  Act 1996. The Chairperson of Task Force 
had forwarded the reports to the State Government for necessary action. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.30  (Para No.3.31) 
 
Further with regard to the transfer of scheme from Planning Commission to 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj th e bigger concern is to monito r the funds allo cated under the 
earlier scheme i.e. RSVY.  It has been stated that Rs. 45 crore was to be released to each 
district under RSVY.  Out of   Rs. 45 crore, Rs. 15 crore has already been released and now 
under the new scheme i.e. Backward Regions Grant Fund the allocation will be made for 
five years.  Besides the Committee also not e that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is 
formulating new mechanism and guidelines in the scheme Backward Regions Grant Fund.  
In this scenario, th e Committee strongly reco mmend to the Department to find out some 
mechanism to coordinate the newly named scheme i.e. Backward Regions Grant Fund with 
the allocations made under the earlier scheme i.e. RSVY so that the real objective of 
bringing the backward districts at par with the progressive districts by providing social and 
economic infrastructure is really achieved.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is proposed that the districts covere d under RSVY would continue to be funded 
under the BRGF until each district  receives the full amount of  Rs. 45 crore as per RSVY 
norms and guidelines.  Further, it is also proposed to subsume thes e districts in the BRGF 
for funding after the RSVY amounts are released in full. 

 24
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 31 (Para No.3.36) 
 
 The Committee find that four schemes (i) Training and Cap acity building (ii) 
Research Studies (iii) Information Technol ogy and (iv) Infrastructure Development 
implemented by the Ministry have been broug ht under one scheme i.e. Rashtriya Gram 
Swaraj Yojana.  The allocation during the y ear 2006-07 for this scheme is Rs.50.50 crore.  
The Committee appreciate the objectives of th e scheme according to which the real issues 
involved with the capacity building of Panc hayats i.e. improving the infrastructure, 
augmenting technical staff and competence,  training, e-governance would be handled by 
one scheme.  Besides a format is being circulat ed to the States for collecting the basic data 
of the existing capacity of each Panchayat.  The Committee would like to be informed of 
the progress made in the implementation of this scheme.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is in the process of  obtaining the approval of Planning 
Commission/Expenditure Finance Committee for the New Scheme.  The Committee would 
be kept informed of the progress made in the implementation of the scheme. 
 
Approval of the Planning Commission a nd the Expenditure Finance Committee 
having been obtained, the Ministry is in the process of implementing the Scheme.  We have 
received proposals from various States fo r funding under various components of the 
Scheme and these are being processed.  So far, Rs. 0.89 crore has been released. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.32 (Para No.3.42) 
 
The Committee notes that the Mini stry has launched a new scheme viz. Panchayat 
Empowerment Incentives Scheme meant to reward the State Governments which are 
serious on the issue of implementa tion of various provisions of Part IX of the Constitution.  
Seven reform areas based on which the incentives will be provided to State Governments 
have been identified.  The Committee is glad to  observe that as many as 8 States namely 
Chattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Orissa, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal 
have come forward by putting proposals to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  The Committee 
hopes that the initiatives take n by the Department would mo tivate State Governments to 
really empower the Panchayati Raj Institutions.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
An incentive scheme would need to devolve large funds to motivate the State 
Governments to empower the Panchayati Ra j Institutions.  A budget allocation of Rs. 10 
crores has been made for the Financial Year 2006-07.  The Ministry has initiated a proposal 

 25
for allocation of Rs. 5,000 crores per annum under the scheme during the 11 th Five Year 
Plan for in-principle approval of the Planning Commission. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 34  (Para No.3.50) 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Ministry is making efforts to ensure the 
success of Rural Business Hubs with Public Private Panchayat Partnership.  This initiative 
will on the one hand enable better market access for locally available resources and skills 
and on the other hand it will involve Panchayats at all levels as facilitators, which would 
enhance their scope as well as bring about definite economic gains.  The Committee hope 
that such efforts are continued further.  The Committee would also like to be kept apprised 
of the progress regarding the new initiatives undertaken. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry shall continue its efforts for ensuring success of Rural Business Hubs 
with Public Private Panchayat Partnership. The progress regarding the new initiatives of the 
Ministry is as following: 
 
(i) The Ministry in association with the Confederation of Indian Industries(CII) has 
received Expression of Interest from 72 industrial houses, Financial Institutions 
and other organizations for setting up Rural Business Hubs(RBH).  The State 
specific Expressions of Interest have been forwarded to the concerned State 
Governments for ensuring interactions between c oncerned PRIs and these 
organizations.  
  
 (ii) The Ministry is also taking up with th e other Central Ministries, like Agriculture, 
Food Processing Industries, Commerce a nd Industry, Textiles, Agro and Rural 
Industries for ensuring convergence of the existing Central Government Schemes 
for socio economic development with the Rural Business Hubs initiative.  
 
(ii) At the instance of the Ministry, 12 States have already constituted State RBH 
Councils. The Ministry has also take n up with the State Governments for 
identification of products/ skills for taki ng forward the RBH initiative at the State 
level. 
 
(iv) So far 39 MOUs have been signed be tween Private Companies, Panchayats and 
rural artisans / producers / processors etc.  These MOUs pertain to different streams 
of activities e.g. distribution of power by Panchayats, plantation of Jatropha, fruit 
processing, seed production, organic food, dairy, brick making, electricity 
generation through bio-mass, handicrafts  and handloom. These MOUs are at 
different stages of implementation. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 

 26
 
Recommendation Serial No. 35 (Para No.3.54) 
 
The Committee note that the Jan Kerosene Pariyojana is a novel initiative launched 
with the joint efforts of the Ministry of Pa nchayati Raj and Minist ry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas with a view to minimise adulte ration of subsidised kerosene and preventing 
diversion of PDS supply of kerosene to black  market.   The Ministry of Food and Civil 
Supplies is entrusted with the framing of guidelin es.  The pilot project of this initiative has 
been launched in about 458 blocks across the country.  Further, awareness campaigns are 
being organised in various media in the lo cal language to create greater impact.  The 
Committee appreciates the efforts of the G overnment to secure a central role for 
Panchayats in such developmental initiatives.  The Committee would like to be informed of 
the progress in respect to this project and whether the Government intends to cover the 
entire country by this scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With a view to minimize rampant leakag e and maldistribution of subsidized 
kerosene oil, Ministry of Panchayati Raj in  association with Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas has launched a. pilot scheme of  Jan Kerosene Pariyojana since October 2nd 
2005 in four hundred and twelve development blocks spreading across almost all the 
States and Union territories.  
 
The Scheme envisaged involvement of Pa nchayati Raj Institution (PRls) through 
constitution of Vigilance Committees at each of the three tiers of PRls, namely the District 
Panchayat (Zilla Parishad), Intermediate. Panchayat (Panchayat Samiti) and Village 
Panchayat (Gram Panchayat) which would monitor the distribution system of kerosene and 
alert the state authorities, oil marketing comp anies and the Central Mi nistry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas about black marketing and dive rsion of the subsidized  kerosene oil. The 
deep and active involvement of Gram Sabha in  monitoring entitlements and availability of 
PDS kerosene in ration shops was the foundati on of the initiative and the starting point of 
the grievances redressal mechanism. A ca mpaign of mass awareness about the Pilot 
Scheme and role of Vigilance Committees in its implementation has also been launched. 
The mass awareness programme comprises; 
 
i. Advertisement in News Papers, 
ii. Radio Jingles, 
iii. T.V Spots/Commercials, 
iv. Commercial Movie/Serials, 
v. Mass Campaign including street play, plays, shows etc. to 
be organized by Zonal Cultural Centers, and 
vi. Promotion and distribution of Posters and Pamphlets. 
 
State government authorities were also  being sensitized through regular 
communications and interactions for facilitating the implementation of the scheme. Regular 
review of the scheme was being adopted at different levels. As a result of the initiatives of 
this Ministry and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Vigilance Committees had either 
been formed or were in the process of being constituted in different States/Union 

 27
territories.  Initially the scheme was upto 30 th March, 2006 and it was fu rther extended to 
30th June, 2006. 
 
 Further review of the programme relating to its continuation and further extension 
beyond 30th June, 2006 and to extend the programme in  other parts of the country is to be 
undertaken by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.   A communication in this 
regard is awaited from the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
 
The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has since extended the Programme for a 
further period upto 30/6/2007. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 

 28
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 22 (Para No.3.4) 
 
As indicated in a preceding para of the report, the data with regard to elected 
representatives of three-tiers of Panchaya ts when added together comes to 21,95,610.  
However, in the Annual Report (2005-2006) of the Ministry, the said data has been 
indicated as 31 lakh elected representatives.  The Ministry may clarify the position with 
regard to the number of elected representati ves of Panchayati Raj Institutions and inform 
the Committee.   
Reply of the Government 
 
The concerns of the Committee have been noted.  The Ministry would like to clarify 
that as per their Annual Report for the year  2005-06 at page 8 - Table 2- Leadership 
Positions in Panchayats, the number of el ected representatives has been shown as 
20,73,715.  However, it has been correctly obser ved by the Committee at page 18 of the 
Annual Report, Para. 4.3 – Progress, the Ministry have indicated  “the number of elected 
representatives is approximately 31 lakhs in the country”.   The figure 31 lakhs is 
regrettably an unforced error and may kindly be read as 21 lakhs.   
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 29
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 (Para No.2.17) 
 
The Committee note that the National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) of 
the UPA Government has given a prominent pla ce to Panchayats and stressed on the need 
for devolution of funds, functions  and functionaries to Panchayati Raj Institutions in the 
true spirit of article 243 G of the C onstitution.  The NCMP has stressed on Activity 
mapping spelling out clearly the f unctional domain of the three ti ers of the Panchayats viz. 
Gram Panchayat, Intermediate Panchayat and District Panchayat.  Besides, it has also 
stressed that the transfer of functions s hould be matched by tr ansfer of funds and 
functionaries. In this regard the initiative wa s taken by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for 
creation of the data base of  Panchayat Bank accounts so th at the funds under Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme can be electronically tr ansferred to Bank accounts of all 2,40,000 
Panchayati Raj Institutions.  To examine the feasibility in this regard a Committee was set 
up under the Chairmanship of Additional Secret ary of the Ministry, which found that said 
electronic transfer of outlay was possible.  
  
As a further initiative some of the scheme s particularly the wage employment and 
drinking water and sanitation schemes of the Mi nistry of Rural Development were initially 
selected.  The initiative taken by the Ministry was not successful as the concerned 
Ministries have certain reserv ations and want to continue with the existing system of 
transfer of funds.  Though the Ministry of Finance is agreeable in principle and has stressed 
that administrative arrangement and flow of funds should be in consonance, it has also 
shifted the onus of getting the various Ministri es agree to the proposed  way of transfer of 
funds on the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
  
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry to get the funds 
under different Central and Centrally Sponsored  Schemes transferred electronically to the 
Bank accounts of Panchayats.  However, the Committee feels that the said transfer of funds 
to Panchayats is feasible only in case of the schemes which are currently being 
implemented by the Panchayats.  The Committee agrees with the views expressed by the 
Ministry of Finance that administrative arra ngements and flow of funds should be in 
consonance.  Besides, another major area of concern is the need to empower the 
Panchayats for enabling them  to shoulder the responsibilit ies of handling schemes for 
which huge outlays are being provided by the Ce ntral Government.  In view of this, the 
Committee feels that the transfer of implementation of various schemes should be done in 
phases.   First of all the Ministry should ensu re that the funds for the scheme, for which the 
PRIs are directly responsible for iden tification, execution a nd implementation, are 
transferred electronically to Bank accounts.  Mo reover the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has 
to work in tandem with the concerned Ministries .  Thus the challenge is great to make the 
Ministries agreeable for which the Ministry has to work in mission mode. 
 

 30
The Committee further appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry to empower Gram 
Sabhas.  While reviewing the Centrally Sponsor ed Schemes, it is being insisted that the 
Gram Sabhas should have a major role to play in selection of beneficiaries, works 
monitoring of programmes and approving the utilisation certificate etc.  Besides, during the 
visits to States by the Minister of Panchayati  Raj also the role of Gram Sabhas is being 
emphasised.  The Committee would like the Minist ry to continue the said initiatives and 
keep the Committee informed about the fu rther progress made with regard to 
implementation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The directions of the Standing Committee ha ve been noted. The Ministry has been 
actively pursuing with the State Governme nts for operationalising the Fund Transfer 
Software for transfer of 12 th Finance Commission grants to the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
through banking channels. The States have been  requested to enter the details of bank 
accounts of all the Panchayats, online, in th e Fund Transfer Software which has been 
uploaded on the National Panchayat Portal.  States such as Orissa have already initiated this 
process. Some States such as Haryana, Goa, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh have 
provided details of the bank accounts of Pa nchayats in which the Twelfth Finance 
Commission grants are being de posited.  These details are being uploaded on the National 
Panchayat Portal by the Minist ry of Panchayati Raj.  Th e Committee would be kept 
informed of further developments in the matter from time to time. 
 
The Ministry is continuing it s initiatives to br ing about significan t changes in the 
guidelines of Centrally Sponsored Schemes in li ne with the provisions of Article 243G of 
the Constitution.  The latest position about the progress made in this regard has been given 
in the State of the Panchayats Report which ha s recently been published by the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and copies of the same have al so been laid in the Parliament.  Sufficient 
number of copies of the Report are also being enclosed with the Action taken Report. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7  (Para No.2.25) 
 
The Committee find from the data made av ailable by the Ministry that at present 
there are 21,95,610 elected representatives spr ead over three tiers of Panchayats.  The 
training of large number of representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions alongwith a large 
number of Panchayati Raj functionaries is an  immense challenge before the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj.  The review of the scheme related to Panchayati  Raj training of the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj in the context of Demands for Grants (2006-2007) has been 
done in the succeeding chapter of the report.   As regards the overall scenario, the 
Committee find that a lot still needs to be done in this regard. 
 
 

 31
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation being in nature of an observation, it does not call for any 
reply. 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 (Para No.2.26) 
 
The Committee further observe that election of PRIs is a Constitutional process and 
every year a number of newly elected repres entatives may add to the persons requiring 
training making the task rather more difficult.  In view of this  scenario, there is an urgent 
need to have a regular system of training.  In  this direction certain  initiatives are being 
taken by the Ministry.  The Committee would recommend for early finalisation of the 
strategy for imparting training to such a la rge numbers of PRIs.  The Committee may be 
kept apprised of the status of finalistion of the issue as stated above in due course. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The directions of the Committee have been  noted.  The National Institute of Rural 
Development has prepared a National Capabili ty Building Framework for Panchayati Raj 
Elected Representatives and Functionaries.  This has been considered by the Ministry 
which has further refined is contents and ha s come out with a modified version of the 
National Capability Building Framework.  It  is proposed to utili ze the existing State 
Institutes of Rural Development and netw ork of Voluntary Orga nization to have a 
comprehensive programme for training including dimensions like Satellite based training. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 (Para No.2.27) 
 
 The Committee further find that at present the period of training imparted to PRIs is 
between 2-5 days.  The Committee appreciate the fact that different days of training may 
be required for different levels of PRIs.  For example, for a newly elected representative, 
there is need of exhaustive training, but for an old representative who has the experience of 
holding such office, the training period may be  for fewer days. Still the Committee are of 
the firm opinion that two to five days are insu fficient to impart training which includes a 
lot of issues like transparency, accountabilit y, PESA, Right to Information Act and the 

 32
knowledge of the important Centrally Spons ored Schemes/Programmes.  Even the 
Secretary, Panchayati Raj has also agreed that the said period of training is not adequate. 
The Committee therefore recommend that while deciding the module for training, it should 
be ensured that sufficient time period is allo cated for a particular level of Panchayati Raj 
representative/functionary.  While deciding the strategy for training, the Ministry may take 
into consideration the concerns of the Committee in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The concerns of the Committee have b een noted.  The Ministry has already 
proposed a National Capability Building Framework for Panchayati Raj Elected 
Representatives and Functionaries.  In this design differentiated st ructures have been 
proposed for different Panchayats Representati ves – the first – time representatives, the 
elected women representatives, the illiter ate representatives and so on.  These are 
Facilitation Course, Basic F oundational course, Functional Literacy Course, Centrally 
Focused Training Programme, Computer Training etc. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 11  (Para No.2.29) 
 
 As regards, the issue of tr ainers, the Committee feel th at NIRD and SIRD may not 
be equipped sufficiently to meet the need for a large number of traine rs.  The Ministry has 
informed that they have a system of traini ng of tutors which can address the problem of 
paucity of trained tutors.  The Committee would like to be informed about the details of the 
system indicating how the trai ners are being tutored.  Besi des the data as to how many 
trainers could be tutored and the field to  which these trained tutors belong may be 
furnished to the Committee to enable them to analyse the system. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The concerns of the Committee have been noted. A good deal of training capability 
has already been created in States like Karn ataka, Kerala etc..  This expertise and 
experience is sought to be disseminated to the rest  of the country.  As pa rt of the initiatives 
for training of PRIs, cascade training is bei ng mooted at creating pools of resource persons 
at each level from the National to the Block le vel who would be a lasting investment in the 
training chain.  Care will be taken to specially identify people with the right mindset, 
commitment and drive as Resource persons.  These could be drawn from Panchayat 
Members themselves (or ex-members), NGOs or could be Government Servants, both 
serving or retired.   These trained tutors would need not only to have experience in 
Panchayati Raj System as a desirable qualific ation, but also more importantly they should 
have the ability to sympathetically communicate, possess multi tasking skills and 
commitment to the tasks.  

 33
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 13  (Para No.2.45) 
 
The Committee find that the overall aim of Part IX is to endow the Panchayats with 
such powers and responsibilities as may be  necessary to enable them to function 
successfully as institutions of self-government , as per Article 243G of the Constitution.  
State Legislatures have been empowered to endow Panchayats by law with such powers 
and authority as may be necessary to en able them to prepare plans for economic 
development and social justice and implement schemes for economic development and 
social justice, including those in relation to the matters contained in the Eleventh Schedule. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation being in nature of an observation, it does not call for any 
reply. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 14  (Para No.2.46) 
 
The Committee in their reports have rep eatedly been expressing concern about the 
slow progress of devolution of funds, func tions and functionaries to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions.  Besides, the Committee feels that endowing Panchayats with certain functions 
is fruitful only if the Panchayats are equi pped with trained functionaries and adequate 
finances are also made available to them.  T hus devolution of functions has to be matched 
by devolution of funds and functiona ries.  The Committee in their 37 th Report have 
reviewed the position in  detail in this regard and found that only one State viz. Karnataka 
has transferred funds, functions  and functionaries for all th e 29 subjects enlisted in the 
Eleventh Schedule.  Other States like Kerala and West Bengal are doing well.  To have an 
exact idea of the work done with regard to devolution of funds, functions and functionaries, 
the Ministry should furnish to the Committee the latest status in this regard. The Committee 
further appreciate the work done by the Ministry to ensure the devolution in the true spirit 
of Article 243G of the Constitution, whereby a lot of work by way of high level interaction 
with the State Governments has been done by th e Ministry  In spite of this, there is not 

 34
considerable improvement in the number of subjects devolved by the various State 
Governments  as could be seen from the co mparison of Appendices I & II( which indicate 
the status of devolution as on 15.03.2006 and 29.06.2005).  There is improvement in the 
number of subjects devolved in the States of  Gujarat and Maharashtra.  But the devolution 
by some of the States such as Haryana wher e the number of functions has decreased from 
16 to 10 and Madhya Pradesh where the number of subjects decreased from 25 to 23 is a 
major area of concern.  The Committee find that  one of the resoluti ons adopted in the 
Round Table Conference was that devolution coul d be routed through legislative measures 
or alternatively by providi ng a strong legislative fram ework for devolution through 
executive orders.  The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to ensure that the 
various resolutions adopted in different Round Table C onferences where the State 
Governments are also represen ted are strictly implemented.  The Ministry should motivate 
the State Governments as well as take some strict actions in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The directions of the Committee have been noted for further action.  The Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj is continually interacting with the State Governments and impressing 
upon them to devolve functions, funds and functi onaries to the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
as also implement the relevant recommendations of the Round Tables.  The matter was also 
reviewed in the Sixth Meeting of the Com mittee of Chief Secretaries and Secretaries 
(Panchayati Raj) of States/UTs and the Seco nd meeting of the Council of Ministers of 
Panchayati Raj held at Bhubaneswar from 13 th to 16 th June, 2006.  A copy of the 
Bhubaneswar Declaration which was issued after the meeting of Council of Ministers is 
enclosed as Appendix-I. 
 
The directions of the Committee have been noted for further action.  The Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj is continually interacting with the State Governments and impressing 
upon them to devolve functions, funds and functi onaries to the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
as also to implement the relevant recomme ndations of the Round Tables.  The matter was 
also reviewed in the seventh meeting of the Committee of Chief Secretaries and Secretaries 
(Panchayati Raj) of States/U Ts. This matter is also being pursued by the Empowered Sub 
Committee of the National Development Council on Financial and Administrative 
Strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institu tions.  In its meetings held on 12 th June, 2006 and 
13th September, 2006, the Sub Committee reviewed  the matter and the position regarding 
implementation of its decisions.  The next m eeting of the Sub Committee is scheduled for 
4.1.2007. 
 
 As a part of interactions with the State Governments, the Minister of Panchayati Raj 
has been undertaki ng tour to different States and Union territories for interacting with the 
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions  and to impress upon the State Governments 
to undertake measures for strengthening of PR Is in a time bound manner .  So far, he has 
undertaken tours to 18 States and 2 Union Terrr itories.  Each visit is concluded with a 
Statement of Conclusions jointly signed with the Chief Minister of the State concerned, 
highlighting the key points of action on which the State would move to operationalise the 
recommendations of the Round Ta bles. All these efforts are bearing fruit and definite 
progress is being made by the States who were  earlier lagging behind.  After the Minister’s 
visits, States like Punjab, Sikkim, Haryana, Uttaranchal etc. have prepared detailed activity 
maps which are in the process of being notifie d after approval of th e Cabinet.  Assam and 

 35
Manipur have agreed to revisit their activity mapping done earlier and are taking necessary 
steps in this regard. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 15  (Para No.2.47) 
 
The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development in their 37th Report 
(13th Lok Sabha) had noted that a Task Force was constituted by the Ministry to prepare an 
activity mapping with re gard to responsibilit ies to be devolved to the three-tiers of 
Panchayats.  The Committee had noted that State Governments/Union territories 
administrations had been advised to complete devolution of powers upon Panchayats by 31 
March, 2002.  Further it has been mentioned by the Ministry that a deadline for States to 
complete the activity mapping was set for 31 March, 2005 and later extended to 30 June, 
2005.  The current status of activity mapping indicat es that only four States i.e. the States 
of Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal and Manipu r have managed to satisfactorily complete 
the task of activity mapping.  Though the States of Gujarat, Haryana and Chhattisgarh have 
achieved some progress in respect to activity  mapping, yet a large number of States are 
lagging behind.  While expressing their concer n at the slow pace of activity mapping, the 
Committee urge the Government to impre ss upon the State Governments the need to 
complete this important task with a sense of urgency.     
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The concerns of the Committee have been noted.  The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is 
continually interacting with the State Gove rnments and impressing upon them to complete 
the Activity Mapping exercise at the earliest.  This was also reviewed in the Sixth Meeting 
of the Committee of Chief Secretaries and Secr etaries(Panchayati Raj) of States/UTs and 
the Second meeting of the Council of Minister s of Panchayati Raj held at Bhubaneswar 
from 13th to 16th June, 2006.   
 
The directions of the Committee have been noted for further action.  The Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj is continually interacting with the State Governments and impressing 
upon them to devolve functions, funds and functi onaries to the Panchayati Raj Institutions 
as also to implement the relevant recomme ndations of the Round Tables.  The matter was 
also reviewed in the seventh meeting of the Committee of Chief Secretaries and Secretaries 
(Panchayati Raj) of States/UTs.  This matter is also being pursued by the Empowered Sub 
Committee of the National Development Council on Financial and Administrative 
Strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institu tions.  In its meetings held on 12
th June, 2006 and 
13th September, 2006, the Sub Committee reviewed  the matter and the position regarding 
implementation of its decisions.  The next m eeting of the Sub Committee is scheduled for 
4.1.2007. 

 36
 As a part of interactions with the State Governments, the Minister of Panchayati Raj 
has been undertaki ng tour to different States and Union territories for interacting with the 
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions  and to impress upon the State Governments 
to undertake measures for strengthening of PR Is in a time bound manner .  So far, he has 
undertaken tours to 17 States and 2 Union te rritories.  Each visit is concluded with a 
Statement of Conclusions jointly signed with the Chief Minister of the State concerned, 
highlighting the key points of action on which the State would move to operationalise the 
recommendations of the Round Ta bles. All these efforts are bearing fruit and definite 
progress is being made by the States who were  earlier lagging behind.  After the Minister’s 
visits, States like Punjab, Sikkim, Haryana, Uttaranchal etc. have prepared detailed activity 
maps which are in the process of being notifie d after approval of th e Cabinet.  Assam and 
Manipur have agreed to revisit their activity mapping done earlier and are taking necessary 
steps in this regard. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 25 (Para No.3.17) 
 
The Committee note that out of the alloca tion of Rs.2 crore under the component of 
Conferences/Seminars/Workshops, Rs.1.3 crore i.e. 67 per cent of the allocation was 
utilized during 2005-2006.  The Committee also notes  that this amount was utilized in high 
level meetings and Conferences (represented by State Ministers of Panchayati Raj, Chief 
Secretaries of States and State Panchayati Raj Secretaries).  Though Panchayats exist at the 
grass roots level no interaction of the higher officials with th e Panchayats appear to have 
taken place.  Besides no workshop where the gra ss roots level Panchayati Raj functionaries 
could represent were undertaken during this pe riod.  Since all actions of the Government 
are eventually implemented and aimed at the mi cro level, interaction between officials and 
grass roots level functionaries should be more vigorous.  The Committee therefore 
recommends that the Ministry should evolve a mechanism whereby they can have direct 
inter-action with people at micro level at regular intervals of time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With a view to interact with elected representatives including elected women 
representatives the Ministry ha s organized Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyans at Udaipur 
and Patiala on 24th – 25th April, 2006 and 17 th – 18th July respectively.  The Ministry plans 
to organize more such Sammelans in other states.    
 
To initiate awareness campaign for gender empowerment, the Panchayat Mahila 
Shakti Abhiyan has been conceptualized.   A Co re Group of eminent activists is formed for 
every state to spearhead the Abhiyan.  So, far, conferences of elected women 
representatives, activists, NGOs, eminent personalities have been held as under:- 
 
 

 37
1. Udaipur (Rajasthan) - 24th & 25 th April, 2006, 
2. Patiala (Punjab) – 17 th & 18th July, 2006, 
3. Manipur - 4 th & 5th October, 2006, and 
4. Goa - 19 th October, 2006.   
 
Such conferences will be held in other states also. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Serial No.29  (Para No.3.30) 
 
The Committee note from the position as i ndicated above that Rashtriya Sam Vikas 
Yojana, a scheme meant for the upliftment of backward districts was approved in the year 
2004-05 and was actually implemented during the year 2005-06.  The scheme was under 
the administrative control of Planning Commissi on.  During 2005-06 the releases for       
Rs. 3,257 crore were made to 147 districts identified as backward districts.  The criteria for 
allocation to each district were   Rs.45 crore pe r district.  The allocation was to be made at 
the rate of Rs.15 crore per year.  It seems from the data that the first installment of Rs. 15 
crore to 147 districts has been released by the Planning Commission under RSVY.  Further 
the Committee note that RSVY now has been subsumed into `Backward Regions Grant 
Fund’ which is under the admini strative control of Ministry of  Panchayati Raj.  Hon’ble 
Finance Minister in his Budge t speech for the y ear 2006-07 has informed that Rs. 5,000 
crore is being allocated for Backward Regi ons Grant Fund during the year 2006-07 and the 
amount would be released in th e coming four years.  The Mini stry of Panchayati Raj has 
further clarified that out of Rs. 5,000 cror e, Rs. 3,750 crore are under the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and the remaining provision of Rs. 1,250 crore is meant for the special 
plans for Bihar and KBK distri cts of Orissa to be handled  by the Planning Commission.  
The Committee disapproves of th e fragmented approach of the Government in handling 
one of the important schemes meant for the backward distri cts and shifting it from one 
Ministry to the other.  The Committee w ould like to strongly recommend to the 
Government that the scheme should be transferred wholly to one Ministry.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Planning Commission have been consul ted in the matter. They have expressed 
the view that it may not be   appropriate to transfer the Special Plans for Bihar and the 
KBK districts Orissa to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and should appropriately be handled 
by the Planning Commission only as these programmes are continuing programmes and 
include multi-sectoral schemes implemente d by various Central/State Government 
agencies. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)  

 38
CHAPER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 10 (Para No.2.28) 
 
Besides deciding the module of imparting training, an important issue which needs 
to be addressed critically is th e infrastructure for training.  Apar t from the issues related to 
training which have been dealt with in the next part of the Report, there is an urgent need 
for accommodation and the requisite infrastructu re for training.  The Committee feel that 
the existing infrastructure available with Panchayats like Panchayat Ghars which can be 
utilised for the purpose is quite inadequate.  There is an urgent need to collect the data base 
in this regard and augment the infrastructure.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The concerns of the Committee have been noted.  The Ministry agrees that the 
existing infrastructure available with the Panchayat is quite inadequate.   The Cabinet has 
approved the Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) whereby 250 identified Backward 
Districts will get an allotment of Rs. 1 crore each for creation of infrastructure till the end 
of the Eleventh Plan.  A separate scheme is being formulated for the non BRGF districts. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Serial No.12 (Para No.2.30) 
 
The Committee also note that satellite co mmunication is being used by rural public 
to interact with their Panchayat Members in Ka rnataka.  This is a laudable initiative as it 
provides a medium for people at  the grass roots level to get a quick solution to their 
problems by specialised resource-persons.  The Committee appreciate this initiative and 
recommend that the Ministry should frame the feasibility of undertaking similar exercise in 
all parts of the country.  Moreover the Central Ministry can also be connected to this 
network and can interact with all people at given intervals of time.    
 
The Committee are of the opinion that this  medium can be used for twin purposes 
of interacting with PR I functionaries as also for impar ting training.  This  would greatly 
reduce costs as well as tackle the problem of training. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 39
The directions of the Committee have been noted.  The National Capability 
Building Framework for Panchayati Raj Elec ted Representatives makes provisions for up-
scaling the satellite communication and satellite based training.  A communication centre is 
proposed to be established in all the States.  This Framework is under the consideration of 
the Ministry. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 18  (Para No.2.52) 
 
The Committee feel that since Bharat Ni rman Programme seeks to revamp the 
entire rural sector infrastructure, there is an  urgent need to provi de a central role to 
Panchayats.  The Committee therefore recomme nd that concrete step s should be taken by 
the Ministry to secure a central role for Pa nchayats in Bharat Nirman Programme.  They 
would like the Ministry to apprise the Committee about the follow up action in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Secretary, Panchayati Raj requested Me mber Secretary, Pl anning Commission by 
letter dated 30.5.06 to advise the Ministries co ncerned to modify the scheme guidelines to 
provide a role to Panchayats in accordance w ith the position agreed during the meeting of 
the Group of Secretaries on 1.3.2006 so that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj could also 
write to the States about the role of the Panchayats in implementing these components of 
the Bharat Nirman. Adviser (Water Resources ), Planning Commission has written to 
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, Secretary, Ministry of Rural 
Development, Secretary, Department of Dr inking Water Supply and the Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Power, on 31.5.06, 6.6.06 and 7.6.06   respectively for thei r feedback in the 
matter. Ministry of Panchayati Raj has b een represented on a Sub group of a Working 
Group on Water Resources for Formulation of various proposals for the sector to be 
implemented during the 11 th Five Year Plan under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Water 
Resources. The sub group will give recommenda tions   on Minor Irrigation and Public 
Private Partnership and its terms of referen ce include re-examination of the participatory 
irrigation management legislatio n to involve Panchayati Raj Institutions.  Responses from 
the other Ministries concerned are awaited. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 40
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 26  (Para No.3.20) 
 
The Committee notes that the outlay for IT and IEC was fully utilized during 2005-
2006.  The Committee would like to point out for such a vast network of PRIs as exists in 
India, e-governance is the best option for establishing an interface between the 
Central/State Ministries and actual functionaries at Panc hayat level. The Committee would 
like to recommend that in the present day scenario where IT has reached such a high degree 
of advancement, the Ministry should take full advantage of it and promote its maximum 
use. This would not only lead to greater transparency but increase accountability as well. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been  noted.  We are in contact with the 
Department of Information Technology and we are in the process of formulating an IT Plan 
for Panchayats. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation Serial No. 27 (Para No.3.21) 
 
The Committee note that under IEC the Mi nistry creates awareness of the powers 
and responsibilities of Panchayats .The Committee would like to point out that the 
dissemination of information is primary to ef fective governance. It is vital that people 
receive accurate information through various sources regard ing the various developmental 
initiatives to ensure their success. Th e Committee would like to recommend that the 
Ministry should look beyond D oordarshan and DAVP for public ity purposes. They should 
also explore other interactive media for the sa me.  The Ministry should encourage the use 
of local language and traditional media such as   drama song and dance as it would create a 
greater impact among the masses. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to disseminate information at the grass roots leve l about development 
initiatives undertaken by Panchayati Raj Institutions, the Ministry proposes to circulate 
bulletins and reports, apart from taking services of Doordarshan and DAVP, by providing 
financial assistance to NGOs and private sector institutions. 
   

 41
In order to disseminate information at  grass roots level about development 
initiatives under taken by Ministry of Pa nchayati Raj Institutions; empowering the 
community and Panchayati Raj Institutions with information and knowledge about their 
roles, rights and res ponsibilities, facilitati ng the State Government s to develop suitable 
communication strategies to promote the effect ive functioning of PRIs  etc, the Ministry 
proposes to circulate bulletins and reports, apart from taking services of Doordarshan and 
DAVP, by providing financial assistance to NGOs and private sector institutions. 
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 33 (Para No.3.48) 
 
The Committee notes that the ‘Scheme fo r Media, Publicity and Advocacy’ which 
has been newly launched includes components of the erstwhile Panchayat Development 
and Training Scheme.  This scheme is inte nded to empower the comm unity and PRIs with 
knowledge about their roles a nd responsibilities keeping in mind the tenets of the 73 rd 
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992 and the Right to Information Act.  Though guidelines 
of this scheme are yet to be finalized, the Government has drafted a media policy and the 
views of the Ministry of the Information and Broadcasting are being so licited.  Further the 
Ministry proposes to set up a Media Adviso ry Group for monitoring this scheme.  The 
Committee would like to recommend here that the guidelines of the scheme be finalized in 
the shortest possible time so that the pattern of allocation and utilization of the earmarked 
outlay can be done meaningfully.  Further the Committee would like to be informed of the 
views of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on the media policy.  The 
Committee note that this scheme is to be m onitored by a Media Advisory Group headed by 
the Minister of Panchayati Raj.  They would li ke to be apprised of the composition of the 
Media Advisory Group and any action taken by it. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is in the process of finalizing the guidelines for the 
media policy and views of the Ministry of In formation and Broadcasting have also been 
sought on the guidelines to be fi nalized.   The formation of a media advisory group headed 
by the Minister of Panchayati Raj is inter-liked with the draft guidelines for which the 
process is in progress.    
 
[Ministry      of       Panchayati     Raj       O.M.      No.    G-22011/2/2006-B&F,   
Dated: 18 August, 2006, 9 January, 2007] 
 
 
 
 

 42
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 3 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
NEW DELHI;          KALYAN SINGH 
15__March, 2007      Chairman ,                                 
24_Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Rural 
                                              Development 
 

APPENDIX I 
 
MEETING OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS OF PANCHAYATI RAJ AT 
BHUBANESWAR 15 - 16 June 2006 
 
 
Bhubaneshwar Declaration 
 
 
 The Council of Ministers observed that this meeting at Bhubaneshwar on 15-16 
June 2006 is the ninth meeting in the last tw o years, of the Uni on Minister and State 
Ministers of Panchayati Raj deliberating on empowering the th ree tiers of Pa nchayats, so 
that they grow into “institutions of local self-government” in the letter and spirit of Parts IX 
and IX A of the Constitution.  
 
2. During comprehensive deliberations over two days, the Council of State Ministers 
of Panchayati Raj reaffirmed three key issues relating to empowerment of Panchayats:   
 
(i) Time bound Activity Mapping as the foundation for devolution of functions, 
funds and functionaries; 
(ii) Creation of a Panchayat Sector in St ate and Central Plan and Non-Plan Budget, 
to facilitate devolution of finances to the Panchayats  in accordance with the 
Activity Mapping by states; and  
(iii) Re-orienting the distri ct planning process to ensure conformity with the 
provisions of Article 243G and the Eleven th Schedule read with the provisions 
of Article 243Z D, of the Constitution.   
 
It was agreed that action on these three points constituted the core of reforms required 
for participative development, including pl anning and implementation. This road map is 
essential for strengthening Panchayats to fully play the role envisaged for them in the 
Constitution.   
 
3. Having reiterated these core reforms, th e Council of Ministers reviewed the action 
taken so far, and spelt out the future course of action.  
 
4.             It was recalled that the Second Round Table of State Mi nisters of Panchayati Raj 
at Mysore (August 2004) had resolved, under the heading, “Planning”, as follows:   
 
“There shall be constituted in every State, at the district level, a District 
Planning Committee (DPC) in accordance w ith the procedure laid  down  in 
the  Constitution  in Article  243ZD (2) by the  end of the  current  financial 
year  wherever  such  DPCs  do  not  already  exist. 
 
As provided  for  in  the Constitution,   each  tier  of the Panchayati  Raj  
system  must  prepare  the perspective  Five Year Plan  and  Annual Plans  
for their  respective  jurisdiction.  The DPC should “consolidate” the plans 
prepared by the Panchayats and Municipalities, as provided for in the 
Constitution,   
 

To  facilitate  such  planning,  the State  Government,  in  accordance  with  
the   provisions of  Article  243ZD, may  indicate  to  each  level  of  the  
Panchayats  and   Municipalities,  “the   extent and  type of  available  
resources,  whether  financial or  otherwise”. 
 
In  the  budgets  of State Governments, consideration  may  be  given  to  
incorporating  a  Panchayat sector  in  each departmental  budget.   At the 
Centre, the Planning Commission, in consultation  with the Central  
Ministries  concerned,  might  work  out   similar  appropriate  
arrangements”. 
 
  
5. State Ministers of Panchayati Raj fr om Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Manipur, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura and 
West Bengal indicated the implementation stat us in their respective States on Activity 
Mapping, creation of Panchayat Sector, fiscal devolution and constitution of District 
Planning Committees. The Vice-Chairmen, Pl anning Boards from Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh, as well as delegations from other States and Union 
territories, indicated their re spective status positions, and supported the idea of moving 
immediately in the direction of decentralized annual and perspective planning at PRI levels. 
The Council of Ministers reviewed progress in this direction and noted that in many States, 
the preliminary task of Activity Mapping acro ss three levels of Panchayats has been 
completed. However, progress across States in the constitution of District Planning 
Committees has been uneven and somewhat slow.   
 
6.    Taking account of the Report of the Expert Committee on Grasroots Level Planning 
(The V. Ramachandran Committee), the Council of  Ministers resolved that well in time for 
the Annual State Plan discussions with the Planning Commission for the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan, all States must rapidly move in  the direction of completing their Activity 
Mapping and providing for a Panchayat Sector in the State Plan and budget, as well as 
constituting and empowering District Planni ng Committees (DPCs) in accordance with the 
provisions of Article 243 ZD of the Constitution. It was agreed that Ministers would ensure 
compliance with the time limits indicated in the conclusions of the Workshop on District 
Planning.  
 
7. Until now, the Planning Commission has not  insisted on district level planning 
during State Plan discussions with State govern ments. The Council of Ministers noted that 
several developments had materi ally altered the situation prev ailing hitherto. Increasingly, 
social sector schemes, including critical Flagship programmes (on health, education, 
nutrition and drinking water, for instance) are being planned and implemented through 
Panchayats. So are NREGP and Bharat Nirm an. So it is proposed with the Backward 
Regions Grant Fund. Accordingly, the Pla nning Commission is reviewing its current 
pattern of deliberations with State governments and Ministries of the Central Government 
with a view to making district planning th e foundation of the Elev enth Five-Year Plan 
commencing on 1 st April, 2007. To this end, the Council of Ministers identified the 
following road map and resolved as follows: 
 
(i) In order to ensure the centrality of Panchayats in critical programmes, the 
Planning Commission may mandate, at the very least, that initial planning, 

approvals and sanctions for these criti cal programmes should issue through the 
PRIs.   
 
(ii) Wherever States have moved ahea d with completion of activity mapping and 
fiscal devolution, Planning Commissi on may mandate that execution and 
implementation of these schemes shall be through Panchayats.  
 
(iii) Financial resources ma de available to PRI, s hould be based on Activity 
Mapping and formulated through the Panchayat Sector in State Budgets. While 
this will substantially augment Panchayat finances, it will cast no additional 
burden on State Budgets as the Panchayat Sector aims at transferring from the 
line department to PRI, those resources required for funding PRI activities 
determined through Activity Mapping. Moreover, with a view to promoting 
planning by PRIs of their entitled resources, conditionalities should be 
progressively relaxed and the element of untied grants sensibly augmented.  
 
(iv) The Planning Commission, in consultati on with central Ministries, will make an 
effort to demarcate financial allocations pertaining to matters in the Eleventh 
Schedule into a separate Panchayat Sector. 
 
8. The Council of Ministers endorsed the c onclusions of the Workshop on Grass roots 
Level Planning convened in New Delhi, during May, 2006. In the context of the run-up to the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Council of Minist ers requests the Planning  Commission and the 
National Development Council to continue its work on rationalizing, simplifying and reducing 
the number of Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The Council of Ministers 
notes with satisfaction that the Planning Commi ssion is shortly convening a meeting of State 
Secretaries of Planning and Panchayati Raj to operationalise th e Bhubaneswar Declaration, as 
also to assist the states in undertaking and re viewing progress.  The Co uncil of Ministers also 
noted for compliance, the conclusions of the Empowered Sub-Committee of the National 
Development Council on Panchayati Raj.   
 
 
9. The Council of Ministers reviewed pr ominent initiatives, which provide for 
Panchayats a critical role in planning and implementation:  
 
(i) Release of Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) grants 
 
a) The Council of Ministers noted that under Article 280 of the Constitution, the 
Central Finance Commission is  to recommend grants to augment the Consolidated 
Funds of States so as to supplement the resources of the Panchayats in accordance 
with the recommendations of the State Finance Commission.  Therefore, these 
grants constitute entitlements of the Panchayats and, therefore, cannot be delayed or 
diverted; 
 
b) The Council of Ministers observed that the TFC had r ecommended that rural local 
bodies give priority to ru ral water supply and sanitati on. However, a consensus 
emerged that while such priority may be accorded, these TFC grants are in the 
nature of untied block grants, and hence there is a critical need to retain flexibility 
at the local level;  

 
c) The Council of Ministers re solved that all States must immediately complete action 
to secure the release of the 1 st and 2 nd installments of TFC grants pertaining to 
2005-06. States that have drawn both instal lments must similarly take immediate 
action to secure the releases due to th em on account of the first installment for 
2006-07;   
 
d) The Council of Ministers noted that as di rected by TFC the monies released by state 
governments to Panchayats would have to be unconditional.  Any action that 
constitutes parking of the money in Panchayat accounts in St ate treasuries, and 
barring the utilization of th e funds without prior approva l, would not constitute a 
‘release’ in the letter and sp irit of the Guidelines issued  by Ministry of Finance, 
Government of India.   
 
e) The Council of Ministers noted that 14 States are beginning to  use the software 
provided by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to track the direct releases from state 
treasuries to Panchayats, and to maintain data bases of Panchayat bank accounts. It 
was agreed that States would immediately operationalize the system so as to ensure 
compliance with the stipulation contained in  the Guidelines issued by Ministry of 
Finance, Government of India that monies must be sent to the Panchayats within 15 
days of their reaching the State Consolidated Fund, failing which state governments 
would be liable to pay interest to Panchayats at RBI-specified rates.  
 
(ii) The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA): 
 
a) Section 13(1) of the Nati onal Rural Employment Guarantee Act states that District, 
Intermediate and Village level panchayats shall be the principal authorities for planning 
and implementation of the Schemes made unde r this Act.  The Council of Ministers 
agreed that state governments would work out detailed mechanisms applicable to each 
level of Panchayat, for implementing this key provision in letter and spirit.  The 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj would assist States if required in this regard; 
 
b) Sections 15, 16, 17 and 18 of  the Act list in detail the functions, duties and powers 
of Panchayats at all three levels and th e Gram Sabha, in implementing NREGA.  The 
Council of Ministers stressed the need for wide dissemination of these provisions to 
Panchayats and the local communities. In th is direction, Ministers would ensure that 
Panchayats put up prominent boards in thei r offices and public ar eas detailing their 
respective powers, duties and functions.  Th e Union Ministry of Panchayati Raj and 
State Governments will work jointly to ensure that this is done.  The assistance of 
NGOs should be sought, and there should be wi de propagation of the details of these 
provisions by having them read out during meetings of every Gram Sabha; 
 
c) The Council of Ministers observed that the 2 per cent allocated for administrative 
costs is grossly insufficient to meet the indispensable requirements of preparatory 
aspects of the programme at all levels of the Panchayats, such as capacity building, 
provision of administrative and technical sta ff; training and orientation of both elected 
representatives and officials; registration; issue of job cards and computerization.  All 
these have to be fully provided in advance.  As such, the Council of Ministers strongly 

supports the proposal of the Ministry of Ru ral Development to earmark 6% of funds 
under NREGA towards administrative costs and capacity building. 
 
d) There is an immediate need for comprehe nsive and sustained training for Panchayat 
level staff and elected representatives in all aspects of the implementation of NREGA 
and, more particularly, of the procedures  relating to implemen tation. The Council of 
Ministers agreed that States mu st set up Task Forces specifically to concentrate on this 
issue.  
 
e) It is observed that the ac tual wages paid to those employed in NREG works is often 
lower than the prescribed minimum wage because the payment of wages is based on the 
Schedule of Rates.  This leads to those who are most in need – the older is compared to 
the younger; the malnourished is compared to the better-fed; and women is compared to 
men – generally receiving substantially lowe r wages than the others. This tends to 
defeat the very purpose of NREGA. Minister s were of the view that the PWD Schedule 
of Rates is primarily designe d to handle contract works,  it is not the appropriate 
measure to determine the wage payable unde r NREG work, where th e priority is to 
provide wage security. Under these circumstances, the Counc il of Ministers resolves 
that every State shall, within a month, prepare separate a Schedule of Rates applicable 
exclusively to NREGA works, based on time an d motion studies that they are enjoined 
to undertake under the guidelines for implementation of the Act. This exercise will be 
aimed at doing away with discriminatory wage payment to some categories of persons 
and ensure equitable and full implementation of the provisions of the Act.  It was noted 
that the Government of Tamil Nadu has already initiated steps in this direction. 
 
f) The Council of Ministers resolved that  there has to be a high and continuous 
emphasis on the implementation of the Right  to Information in respect of NREGA. 
Muster rolls must invariably be maintained in full, particularly indicating the full details 
of the persons who have turned out for work.  Such muster rolls must be made available 
for inspection by the Gram Sabha as also wh enever separately called upon to do so at 
the Gram Panchayat or any other appropriate Panchayat level.  
 
(iii) National Rural Health Mission (NRM): 
 
The Council of Ministers applauds the cen trality accorded to Panchayats in the 
implementation of the National Rural Health Mi ssion (NRHM), and resolves to support all 
steps that will strengthen the communitisati on of health care, and convergent action under 
the umbrella of the Panchayati Raj Institutions.  
 
(iv) Jan Kerosene Pariyojana 
 
The Council of Ministers noted that the pilot project on the Jan Kerosene Pariyojana 
is scheduled to come to an end by June 30, 2006, and that the evaluation report by NCAER 
is also scheduled to be presented by that da te. The Council of Minister s urged that as there 
have been a number of teething problems with respect to the pilot project, which are now in 
the process of being resolved, the pilot project may be permitted to continue for another six 
months to make course corrections and, ther eafter, for yet another six months before 

undertaking a final evaluation of the pilot project, and subse quent implementation of this 
project throughout the country on a permanent basis. Th e Council of Ministers would wish 
it to be brought to the attenti on of Government of India that in their view the pilot project 
has served a useful purpose and needs to be continued, with such course corrections as may 
be necessary.   
 
(v) Rural Business Hubs (RBH) 
 
The Council of Ministers noted the evolu tion of the concept of Rural Business 
Hubs, the MoUs already signed on the principle of Public-Private-Panchayat Partnership 
(PPPP), and the establishment of  State level RBH Councils in a majority of States. The 
Council of Ministers decided that State Governments, th rough their respective State 
Departments of Panchayati Raj, will extend their full support and cooperation to the RBH 
movement, with a view to establishing  hundr eds of Rural Business Hubs all over the 
country as soon as possible.  Accordingly, th e Departments of  Panchayati Raj  in State 
governments  will endeavour to bring about convergence  of all existing  State and Central 
Schemes with the proposed RBHs, and secure the involvement and participation of State 
and Central Financial Institutions, Promotional and Marketing Organisations, Producer and 
Marketing Cooperatives, Association/Chambers  of Commerce, and NG Os as appropriate, 
in individual Rural Business Hubs.  It was reco gnized that the essential step is for state 
governments to rapidly complete the Block-wise listing of   products and skills which are to 
be brought to the attention of state, regi onal and national business houses, by the State-
level and National RBH Councils to promote entr epreneurial interest in establishing Rural 
Business Hubs in partnership with PRIs. 
 
(vi) Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyan 
 
 The Council of Ministers resolved that the Panchayat Mahila Shakti Abhiyan 
launched in Rajasthan in April 2006 in as sociation with  the National Women’s 
Commission would be replicated in all States to give voice to the demands and issues of the 
Elected Women Representatives (EWRs) in th e PRIs.  To this end, State-wide Mahila 
Shakti Sammelans would be held in each State, to be followed by division-wise and 
district-wise meetings. These Sammelans woul d debate, discuss and implement the charter 
of demands adopted by the EWRs.  The Council of Ministers further resolved that to ensure 
that the momentum of the Mahila Shakti Abhiyans is maintained and to provide knowledge 
support and hand holding to the EWRs, nodal agenci es be identified in the states to pursue 
the support activities en visaged, such as training suppor t, interaction to promote group 
visits and study tours, and lo gistics support and gap-filling in specific areas such as 
accounts-training, social audit an d implementation of right to  information. At the same 
time, it was recognized that the success of the Abhiyan crucially depended on ownership of 
the Abhiyan by EWRs and their own determ ination of how to organize and carry it 
forward.  The role of the State must be limited to facilitation. 
 
(vii) Panchayat Yuva Shakti Abhiyan 
 
The Council of Ministers re solved that the Panchayat Yuva Shakti Abhiyan, to be 
launched in Haryana immediately after this m eeting of the Councils of Ministers,,would be 
pursued in all States in collaboration with th e Ministry of Youth a nd Sports Affairs and 
State departments concerned. On account of the unique congruence between the number of 

Youth Clubs and Panchayats, running roughly 2.5 lacs each, and th e fact that a majority of 
elected PRI leaders are below the age of 35 ye ars (thus categorized as youth), the Council 
of Ministers resolved that the Panchayat Yuva Shakti Abhi yan would aim at synergising 
and networking Youth Clubs a nd Panchayats with a view to unleashing youth power and 
addressing specific youth-related issues from among the 29 subjects enumerated in the 
Eleventh Schedule of the C onstitution, through convergent activity between the Nehru 
Yuva Kendra representatives, and the elected PRI representatives.   The Council of 
Ministers further resolved that the positive energy of youth should be deployed to galvanize 
the hitherto dormant institution of the Gram  Sabha to function as a responsive, active 
assembly of the people exercising the powers of monitoring, superv ision, mentoring and 
support to the Gram Panchayat.  
 
(viii) Action Taken Reports on Statemen ts of Conclusions signed between Union 
Ministers of Panchayati Raj and State Chief Ministers:  
 
The Council of Ministers requested that States / UTs may forward an Action Taken 
Report to Ministry of Panchayati Raj by July  15th 2006 in respect of the Statements of 
Conclusions signed between chie f Ministers and the Union Mini ster of Panchayati Raj in 
the15 States / UTs the Union Minister has tour ed since April 2005.    It was noted that the 
Union Minister proposes to complete his tour s of remaining States/UTs, during the course 
of the current financial year. 
  

APPENDIX-II 
 
STATEMENT SHOWING RELEASE OF GRANTS OF 12TH  FINANCE 
COMMISSION AS ON 05-12-2006 
             (In lakhs) 
        2005-2006 2006-07 
     Amount released 
Amount 
released 
Sl. 
No. State Total 
allocation 
Amount of 
one 
installment 
(6 monthly) 
1st 
installment
2nd 
installment 
 
1st 
installment
1 Andhra Pradesh 158700 15870 15870 15870 15870
2 Arunachal Pradesh 6800 680 680 0 0
3 Assam 52600 5260 5260 0 0
4 Bihar 162400 16240 16240 16240 16240
5 Chhattisgarh 61500 6150 6150 6150 6150
6 Goa 1800 180 180 0 0
7 Gujarat 93100 9310 9310 9310 9310
8 Haryana 38800 3880 3880 3880 3880
9 Himachal 14700 1470 1470 1470 1470
10 J&K 28100 2810 1762** 1762 1762 
11 Jharkhand 48200 4820 0 0 0
12 Karnataka 88800 8880 8880 8880 8880
13 Kerala 98500 9850 9850 9850 9850
14 Madhya Pr. 166300 16630 16630 16630 16630
15 Maharashtra 198300 19830 19830 19830 19830
16 Manipur 4600 460 212* 0 0
17 Meghalaya 5000 500 500 0 0
18 Mizoram 2000 200 200 200 200
19 Nagaland 4000 400 400 400 0
20 Orissa 80300 8030 8030 8030 8030
21 Punjab 32400 3240 3240 0  0
22 Rajasthan 123000 12300 12300 12300 12300
23 Sikkim 1300 130 130 0 0
24 Tamilnadu 87000 8700 8700 8700 8700
25 Tripura 5700 570 570 0 0
26 U.P 292800 29280 29280 29280 29280
27 Uttaranchal 16200 1620 1620 1620 1620
28 West Bengal 127100 12710 12710 12710 12710
  Total 2000000 200000 191910 183112 182712
 
Grand total of Amount Released 557734
 
 
*  Excluding share of PRI Grants pertaining to Hill areas amounting to Rs. 248.40 lakh. 
**  After deducting Rs. 1048.03 lakh being share of PRIs where elections have not been 
held. 

APPENDIX-III 
 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2006-2007) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY 
THE 1 MARCH, 2007 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
   Shri Hannan Mollah    - In the Chair  
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Mani Charenamei 
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
4. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh 
5. Shri Sita Ram Singh 
6. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri Jayantilal Barot 
8. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
9. Shri P.R. Rajan 
10. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K.Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Grover   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
4. Shri A. K. Shah   - Deputy Secretary Grade II 
 
2. In the absence of Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Hannan Mollah, M.P. to act 
as Chairman for the sitting under Rule 258(3)  of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
3. ***     ***     ***  
4. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum N o. 5 regarding draft 
action taken report on Twenty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants               
(2006-2007) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  The Committee after deliberations adopted 
the draft report without any modifications.  
 

5. The Committee then authorised the Chairm an to finalise the aforesaid draft action 
taken Reports on the basis of factual verifica tion from the concerned Department/Ministry 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
6.  The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
crd2/desktop/rd_26rpt_appendices 