15
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
FIFTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


FIFTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on …………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on …………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

C.R.D. No. 018
Price : Rs. 22.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2005-2006) ...................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ........................................................ 14
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies........................................................................... 23
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ..................................................... 25
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 28
APPENDICES
I. Statement showing State-wise release of grants
as per Finance Commission recommendations and
its utilisation by Panchayati Raj Institutions .... 33
II. Statement indicating the funds, functions and
functionaries devolved by the States/Union
territories indicating latest position upto
29 June, 2005 ............................................................... 35
III. Statement indicating the funds, functions and
functionaries devolved by the States/Union
territories indicating number of Departments/
subjects transferred to Panchayats ....................... 36
IV. Extracts of minutes of the Seventh sitting
of the Committee held on Thursday the
27 October, 2005 ....................................................... 38
V. Analysis of Action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Twelfth
Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ...... 40

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
12. Shri Prabodh Panda
13. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shrimati Vanga Geetha
24. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
25. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
26. Shri Penumalli Madhu
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
4. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Fifteenth Report on the action taken
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twelfth
Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2004-2005)
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005.
The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained
in the Report were received on 17 August, 2005.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
27 October, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee is
given in Appendix V .
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
22 November, 2005 Chairman,
1 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2005-2006)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Twelfth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006)
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 20 April, 2005.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 19 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows:
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.6, 2.25, 2.27, 2.35, 2.36, 2.37, 2.44, 2.49, 2.57 and
2.60.
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 2.7 and 2.26
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.5, 2.38 and 2.39.
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.23, 2.24, 2.48 and 2.53.
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by
the Government should be furnished to the Committee within three
months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2
A. Delay in acquisition of manpower
Recommendation (Para No. 2.5)
5. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee note that though the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
is a new Ministry (set up on 27 May 2004), yet the various
activities of the Ministry were earlier being handled by the
Department of Rural Development. Therefore in the opinion of
the Ministry, the administrative difficulties should have been
sorted out before the actual bifurcation had taken place so that
the purpose of creating a new Ministry is fulfilled. In fact the
Committee had expressed the similar reservations in the earlier
report. Here the Committee would like to recommend that the
acquisition of manpower should be completed within the shortest-
possible time so that the Ministry can tackle the task it has been
entrusted with.”
6. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“All out efforts were made by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to
acquire the requisite manpower to accomplish the task assigned
to it. As a result necessary approval for the creation of 66 posts
in various Grades has been accorded by the Ministry of Finance.
The approval of the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet
wherever needed, has been obtained. Out of the 66 posts for the
Ministry, 17 officers/staff have already joined. For filling up of
the remaining posts, the concerned competent authority viz.
Department of Personnel and Training, Department of Official
Language, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (who have been
recently declared as Cadre control authority of Ministry of
Panchayati Raj), Employment Exchange etc. have been requested
to nominate the requisite staff which is within their purview of
fill up the vacant posts.”
7. The Committee note that more than one year has passed since
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj was set up on 27 May, 2004. Though
the Ministry appears to have made some efforts in the right direction
in so far as acquisition of manpower is concerned, yet by their own
admission 49 posts out of the 66 created still remain vacant. The
Committee find that the main objective of creating a separate
Ministry of Panchayati Raj was to give focused attention to the issues
related to Panchayati Raj. Without adequate manpower, the said
objective cannot be achieved. While expressing concern on the

3
considerable delay in sorting out the administrative issues, the
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the task of
acquisition of manpower needs to be completed in the shortest
possible time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress in this regard.
B. Training of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.23 and 2.24)
8. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee find that there is only one Centrally Sponsored
Scheme i.e. the Scheme of Panchayat Development and Training
(PD&T) under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
The major allocation for the Ministry has been made for training.
The details of financial achievement have been analysed in the
preceding part of the report. As regards the physical achievement,
the Committee note that out of 30 lakh representatives of
Panchayati Raj Institutions over 6 lakh could be provided training
so far by the efforts of Government under the aforesaid scheme.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.23)
“Further as stated by the Ministry out of the total elected
representatives of PRIs a majority of them are new entrants. The
Committee find that the Constitution has placed vast responsibility
on the Gram Panchayats to formulate and execute various
programmes for economic development and social justice. To
enable PRIs to handle such onerous responsibility, training is the
basic input. The Committee feel that the Ministry has to put
more stress on this aspect. There is an urgent need to have a
time bound programme for imparting training to all
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions and the staff. The
Committee would like the Department to chalk out an action
plan in consultation with the State Governments and apprise
them accordingly.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
9. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as under:
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to
the Secretaries of Panchayati Raj in the States and they have
been requested to send the proposals of training of elected

4
representatives of PRIs to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to enable
it to provide necessary assistance. They have also been requested
that while forwarding the proposals the recommendations made
during the seventh Round Table of Ministers in charge of
Panchayati Raj at Jaipur relating to capacity building and training
of the elected representatives may be kept in mind.”
Replies to Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.23 & 2.24)
10. The Committee find that in pursuance of their
recommendation to have a time bound programme for imparting
training to all representatives and functionaries of Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs), the Ministry has requested Secretaries of
Panchayati Raj Departments of respective State Governments to send
proposals of training in this regard. The Committee would like the
Ministry to pursue the matter further with the State Governments
so that the task of imparting training to PRIs can be completed
within a stipulated time frame.
The Committee further find that the Secretaries of Panchayati
Raj Departments in the States have been requested to keep in mind
the recommendations made during the Seventh Round Table
Conference of Ministers in charge of Panchayati Raj Departments at
Jaipur relating to capacity building and training of the elected
representatives while sending the proposals for training. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the
recommendations made at the aforesaid Round Table Conference in
this regard.
C. Need for a mechanism for monitoring utilisation of funds
allocated by Ninth and Tenth Finance Commissions
Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.38 and 2.39)
11. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee would like to be apprised about the State-wise
position of the matching contribution provided by the
representative State Governments with regard to the Tenth Finance
Commission outlay.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
“The Committee further find that the grants-in-aid being extended
by the Finance Commission are for the normal and the excluded

5
areas as proposed by the Finance Commission. It is for the States
concerned to distribute the grants recommended by the Finance
Commission among the local bodies including those in the
excluded area in a clear and just manner. The Committee would
like to be clarified about the details of the normal and excluded
areas as states above. While nothing that it is the discretion of
the State Governments to allocate the funds to the PRIs the
Committee would like to be apprised of as to whether any data
with regard to funds allocated by the State Governments out of
the Ninth and Tenth Finance Commissions to PRIs has been
maintained by the Ministry. If so, the Committee would like to
be apprised of the details in this regard. Further, the Committee
note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has stated that they
would continue to make available funds for the capacity building
of Panchayati Raj Institutions. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the details of the funds being provided/proposed
to be provided for the said purpose by the Ministry .”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.39)
12. The Government in the action taken replies have stated as
under:
“State-wise position of the matching contribution provided by
the respective State Governments with regard to the Tenth Finance
Commission outlay has been given at Appendix-I.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
“The Ministry of Finance has informed that the Twelfth Finance
Commission has not recommended separate grants-in-aid for the
normal and the excluded areas. It is for the State concerned to
distribute the grants recommended for the State among the local
bodies including those in the excluded areas in a fair and just
manner. The Ninth Finance Commission did not recommend any
fund for the PRIs. * * *”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.39)
13. Pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee, the
Ministry has forwarded the data indicating State-wise matching
contribution provided by the respective State Governments with
regard to the Tenth Finance Commission outlay. The critical analysis
of the data indicates as under:
(i) out of Rs. 4,380.93 Rs. 3,576.35 crore is amount of the
grants released to State Governments. Thus there is a
shortfall of Rs. 804.58 crore;

6
(ii) the total allocation (the Tenth Finance Commission’s
allocation of Rs. 3,576.35 crore plus State matching
contribution of Rs. 3,863.92 crore) is Rs. 7,440.27 crore. Out
of Rs. 7,440.27 crore the utilisation reported by State
Governments is Rs. 5,933.75 crore. Thus there is under
utilisation of Rs. 1,506.52 crore.
(iii) individual State-wise utilisation reports indicate that
altogether 9 States utilised less than 80 per cent of the
total outlay. Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra,
Mizoram, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and T ripura have
reported more than 100 per cent utilisation. Not only that
some States have reported inflated data of utilisation, for
example, 376 per cent in case of Kerala, 291 per cent in
case of Sikkim, and 265 per cent in case of Andhra
Pradesh;
(iv) Arunachal Pradesh and West Bengal have provided ‘nil’
matching contribution; and
(v) the information with regard to utilisation position is still
awaited from 6 States.
The Committee would like the comments of the Ministry on
each of the observations noted above so as to enable the Committee
to analyse the position in a better way.
The Committee further note that the following information as
desired vide there earlier recommendations has not been furnished
by the Ministry:
(i) the details of the funds released out of Tenth Finance
Commission funds for the capacity building of Panchayati
Raj Institutions; and
(ii) the clarification about the details of normal and excluded
areas for which the grants recommended by the Finance
Commission are to be distributed among the local bodies.
The Committee would like the response of the Ministry on the
aforesaid issues raised in their earlier recommendations.
D. Progress with regard to devolution of funds, functions and
functionaries
Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)
14. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee in their earlier reports have been repeatedly
recommending the need to devolve the functions along with the

7
funds and functionaries. They note that the overall aim of Part
IX of the Constitution is to endow the Panchayats with such
powers and responsibilities as may be necessary to enable them
to function successfully as institutions of self-government as per
the mandate of the Constitution. State Legislatures have been
empowered to endow Panchayats by law with such powers and
authority as may be necessary to enable them to pursue economic
development and social justice, including those in relations to
the matters contained in the Eleventh Schedule. The Committee
are constrained to note that even though around thirteen years
have elapsed since the 73rd Amendment Act was enacted yet
there is no considerable progress on the issue of devolution. Only
one State i.e. Karnataka has transferred the funds, functions and
functionaries for all the 29 subjects indicated in the Eleventh
Schedule. Other States where considerable progress in this regard
has been done are Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Sikkim. It
is really a matter of concern that several States like Haryana and
Punjab have not transferred the funds vis-a-vis functions and
functionaries, not even for a single subject to Panchayats. The
Committee also find that with the constitution of the new Ministry
the efforts are being made to motivate State Governments in this
regard through various round table Conferences. They are also
happy to note that a deadline in this regard has also been made.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the aforesaid
deadline with regard to devolution. The Committee would also
like that the matter should further be pursued with the State
Government and they be apprised of the progress in this regard.”
15. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The matter was taken up with the Secretaries of Panchayati Raj
in the States and UTs bringing to their notice, the above
recommendation of the Committee. Their attention was also
drawn to the first Round Table Conference wherein the subject
of devolution of funds, functions and functionaries was discussed.
The latest position as informed by the States is enclosed in the
Table ( Appendix-II). It can be seen there from that there has been
considerable progress made by the States in the devolution of
activities to Panchayats. To give a further impetus in this regard,
the Council of State Ministers of Panchayati Raj has met at Kochi
on 5th & 6th August, 2005 discuss the specific issues of activity
mapping. *** *** *** ***”

8
16. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has claimed that there has
been considerable progress made by the States in the devolution of
activities to Panchayats. To substantiate this the Ministry has
indicated the devolution status in a statement ( Appendix II ). The
Committee while analysing the said statement in comparison to the
status at the stage of examination of Demands for Grants 2005-2006
[refer Para No. 2.41 of Twelfth Report 2005-2006 (Copy at Appendix-III)]
find that there is some progress in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Uttaranchal, D&N Haveli and Daman and Diu. However in case of
Gujarat the number of subjects devolved seems to have decreased
from 15 to 14. The Committee further note that the Ministry has
given an incomplete status of devolution in different States.
Devolution status with regard to funds, functions and functionaries
has not been separately indicated. Besides in case of 9 States/Union
territories no information has been provided. The Committee would
like the Ministry to furnish the complete information so as to enable
them to come to meaningful conclusion with regard to the progress
made in respect of devolution of subjects to PRIs.
The Committee, however, find that there is considerable progress
with regards to activity mapping in most of the States/Union
territories. The Committee would like the Ministry to continue the
efforts with regard to motivating State Governments/Union territory
Administrations in this regard.
E. Constitution of District Planning Committees
Recommendation (Para No. 2.48)
17. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee find that District Planning Committees are to
be constituted in every district to consolidate the plans prepared
by the Panchayats. They are constraint to note that there are a
number of States in which District Planning Committees have
not been constituted so far in accordance with the provisions of
Article 243ZD. The Committee also note that with the pursuance
of the newly constituted Ministry, a deadline has been fixed
whereby all the States/Union territories are required to set up
DPCs by the end of the current financial year. The Committee
feel that State Governments need to be persuaded further to
comply with the said deadline and they be apprised accordingly.”

9
18. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“A letter was sent by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all
Secretaries of Panchayati Raj in the States on 30 May, 2005
enclosing the above recommendation of the Committee and they
have been requested to constitute the DPCs in their respective
States, if the same have not been constituted so far. They have
also been informed about the recommendation of the Committee
to discourage the practices which are not in true spirit of the
Constitution. Their attention has also been drawn to the meeting
of the Committee of Chief Secretaries and Secretaries of
Panchayati Raj in the States/Union territories held on 11 April,
2005 wherein the Ministry of Panchayati Raj desired that the
States that have not constituted DPCs in accordance with Article
243ZD of the Constitution are to do so within 31 October, 2005.”
19. The Committee find that a deadline has been given by the
Ministry of Panchayati  Raj to State Governments for the constitution
of District Planning Committees (DPCs) by 31 October 2005. The
Committee hope that a considerable progress with regard to
constitution of District Planning Committees in the respective States
might have been made by now. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the status in this regard so as to enable them to
appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry.
F. Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes
Recommendation (Para No. 2.53)
20. The Committee had recommended as below:
“The Committee find that it is matter of concern that even for
the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, related to 29 subjects as enlisted
in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution, the Union
Government cannot ensure the implementation of schemes
through Panchayats. The Committee appreciate that with the
constitution of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, the matter is being
looked into seriously. Not only that, Prime Minister has intervened
and the matter is being seriously pursued by the Cabinet
Secretary. The Committee further find that with regard to release
of funds directly to Panchayati Raj Institutions under the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Union Ministries, a Committee has
been constituted which will submit the report shortly. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the deliberations and
decisions taken by the said Committee. The Committee would

10
like to urge the Ministry of step up their efforts in this regard
and hope that considerable progress will be made on the aforesaid
subject. The Committee also feel that ensuring the implementation
of Centrally Sponsored Schemes through Panchayati Raj
Institutions will further motivate the State Governments to
devolve 29 subjects enlisted in Eleventh Schedule of the
Constitution.”
21. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has examined the list of
approximately 300 schemes listed in V olume-II of the Expenditure
Budget 2004-05 which, in the explanatory notes, itemizes, inter-
alia, the various Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The overwhelming
majority of these schemes are related to the 29 subjects listed in
the Eleventh Schedule. In most Centrally Sponsored Schemes,
there is considerable scope for recognizing the centrality of
Panchayats in their implementation, in line with the letter and
spirit of Parts IX of the Constitution, so as to empower them to
function as “institutions of self-government” as per the provisions
of Article 243G of the Constitution in respect of such schemes.
These are among the issues that have been pursued through
evolution of consensus in the series of seven Round Tables of
Panchayati Raj Institutions organized by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj.
The Prime Minister has approved a suggestion from the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj that all Ministries who are operating
Centrally Sponsored Schemes should review their schemes in the
light of Article 243G read with the Eleventh Schedule, with a
view to incorporating into these Schemes, the Constitutional
provisions in this regard in letter and spirit. It has also been
decided that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj should be consulted
and their views incorporated in the notes prepared for
consideration of Cabinet/Cabinet Committees in all cases relating
to Centrally Sponsored Programmes/Schemes that have a bearing
on decentralization. Cabinet Secretariat has accordingly issued
instructions to all the Ministries on the 8 November, 2004 in this
regard. Ministries are taking necessary action in this regard.
A Committee was constituted by the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj on feasibility of sending funds to PRIs directly through
banking channels. The Committee has submitted its report. The
Committee has recommended that it is feasible to maintain a
database of Panchayat accounts, State-wise for the country to
transfer funds without any delay or diversion to these accounts

11
by using channels and to set up a feedback mechanism to know
when a particular bank account is credited with funds. For this
purpose, a nodal bank has to be identified for each particular
State based on the number of Branches and Branch connectivity
of the banks in the State. The strongest Bank in terms of territorial
coverage and connectivity in a State should be selected as the
nodal Bank. It has been recommended that there should be a
service level agreement between the Ministry which remits funds
to the Panchayat Bank account and the Nodal Bank, laying out
the number of days it will take to credit funds, the number of
days it will take for feedback about date of credit, and the time
period by which the Bank Branches will be connected to its
centralized business solutions network or in the interim to its
wide area network. The Department of Panchayati Raj in a State
will need to create and maintain, with the assistance of its local
State National Informatic Centre Office, a database of Panchayat
Bank accounts on the National Panchayat Portal which has
already been created by the National Informatic Centre, Delhi.
The funds to be remitted to Panchayats through their Panchayat
Bank accounts can be prescribed by the States concerned or by
the Central Ministries concerned depending on the guidelines
framed for the particular schemes or funds being administered
by the Ministry.
A Cell to be created in the Ministry of Panchayati Raj or in
the Ministry of Finance can look after all the institutional,
coordination and infrastructural issues relating to maintaining a
computerized database of Panchayat accounts and coordinating
with designated Nodal Banks for different States as well as with
State Governments. The Cell should have permanent
representation from the office of Chief Controller of Accounts,
Office of NIC and the Ministries of Panchayati Raj and Finance.
The recommendations of the Committee have been sent to the
Ministry of Finance for their consideration.
A Review Meeting was taken by the Prime Minister on the
outcome of the Round Tables on the Panchayati Raj on 2 June,
2005. It was decided during the meeting that the Central
Ministries/Planning Commission should rationalize policies of
Centrally Sponsored Schemes in accordance with the Eleventh
Schedule of the Constitution in keeping with the suggestions of
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Planning Commission Task Force
Report on PRIs on December, 2001 and the Task Force of the
State Secretaries of PR in December, 2004. It was also decided

12
that the issue of rationalising Centrally Sponsored Scheme Policy
be referred by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to the Group of
Ministries on Panchayati Raj for early resolution.
As per the directive of the Prime Minister, on rationalizating
of Policy relating to CSS in accordance with the Eleventh Schedule
of the Constitution, the matter has been referred to the Group of
Ministers.”
22. The Committee note the efforts being made by the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj with regard to implementation of different
Centrally Sponsored Schemes by Panchayati Raj Institutions as per
the mandate of article 243G read with Eleventh Schedule of the
Constitution. Further the Committee constituted by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj has found that it is feasible to send funds to PRIs
with regard to Centrally Sponsored Schemes directly through Banking
channels. The Committee appreciate that Hon’ble Prime Minister has
evinced keen interest and a review meeting was taken by him. The
Committee further find that on the directive of the Prime Minister
the matter of rationalizing of policy related to Centrally Sponsored
Schemes has been referred to the Group of Ministries. The
Committee while appreciating the initiatives taken by the Ministry
in this direction would like them to continue their efforts in this
regard. The Committee would like to be apprised of the follow up
action in this regard.
G. Progress with regard to setting up of “Rural Business Hubs”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.57)
23. The Committee had noted as below:
“The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry to secure
a constructive partnership between Panchayats and industries as
envisaged in the concept of establishing ‘Rural Business Hubs’.
The Committee feel that the said vision when translated into
reality has the great potential to bring about an economic
transformation in rural India. The Committee hope that progress
in this regard is made and they would like to be apprised of it.”
24. The Government in the action taken reply have stated as under:
“A Conference of Chief Ministers in charge of Rural Development
and Panchayati Raj on Poverty Alleviation through Panchayati
Raj was organised in Delhi on 29-30 June, 2004. The Prime
Minister in his inaugural address emphasized the need to learn
from the Chinese Model of Town and Village Enterprises that

13
add value to agricultural produce in the rural areas. In this
context, he suggested the establishment of Rural Business Hubs
based on local resource endowments, felt needs of the local
community, and relative absorptive capacity. Accordingly, the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been engaged in consultation with
various experts in order to devise an appropriate framework for
Panchayats to facilitate the setting up of the Rural Business Hubs.
In November, 2004, National Presentation on Rural Business Hubs
was organised jointly by Ministry of Panchayati Raj and
Confederation of Indian Industry in which several Government
agencies such as IT, Financial Institutions including NABARD
and institutions dealing with Textiles, Handicrafts and Agro
Business participated. About 1000 elected representatives of Gram
Panchayats, Block Panchayats and Zilla Panchayats from various
States/UTs also participated along with about 250 representatives
of industry. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the CII are now
working together to facilitate public-private-panchayat partnership
to establish rural business hubs. For this purpose, a Rural Business
Council Co-chaired by the Minister of Panchayati Raj and
Shri S.K. Munjal, former Chairman of CII has been set up. The
first Meeting of the Council was held on the 29th July, 2005.
Ten States namely, Uttaranchal, Kerala, Karnataka, Jammu &
Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh and Assam have been initially selected as focus
States for the purpose of facilitating the establishment of Rural
Business Hubs. One individual, either from CII or from the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been assigned the responsibility
of taking up the facilitation process in these States for Panchayats
to set up Rural Business Hubs.”
25. The Committee are glad to note that remarkable progress has
been made on the issue of setting up ‘Rural Business Hubs’ (RBHs)
for facilitating public-private-Panchayat participation. The Committee
have been informed that the consultations are in progress with
various experts to devise an appropriate framework for Panchayats
to facilitate the setting up of the said Rural Business Hubs. The
Committee also find that ten States have initially been selected for
the purpose of establishing Business Hubs. The Committee hope
that the vision of Rural Business Hubs would be translated into
reality with the initiative of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The
Committee would like to be kept informed about the progress made
in this regard.

14
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.6)
The Committee while analysing the data of outlay earmarked
during 10th Plan, find that during the Tenth Plan the allocation
provided under the scheme of Panchayati Raj Development and
Training is less than half of the projected outlay. Another noticeable
fact noticed by the Committee is that during the first year i.e.
2004-2005 of the newly created Ministry, the Ministry has got less than
half of what was projected outlay. But even that amount could not be
spent fully. Out of Rs. 31.04 crore earmarked at BE stage, the
expenditure incurred is just Rs. 6.98 crore which includes the releases
of Rs. 1 crore made for North Eastern Region. In fact out of
Rs. 1 crore earmarked to North Eastern Region, only Rs. 16,78.460
could be spent and remaining amount was transferred to non-lapsable
fund. The analysis with regard to PD&T scheme has been done in the
subsequent part of the report. Here while analysing the over all position
of outlay the Committee find that even though the allocation is just
half of the projected outlay during 2004-2005 the expenditure reported
is a just one-fifth of the BE. Not only that about half of the outlay has
been earmarked in the last three months of the year. The Committee
express their strongest concern on the gross non-utilisation of resources
and recommend that suitable corrective actions may be taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted. Necessary
corrective action are being taken and as a result the funds earmarked
for the year 2005-06 will be utilised fully during the current financial
year.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25)
The Committee further find that after the setting up of the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj, a Training and Research Advisory Committee has

15
been set up. Two sittings of the said Committee have been held so far
and the Advisory Committee has approved five research/training
proposals in this regard. The Committee also note that the Ministry
has furnished the reasons for under spending as the late constitution
of this body. Whereas the Ministry was constituted on 27 May, 2004
the Committee could only be constituted on 18 January, 2005. It has
also been stated that the Head of Account of the Ministry was partially
separated on November, 2004 and after that the said Advisory
Committee could be constituted. The Committee while understanding
the initial teething problems of the Ministry hope that this year more
attention would be paid on the training of PRIs.
Reply of the Government
The Recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.27)
The Committee also note that the Department of Rural
Development (Ministry of Rural Development also have allocation for
NIRD, SIRD, ETCs which cater to the training needs of PRIs. In this
situation the Committee would like to be apprised of the status of
training Committees under the Ministry of Rural Development. The
Committee would also like to be apprised how the coordination
between the training aspect being handled by the Ministry of Rural
Development and this Ministry would be ensured. Besides the
Committee will also like to be apprised of the involvement of NIRD,
SIRD, ETCs under the Ministry of Rural Development for the purpose
of training.
Reply of the Government
Both the Departmental Screening Committee (DSC) which considers
proposals received for non-recurring expenditure in respect of State
Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) and Extension Training Centres
(ETCs), and the Training Advisory Committee (TAC) considering
programmes under SGSY Scheme continue to function in the Ministry
of Rural Development.
The NIRD, among other activities also provide support for training
of PRI elected representatives in terms of Training of Trainers,
development of material and other guidance SIRDs impart training to

16
the Rural Development functionaries at the National, State and District
level while ETCs impart training to the Rural Development
functionaries at Block/Village level. The SIRDs/ETCs also provide
training to PRIs members and officials at different levels.
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is working in close co-ordination
with these activities of the NIRD, SIRDs. The following are the specific
areas of coordination:
(a) The Director General of the NIRD is member of the TRAC
of Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
(b) Training of PR Members and officials by SIRD is funded by
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.35)
The Committee find from the position of allocation and utilisation
of outlay provided by the 10th Finance Commission that the utilisation
is 84 per cent whereas the percentage utilisation of funds allocated by
the 11th Finance Commission is stated to be 69 per cent only . The
Committee find from the information furnished by the Ministry that
the funds in this regard have not been released to State Governments.
The Committee also note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has
identified the tracking and monitoring of funds as the thrust area in
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. While appreciating the said initiative
of the Ministry the Committee further stress that there is an urgent
need to put a mechanism for monitoring of the outlay being earmarked
particularly when the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is making efforts to
ensure devolution of funds for the 29 subjects indicated in the Eleventh
Schedule of the Constitution besides ensuring direct release of funds
under different Centrally Sponsored Schemes directly to Panchayats.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, Finance
Commission Division have put a mechanism in place for monitoring
of the outlay earmarked for Panchayats. The Guidelines were released
and utilisation of Grants recommended by the Twelfth Finance
Commission for augmentation of the Consolidated Funds of the States

17
for supplementing these resources of the Rural and Urban Local Bodies
spells out the following mechanism with respect to the monitoring of
fund transfer:
• Every State shall constitute a High Level Committee (HLC))
headed by the Chief Secretary to ensure proper utilisation
of Local Bodies Grants.
•A  Central Review Committee shall be constituted in the
GOI, headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure to review the releases and
utilization of grants.
•A  separate Committee for PRIs headed by the Secretary,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Government of India, would be
constituted to monitor the mode of release of local body
grants to Panchayats. This Committee shall bring out the
points for intervention by Government of India in Ministries
of Panchayati Raj and Finance to ensure smooth and
uninterrupted flow of funds to PRIs.
• Grants will not be released to a State (if covered under
Part IX of the Constitution) where elections for constituting
these Panchayats have not been held, for the period for
which here were no elected Panchayats as per the provisions
of the Constitution.
• Local body grants shall be released in two equal instalments
in July and January every year. States have to mandatorily
transfer the grants released by the Centre to the PRIs within
15 days of the same being credited to the State’s account.
• State Finance Secretary would be required to provide a
certificate within 15 days of the release of each instalment
by Government of India under his signature certifying the
dates and amounts of local grants received by the State
from the Government of India and the dates and amount
of grants released by the State to the PRIs.
• In the case of delayed transfer to PRIs from the State, an
amount of interest at the rate equal to the RBI Bank rate
should be additionally paid by the State Government to the
PRIs, for the period of delay.

18
•A  certificate of release of the previous instalment to PRIs
will be a pre-condition from the second release onwards.
State Governments will also need to give details of
allocations of funds to PRIs before they become eligible to
receive funds.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.36)
They note that certain conditions laid down by the Finance
Commissions stipulate that the funds would be released only on the
fulfilment of certain conditions. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the conditions laid down by the Finance Commission
in this regard. They also note that several States have not complied
the conditions laid down by the Finance Commission. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the names of the said States. The
Committee hope what with the creation of an exclusive Ministry to
deal with the Panchayati Raj, the things will improve and it will be
ensured that there is effective utilization of funds allocated by the
Finance Commissions.
Reply of the Government
Guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance on the recommendations
of the 10th & 11th Finance Commission stipulated devolution of
functions and responsibilities from the State to local bodies with
mandatory elections so that they function as the effective units of
local self government. During the first year of the recommendation
period the funds were released to States for PRIs and ULBs on ad-hoc
basis and for subsequent years releases the State Governments were
required to furnish utilisation certificates and holding of Panchayat
elections was mandatory. During the period to which the
recommendations of the Tenth Finance Commission applied 5 States
namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir, Meghalaya and
Nagaland had not complied partly/fully the conditions laid in the
Guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance. During the period to which
the recommendations of the Eleventh Finance Commission applied 5
States namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir
and Jharkhand had not complied partly/fully the conditions laid down
in the Guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of
Panchayati Raj will take action to monitor the effective utilisation of
funds allocated to them, in terms of the guidelines issued by the
Ministry of Finance on the utilisation of grants released on the
recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission in this regard.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]

19
Recommendation (Para No. 2.37)
The Committee further find that a sum of Rs. 20,000 crore have
been allocated as grants-in-aid to augment the Consolidated Fund of
States for the period 2005-2010. They also note that the information on
the action plan for the utilisation of the said allocation is being procured
by the Ministry, from the Ministry of Finance. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the details in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Twelfth Finance Commission recommended a sum of Rs. 20,000
crore as grants-in-aid to PRIs to augment the Consolidated Fund of
States for the period 2005-2010. The Finance Commission has
recommended the PRIs to perform the following functions:
(i) the PRIs should be encouraged to take over the assets
relating to water supply and sanitation and utilise the grants
for repairs/rejuvenation as also the O&M costs. The PRIs
should, however, recover at least 50 per cent of the recurring
costs in the form of user charges; and
(ii) of the grants allocated for Panchayats, priority should be
given to expenditure on the O&M costs of water supply
and sanitation. This will facilitate Panchayats to take over
the schemes and operate them.
The Guidelines for release of Local Bodies Grants recommended
by the Twelfth Finance Commission has been issued by the Ministry
of Finance and a copy thereof is enclosed for reference. ( Annexure-I).
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)
The Committee in their earlier reports have been repeatedly
recommending the need to devolve the functions along with the funds
and functionaries. They note that the overall aim of Part IX of the
Constitution is to endow the Panchayats with such powers and
responsibilities as may be necessary to enable them to function
successfully as institutions of self-government as per the mandate of
the Constitution. State Legislatures have been empowered to endow
Panchayats by law with such powers and authority as may be necessary
to enable them to pursue economic development and social justice,

20
including those in relations to the matters contained in the Eleventh
Schedule. The Committee are constrained to note that even though
around thirteen years have elapsed since the 73rd Amendment Act
was enacted, yet there is no considerable progress on the issue of
devolution. Only one State i.e. Karnataka has transferred the funds,
functions and functionaries for all the 29 subjects indicated in the
Eleventh Schedule. Other States where considerable progress in this
regard has been done are Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Sikkim.
It is really a matter of concern that several States like Haryana and
Punjab have not transferred the funds vis-a-vis functions and
functionaries, not even for a single subject to Panchayats. The
Committee also find that with the constitution of the new Ministry
the efforts are being made to motivate State Governments in this regard
through various round table Conferences. They are also happy to note
that a deadline in this regard has also been made. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the aforesaid deadline with regard to
devolution. The Committee would also like that the matter should
further be pursued with the State Governments and they be apprised
of the progress in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The matter was taken up with the Secretaries of Panchayati Raj in
the States and UTs bringing to their notice, the above recommendation
of the Committee. Their attention was also drawn to the first Round
Table wherein the subject of devolution of funds, functions and
functionaries was discussed. The latest position as informed by the
States is enclosed in the Table given at Annexure-III as can be seen
therefrom, there has been considerable progress made by the States in
the devolution of activities to Panchayats. To give a further impetus in
this regard, the Council of State Ministers of Panchayati Raj has met
at Kochi on 5th & 6th August, 2005 to discuss the specific issues of
activity mapping. A statement of conclusions arrived at in the meeting
is enclosed as ( Annexure-IV)
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.49)
The Committee further find that as stated by the Ministry the
meetings of the DPCs are not being chaired as per the provisions of

21
the Constitutions. In some States, Minister-in-charge of the districts
have been made as the Chairpersons of the DPCs. The Committee
hope that with the transfer of DPCs to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
which is exclusively dealing with the matters related to implementation
of Part IX of the Constitution, the State Governments would be
persuaded to discourage the practices which are not in true spirit of
the Constitution. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
efforts being made by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
A letter was sent by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Secretaries
of Panchayati Raj in the States on 30 May, 2005 enclosing the above
recommendation of the Committee and they have been requested to
constitute the DPCs in their respective States, if the same have not
been constituted so far. They have also been informed about the
recommendation of the Committee to discourage the practices which
are not in true spirit of the Constitution. Their attention has also been
drawn to the meeting of the Committee of Chief Secretaries and
Secretaries of Panchayati Raj in the States/UTs held on 11.4.2005
wherein the Ministry of Panchayati Raj desired that the States that
have not constituted DPCs in accordance with Article 243ZD of the
Constitution are to do so within 31 October, 2005.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.57)
The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry to secure a
constructive partnership between Panchayats and industries as
envisaged in the concept of establishing ‘Rural Business Hubs’. The
Committee feel that the said vision when translated into reality has
the great potential to bring about an economic transformation in rural
India. The Committee hope that progress in this regard is made and
they would like to be apprised of it.
Reply of the Government
A Conference of Chief Ministers and State Ministers in charge of
Rural Development and Panchayati Raj on Poverty Alleviation through
Panchayati Raj was organised in Delhi on 29-30 June, 2004. The Prime
Minister in his inaugural address emphasised the need to learn from
the Chinese Model of Town and Village Enterprises that add value to
agricultural produce in the rural areas. In this context, he suggested
the establishment of Rural Business Hubs based on local resource
endowments, felt needs of the local community, and relative absorptive

22
capacity. Accordingly, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been engaged
in consultation with various experts in order to devise an appropriate
framework for Panchayats to facilitate the setting up of the Rural
Business Hubs. In November, 2004, National Presentation on Rural
Business Hubs was organsied jointly by Ministry of Panchayati Raj
and Confederation of Indian Industry in which several Government
agencies such as IT, Financial Institutions including NABARD and
institutions dealing with Textiles, Handicrafts and Agro Business
participated. About 1000 elected representatives of Gram Panchayats,
Block Panchayats and Zilla Panchayats from various States/UTs also
participated along with about 250 representatives of industry. The
Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the CII are now working together to
facilitate public-private-panchayat partnership to establish rural business
hubs. For this purpose, a Rural Business Council Co-chaired by the
Minister of Panchayati Raj and Shri S.K. Munjal, former Chairman of
CII has been set up. The first Meeting of the Council was held on the
29 July, 2005.
Ten States namely, Uttaranchal, Kerala, Karnataka, J&K, Punjab,
Rajasthan, West Bengal, U.P ., Chhattisgarh and Assam have been
initially selected as focus States for the purpose of facilitating the
establishment of Rural Business Hubs. One individual, either from CII
or from the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been assigned the
responsibility of taking up the facilitation process in these States for
Panchayats to set up Rural Business Hubs.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.60)
The Committee appreciate the fact that the Government has
initiated the process of awarding Panchayats for excellence in various
fields. Here the Committee would like to suggest the greater publicity
should be given to such events that would increase awareness about
them at all levels and inspire more Panchayats to strive for such
awards.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]

23
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 2.7)
The Committee find from Detailed Demands for Grants of Ministry
of Panchayati Raj as tabled in the House, that there are certain
components of plan allocation, such as Grants-in-aid to State
Governments, projects assisted by the United Nations agencies, other
charges, Panchayat Development and Research, Grants to Institutions,
Conferences, Seminar, Workshop for which the allocation has been
separately made. However in the Performance Budget the analysis of
Plan outlay and expenditure has been done under only one major
scheme i.e. Panchayat Development and Training. The Committee would
like to recommend that the analysis head-wise as indicated in the
detailed Demands for Grants as explained above should be indicated
in detail in the Performance Budget so as to enable the Committee to
analyse the data critically and arrive at some meaningful conclusions.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation has been noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.26)
The Committee further find from the reply of the Ministry that
earlier there was Research and Training Committee under the
Panchayati Raj Training Division of the Ministry of Rural Development.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the difference between
the erstwhile Committees that was functioning under the Ministry of
Rural Development and the existing Research and Training Committee
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
Reply of the Government
The Research and Training Committee which was earlier
functioning under the Ministry of Rural Development assisted the States
in imparting training to all elected representatives of Panchayats and

24
official functionaries. The Ministry of Rural Development was providing
financial assistance for research studies to the Research Institutes/NGOs.
The Ministry of Rural Development also provides assistance to 27 State
Institutes of Rural Development (SIRDs) and 88 Extension Training
Centres (ETCs) engaged in imparting training to the elected
representatives and officials in the States for meeting partially their
requirement of recurring and non-recurring expenditure.
After the transfer of work relating to Training of Panchayati Raj
Members etc. to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, there is a Committee
functioning in the Training Division of the Ministry of Rural
Development namely, the Departmental Screening Committee (DSC)
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (RD) which considers proposals
received for non-recurring expenditure in respect of State Institutes of
Rural Development and Extension Training Centres. Additionally, the
Ministry of Rural Development also has a Training Advisory Committee
in the SGSY Division that provides funding to the State Governments,
SIRDs and Bankers for organizing Training Programmes on various
SGSY Schemes.
The existing Training and Research Committee under the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj, considers proposals of the States as also the State
Institutes of Rural Development/Extension Training Centres etc. in
imparting training to the elected representatives and officials in the
States. The TRAC of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj also considers
proposals for providing financial assistance for Research Studies to
Research Institutes/NGOs on various aspects of Panchayati Raj.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]

25
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that though the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is
a new Ministry (set up on 27 May 2004), yet the various activities of
the Ministry were earlier being handled by the Department of Rural
Development. Therefore, in the opinion of the Ministry, the
administrative difficulties should have been sorted out before the actual
bifurcation had taken place so that the purpose of creating a new
Ministry is fulfilled. In fact the Committee had expressed the similar
reservations in the earlier report. Here the Committee would like to
recommend that the acquisition of manpower should be completed
within the shortest-possible time so that the Ministry can tackle the
task it has been entrusted with.
Reply of the Government
All out efforts were made by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to
acquire the requisite manpower to accomplish the task assigned to it.
As a result necessary approval for the creation of 66 posts in various
Grades has been accorded by the Ministry of Finance and the
Appointments Committee of the Cabinet’s approval wherever needed
has been obtained. Out of the 66 posts for the Ministry, 17 officers/
staff have already joined for filling up of the remaining posts, the
concerned competent authority viz., Department of Personnel &
Training, Department of Official Language, Ministry of Petroleum &
Natural Gas (who have been recently declared as Cadre control
authority of Ministry of Panchayati Raj). Employment Exchange etc.
have been requested to nominate the requisite staff which is within
their purview to fill up the vacant posts.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

26
Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
The Committee would also like to be apprised about the State-
wise position of the matching contribution provided by the respective
State Governments with regard to the 10th Finance Commission outlay.
Reply of the Government
State-wise position of the matching contribution provided by the
respective State Governments with regard to the Tenth Finance
Commission outlay is at Annexure-II.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.39)
The Committee further find that the grants-in-aid being extended
by the Finance Commission are for the normal and the excluded areas
as proposed by the Finance Commission. It is for the States concerned
to distribute the grants recommended by the Finance Commission
among the local bodies including those in the excluded area in a clear
and just manner. The Committee would like to be clarified about the
details of the normal and excluded areas as stated above. While noting
that it is the discretion of the State Governments to allocate the funds
to the PRIs the Committee would like to be apprised of as to whether
any data with regard to funds allocated by the State Governments out
of the Ninth and Tenth Finance Commissions to PRIs has been
maintained by the Ministry. If so, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the details in this regard. Further, the Committee note that
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has stated that they would continue to
make available funds for the capacity building of Panchayati Raj
Institutions. The Committee would like to be apprised about the details
of the funds being provided/proposed to be provided for the said
purpose by the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Finance has informed that the Twelfth Finance
Commission has not recommended separate grants-in-aid for the normal
and the excluded areas. It is for the State concerned to distribute the

27
grants recommended for the State among the local bodies including
those in the excluded areas in a fair and just manner. The Ninth
Finance Commission did not recommend any fund for the PRIs. For
the first time, the 10th Finance Commission recommended PRIs grants
for Rs. 4381 crore for the period 1995-2000. State-wise details are at
Annexure-II. For the year 2005-06, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has budget
Provision of Rs. 29.40 crore for providing grants-in-aid for training of
elected representatives of PRIs.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

28
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 2.23)
The Committee find that there is only one Centrally Sponsored
Scheme i.e. The Scheme of Panchayat Development and Training
(PD&T) under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The
major allocation for the Ministry has been made for training. The details
of financial achievement have been analysed in the preceding part of
the report. As regards the physical achievement, the Committee note
that out of 30 lakh representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions over
6 lakh could be provided training so far by the efforts of Government
under the aforesaid scheme.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the
Secretaries of Panchayati Raj in the States and they have been requested
to send the proposals of training of elected representatives of PRIs to
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to enable it to provide necessary
assistance. They have also been requested that while forwarding the
proposals the recommendations made during the seventh Round Table
of Ministers in charge of Panchayati Raj at Jaipur relating to capacity
building and training of the elected representatives may be kept in
mind.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
Further as stated by the Ministry out of the total elected
representatives of PRIs a majority of them are new entrants. The
Committee find that the Constitution has placed vast responsibility on
the Gram Panchayats to formulate and execute various progammes
for economic development and social justice. To enable PRIs to handle

29
such onerous responsibility, training is the basic input. The Committee
feel that the Ministry has to put more stress on this aspect. There is
an urgent need to have a time bound programme for imparting training
to all representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions and the staff. The
Committee would like the Department to chalk out an action plan in
consultation with the State Governments and apprise them accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the
Secretaries of Panchayati Raj in the States and they have been requested
to send the proposals of training of elected representatives of PRIs to
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to enable it to provide necessary
assistance. They have also been requested that while forwarding the
proposals the recommendations made during the seventh Round Table
of Ministers in charge of Panchayati Raj at Jaipur relating to capacity
building and training of the elected representatives may be kept in
mind.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.48)
The Committee find that District Planning Committees are to be
constituted in every district to consolidate the plans prepared by the
Panchayats. They are constraint to note that there are a number of
States in which District Planning Committees have not been constituted
so far in accordance with the provisions of Article 243ZD. The
Committee also note that with the pursuance of the newly constituted
Ministry, a deadline has been fixed whereby all the States/Union
Territories are required to set up DPCs by the end of the current
financial year. The Committee feel that State Governments need to be
persuaded further comply with the said deadline and they be apprised
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
A letter was sent by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Secretaries
of Panchayati Raj in the States on 30 May, 2005 enclosing the above
recommendation of the Committee and they have been requested to

30
constitute the DPCs in their respective States, if the same have not
been constituted so far. They have also been informed about the
recommendation of the Committee to discourage the practices which
are not in true spirit of the Constitution. Their attention has also been
drawn to the meeting of the Committee of Chief Secretaries and
Secretaries of Panchayati Raj in the States/UTs held on 11.4.2005
wherein the Ministry of Panchayati Raj desired that the States that
have not constituted DPCs in accordance with Article 243ZD of the
Constitution are to do so within 31 October, 2005.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.53)
The Committee find that it is matter of concern that even for the
Centrally Sponsored Schemes, related to 29 subjects as enlisted in the
Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution, the Union Government cannot
ensure the implementation of schemes through Panchayats. The
Committee appreciate that with the Constitution of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, the matter is being looked into seriously. Not only
that, Prime Minister has intervened and the matter is being seriously
pursued by the Cabinet Secretary . The Committee further find that
with regard to release of funds directly to Panchayati Raj Institutions
under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Union Ministries, a
Committee has been constituted which will submit the report shortly.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the deliberations and
decisions taken by the said Committee. The Committee would like to
urge the Ministry of step up their efforts in this regard and hope that
considerable progress will be made on the aforesaid subject. The
committee also feel that ensuring the implementation of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes through Panchayati Raj Institutions will further
motivate the State Governments to devolve 29 subjects enlisted in
Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has examined the list of
approximately 300 schemes listed in Volume-II of the Expenditure
Budget 2004-05 which, in the explanatory notes, itemizes, inter alia,  the
various Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The overwhelming majority of
these schemes are related to the 29 subjects listed in the Eleventh
Schedule. The most Centrally Sponsored Schemes, there is considerable
scope for recognizing the centrality of Panchayats in their

31
implementation, in line with the letter and spirit of Parts IX of the
Constitution, so as to empower them to function as “institutions of
self-government” as per the provisions of Article 243G of the
Constitution in respect of such schemes. These are among the issues
that have been pursued through evolution of consensus in the series
of seven Round Tables of Panchayati Raj Institutions organized by the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
The Prime Minister has approved a suggestion from the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj that all Ministries who are operating Centrally
Sponsored Schemes should review their schemes in the light of
Article 243G read with the Eleventh Schedule, with a view to
incorporating into these Schemes, the Constitutional provisions in this
regard in letter and spirit. It has also been decided that the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj should be consulted and their views incorporated in
the notes prepared for consideration of Cabinet/Cabinet Committees
in all cases relating to Centrally Sponsored Programmes/Schemes that
have a bearing on decentralisation. Cabinet Secretariat has accordingly
issued instructions to all the Ministries on the 8 November, 2004 in
this regard. Ministries are taking necessary action in this regard.
A Committee was constituted by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
on feasibility of sending funds to PRIs directly through banking
channels. This Committee has submitted its report. The Committee
has recommended that it is feasible to maintain a database of Panchayat
accounts, State-wise for the country to transfer funds without any delay
or diversion to these accounts by using channels and to set up a
feedback mechanism to know when a particular bank account is
credited with funds. For this purpose, a nodal bank has to be identified
for each particular State based on the number of braches and branch
connectivity of the banks in the State. The strongest Bank in terms of
territorial coverage and connectivity in a State should be selected as
the nodal Bank. It has been recommended that there should be a
service level agreement between the Ministry which remits funds to
the Panchayat Bank account and the nodal bank, laying out the number
of days it will take to credit funds, the number of days it will take for
feedback about date of credit, and the time period by which the bank
braches will be connected to its centralised business solutions network
or in the interim to its wide area network. The Department of
Panchayati Raj in a State will need to create and maintain, with the
assistance of its local State National Informatic Centre Office, a database
of Panchayat Bank accounts on the National Panchayat Portal which
has already been created by the National Informatic Centre, Delhi.
The funds to be remitted to Panchayats through their Panchayat Bank
accounts can be prescribed by the States concerned or by the Central
Ministries concerned depending on the guidelines framed for the
particular schemes or funds being administered by the Ministry.

32
A Cell to be created in the Ministry of Panchayati Raj or in the
Ministry of Finance can look after all the institutional, coordination
and infrastructural issues relating to maintaining a computerized
database of Panchayat accounts and coordinating with designated Nodal
Banks for different States as well as with State Governments. The Cell
should have permanent representation from the office of Chief
Controller of Accounts, office of NIC and the Ministries of Panchayati
Raj and Finance.
The recommendation of the Committee have been sent to the
Ministry of Finance for their consideration.
A Review Meeting was taken by the Prime Minister on the outcome
of the Round Tables on the Panchayati Raj on 2 June, 2005. It was
decided during the meeting that the Central Ministries/Planning
Commission should rationalize policies of Centrally Sponsored Schemes
in accordance with the XI Schedule of the Constitution in keeping
with the suggestions of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Planning
Commission Task Force Report on PRIs on December, 2001 and the
Task Force of the State Secretaries of PR in December, 2004. It was
also decided that the issue of rationalsing Centrally Sponsored Scheme
Policy be referred by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to the Group of
Ministers on Panchayati Raj for early resolution.
As per the directive of the Prime Minister, on rationalizing of
Policy relating to CSS in accordance with the XI Schedule of the
Constitution, the matter has been referred to the Group of Ministers.
[Ministry of Panchayati Raj OM No. H-11011/2/2005-PR
Dated: 4 August, 2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
22 November, 2005 Chairman,
1 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

33
APPENDIX I
(As on 31.3.2005)
STATEMENT SHOWING STATE-WISE RELEASE OF GRANTS AS
PER FINANCE COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS AND ITS
UTILISATION BY PANCHAYATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS
(Rs. In lakhs)
Sl.No. State Tenth Finance Commission
Allocation Grants Short Desired Matching Grants Utilisation Col. 8 as
(1995-2000) released fall utilisation Contribution released reported % of
to (Col. 2 grant by by SG by Col. 5
SG minus 3) released PRI/SG to State
(1995-2000) alongwith reported PRIs Govt.
desired by
matching State
contribution Govt.
by State Govt.)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 35100 33594.21 1505.79 44791.16 85169.86 118764.07 118764.07 265.15
2. Arunachal Pradesh 451 141.25 309.75 188.33 NA IA IA —
3. Assam 13336 4167.50 9168.5 5556.53 NIL 4167.5 4167.5 75.00
4. Bihar* 50719 12680.00 3803.9 16906.24 897.02 9221.13 9221.13 54.54
5. Chhattisgarh —— ——— ———
6. Goa 591 258.50 332.5 344.66 NA IA IA —
7. Gujarat 19201 19201.00 0 25600.69 21767.59 19200.00 19200.00 75.00
8. Haryana 8264 8264.00 0 11018.39 826.04 9090.04 9090.04 82.50
9. Himachal Pradesh 3218 2816.00 402 3754.57 649.33 3887.38 3867.38 103.00
10. Jammu and Kashmir 3759 3759.00 0 5011.87 — IA IA —
11. Jharkhand —— 0.00 0.00 NA IA IA —
12. Karnataka 22177 22177.00 0 29568.59 4350.13 22177.00 22177.00 75.00
13. Kerala 17881 17881.00 0 23840.74 119714.00 89788.00 89788.00 376.61
14. Madhya Pradesh 34869 34285.57 583.43 45712.95 54448.00 34868.00 34868.00 76.28
15. Maharashtra 34701 21688.00 130.13 28916.61 13189.50 34827.00 34827.00 120.44
16. Manipur 931 407.25 523.75 542.99 407.25 407.25 407.25 75.00

34
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
17. Meghalaya** 865 378.00 487 503.99 NA IA IA —
18. Mizoram 294 294.00 0 391.99 294.00 588.00 588.00 150.00
19. Nagaland*** 465 203.50 261.5 271.33 NA IA IA —
20. Orissa 20099 20099.00 0 26798.00 16750.00 36849.00 36849.00 137.51
21. Punjab 10335 4521.50 5813.5 6028.52 1507.17 4224.85 4224.85 70.08
22. Rajasthan 21222 21222.00 0 28295.29 25157.62 45907.82 45907.82 162.25
23. Sikkim 190 190.00 0 253.33 548.00 738.00 738.00 291.32
24. Tamil Nadu 28734 28734.00 0 38311.04 28734.00 57468.00 57468.00 150.00
25. Tripura 1394 870.50 523.5 1160.64 350.00 1744.00 1744.00 150.26
26. Uttar Pradesh 75952 66458.00 9494 88608.45 11632.57 67181.43 67181.43 75.82
27. Uttaranchal ——— — NA ———
28. West Bengal 33345 33345.00 0 44458.89 Nil 32298.54 32298.54 72.65
Total 438093.00 357635.78 80457.22 476835.79 386392.08 593375.01 593375.01 124.44
* Includes Rs. 3207 lakhs transferred to Jharkhand.
** Meghalaya had transferred the entire TFC funds to ULBs as there are no PRIs in
Meghalaya.
*** Govt. of Nagaland has transferred the entire fund. 1A Information Awaited.

APPENDIX II 
 
THE STATEMENT INDICATING THE FUNDS FUNCTIONS AND 
FUNCTIONARIES DEVOLVED BY THE STATES/UNION TERRITORIES 
INDICATING LATEST POSITION UPTO 29 JUNE, 2005 
 
State Subjects transferred 
through legislation 
Activity 
mapping 
undertaken 
Latest position 
((29.6.2005) 
Andhra Pradesh 17 Subjects  9 Subjects Committee constituted under 
Special Chief Secretary has yet to 
meet to consider activity mapping. 
Assam 29 Subjects 29 Subjects on 
26.7.2002 
Activity mapping not 
operationalised through executive 
orders and funds transfer. 
Arunachal Pradesh Nil 6 Subjects -- 
Bihar 25 Subjects 20 Subjects  
Chhattisgarh 29 Subjects 6 Subjects Activity mapping for six completed 
and the remaining to be completed 
by October, 2005. 
Goa 6 Subjects 18 Subjects  
Gujarat 14 Subjects 14 Departments Activity in respect of 5 subjects 
have been devolved partially.  With 
respect to 10 functions, activities 
are yet to be devolved. 
Haryana 16  16 Subjects Draft Activity mapping prepared.  
Final decision of Govt. of Haryana 
awaited. 
Himachal Pradesh 26 subjects  Preliminary discussions held draft 
activity mapping. 
Jammu & Kashmir    
Jharkhand    
Karnataka 29 Subjects 29 Subjects Devolution of funds pertaining to 
26 subjects completed with effect 
from 2005-06. 
Kerala 26 Subjects 26 Subjects United funds devolved in respect of 
devolved functions. 
Maharashtra  19 Subjects 9 Departments   
Madhya Pradesh  25 Subjects 7 Subjects Draft Activity Mapping under 
consideration of Government. 
Manipur 22 Subjects  22 Subjects Activity Mapping of 22 subjects 
completed. 
Orissa 25 Subjects 8 Subjects Meeting of 11 Departments have 
been called and activity mapping of 
8 Departments are in progress. 
Pondicherry    
Punjab 7 Subjects 6 Draft Activity Mapping prepared.  
Final decision of Govt. awaited. 
Rajasthan 29 Subjects 18 Subjects  
transferred 
Activity Mapping is in progress. 
Sikkim    
Tamil Nadu    
Tripura    
Uttar Pradesh 12 Subjects 10 Subjects Activity Mapping is in progress. 
Uttaranchal 14 Subjects 14 Subjects Activity Mapping in respect of 9 
departments completed and under 
consideration of the Government.  
GOs for devolution of 3 
departments issued. 
West Bengal  29 Subjects  29 Activity Mapping is completed, 
awaiting approval of Cabinet. 
D & N Haveli 29 Subjects 29 Subjects Activity Mapping is completed. 
Daman & Diu 29 Subjects 29 subjects Activity Mapping is completed. 
A&N Nicobar Islands    
Lakshdweep    
Chandigarh UT    
 
35 

36
APPENDIX III
THE STATEMENT  INDICATING  THE FUNDS, FUNCTIONS
AND FUNCTIONARIES DEVOLVED BY THE STATES/UNION
TERRITORIES INDICATING NUMBER OF DEPARTMENTS/
SUBJECTS TRANSFERRED TO PANCHAYATS
Sl.No. States/Union No. of Departments/Subjects Remarks
territories Transferred to Panchayats
Funds Functions Functionaries
 12 3 4 5 6
 1. Andhra Pradesh 05 17 02
 2. Arunachal Pradesh —— — Elections held recently.
Yet to devolve 3Fs.
 3. Assam —2 9 —
 4. Bihar 82 5— Only functional  control
 5. Jharkhand —— — Elections have not yet
been held.
 6. Goa 66 —
 7. Gujarat 15 15 15
 8. Haryana —1 6 —
 9. Himachal Pradesh 02 26 11
10. Karnataka 29 29 29
11. Kerala 26 26 26
12. Madhya Pradesh 10 23 09
13. Chhattisgarh 10 29 09
14. Maharashtra 18 18 18
15. Manipur —2 2 0 4
16. Orissa 09 25 21
17. Punjab —0 7 —

37
12 3 4 5 6
18. Rajasthan 18 29 18
19. Sikkim 24 24 24
20. Tamil Nadu —2 9 —
21. Tripura —1 2 —
22. Uttar Pradesh 04 12 06
23. Uttaranchal —1 1 1 1
24. West Bengal 12 29 12
25. A&N Islands 06 06 06
26. Chandigarh —— —
27. D&N Haveli —0 3 0 3
28. Daman & Diu 05 09 03
29. NCT of Delhi Panchayati Raj System is yet to be revived
30. Pondicherry —— — Elections have not
yet been held
31. Lakshadweep —0 6 —

38
APPENDIX IV
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON THURSDAY THE 27 OCTOBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Mohan Jena
4. Shri Subhash Maharia
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri Dawa Narbula
7. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
8. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
9. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
10. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
14. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
15. Shrimati Vanga Geetha
16. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
17. Shri Penumalli Madhu
18. Shri Kalraj Mishra
19. Dr. Chandan Mitra
20. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
21. Prof. R.B.S. Varma

  
          
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri A. K. Shah   - Under Secretary 
4. Shrimati Gurjeet Kaur    - Assistant Director  
 
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcom ed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee and felicitated Smt. Vanga Geetha, MP, Rajya Sabha on her nomination as 
the member of the Committee.   Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration 
Memorandum No. 2 regarding action take n report on Eleventh Report of the 
Committee  on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Drinking Water 
Supply (Ministry of Rural Development).  The Committee after deliberation adopted 
the draft report with certain modifications as indicated in Annexure.  
3. The Committee then took  up for consideration Memorandum No. 3 regarding 
action taken report on Twelfth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Panchaya ti Raj.  The Committee after deliberation 
adopted the said draft report without any modifications. 
4. The Committee then authorised the Ch airman to finalise the aforesaid draft 
action taken Reports on the basis of fa ctual verification from the concerned 
Department/Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided that  the next sitting mi ght be convened on 
Thursday, the 10  November, 2005. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

40
APPENDIX V
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (14TH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 19
II. Recommendations that have been accepted
by the Government 10
Para Nos. 2.6, 2.25, 2.27, 2.35, 2.36, 2.37, 2.44,
2.49, 2.57 and 2.60
Percentage to the Total recommendations (52.63%)
III. Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies 2
Para Nos. 2.7 and 2.26
Percentage to the Total recommendations (10.52%)
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee 3
Para Nos. 2.5, 2.38 and 2.39
Percentage to the Total recommendations (15.78%)
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited 4
Para Nos. 2.23, 2.24, 2.48 and 2.53
Percentage to the Total recommendations (21.05%)