6
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on
Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee
on Rural Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ……………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 006
Price : Rs. 14.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2004-2005) ...................................... (iii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
CHAPTER I Report ......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government ....................................................... 12
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies .......................................................................... 14
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .................................................... 15
C
HAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited .... 22
APPENDICES
I. Relevant extracts of Rajya Sabha Debates held
on  25.7.2003  on  Government  motion  for
consideration of progress  of  implementation
of Part IX A of the Constitution ........................ 23
II. Operative part  of  Hon’ble  Supreme Court
Order in case  no. 719 of 1995  of 24.2.1997
regarding interpretation of Article 243E of the
Constitution ............................................................... 24
III. Extracts of the Minutes  of  the  Tenth sitting
of the Committee held on 14.2.2005 .................. 26
IV . Analysis of Action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Fourth
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha).... 28

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
12. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
14. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
15. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
24. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
25. Shri Penumalli Madhu
26. Shri Stephen Marandi
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
(iii)

(iv)
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Shri Keshubhai S. Patel
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director

ABBREVIATIONS
AIR — All India Radio
BE — Budget Estimates
NIRD — National Institute of Rural Development
NC — Not Covered
NGO — Non-Governmental Organization
OTA — Over-time Allowance
PESA — Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the
Scheduled Areas) Act
PRIs — Panchayati Raj Institutions
RE — Revised Estimates
SCs/STs — Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
SFCs — State Finance Commissions
SGSY — Sampoorna Gram Swarozgar Yojana
TFC — Tenth Finance Commission
UTs — Union Territories
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Sixth Report on the action taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 August, 2004.
The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained
in the Report were received on 15  December, 2004.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
14 February, 2005.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee
(2004-2005) is given in Appendix IV .
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
24 February, 2005 Chairman,
 5 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(vii)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Rural Development (2004-2005)
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in their Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005)
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 19 August, 2004.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 14 recommendations which have been categorised as
follows :
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2.38, 2.39 and 2.43
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No. 2.40
(iii) Recommendation in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2.15, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 2.30, 2.31
and 2.44
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Nil
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of these recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Inadequate allocation of outlay to the newly created Ministry of
Panchayati Raj
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.15, 2.16, 2.17 and 2.18)
4. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that with the creation of a new Ministry i.e.,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj to deal with the various issues related

2
to Panchayati Raj Rs. 20 crore has been allocated during 2004-2005
against the allocation of Rs. 16 crore during the previous year.
They also find that Rs. 80 crore has been allocated during Tenth
Plan as against the actual expenditure of Rs. 19.57 crore during
Ninth Plan. They also note that as per the projections made by
the newly created Ministry, Rs. 70.60 crore was the requirement of
outlay during the year 2004-2005. They note that less than
one-third of what was projected has been provided to the Ministry.
They also find that the Ministry will be approaching Ministry of
Finance for additional allocation at the revised estimates stage since
the Ministry was created on 27 May, 2004. The detailed analysis
head-wise is given in subsequent paragraphs of the Report. Here
the Committee would like to recommend to the Government to
provide adequate allocation to the Ministry, so that the set objectives
of ensuring implementation of Part IX of the Constitution in
respective States is achieved as per the mandate of the Constitution.
(Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
“The Committee note that out of 28 lakh elected representatives of
Panchayati Raj Institutions, 6.03 lakh representatives have been
imparted training so far. They also note that out of proposed
allocation of Rs. 30 crore during 2004-05, Planning Commission
has allocated Rs. 20 crore. The Committee note that to enable the
Panchayats to shoulder the responsibilities assigned to them in
pursuance of Article 243(G) of the Constitution, training of
Panchayati Raj functionaries is the necessary requirement. In view
of this, the Committee feel that adequate allocation under this
head should be provided and the Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission should be conveyed the feelings of the Committee in
this regard.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
“While recommending for higher outlay under Panchayati Raj
development and training of elected representatives of Panchayati
Raj Institutions, the Committee feel that the Ministry should chalk
out an action plan in consultation with National Institute of Rural
Development, State Governments and all other agencies concerned
in this regard so that the task is completed within the stipulated
time fame. The Committee while examining the subject
‘Implementation of Part IX of the Constitution’ in their 37th Report,
2002 had recommended for an exponential increase in the quantum
of funds made available for training as well as deep consideration

3
to the overall training requirements of both elected Members and
Panchayati staff. While reiterating the earlier recommendation of
the Committee, the Committee would like to recommend for
adequate outlay under the programme.”
(Recommendation (Para No. 2.17)
“The Committee note that under Information Education
Communication (IEC) Research Studies and Information Technology
Rs. 2 crore have been earmarked during the year 2004-05. Out of
that Rs. 1.5 crore has been allocated for Panchayati Raj development
training and research institutions, etc. and Rs. 50 lakh has been
allocated for Information and Technology.
The Committee feel that Doordarshan and All India Radio (AIR)
can play an effective role by their programmes in the task of
training elected Members and Staff, especially representatives of
the weaker sections and women so as to be effective participants
in the system of Panchayati Raj Institutions. The Committee further
feel that the benefit of audio and video CDs can be taken to
impart training to PRIs. For this purpose, National Institute of
Rural Development (NIRD) and other technical institutions can
play an important role. Further, the Committee note that the PRIs
can be trained by stage demonstrations and street plays. The
Ministry should find out how all these techniques can be made
available so that the training can be completed within the stipulated
time period. The Committee would like also to recommend to
provide adequate allocation under the aforesaid head.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.18)
5. The Government in their action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is still in the process of being set
up and the requisite staff is yet to become available to the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj. The Ministry will approach the Finance Ministry
to provide adequate funds consonant to expansion in
establishment.“
(Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
“The Ministry is in the process of creation of posts and allocation
of business which is expected to be completed in the current

4
financial year. Thereafter, the Ministry will approach Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance, in accordance with the
observations of the Committee, which will be conveyed to the
Ministries.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No 2.16)
“The Ministry is already in touch with National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD), Hyderabad, National Institute of
Administrative Reforms (NIAR), Mussoorie and Lal Bahadur Shastri
National Academy of Administration to help design training
programmes for elected representatives of Panchayati Raj
Institutions which will then be recommended to the States for
implementation through State Institutes of Rural Development
(SIRDs) and Administrative Training Institutes  (ATIs). The
necessary Action Plan will be initiated after the  posts are created
and filled up for the Ministry and adequate outlay for training
will be asked for from the concerned Ministries.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.17)
“The advice of the Committee has been noted for compliance and
concerned agencies will be approached for necessary advice/
assistance once the posts are created and filled up and the Ministry
is fully functional.”
Reply to  Recommendation (Para No. 2.18)
6. The Committee in their earlier recommendations had inter-
alia recommended as under:
(i) the Government should provide requisite outlay i.e.
Rs. 70.60 crores for the year 2004-05 as projected by the
Ministry so as to meet the set objective of creating a new
Ministry of Panchayati  Raj
(ii) more emphasis should be given on training of both elected
representatives of PRIs and staff of Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs) and for this purpose adequate outlay
should be provided. An Action Plan in this regard should
be drafted in consultation with National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD), State Governments and all other
concerned agencies so as to complete the task within the
stipulated time period. Different techniques of training
such as audio-visual media, Doordarshan and AIR could
be used for the purpose of training of representatives of
PRIs and Panchayati Raj functionaries.

5
The Committee note that a new Ministry of Panchayati Raj has
been created w.e.f. 27 May, 2004 so that the  work  of advocacy of
monitoring and implementation of the Constitution
(73rd Amendment) Act, 1992 and the Provision of the Panchayats
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 could be more effectively
implemented. They also find that the various activities transferred
to the newly created Ministry were earlier being handled by the
Ministry of Rural Development. Further almost nine months have
passed since the Ministry had been created. The Committee are
unhappy to note a vague and stereotyped reply stating that the
requisite staff is yet to be made available to the Ministry and these
areas would be addressed after the requisite infrastructure is made
available. The Committee disapprove the way the Ministry has tried
to sidetrack their recommendations. They feel that before the
bifurcation of Ministry of Rural Development  such administrative
issues should have been sorted out so that the objective of creating
a new Ministry is fulfilled. The Committee now reiterate their earlier
recommendations and would like that action should be taken without
any further delay and they be apprised accordingly.
B. Reasons for Lower Utilisation of funds by the T enth and Eleventh
Finance Commissions
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.23, 2.24 and 2.25)
7. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that Tenth Finance Commission made an
ad-hoc provision of Rs. 4,38,093 lakh for Panchayati Raj Institutions
for 1996-2000. Out of provision of Rs. 4,38,093 lakh, Rs. 3,57,536.78 lakh
were released to PRIs and a balance of Rs. 80,457.22 lakh was left.
This shows that the allocation remained unutilized. In case of Eleventh
Finance Commission, Rs. 16,00,000 lakh was the allocation by Ministry
and grant worth Rs. 5,29,151.94 lakh was released. Rs. 7,12,061.66 lakh
was released to PRIs by State and utilization was of
Rs. 3,41,771.08 lakh.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.23)
“The Committee note from the position as indicated above that
there is shortfall in releases as compared to the allocation made
by the Tenth Finance Commission to the respective Panchayati Raj

6
Institutions. In as many as 10 States/Union Territories, the position
of matching contribution by States/Union Territories is still awaited.
As regards the position of utilisation of funds by PRIs, from 9
States the information is still awaited. To have a clear idea of
utilisation of funds by PRIs in respective States, the Committee
would like the Ministry to furnish percentage-wise utilisation
position in each of the States/Union Territories so as to enable the
Committee to comprehend the position with regard to utilisation
of funds allocated during Tenth and Eleventh Finance
Commissions.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
“About the unutilised funds stated above the Committee may be
apprised about the reasons therefor. The funds allocated are not as
per requirement projected. However, inspite of that if certain
amount remains unutilised it smacks of some anomaly. The
Government should make a thorough study of this aspect and
find out ameliorative measures so that nothing is left out once
allocation has been made.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25)
8. The Government in their action taken replies have stated as
under:
“Noted”.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.23)
“Interaction with the Ministry of Finance on tracking and
monitoring funds going through the Consolidated Funds of the
States and meant for the Panchayats to ensure that these actually
reach their intended targets has been identified as a thrust area in
the Ministry‘s road map. The Ministry of Finance has been
approached in the matter and the reply to this question will be
submitted upon receipt of their response.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
“As at 2.24 above. The Ministry of Finance has been approached
in the matter and the reply to this question will be submitted
shortly.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.25)

7
9. The Committee in their earlier recommendations had expressed
their concern on the shortfall in releases made by the Tenth and
Eleventh Finance Commissions for the respective Panchayati Raj
Institutions and desired that the information indicating percentage
wise utilisation position with regard to funds allocated to PRIs by
the Tenth and Eleventh Finance  Commissions be made available to
them. The Committee find that the issue is being taken up with the
Ministry of Finance and they would like to be informed in this
regard in due course. It may further be added that the Committee
would like that the information with regard to utilisation of funds
allocated by the Tenth and Eleventh Finance Commissions should
be periodically maintained and the position should also be indicated
in Performance Budget.
C. Progress with regard to devolution of functions, functionaries
and finances to Panchayati Raj Institutions
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.30 and 2.31)
10. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that earlier a proposal to amend some parts
of the Constitution (73rd Amendment Act) 1992 was under
consideration of the Government. However, at present, the thrust
of the Ministry is to facilitate and secure implementation of the
provisions enshrined in the Constitution (73rd Amendment) Act,
1992 by States/Union Territories in letter and spirit by encouraging
them to adopt carefully drawn up plans of action. The thrust of
the Ministry is that functions, functionaries and finances to
Panchayati Raj Institutions are suitably devolved to empower Gram
Sabhas and District Planning Committees to make Panchayati Raj
Institutions true institutions of self-government. While noting the
position of thrust area of the Ministry, the Committee would like
that the various issues raised in their Reports should be taken into
account and desired action taken on the various aspects. The
Committee may also like to be kept informed about this.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
“The Committee are, however, constrained to note the reply of the
Ministry that they would compile the information from respective
States when the staff strength would be made available to them.
The Committee find that the area of activity entrusted to the newly
created Ministry of Panchayati Raj was previously under the

8
Ministry of Rural Development. The only change is that area of
activities have been transferred from one Department to another.
The Committee fail to understand why the requisite information
could not be obtained by the erstwhile Ministry of Rural
Development. They would like that the information should be
compiled expeditiously and they be kept informed about the status
of implementation of the various recommendations made by them
in the earlier Reports.”
Recommendation (Para No. 2.31)
11. The Government in their action taken replies have stated as
under:
“The recommendation has been noted for compliance.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
“Whereas the new Ministry has indeed been separated from the
Ministry of Rural Development, the bifurcation and allocation of
business remains under consideration. Besides, the area of interest
of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj goes beyond that of Rural
Development. Hence the need for  separation. The necessary action
for the creation of the posts for the Ministry is in hand and the
requisite information, which is available, will be compiled as soon
as the staff to do so is available.”
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.31)
12. The erstwhile Standing Committee on Urban and Rural
Development (2002) had presented a Report on the subject
‘Implementation of Part IX of the Constitution’ to the Houses of
Parliament on 20 November 2002. The Committee while examining
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) had desired the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj to indicate the action taken on each of the
recommenations made in the aforesaid report. At that staged the
Ministry had stated that the information could not be furnished due
to inadequate staff and infrastructure. The Committee in their earlier
recommendations while not agreeing with the plea of the Ministry,
had categorically stated that information should be compiled
expeditiously and sent to the Committee. The Committee are
constrained to note that instead of taking some action on their
recommendations, the Government had again taken recourse to the
flimsy plea i.e. inadequate staff and infrastructure. The Committee
find that the recommendations made by the erstwhile Committee in

9
their aforesaid report were honoured by the then Hon. Minister of
Rural Development and a debate on the subject ‘Panchayati Raj’
was held on the floor of the Houses of Parliament.
1 
Even then the
Ministry is not at all serious in taking action in this regard. They
fail to understand how the objective of creating a separate Ministry
for implementation of the provisions of Part IX of the Constitution
could be met in such a situation. While deploring the way the
Ministry is working, the Committee would like an explanation from
the Ministry for not taking any action on the recommendations so
far.
C. Clarification on Supreme Court’s ruling on Article 243(E) of the
Constitution
Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)
13. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee in their 37th Report had examined the issue of
postponing of elections by different State Governments. They while
examining the said issue were apprised that the Supreme Court
had ruled that the concerned States could not be permitted to
withhold election to Panchayats except in case of genuine
supervening difficulties such as unforeseen natural calamities in
the state like flood, earthquake etc., or urgent situation prevailing
in the State for which elections to the Panchayats cannot be held
in time. The Committee were also apprised that the said ruling of
the Supreme Court interpreting Article 243(E) of the Constitution
has been differently interpreted by the State  Governments. The
Committee had observed that since regular periodic elections within
the letter and spirit of the Constitution provision lie at the very
heart of the democratic process, the Central Government should
secure a clear ruling from the Supreme Court about the meaning
and scope of Article 243(E) so that elections are held within five
years. The representatives of the Ministry informed them that they
plan to approach the Supreme Court. In this direction, the
Committee would like that a clear ruling of the Supreme Court
should be obtained expeditiously so that the State Governments
cannot interpret the said ruling of the Supreme Court differently
for postponing elections.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)
1. See Appendix I.

10
14. The Government in their action taken replies have stated as
under:
“In the Fourth Round Table of Ministers in charge of Panchayati
Raj held at Chandigarh on 7 and 8 October 2004, the subject of
Panchayati Raj in jurisprudence was discussed and it was agreed
to recommend to their respective Governments, joint acceptance
by the Centre and the States/Union Territories Administrations
certain action points. The resolutions arrived at seven Round Table
Conferences will be discussed during the meeting of the Chief
Ministers scheduled to be held in early next year in which the
resolutions are expected to be jointly accepted by the Centre and
the States.
The Supreme Court has already interpreted 243E in case No.
719 of 1995 of 24.2.1997 (copy of operative part of the Order is at
Appendix II). The present position is that all State Governments/
Union Territories administrations have held elections as provided
in the Constitution, except the State of Jharkhand and Union
Territory of Pondicherry. Both Governments have assured that
elections will be held in early 2005. The Ministry is pursuing this.
Hence a judgement of the Supreme Court is available for recourse
in case of any default by any State/Union Territories.
Reply to Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)
15. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had observed
that the ruling given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court i.e. “States
could not be permitted to withhold elections to Panchayats except
in case of genuine supervening difficulties such as unforeseen natural
calamities in the State like flood, earthquake etc., or urgent situation
prevailing in the State for which elections to the Panchayats cannot
be held in time ” had differently been interpreted by the State
Governments for the purpose of postponing elections to Panchayats.
The representatives of the Ministry during the course of evidence
on Demands for Grants 2004-05 had informed the Committee that
they had planned to approach the Hon’ble Supreme Court in this
regard. The Committee while taking note of the stand taken by the
Ministry, had desired that a clear ruling from the Hon’ble
Supreme Court should be obtained. No action seems to have been
taken as per the action taken reply provided by the Government.
Only the copy of the earlier ruling of the Hon’ble Supreme Court

11
(Appendix II) already in the knowledge of the Committee has been
furnished. They feel that the Ministry has not understood the
recommendations in the right perspective. They would like to
reiterate their earlier recommendation and would desire that a clear
ruling interpreting the words ‘urgent situation prevailing in the State
for which elections to the Panchayats cannot be held in time’, as
appeared in the earlier ruling of the Hon’ble Supreme Court should
be obtained from the Hon’ble Supreme Court and the Committee be
apprised accordingly.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
The Committee note that the issues related to Panchayati Raj have
been taken from the Ministry of Rural Development, and a new
Ministry i.e., the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been created to give
focused attention on implementation of the following two Acts
(i) 73rd Amendment Act, 1992 (ii) Provisions of the Panchayats
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996. The Committee while
appreciating the steps taken by the Government to give focused
attention to ensure implementation of Part IX of the Constitution note
that the Ministry has set the target of ensuring implementation of
various provisions enshrined in 73rd Amendment Act within time frame
of one and half year as stated by the representatives of the Ministry
during the course of oral evidence.
Reply of the Government
Noted.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.39)
The Committee in their 37th Report had recommended that the
Ministry should submit an annual state of the Panchayati Raj Report
to enable Parliament to effectively monitor the implementation of
Part IX. The Committee hope that the newly created Ministry would
implement their recommendations in the right earnest and present an
Annual Report to Parliament not only to effectively monitor the various
provisions but also to have transparency in all the matters related to
Panchayati Raj Institutions.
Reply of the Government
The subject of Annual Reports on the state of Panchayats was
discussed during the Fifth Round Table of Ministers in charge of
Panchayati Raj held at Srinagar on 28-29 October, 2004 and the
Ministers in charge agreed to recommend to their respective
Governments for joint acceptance by the Centre and the State certain
12

13
points of action. The resolutions arrived at seven Round Table
Conferences will be recommended to be jointly accepted by the Centre
and the States.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.43)
The Committee find that there is no clarity on the time to be
taken by the Ministry in attaining the objective of devolution of powers
to Panchayats in pursuance of Article 243(G) of the Constitution. At
one place the representative of the Ministry assured the Committee
that within one and half year they will try to achieve the set objectives
whereas at another place, she stated that they will allow States to take
two or three years but ask them not to do it in a half-hearted way.
The Committee appreciate that the responsibilities of entrusting
devolution rests with the State Governments. However since
implementation of Part IX of the Constitution is the responsibility of
the Union Ministry of Panchayati Raj, the Ministry should set the
targets realistically and present the position before the Committee
accordingly. The Committee are also concerned though in theory all
the 29 subjects have been devolved the ground realities show otherwise.
The matter needs serious attention and such cavalier approach needs
severe criticism. The Government should impress upon the States that
such half-hearted measures are not in consonance with the spirit of
73rd Amendment Act.
Reply of the Government
As noted by the Committee, the responsibility of implementing
the provisions of the Constitution pertaining to Panchayati Raj rests
with the State Governments. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is in
constant touch with States/Union Territories to ensure that the
provisions of the Constitution are complied with. To achieve a specific
targeted approach to implementation in areas identified by consensus,
six Round Table Conferences have already been held and the seventh
scheduled for 17-19 December, 2004. Conclusions carried at in these
meetings will be placed before the Chief Ministers’ Conference
scheduled for early next year in which the resolutions will be jointly
accepted by the Centre and States. It is expected that at that time a
schedule will be finalised for implementation of these resolutions in a
time bound manner.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 2.40)
The Committee further note that in line with fulfillment of the
aforesaid objectives, the first Round Table Conference on Panchayati
Raj was held in Kolkata on 24-25 July, 2004. They also note that the
Ministry proposes seven Round Table Conferences over a span of six
months to formulate a draft action plan for achieving the objectives of
strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions. The Committee further
find that in the first Round Table  Conference Panchayati Raj Ministers
in charge of Panchayati Raj Institutions and their representatives agreed
to recommend to the respective Governments, the conclusions reached
during the meeting on the subjects under consideration for further
necessary adoption at the meeting of the Chief Ministers scheduled to
be held towards the end of the current financial year. The Committee
hope that such Round Table Conferences would be able to persuade
the respective State Governments to devolve the functions to the three
tiers of Panchayati Raj Institutions to have true Panchayati Swaraj.
Reply of the Government
Needs no reply.
14

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
The Committee note that with the creation of a new Ministry i.e.,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj to deal with the various issues related to
Panchayati Raj Rs. 20 crore has been allocated during 2004-05 against
the allocation of Rs. 16 crore during the previous year. They also find
that Rs. 80 crore has been allocated during Tenth Plan as against the
actual expenditure of Rs. 19.57 crore during Ninth Plan. They also
note that as per the projections made by the newly created Ministry,
Rs. 70.60 crore was the requirement of outlay during the year
2004-2005. They note that less than one-third of what was projected
has been provided to the Ministry. They also find that the Ministry
will be approaching Ministry of Finance for additional allocation at
the revised estimates stage since the Ministry was created on
27 May, 2004. The detailed analysis head-wise is given in subsequent
paragraphs of the Report. Here the Committee would like to
recommend to the Government to provide adequate allocation to the
Ministry, so that the set objectives of ensuring implementation of
Part IX of the Constitution in respective States is achieved as per the
mandate of the Constitution.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is still in the process of being set
up and the requisite staff is yet to become available to the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj. The Ministry will approach the Finance Ministry to
provide adequate funds consonant to expansion in establishment.“
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16)
The Committee note that out of 28 lakh elected representatives of
Panchayati Raj Institutions, 6.03 lakh representatives have been imparted
training so far. They also note that out of proposed allocation of
15

16
Rs. 30 crore during 2004-05, Planning Commission has allocated
Rs. 20 crore. The Committee note that to enable the Panchayats to
shoulder the responsibilities assigned to them in pursuance of
Article 243(G) of the Constitution, training of Panchayati Raj
functionaries is the necessary requirement. In view of this, the
Committee feel that adequate allocation under this head should be
provided and the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission should
be conveyed the feelings of the Committee in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is in the process of creation of posts and allocation
of business which is expected to be completed in the current financial
year. Thereafter, the Ministry will approach the Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance, in accordance with the observations of the
Committee, which will be conveyed to the Ministries.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 2.17)
While recommending for higher outlay under Panchayati Raj
development and training of elected representatives of Panchayati Raj
Institutions, the Committee feel that the Ministry should chalk out an
action plan in consultation with National Institute of Rural
Development, State Governments and all other agencies concerned in
this regard so that the task is completed within the stipulated time
frame. The Committee while examining the subject ‘Implementation of
Part IX of the Constitution’ in their 37th Report, 2002 and recommended
for an exponential increase in the quantum of funds made available
for training as well as deep consideration to the overall training
requirements of both elected Members and Panchayati staff. While
reiterating the earlier recommendation of the Committee, the Committee
would like to recommend for adequate outlay under the programme.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is already in touch with National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD), Hyderabad, National Institute of Administrative
Reforms (NIAR), Mussoorie and Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy
of Administration to help design training programmes for elected
representatives of Panchayati Raj institutions which will then be

17
recommended to the States for implementation through State Institutes
of Rural Development (SIRDs) and Administrative Training Institutes
(ATIs). The necessary Action Plan will be initiated after the  posts are
created and filled up for the Ministry and adequate outlay for training
will be asked for from the concerned Ministries.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.18)
The Committee note that under IEC Research Studies and
Information Technology Rs. 2 crore have been earmarked during the
year 2004-05. Out of that Rs. 1.5 crore has been allocated for Panchayati
Raj development training and research institutions, etc. and
Rs. 50 lakh has been allocated for Information and Technology. The
Committee feel that Doordarshan and AIR can play an effective role
by their programmes in the task of training elected Members and
Staff, especially representatives of the weaker sections and women so
as to be effective participants in the system of Panchayati Raj
Institutions. The Committee further feel that the benefit of audio and
video CDs can be taken to impart training to PRIs. For this purpose,
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) and there technical
institutions can play an important role. Further, the Committee note
that the PRIs can be trained by stage demonstrations and street plays.
The Ministry should find out how all these techniques can be made
available so that the training can be completed within the stipulated
time period. The Committee would like also to recommend to provide
adequate allocation under the aforesaid head.
Reply of the Government
The advice of the Committee has been noted for compliance and
concerned agencies will be approached for necessary advice/assistance
once the posts are created and filled up and the Ministry is fully
functional.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report).

18
Recommendation (Para No. 2.23)
The Committee note that Tenth Finance Commission made an ad-
hoc provision of Rs. 4,38,093 lakh for PRIs for 1996-2000. Out of
provision of Rs. 4,38,093 lakh, Rs. 3,57,536.78 lakh were released to
PRIs and a balance of Rs. 80,457.22 lakh was left. This shows that the
allocation remained unutilised. In case of Eleventh Finance Commission,
Rs. 16,00,000 lakh was the allocation by Ministry and grant worth
Rs. 5,29,151.94 lakh was released. Rs. 7,12,061.66 lakh was released to
PRIs by State and utilisation was of Rs. 3,41,771.08 lakh.”
Reply of the Government
Noted.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
The Committee note from the position as indicated above that
there is shortfall in releases as compared to the allocation made by the
Tenth Finance Commission to the respective Panchayati Raj Institutions.
In as many as 10 States/Union Territories, the position of matching
contribution by States/Union Territories is still awaited.   As regards
the position of utilisation of funds by PRIs, from 9 States the
information is still awaited. To have a clear idea of utilisation of funds
by PRIs in respective States, the Committee would like the Ministry to
furnish percentage-wise utilisation position in each of the States/Union
Territories so as to enable the Committee to comprehend the position
with regard to utilisation of funds allocated during Tenth and Eleventh
Finance Commissions.
Reply of the Government
Interaction with the Ministry of Finance on tracking and monitoring
funds going through the Consolidated Funds of the States and meant
for the Panchayats to ensure that these actually reach their intended
targets has been identified as a thrust area in the Ministry‘s road map.
The Ministry of Finance has been approached in the matter and the
reply to this question will be submitted upon receipt of their response.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report).

19
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25)
About the unutilised funds stated above the Committee may be
apprised about the reasons therefor. The funds allocated are not as per
requirement projected. However, inspite of that if certain amount
remains unutilised it smacks of some anomaly. The Government should
make a thorough study of this aspect and find out ameliorative
measures so that nothing is left out once allocation has been made.
Reply of the Government
As at 2.24 above. The Ministry of Finance has been approached in
the matter and the reply to this question will be submitted shortly.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 2.30)
The Committee note that earlier a proposal to amend some parts
of the Constitution (73rd Amendment Act), 1992 was under
consideration of the Government. However, at present, the thrust of
the Ministry is to facilitate and secure implementation of the provisions
enshrined in the Constitution (73rd Amendment) Act, 1992 by
States/Union Territories in letter and spirit by encouraging them to
adopt carefully drawn up plans of action. The thrust of the Ministry
is that functions, functionaries and finances to Panchayati Raj
Institutions are suitably devolved to empower Gram Sabhas and District
Planning Committees to make Panchayati Raj Institutions true
institutions of self-government. While noting the position of thrust
area of the Ministry, the Committee would like that the various issues
raised in their Reports should be taken into account and desired action
taken on the various aspects. The Committee may also like to be kept
informed about this.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation has been noted for compliance.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report).

20
Recommendation (Para No. 2.31)
The Committee are, however, constrained to note the reply of the
Ministry that they would compile the information from respective States
when the staff strength would be made available to them. The
committee find that the area of activity entrusted to the newly created
Ministry of Panchayati Raj was previously under the Ministry of Rural
Development. The only change is that area of activities have been
transferred from one Department to another. The Committee fail to
understand why the requisite information could not be obtained by
the erstwhile Ministry of Rural Development. They would like that
the information should be compiled expeditiously and they be kept
informed about the status of implementation of the various
recommendations made by them in the earlier Reports.
Reply of the Government
Whereas the new Ministry has indeed been separated from the
Ministry of Rural Development, the bifurcation and allocation of
business remains under consideration. Besides, the area of interest of
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj goes beyond that of Rural Development.
Hence the need for  separation. The necessary action for the creation
of the posts for the Ministry is in hand and the requisite information,
which is available, will be compiled as soon as the staff to do so is
available.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report).
Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)
The Committee in their 37th Report had examined the issue of
postponing of elections by different State Governments. They while
examining the said issue were apprised that the Supreme Court had
ruled that the concerned States could not be permitted to withhold
election to Panchayats except in case of genuine supervening difficulties
such as unforeseen natural calamities in the State like flood, earthquake
etc., or urgent situation prevailing in the State for which elections to
the Panchayats cannot be held in time. The Committee were also
apprised that the said ruling of the Supreme Court interpreting
Article 243(E) of the Constitution has been differently interpreted by
the State  Governments. The Committee had observed that since regular
periodic elections within the letter and spirit of the Constitution

21
provision lie at the very heart of the democratic process, the Central
Government should secure a clear ruling from the Supreme Court
about the meaning and scope of Article 243(E) so that elections are
held within five years. The representatives of the Ministry informed
them that they plan to approach the Supreme Court. In this direction,
the Committee would like that they plan to approach the Supreme
Court. In this direction, the Committee would like that a clear ruling
of the Supreme Court should be obtained expeditiously so that the
State Governments cannot interpret the said ruling of the Supreme
Court differently for postponing elections.
Reply of the Government
In the Fourth Round Table of Ministers in charge of Panchayati
Raj held at Chandigarh on 7 and 8 October 2004, the subject of
Panchayati Raj in jurisprudence was discussed and it was agreed to
recommend to their respective Governments, joint acceptance by the
Centre and the States/Union Territories Administrations certain action
points. The resolutions arrived at seven Round Table Conferences will
be discussed during the meeting of the Chief Ministers scheduled to
be held in early next year in which the resolutions are expected to be
jointly accepted by the Centre and the States.
The Supreme Court has already interpreted 243E in case No. 719
of 1995 of 24.2.1997 (copy of operative part of the Order is at
Appendix II). The present position is that all State Governments/Union
Territories administrations have held elections as provided in the
Constitution, except the State of Jharkhand and Union Territory of
Pondicherry. Both Governments have assured that elections will be
held in early 2005. The Ministry is pursuing this. Hence a judgement
of the Supreme Court is available for recourse in case of any default
by any State/Union Territories.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report).

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—Nil—
   N EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
24 February, 2005 Chairman,
 5 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
22

APPENDIX I
RELEVANT EXTRACTS OF THE DEBATES HELD IN RAJYA SABHA
ON 25 JULY, 2003 (PAGE NO. 234) ON GOVERNMENT
MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION OF PROGRESS OF
IMPLEMENTATION OF PART IX AND PART IX A
OF THE CONSTITUTION
During the course of debate on the above issue the then Minister
of State in the Ministry of Rural Development, Shri Annasaheb M.K.
Patil while replying to the debate had inter-alia assured the House as
under:
“……… Madam, some Members have given suggestions pertaining
to three points. They have suggested that the suggestion given by
the Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development in their
37th (Report), of 13th Lok Sabha, suggestion given by the
Task-force and the suggestion given by the Empowered sub-
committee are to be incorporated while bringing in the PRI
amendment. This has already been taken into consideration ……”
23

APPENDIX II
OPERATIVE PART OF HON’BLE SUPREME COURT ORDER IN CASE
NO. 719 OF 1995 OF 24.02.1997 REGARDING INTERPRETATION OF
ARTICLE 243E OF THE CONSTITUTION
CASE NAME: Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra and Others
Vs
Government of U.P . and Others
(Writ Petition No. 719 of 1995) Decided on: 24.2.1997
Honourable Judges: Hon. Justice G.N. Roy and
Hon. Justice G.B. Pattanaik
“Before we part, we may however, indicate that 73rd Amendment
of the Constitution was made with the stated object of continuity of
Panchayat bodies regulating the tenure. Article 243E of the Constitution
envisages that the tenure of the Panchayat shall be five years from the
date appointed for its first meeting and shall continue no longer than
that.
Even a Panchayat constituted upon premature dissolution of the
earlier one, shall not continue beyond the tenure of five years. Article
243E also provides that election of Panchayat shall be held before the
expiry of the said tenure of five years or within six months of its
dissolution or as the case may be. In order to ensure holding of election
of Panchayats, Article 243E of the Constitution provides that laws
relating to Panchayats in the States inconsistent with the
73rd amendment shall continue in force only for a year from the
commencement of the seventy-third amendment unless the competent
legislature has repealed or suitably amended such laws in the mean
time. It is necessary to emphasise that various clauses of Article 243
are to be followed in letter and spirit. The concerned States cannot
be permitted to withhold elections of Panchayats except in cases of
genuine supervening difficulties to hold such elections e.g.
unforeseen natural calamities in the State like flood, earthquake etc.
or extremely urgent situation prevailing in the State for which
elections of the Panchayats cannot be held within the timeframe. It
will be unfortunate if the concerned States remain insensitive to the
constitutional mandate of holding election of Panchayats in time
24

25
and by unjustified inaction, allows old bodies to continue in the
office of the Panchayats. We hope and trust that the State
Government will be alive and sensitive to the duties and
responsibilities flowing from the mandate of the Constitution in
holding panchayat election.”
Hon. Justice G.N. Roy and Hon. Justice G.B. Pattanaik
RLEK will be too happy to assist you in all the possible ways for
implementing the 73rd Amendment of the Panchayati Raj Act in it’s
true letter and spirit.
You may contact us on our e-mail or through fax/telephone for
further assistance.
(Avdhash Kaushal)

APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 14 FEBRUARY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1220 hrs. in Committee Room
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Mohan Jena
4. Shri Hannan Mollah
5. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
6. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
7. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
8. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
9. Shri Mohan Singh
10. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
11. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
13. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
14. Shri Penumalli Madhu
15. Shri Kalraj Mishra
16. Dr. Chandan Mitra
17. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Shah — Assistant Director
26

27
2. As the Chairman was stranded on account of delay of train, the
Committee chose Shri Mohan Singh, MP to act as Chairman for the
sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha. He was in the Chair till 1200 hrs., when the
Chairman came and presided over the sitting.
3. *** *** ***
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 3 alongwith the draft action taken report on
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
After the discussion, the Committee adopted the draft report without
any change.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
said draft reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministry/Department and to present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related with the subject matter of the Report.

APPENDIX IV
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total Number of recommendations 14
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government 3
Para Nos. 2.38, 2.39 and 2.43
Percentage to total recommendations 21.42%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies 1
Para No. 2.40
Percentage to total recommendations 7.1%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee 10
Para Nos. 2.15, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25,
2.30, 2.31 and 2.44
Percentage to total recommendations 71.42%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited Nil
Percentage to total recommendations —
28