21
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

TWENTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.5.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.5.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2006/Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 27
Price : Rs. 95.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory.................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Overall Analysis of Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj ...................................... 2
(i) Implementation of the Direction 73A ........ 2
(ii) Allocation and Utilisation during 9th and
10th Plans .......................................................... 3
(iii) Panchayati Raj and National Common
Minimum Programme (NCMP) ................... 5
(iv) T raining of elected representatives and
officials of PRIs—the overall scenario ....... 9
(v) Devolution of funds, functions and
functionaries to Panchayati Raj Institutions.... 13
(vi) Role of Ministry in the ‘Bharat Nirman
Programme’ ....................................................... 19
(vii) Constitution of District Planning
Committees ........................................................ 20
(viii) Strategy for the Eleventh Plan .................... 22
(ix) Allocation to Panchayats by Twelfth
Finance Commission ....................................... 23
C
HAPTER III Scheme-wise analysis ................................................. 27
A. Existing Scheme
Panchayat Development & Training ........... 27
B. New Schemes
(i) Backward Regions Grants Fund ........ 34
(i)

(ii) Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana ........... 37
(iii) Panchayat Empowerment Incentive
Scheme ...................................................... 39
(iv) Scheme for Media, Publicity and
Advocacy .................................................. 41
C. Miscellaneous
(i) Public Private Panchayat Partnership
Initiatives (Rural Business Hubs) ...... 43
(ii) Jan Kerosene Pariyojana....................... 43
APPENDICES
I. Progress of activity mapping in States and Union
territories as on 15 March, 2006 ........................................ 45
II. Progress of activity mapping in States and Union
territories as on 29 June, 2005 ........................................... 50
III. Shares of States in Allocation in respect of Twelfth
Finance Commission (2005-2010) ........................................ 53
IV . Release of instalments of Twelfth Finance Commission
Grants to Panchayati Raj Institutions as on 15 March,
2006 ............................................................................................ 54
V. Panchayat Empowerments and Accountability
Incentive Scheme—Guidelines ............................................. 56
VI. Extracts of the Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee
held on 22 March, 2006 ....................................................... 61
VII. Minutes of sitting of the Committee held on 13 April,
2006 ............................................................................................ 63
VIII. Extracts of the Minutes of sitting of the Committee
held on 9 May , 2006 ............................................................. 66
IX. Statement of observations/recommendations .................. 68
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2005-2006)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Pallani Shamy
*12. Shri Prabodh Panda
@13. Vacant
14. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
15. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
(iii)
*Hon’ble Speaker has changed the nomination of Shri Prabodh Panda, MP (LS) from
Standing Committee on Water Resources to Standing Committee on Rural Development
vide para No. 1580, Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II dated 23 August, 2005.
@Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil, MP (LS) and member of the Committee ceased to be
member of the Lok Sabha vide Notification No. 21/5/2005/T w.e.f. 23.12.2005 (AN).

Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
$#23. Vacant
#24. Vacant
25. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
26. Shri Penumalli Madhu
#27. Vacant
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
#30. Vacant
#31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
(iv)
$Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has changed the nomination of Shrimati Vanga Geetha,
MP (RS) from Standing Committee on Industry to Standing Committee on Rural
Development w.e.f. 23 August, 2005 vide Committee Branch-I note dated 25.8.2005.
#Shrimati Vanga Geetha, MP (RS), Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar, MP (RS),
Shri Kalraj Mishra, MP (RS), Dr. Faguni Ram MP (RS) and Prof. R.B.S. Varma, MP (RS)
and members of the Committee on Rural Development ceased to be members of the
Rajya Sabha due to completion of the tenure of the members of Rajya Sabha
w.e.f. 2.4.2006 vide Coordination Cell note dated 23.3.2006.

ABBREVIATIONS
BE — Budget Estimates
BRGF — Backward Regions Grants Fund
CII — Confederation of Indian Industries
DPC — District Planning Committee
IEC — Information, Education and Communication
NCMP — National Common Minimum Programme
NIRD — National Institute of Rural Development
NGO — Non-Governmental Organisation
PD & T — Panchayat Development and Training Scheme
PESA — Pr ovisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996
PRIs — Panchayati Raj Institutions
RBH — Rural Business Hubs
RE — Revised Estimates
SFC — State Finance Commissions
SIRD — State Institute of Rural Development
TFC — Tenth Finance Commission
UNFPA — United Nations Population Fund
UTs — Union territories
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty-First Report on Demands
for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
2. The Committee examined the Demands for Grants pertaining to
Ministry of Panchayati Raj for the year 2006-2007 which were laid on
the Table of the House on 13 March, 2006.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj on 13 April, 2006.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 9 May, 2006.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for placing before them the requisite
material and their considered views in connection with the examination
of the subject.
6. They would also like to place on record their deep sense of
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
17 May, 2006 Chairman,
27 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(vii)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj came into effect on 27 May , 2004
by replacing Panchayati Raj Division of the Ministry of Rural
Development. The Ministry has been set up primarily to oversee the
implementation of Part-IX of the Constitution [inserted by the Seventy-
third Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992], provisions of the Panchayats
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA) and Article 243 ZD
of the Constitution dealing with District Planning Committees.
1.2 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has initially been directly
administering only one scheme i.e. ‘Panchayat Development and
Training’. However, from 2006-07, the Ministry has been given the
charge of the following four new schemes:
1. Backward Regions Grants Fund;
2. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana;
3. Panchayat Empowerment Incentive Scheme; and
4. Scheme for Media, Publicity and Advocacy.
1.3 The overall Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj for 2006-2007 are for Rs. 3825.73 crore.
1.4 The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
have been presented to Parliament under Demand No. 67. The detailed
Demands for Grants of the Ministry were laid in Lok Sabha on
13 March 2006.
1.5 In the present Report the Committee have analysed the
performance of the ‘Panchayat Development and Training Scheme’ and
the basic objective and allocation of new schemes in the context of
Demands for Grants (2006-07). Besides the Committee have dealt with
the important issues related to implementation of Part IX of the
Constitution viz. Elections to Panchayats, Devolution of Funds,
Functions and Functionaries, District Planning Committees, allocation
of funds to panchayats by Twelfth Finance Commission and review of
the performance of the Ministry since its creation particularly during
the year 2005-06.

2
CHAPTER II
OVERALL ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007)
OF THE MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
(i) Status of Implementation of the recommendations made by the
Committee in their Fourth and Twelfth Reports under Direction
73A of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
As per direction 73A of the Directions of the Speaker, Lok Sabha,
the Minister concerned shall make once in six months a statement in
the House regarding the status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Reports of Departmentally Related
Standing Committees of Lok Sabha with regard to his Ministry.
2.2 Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
was presented to Parliament on 18 August, 2004. Hon’ble Minister of
Panchayati Raj made a statement in the House in pursuance of direction
73A on 12 May , 2005. On examination of the statement it was found
that the status of action taken on each of the 14 recommendations was
not indicated in the statement as such the statement was found to be
deficient of the set procedure. Further the Committee presented Twelfth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj to Parliament on 20 April, 2005. The statement with regard to this
Report had fallen due on 19 October, 2005.
2.3 Ministry of Panchayati Raj was requested to take the necessary
action for tabling the revised statement with regard to Fourth Report
and making a statement by Hon’ble Minister in respect of Twelfth
Report vide Lok Sabha Secretariat OM dated 20 January, 2006 and
subsequent reminder dated 24 February , 2006. Besides, the format in
which the statement has to be made was also sent to the Ministry for
their use. In spite of this, the revised statement in respect of Fourth
Report and the statement in respect of Twelfth Report are yet to be
made by the Hon’ble Minister.
2.4 When asked about the reasons for delay in making the
statements on the status of implementation of recommendations of the
Committee made in Fourth and Twelfth Reports, it has been submitted
that after receipt of O.M. dated 20 January , 2006 from Lok Sabha
Secretariat, the Ministry has already prepared the revised statement.
The revised statement regarding status of implementation of
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report and statement
regarding status of implementation of recommendations contained in

3
the Twelfth Report shall be tabled in the ensuing Session of the
Parliament.
2.5 The Committee note that the primary objective of inserting
direction 73A in the Directions by the Speaker was to make the
Government more accountable for implementation of the various
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee are concerned
to note that even after lapse of around six months when the statement
on Twelfth Report has fallen due and about three months when the
Ministry was requested for making the revised statement in respect
of Fourth Report, the statements are yet to be made by the Hon’ble
Minister. The Committee find that the Ministry is taking the desired
action to make the statements in the Second part of the Seventh
Session. The Committee would like to recommend to the Ministry
to ensure that the statements are made at the earliest during the
Second part of the Seventh Session. The Committee further strongly
recommend to the Ministry to ensure that the statements on each of
the reports are made within the specified period i.e. six months
after the presentation of the Report to Parliament as per direction
73A of the Directions by the Speaker, in future.
(ii) Allocation and utilisation during 9th and 10th Plans
2.6 Panchayati Raj has been envisaged as the medium through
which the goals of decentralization are sought to be achieved. At
present there are 537 District Panchayats, 6097 Intermediate Panchayats
and 2,34,676 Village Panchayats with a total number of 21,95,610 elected
representatives spread over these three tiers with representation to:
Women — 41 per cent,
Scheduled Castes — 18 per cent, and
Scheduled Tribes — 11 per cent
2.7 Till 2005-06 the Ministry of Panchayati Raj was administering
only one scheme namely ‘Panchayat Development and Training’
including Research, Conference, Awards, Information Technology and
IEC. The overall allocation during the 9th Plan (1997-2002) and the
10th Plan (2002-2007) so far under the scheme has been given as under:
9th Plan allocation
(Rs. in crore)
Period (1997-2002) BE RE Utilization
Total 17.00 21.50 19.57

4
10th Plan Allocation
(2002-2007)
(Plan+non-Plan)
(Rs. in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actuals
2002-2003 5 5 5.75
2003-2004 16 16 21.61
(the excess
amount was
taken from
SGSY Training)
2004-2005 31.04 10.20 8.62
2005-2006 50.44 50.49 48.71
(as on 31
March, 2006)
2006-07 3825.73* — —
*Includes an allocation of Rs. 3750 crore under the Additional Central Assistance to
State Plans (being implemented through the newly introduced Backward Regions Grant
Fund Scheme) plus Rs. 75 crore for implementation of three new schemes of Gram
Swaraj, Panchayat Empowerment and Incentive Scheme and Scheme for Media Publicity
and Advocacy.
2.8 The outlay of Rs. 75 crore for the Central Plan is for the
implementation of three new schemes namely.
1. Gram Swaraj (Rs. 50.50 crore)
2. Panchayat Empowerment and Incentive Scheme. (Rs. 10
crore)
3. Scheme for Media Publicity and Advocacy . (Rs. 3.00 crore)
Besides the mandatory allocation for the North East of Rs. 7.50
crore and Rs. 4 crore is for meeting Secretarial expenses.
2.9 The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj was
created on 27 May, 2004 to oversee the implementation of various
provisions made under Part IX of the Constitution by way of the
73rd Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992. The Committee further
note that till 2005-2006 the Ministry of Panchayati Raj was
administering only one scheme namely, ‘Panchayat Development and
Training’. The detailed component-wise analysis of this scheme has
been dealt with in the next chapter of this Report. The Committee

5
while analysing the overall position of allocation and utilisation
under the scheme as indicated above find that during 2004-05, i.e.
the first year of the newly created Ministry, the Ministry was able
to utilise only about 84 per cent of the total allocation even though
the initial allocation made at the Budget Estimates stage was reduced
to Rs. 10.24 crore at the Revised Estimate stage. The delay in the
operationalisation of the account of the Ministry (which became
functional only in November 2004) has been given as the reason for
the low rate of utilisation.
2.10 The Committee further note that during the year 2005-2006
the Ministry was allocated Rs. 50.44 crore out of which Rs. 50 crore
was plan outlay and Rs. 44 lakh was non-plan outlay. The Revised
Estimates remained unchanged at Rs. 50 crore. Out of this the total
utilisation was to the tune of Rs. 48.71 crore. Thus there has been
an overall utilisation of more than 97 percent. Except in the utilisation
for the components of Conferences, Seminars, Workshops and for
Management Cell (the detailed analysis of which has been done in
the succeeding chapter of the Report), the Ministry has managed to
utilise more than 95 per cent of outlay.
2.11 The Committee find that huge added responsibilities have
been entrusted to the Ministry by way of new schemes. The
allocation of the Ministry has substantially been enhanced from
Rs. 50.44 crore to Rs. 3825.73 crore during the year 2006-07. The
Committee hope that the initial teething problems involved with
the setting up of the new Ministry would have been solved by now.
They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should now gear
themselves up, to shoulder the added responsibilities.
(iii) Panchayati Raj and National Common Minimum Programme
2.12 The National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP), of the
UPA Government with respect to Panchayats has mandated:
(a) While Panchayati Raj Legislations have devolved certain
functions to Panchayats, these are normally stated out in
broad terms. When so stated out they do not provide clarity
as to the role separation between the three levels of
Panchayats with respect to any particular devolved function.
(b) Government orders, circulars and other scheme specific
instructions relating to the role of Panchayats in
implementation are often not in consonance with legislative
devolution of functions.

6
(c) Activity Mapping ought to touch all levels of the
Government and be strictly based on the principle of
subsidiarity and the assignment of activities should be
followed by a matching transfer of funds pertaining to that
activity to the Panchayats concerned and by the devolution
of functionaries. However, scheme instructions result in
overlap among the three levels of Panchayats in performance
of functions. Scheme instructions and Government orders
set up parallel bodies, which compete in performing the
same activities as Panchayats.
2.13 When asked about the status of implementation of NCMP ,
the Ministry has stated as under:
“With respect to the objectives of quick transfer of central funds to
the Panchayats without delay or diversion, a Committee with
Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Panchayati Raj as
Chairperson and representatives of the Ministry of Finance as
members among others, went into this issue in detail and submitted
its report in May, 2005. The Committee’s terms of reference included
an examination of the feasibility of maintaining a data base of the
bank accounts of all the 2,40,000 Panchayati Raj Institutions,
feasibility of electronic transfer of funds under the current Banking
system and feedback mechanism on actual crediting of funds into
the accounts of PRIs. The Committee concluded unanimously that
maintenance of database of Panchayat accounts; State-wise and
setting up of feedback mechanism was quite feasible. Subsequently,
on the request of Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Panchayati Raj
identified the following schemes for coverage under the proposed
system:
(i) Wage Employment Schemes: Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar
Yojana (SGRY), National Food for Work Programme (NFWP)
as also the fund transfers under the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA)
(ii) Rural Water Supply and Sanitation: Swajaldhara,
Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP) and
Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC)
(iii) National Rural Health Mission
(iv) Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
(v) ICDS (Integrated Child Development Scheme)

7
2.14 Ministry of Panchayati Raj wrote to the Ministries concerned
suggesting that they adopt the proposed system. However, the response
of the Ministries indicate that they would like to continue with the
existing systems. The matter was also taken up with the Ministry of
Finance for an early resolution of the issue. The Ministry of Finance
has supported the initiative in principle. However, they have stressed
that the administrative arrangements and flow of funds should be in
consonance and have requested the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to work
with the concerned administrative Ministry for transfer of responsibility
for implementation of the schemes to Panchayats before instructions
are issued for electronic transfer of funds to Panchayats.
2.15 The Committee have further been informed that States are
being persuaded to adopt the system of rapid transfer of funds to
Panchayats in respect of Twelfth Finance Commission Grants. A
software has been prepared in this regard by NIC on the instructions
of Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The software inter-alia enables States to
create a database of Bank accounts of Panchayats at all levels and
ensure rapid transfer of funds directly from the consolidated fund of
States to each Panchayat without delay and diversion. A
videoconference was conducted in this regard and 14 States have agreed
to adopt the system. Thus this system is also being pursued for
implementation from the State level onward to Panchayats.
2.16 Regarding the empowerment of Gram Sabha and devolution
of funds and functionaries, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, while
reviewing the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of various Ministries is
insisting that the Gram Sabha should have a major role to play in
selection of beneficiaries and works, monitoring of programmes and
approving the utilization certificates etc. During the visits to States by
the Minister (Panchayati Raj) also, the role of Gram Sabha is being
emphasized.
2.17 The Committee note that the National Common Minimum
Programme (NCMP) of the UPA Government has given a prominent
place to Panchayats and stressed on the need for devolution of funds,
functions and functionaries to Panchayati Raj Institutions in the true
spirit of Article 243G of the Constitution. The NCMP has stressed
on activity mapping spelling out clearly the functional domain of
the three tiers of the Panchayats viz. Gram Panchayat, Intermediate
Panchayat and District Panchayat. Besides, it has also stressed that
the transfer of functions should be matched by transfer of funds
and functionaries. In this regard the initiative was taken by the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj for creation of the data base of Panchayat

8
Bank accounts so that the funds under Centrally Sponsored Schemes
can be electronically transferred to Bank accounts of all 2,40,000
Panchayati Raj Institutions. To examine the feasibility in this regard
a Committee was set up under the Chairmanship of Additional
Secretary of the Ministry, which found that said electronic transfer
of outlay was possible.
As a further initiative some of the schemes particularly the wage
employment and drinking water and sanitation schemes of the
Ministry of Rural Development were initially selected. The initiative
taken by the Ministry was not successful as the concerned Ministries
have certain reservations and want to continue with the existing
system of transfer of funds. Though the Ministry of Finance is
agreeable in principle and has stressed that administrative
arrangement and flow of funds should be in consonance, it has also
shifted the onus of getting the various Ministries agree to the
proposed way of transfer of funds on the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj.
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry
to get the funds under different Central and Centrally Sponsored
Schemes transferred electronically to the Bank accounts of Panchayats.
However, the Committee feel that the said transfer of funds to
Panchayats is feasible only in case of the schemes which are currently
being implemented by the Panchayats. The Committee agree with
the views expressed by the Ministry of Finance that administrative
arrangements and flow of funds should be in consonance. Besides,
another major area of concern is the need to empower the Panchayats
for enabling them to shoulder the responsibilities of handling
schemes for which huge outlays are being provided by the Central
Government. In view of this, the Committee feel that the transfer of
funds for implementation of various schemes should be done in
phases. First of all the Ministry should ensure that the funds for the
scheme, for which the PRIs are directly responsible for identification,
execution and implementation, are transferred electronically to Bank
accounts. Moreover the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has to work in
tandem with the concerned Ministries. Thus the challenge is great
to make the Ministries agreeable for which the Ministry has to work
in mission mode.
The Committee further appreciate the initiatives of the Ministry
to empower Gram Sabhas. While reviewing the Centrally Sponsored
schemes, it is being insisted that the Gram Sabhas should have a
major role to play in selection of beneficiaries, works, monitoring of
programmes and approving the utilisation certificate etc. Besides,

9
during the visits to States by the Minister of Panchayati Raj also
the role of Gram Sabhas is being emphasised. The Committee would
like the Ministry to continue the said initiatives and keep the
Committee informed about the further progress made with regard to
implementation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme in this regard.
2.18 The Committee further note that with regard to the electronic
transfer of funds to PRIs in respect of Twelfth Finance Commission
funds some progress has been made. A data base has been prepared
by NIC and the system is being prepared for implementation at the
State level onwards to Panchayats. The Committee would like the
Ministry to continue the efforts more vigorously and keep the
Committee informed about the results achieved in this regard.
(iv) Training of elected representatives and officials of PRIs—the
overall scenario
2.19 There are around 31 lakh functionaries of PRIs in India.
Training of elected representatives is basic input for effective and
successful working of PRIs. With the enactment of Seventy Third
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992, Panchayats have been given a
wide range of powers which makes training and capacity building
crucial for governance.
2.20 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is assisting States in imparting
training to all elected representatives and official functionaries in an
effective, time-bound and economical fashion. Training of Panchayati
Raj elected representatives has two parts, namely (a) provision of
training infrastructure, such as satellite training studios and receiving
stations and Training Centres at the district level and (b) supporting
actual training of elected representatives and officials of PRIs.
2.21 the curriculum of training is based on a basic minimum agreed
format on essential issues which include the process of planning and
implementation, budgeting and expenditure management, information
system, participatory consultative decision making, improving local
taxation and in particular delivery of public service to the poor. When
the Committee desired to know preparedness of the Ministry to
undertake this immense task of imparting training and the actions
initiated to this effect the Ministry stated as under:
“Ministry is working on a National training design with a view to
frame a ‘National Programme on Capacity Building of Panchayats’,
which would aim at a comprehensive and time bound training for
all elected Panchayat members. This would involve a State-wise

10
Action Plan, Training, Infrastructure, Orientation of Resource
Persons required and financial allocations for the programmes. The
training would include issues on transparency, accountability,
Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Area (PESA), Right to
Information Act, and NREGA, Agriculture and other issues related
to the subject of Health, Education and Public Distribution System.
It would use a mix of traditional and communicative methods/
approaches that work in tandem for maximum effect. It is proposed
to utilize the National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD),
Hyderabad as the nodal agency at the National level and the State
Institutes of Rural Development (SIRD) as the nodal agency at the
State level. SIRDs will also prepare their individual action plans
based on a needs assessment for each State. Training periods for
different levels of participants and different kinds of modules are
being planned for varying coverage and intensity depending on
the level of the participants, the emphasis is on to weaker sections,
neo-literates and women representatives. As a new initiative, the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj is in the process of holding a series of
conferences with elected women Panchayati Raj representatives
(Panchayati Mahila Shakti Abhiyan) in collaboration with respective
Ministries.”
2.22 During the course of the evidence, the Committee have been
informed that the duration of the training though not fixed was usually
between 2-5 days. The Committee have also been informed that training
was need based and when new schemes or programmes of the
Government are introduced the desired training may be imparted.
When asked about the adequacy of period of training, the Secretary,
Panchayati Raj during the course of oral evidence candidly admitted
that the training provided was inadequate and that a “blitzkrieg of
training is needed” to meet satisfactorily the immense task that
Panchayats are entrusted with. Moreover, it is seen that not only the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj provides training but also those Ministries
who administer Centrally Sponsored Schemes through Panchayats also
provide their own training. The Committee have further been informed
that the Ministries implementing the various schemes like NREGA,
SGSY, IAY and PMGSY Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Mid Day meals and
Adult Literacy schemes, ARWSP and TSC, NRHM, ICDS and Rajiv
Gandhi Rural Electrification Scheme provide their own training. Thus
there is a huge wastage of resources.
2.23 The Ministry also informed the Committee that they have a
system of training of trainers which addresses the problem of paucity
of trained elected representatives.

11
2.24 Further, in Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Gujarat a
system of distance learning is being practised with great success with
the help of satellite communication. For example in Karnataka one can
talk with up to 5000 Panchayat members at one time. It is a one-way
video and two ways audio communication system and can cover 90,000
Panchayat members in Karnataka in 18 days. It is conducted every
week from Monday to Thursday in Mysore. There are 200-reception
Centres. In each of the Centres, 20-30 members gather and get their
queries answered over the phone. These questions once answered are
documented, printed and sent as FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions)
so that they can serve as a ready reference when required. Even the
Chief Minister of Karnataka has interacted several times with Panchayat
members directly through this medium. It is an inexpensive method
and training can also be imparted to a greater number of functionaries
at one time in a shorter duration of time. This system is also being
introduced in Rajasthan and West Bengal.
2.25 The Committee find from the data made available by the
Ministry that at present there are 21,95,610 elected representatives
spread over three-tiers of Panchayats. The training of large number
of representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions alongwith a large
number of Panchayati Raj functionaries is an immense challenge
before the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The review of the scheme
related to Panchayat Development and Training of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj in the context of Demands for Grants (2006-2007) has
been done in the succeeding chapter of the report. As regards the
overall scenario, the Committee find that a lot still needs to be done
in this regard.
2.26 The Committee further observe that election of PRIs is a
Constitutional process and every year a number of newly elected
representatives may add to the persons requiring training making
the task rather more difficult. In view of this scenario, there is an
urgent need to have a regular system of training. In this direction
certain initiatives are being taken by the Ministry. The Committee
would recommend for early finalisation of the strategy for imparting
training to such a large numbers of PRIs. The Committee may be
kept apprised of the status of finalisation of the issue as stated
above in due course.
2.27 The Committee further find that at present the period of
training imparted to PRIs is between 2-5 days. The Committee
appreciate the fact that different days of training may be required
for different levels of PRIs. For example for a newly elected

12
representative, there is need of exhaustive training, but for an old
representative who has the experience of holding such office, the
training period may be for fewer days. Still the Committee are of
the firm opinion that two to five days are insufficient to impart
training which includes a lot of issues like transparency,
accountability, PESA, Right to Information Act and the knowledge
of the important Centrally Sponsored Schemes/Programmes. Even
the Secretary, Panchayati Raj has also agreed that the said period of
training is not adequate. The Committee therefore recommend that
while deciding the module for training, it should be ensured that
sufficient time period is allocated for a particular level of Panchayati
Raj representative/functionary. While deciding the strategy for
training, the Ministry may take into consideration the concerns of
the Committee in this regard.
2.28 Besides deciding the module of imparting training, an
important issue which needs to be addressed critically is the
infrastructure for training. Apart from the issues related to training
which have been dealt with in the next part of the Report, there is
an urgent  need for accommodation and the requisite infrastructure
for training. The Committee feel that the existing infrastructure
available with Panchayats like Panchayat Ghars which can be utilised
for the purpose is quite inadequate. There is an urgent need to
collect the data base in this regard and augment the infrastructure.
2.29 As regards, the issue of trainers, the Committee feel that
NIRD and SIRD may not be equipped sufficiently to meet the need
for a large number of trainers. The Ministry has informed that they
have a system of training of trainers which can address the problem
of paucity of trained trainers. The Committee would like to be
informed about the details of the system indicating how the trainers
are being trained. Besides the data as to how many trainers could
be trained and the field to which these trained trainers belong may
be furnished to the Committee to enable them to analyse the system.
2.30 The Committee also note that satellite communication is
being used by rural public to interact with their Panchayat Members
in Karnataka. This is a laudable initiative as it provides a medium
for people at the grassroots level to get a quick solution to their
problems by specialised resource-persons. The Committee appreciate
this initiative and recommend that the Ministry should frame the
feasibility of undertaking similar exercise in all parts of the country.
Moreover the Central Ministry can also be connected to this network
and can interact with all people at given intervals of time. The

13
Committee are of the opinion that this medium can be used for
twin purposes of interacting with PRI functionaries as also for
imparting training. This would greatly reduce costs as well as tackle
the problem of training.
(v) Devolution of funds, functions and functionaries to Panchayati
Raj Institutions
2.31 The main objective of creation of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj has been to monitor the implementation of the 73rd Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 1992. The provisions of the aforesaid Act are:—
— Devolution of funds, functions and functionaries.
— Establishment of a three-tier structure (village Panchayat,
Intermediate Panchayat and District Level Panchayat).
— Gram Sabhas at the Gram Panchayat Level.
— Regular Election to Panchayats every five years.
—P roportionate reservation of seats and posts for SCs/STs.
— Reservation of not less than 1/3rd of seats and posts for
women.
— constitution of State Finance Commission (SFC) to
recommend measures to improve the finances of Panchayats.
— Constitution of State Election Commission.
2.32 As per article 243G of the Constitution, devolution of funds,
functions and functionaries is the most important aspect of the
empowerment of Panchayats. Devolution in this context means the
transfer of funds, functions and functionaries to Panchayats by the
respective State Governments regarding the 29 subjects contained in
the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. Further the Constitution of
India under Article 243G provides for devolution that is the
empowerment of PRIs to function as institutions of self-government
for the main purpose of (i) making plans for economic development
and social justice for their respective areas, and (ii) implementing
programmes of economic development and social justice in their
respective areas, for subjects devolved to the PRIs including those
listed in the Eleventh Schedule and subject to such conditions as the
State may by law specify.
2.33 The Ministry has admitted that the rate of devolution has
been uneven everywhere. The main obstacles faced by the Ministry as
listed out by them are:—
(a) Delays in the conduct of elections to Panchayati Raj
Institutions in several States, even after passage of
Panchayati Raj Legislations in the State concerned;

14
(b) Under-current of competition and tension between elected
representatives both within and outside the Panchayats;
(c) Resistance from and apprehensions concerning devolution
harboured by State level line department officials; and
(d) Limited capacity amongst State policy makers to manage
problems and issues encountered during the transitional
period when devolution is underway.
2.34 The Committee have analysed the issue of devolution in detail
in the 37th Report on the subject of implementation of Part IX of the
Constitution which was presented to Parliament on 22 November, 2002.
The Committee in the said Report had expressed concern over the
slow progress of the implementation of Article 243G of the Constitution.
Further the said issue has been raised in the various reports on
Demands for Grants.
2.35 The status of devolution as on 15 March, 2006 as given by
the Ministry has been given in Appendix I . Further the information
with regard to devolution of subjects as furnished by the Ministry
while examining Demands for Grants (2005-06) has been given at
Appendix II. While analysing the position of devolution of subjects in
one year  i.e. during the period 2005-06 as revealed in these two
Appendices, the Committee note that there is not considerable
improvement in the status of devolution of subjects. There is
improvement in the number of subjects devolved in the States of
Gujarat and Maharashtra. Further there is reversal of devolution by
some of the States such as Haryana where the number of functions
has decreased from 16 to 10 and Madhya Pradesh where the number
of subjects decreased from 25 to 23. The latest position of devolution
of functions by way of funds, functions and functionaries has not
been indicated in the various Budget documents of the Ministry.
2.36 The Ministry began the exercise of activity mapping, involving
the identification of activities related to the devolved functions with a
view to attributing each of these activities to the appropriate tier or
the 3-tier system. A deadline for States to complete the activity mapping
exercise was set for 31 March, 2005 and later extended to 30 June,
2005. The current status of the activity mapping exercise is given at
Appendix-I.
2.37 The Ministry mentions that progress with regard to Activity
Mapping is continually being monitored. Four meetings of Committees
of Chief Secretaries and Principle Secretaries were held during

15
2005-2006 in which the status of activity mapping was discussed.
Further, it was also discussed in the first meeting of the Council of
State Ministers of Panchayati Raj held at Kochi in Kerala in August,
2005. Moreover, during the seven Round Table Conferences organized
by the Ministry, 150 action points pertaining to 18 dimensions of
Panchayati Raj were identified.
2.38 State-wise status of activity mapping:
States which have completed Kerala, Karnataka and West
Activity Mapping satisfactorily Bengal
States which have undertaken Uttaranchal, Orissa, Haryana,
limited Activity Mapping for Maharashtra, Gujarat, Manipur,
a few subjects Assam and Goa
States where Activity Mapping Andhra Pradesh, Bihar
is in progress Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttar
Pradesh, Tripura, Arunachal
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and
Tamil Nadu.
2.39 When asked about the slow progress of Activity Mapping,
the Ministry has replied as under :
“Since the Panchayati Raj is a State subject, the process of activity
mapping is required to be undertaken by the State Governments.
Most of the States have made considerable progress in this regard
as submitted before the Committee earlier. However, most of the
States have not given any firm indication as to when they would
be likely to complete the process in respect of all the 29 subjects
listed in Schedule-XI.”
2.40 The Ministry also mentions that they have taken several steps
to hasten up the process as mentioned below:
(a) Providing Technical Assistance;
(b) Visits of the Ministers to States;
(c) Reviewing interactions with States Governments;
(d) The awards scheme instituted by the Ministry; and
(e) The Panchayat Empowerment Incentive Scheme.

16
2.41 The Committee wanted to know the major obstacles being
faced by Ministry in achieving the activity mapping.
The Ministry has listed out the following problems:—
(a) While Panchayati Raj Legislations have devolved certain
functions to Panchayats, these are normally stated out in
broad terms. When so stated out they do not provide clarity
as to the role separation between the three levels of
Panchayats with respect to any particular devolved function.
(b) Government orders, circulars and other scheme specific
instructions relating to the roles of Panchayats in
implementation often are not in consonance with legislative
devolution of functions.
(c) Activity Mapping ought to touch all levels of the
Government and be strictly based on the principle of
Subsidiarity and the assignment of activities should be
followed by a matching transfer of funds pertaining to that
activity to the Panchayats concerned and by the devolution
of functionaries. However, scheme instructions result in
overlap among the three levels of Panchayats in performance
of functions. Scheme instructions and Government orders
set up parallel bodies which compete in performing the
same Activities as Panchayats.
(d) Activity Mapping is not accompanied by the concomitant
placement of funds pertaining to the activity concerned with
the level of Panchayat assigned that activity. Therefore,
mandates passed on to Panchayats end up being unfunded
mandates.
(e) In the absence of financial allocation not being in accordance
with functional devolution, employees of line department
continue to answer to the departmental hierarchy rather than
be accountable to the Panchayat which is assigned the
Activity concerned.
2.42 On the issue of devolution by way of executive order of the
Ministry, the Ministry has stated:
“Since Panchayati Raj is a State subject, it is the States that have
to operationalise in full measure the devolution of functions, funds
and functionaries to Panchayati Raj Institutions. Such devolution

17
is expressed through legislative provisions by State Governments.
The reforms which are agreed upon between the Central
Government and the State Government concerned are only in
furtherance of the provisions of States legislations. Under these
circumstances, it is hoped that State Government will consider
the empowerment of Panchayati Raj institutions as a progressive
and sustained measure backed by a national consensus in that
regard.”
2.43 Ministry has further added that one of the resolution of Round
Table 1 held at Kolkata States as follows:
“With a view to promoting a measure of irrevocability of
devolved functions, devolution may be routed through legislative
measures, or alternative, by providing a strong legislative
framework for devolution through executive orders.”
2.44 Ministry has also informed that wherever States have issued
orders in respect of activity mapping, they are being pursued to give
wide publicity to the same so that people, particularly elected
representatives of Panchayats, are fully aware of their rights and
responsibilities. It is hoped that with greater awareness of rights, duties
and responsibilities of Panchayat members, the tendency of some States
to diminish devolution of powers and responsibilities to the Panchayats
would be treated with extreme caution.
2.45 The Committee find that the overall aim of Part IX is to
endow the Panchayats with such powers and responsibilities as may
be necessary to enable them to function successfully as institutions
of self-government, as per Article 243G of the Constitution. State
Legislatures have been empowered to endow Panchayats by law with
such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to
prepare plans for economic development and social justice and
implement schemes for economic development and social justice,
including those in relation to the matters contained in the Eleventh
Schedule.
2.46 The Committee in their reports have repeatedly been
expressing concern about the slow progress of devolution of funds,
functions and functionaries to Panchayati Raj Institutions. Besides,
the Committee feel that endowing Panchayats with certain functions
is fruitful only if the Panchayats are equipped with trained
functionaries and adequate finances are also made available to them.
Thus devolution of functions has to be matched by devolution of

18
funds and functionaries. The erstwhile Committee on Urban and
Rural Development in their 37th Report have reviewed the position
in detail in this regard and found that only one State viz. Karnataka
has transferred funds, functions and functionaries for all the 29
subjects enlisted in the Eleventh Schedule. Other States like Kerala
and West Bengal are doing well. To have an exact idea of the work
done with regard to devolution of funds, functions and functionaries,
the Ministry should furnish to the Committee the latest status in
this regard. The Committee further appreciate the work done by the
Ministry to ensure the devolution in the true spirit of Article 243G
of the Constitution, whereby a lot of work by way of high level
interaction with the State Governments has been done by the
Ministry in spite of this, there is not considerable improvement in
the number of subjects devolved by the various State Governments
as could be seen from the comparison of Appendices I & II  (which
indicate the status of devolution as on 15.03.2006 and 29.06.2005).
There is improvement in the number of subjects devolved in the
States of Gujarat and Maharashtra. But the devolution by some of
the States such as Haryana where the number of functions has
decreased from 16 to 10 and Madhya Pradesh where the number of
subjects decreased from 25 to 23 is a major area of concern. The
Committee find that one of the resolutions adopted in the Round
Table Conference was that devolution could be routed through
legislative measures or alternatively by providing a strong legislative
framework for devolution through executive orders. The Committee
feel that there is an urgent need to ensure that the various resolutions
adopted in different Round T able Conferences where the State
Governments are also represented are strictly implemented. The
Ministry should motivate the State Governments as well as take
some strict actions in this regard.
2.47 The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural Development
in their 37th Report (13th Lok Sabha) had noted that a Task Force
had been constituted by the Ministry to prepare an activity mapping
with regard to responsibilities to be devolved to the three-tiers of
Panchayats. The Committee had noted that State Governments/Union
Territories administration had been advised to complete devolution
of powers upon Panchayats by 31 March, 2002. Further it has been
mentioned by the Ministry that a deadline for States to complete
the activity mapping was set for 31 March, 2005 and later extended
to 30 June, 2005. The current status of activity mapping indicates
that only four States i.e. The States of Kerala, Karnataka, West Bengal
and Manipur have managed to satisfactorily complete the task of
activity mapping. Though the States of Gujarat, Haryana and

19
Chhattisgarh have achieved some progress in respect to activity
mapping, yet a large number of States are lagging behind. While
expressing their concern at the slow pace of activity mapping, the
Committee urge the Government to impress upon the State
Governments the need to complete this important task with a sense
of urgency.
2.48 The Committee find that inspite of holding as many as
7 Round Table Conferences and adopting as many as 150 action
points pertaining to 18 dimensions of Panchayati Raj unanimously
at the conclusion of the last Round Table Conference in Jaipur, the
way the Ministry has tried to respond to certain issues is far from
satisfactory. At many places the Ministry has attributed the reasons
for slow progress with regard to devolution of funds, functions and
functionaries and activity mapping to the Panchayati Raj being a
State subject. While appreciating the fact that various State
Governments have to implement the provisions in pursuance of
Article 243 G in their respective laws, the Committee wish to
emphasise that implementation of Part IX of the Constitution is the
responsibility of the Union Government. The Committee therefore
recommend for more serious and concerted initiatives by the Ministry
to give focused attention to the implementation of the various
provisions of Part IX of the Constitution.
(vi) Role of Ministry in the ‘Bharat Nirman Programme’
2.49 The Bharat Nirman programme seeks to place renewed
emphasis in six identified key areas viz. assured irrigation, drinking
water supply, rural roads, rural housing, and rural electrification and
telephone connectivity. The strategy for implementation of Bharat
Nirman would need to take into account the assignment of functions
to Panchayats as stated in article 243G of the Constitution read along
with the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. This would mean that
in any strategy meant to implement programmes relating to these areas,
a central role would have to be given to Panchayats, not as
implementing agencies alone but as institutions of self-government.
2.50 When the Ministry was questioned regarding the actions it
has initiated with regard to implementation of Bharat Nirman
Programme, the Ministry have replied:
“Secretary, MoPR made a presentation to the National Committee
on Rural Infrastructure chaired by the Prime Minister on 23 June,
2005, regarding the role that Panchayats could play in
implementing Bharat Nirman. While accepting the Centrality of
Panchayats in the implementation of Bharat Nirman in principle,

20
the National Committee decided that the feasibility of involvement
of Panchayats in each of the Bharat Nirman components would
be considered by a Group of Secretaries under the chairmanship
of the Member Secretary, Planning Commission. Planning
Commission requested MoPR to take up the issue with the
Ministries concerned and report to the Group. MoPR, in
consultation with the Ministries concerned with the six aspects
of Bharat Nirman, worked out the details of the institutional
structure proposed for involvement of Panchayats in respect of
each item of Bharat Nirman.
Scheme specific formulations that emerged from the discussions
with the Secretaries of Ministries concerned were discussed in
the meeting of the group of Secretaries chaired by Member-
Secretary, Planning Commission on 1st March 2006.
These matters would now be further considered by the National
Committee on Rural Infrastructure.”
2.51 The Committee note that the ‘Bharat Nirman’ Programme
seeks to build an effective rural infrastructure in which the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj is an important partner. The Ministry outlined the
role it could play to the National Committee on Rural Infrastructure
chaired by the Prime Minister. The Committee note that this body
has duly recognized the significance of Panchayats in the
implementation of the Bharat Nirman Programme. The National
Committee on Rural Infrastructure has asked the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj to discuss and receive the feedback regarding this
aspect from other concerned Ministries. The Ministry accordingly in
consultation with the concerned Ministries worked out the details
of the institutional structure proposed for involvement of Panchayats
in respect of each item in Bharat Nirman Scheme. Specific
formulation that emerged from the discussion with the Ministries
were discussed in the group of Secretaries chaired by Member
Secretary, Planning Commission on 1 March, 2006. The outcome of
these deliberations has been placed before the National Committee
on Rural Infrastructure for consideration.
2.52 The Committee feel that since Bharat Nirman Programme
seeks to revamp the entire rural sector infrastructure, there is an
urgent need to provide a central role to Panchayats. The Committee
therefore recommend that concrete steps should be taken by the
Ministry to secure a central role for Panchayts in Bharat Nirman
Programme. They would like the Ministry apprise the Committee
about the follow up action in this regard.
(vii) Constitution of District Planning Committees
2.53 The State Governments, under Article 243ZD of the
Constitution are required to constitute District Planning Committees

21
(DPCs) in each district. The main duty of DPCs is to facilitate the
process of decentralised planning for each district as a whole. The
Ministry had given a deadline of 31 October, 2005 for constituting
DPC’s in each State.
The status of constitution of DPCs is as under:
a. Not Constituted, Panchayat Elections yet to be held.
1. Jharkhand
b. DPCs not constituted and no legal provision exists for the same.
1. Gujarat
2. Arunachal Pradesh
3. Tripura
4. Orissa
c. DPCs not notified or constituted, even though legal provision
exists.
Sl.No. State Remarks
1. Andhra Pradesh Ordinance issued in Sept. 05. Replaced
now by legislation.
2. Maharashtra Legislation for DPCs was passed but has
not been implemented.
3. Uttar Pradesh Legislation enacted in 1999 but not
implemented.
4. Uttaranchal Has inherited UP Panchayati Raj Act.
DPCs not notified.
5. Punjab Legislation has been enacted in Oct. 05.
d. Not re-constituted after fresh elections to Panchayats.
Sl.No. State Remarks
1. Assam** Election were held in January 2002.
2. Haryana Election were held in March 2005.
3. Himachal Pradesh Election were held in December 05.
4. Karnataka Election to the Taluk and Zilla Panchayat
were concluded in December 2005. DPCs
have not been re-constituted yet.
**Constituted only in 10 out of 27 districts.

22
(viii) Strategy for the Eleventh Plan
2.54 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is approaching the Eleventh
Five Year plan from two aspects namely:—
(a) Schemes and programmes of the Ministry that it will operate
during the period of the Plan; and
(b) ensuring that the planning process for the Eleventh Plan is
re-oriented so as to ensure that plans are built from level of
each Gram Panchayat upwards in a participative manner.
2.55 The main thrust areas of the Eleventh Plan as envisaged by
the Ministry will be on two schemes namely (a) Gram Swaraj which
is aimed at holistic capacity building of Panchayats and (b) Panchayat
Empowerment and Accountability Incentive Scheme which will reward
States for undertaking reforms aimed at devolution as agreed upon in
the Round Tables; and reward Panchayats on the basis of identified
performance parameters with an emphasis on accountability to the
Gram Sabha.
2.56 Further the Ministry of Panchayati Raj had set up an Expert
Planning Group on grass root level planning under the Chairpersonship
of Shri V . Ramachandran. The Planning Commission has also
constituted a Working group on democratic decentralization chaired
by Secretary Panchayati Raj.
2.57 The Committee find that the constitution of District Planning
Committees is a mandatory provision of Part IX of the Constitution.
Even after lapse of more than 14 years of the enactment of Part IX
of the Constitution, in as many as 10 States viz Andhra Pradesh,
Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab,
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, DPCs have not been
constituted. Besides in Assam and Manipur, the DPCs have not been
constituted for all the districts. Not only that, the Committee are
surprised to observe from the information provided by the Ministry
that no legal provision with regard to constitution of DPCs exist in
the States of Gujarat, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and Orissa. The
Committee would like to stress that District Planning Committees
are an important mechanism enshrined in Part IX of the Constitution
to consolidate the plans prepared by Panchayats and Municipalities.
As per strategy worked out for the 11th Plan it is proposed to reorient
the planning process to ensure that plans are built from the level of
each Gram Panchayat upwards in a participative manner. In view of
this the Committee fail to understand how the objectives set by the

23
Ministry would be achieved in the absence of constitution of District
Planning Committees by many of the State Governments. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to the Government to find
out ways and means whereby State Governments could be impressed
upon to implement the various provisions of Part IX of the
Constitution so that the objective of decentralization as envisaged in
the Constitution can be achieved.
(ix) Allocation to Panchayats by Twelfth Finance Commission
2.58 The Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) has recommended
grants amounting to Rs. 20,000 crore payable during 2005-2010 to
augment the Consolidated funds of the States to supplement the
resources of the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). The thrust areas
identified by the TFC are:
(a) The Grants for PRIs should be prioritised to improve the
service delivery by the Panchayats in respect of Water
Supply and Sanitation;
(b) Panchayats need to be encouraged to take over water supply
assets created under the Swajaldhara Programme and
maintain them with the help of these grants; and
(c) High priority needs to be assigned to create a database and
maintenance of accounts at the grass root levels and amounts
must be specifically earmarked for the same.
2.59 the TFC has also recommended the inter-se allocation among
States based on the following weightages:
Sl.No. Criterion Weight (per cent)
(i) Population 40
(ii) Geographical Area 10
(iii) Distance from highest per capita income 20
(iv) Index of deprivation 10
(v) Revenue efforts of which
(a) with respect to own revenue of states 10
(b) with respect to GSDP 10
2.60 The details of State-wise allocations based on the above
parameters are given in Appendix III.

24
2.61 Further, as informed by the Ministry the first installment of
TFC Grant was due in July 2005 and it was contingent upon the State
Governments to intimate details of the allocation of funds to Panchayats
at all three levels as aggregated upon district level alone as a pre
condition to the release of the first installment. The Ministry of Finance
released the first installment to different States on different dates. At
the stage of release of first and second installments, furnishing of the
utilisation certificates is not a precondition. Utilisation certificates are
required to be provided on a yearly basis. As per the guidelines, it is
only from the second installment for the year 2006-07 that releases
would be dependent on receipt of utilisation certificates. In view of
this, details of utilisation of funds released so far are not available as
of now. Details of the funds allocated under the Twelfth Finance
Commission are given at Appendix IV . The main obstacle that the
Ministry is encountering in the way of release of funds to the States
is the delay by the States in furnishing the details of the allocation of
these funds to the PRIs.
2.62 A monitoring committee has been set up under the
Chairmanship of Secretary Panchayati Raj to supervise the monitoring
of the releases of local body grants to Panchayats. The composition of
the Committee is as under:
1. Secretary (Panchayati Raj) — Chairman
2. Joint Secretary (State Finances), — Member
Ministry of Finance
3. Financial Advisor (Panchayati Raj) — Member
4. Joint Secretary (Panchayati Raj) — Member Secretary
2.63 The above Committee is required to monitor the mode of
release of local body grants to Panchayats and to bring out the points
for intervention by Government of India in Ministries of Panchayati
Raj and Finance to ensure smooth and uninterrupted flow of funds to
PRIs the Ministry was requested to furnish the details of the work
undertaken under the TFC. In reply they stated:
“The Monitoring Committee in the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
held its first meeting on 2nd September, 2005. The Ministry
circulated the TFC guidelines and made a detailed presentation
on the procedure for release of installments during the Meeting
of the Committee of Chief Secretaries and Principal Secretaries of
Panchayati Raj of States/UTs held on 9.09.2005.

25
Subsequently the Committee also met on 28.10.2005 and 21.02.2006
and deliberated on ways and means to ensure that all the State
Governments provide the details on allocation and release of
funds, which are prescribed as preconditions in the guidelines
issued by the Ministry of Finance, so that all instalments are
released to them as soon as they become due. The Ministry has
also prepared software through the NIC, which enables States to
ensure transfer of funds to Panchayats concerned without delay
or diversion within the 15 days limit prescribed in the guidelines
of Ministry of Finance. The software has already been provided
to States. For wider dissemination of the guidelines as also to
pursue the use of the software, a Video Conference was organized
in New Delhi on 07.12.2005 in which the Finance Secretaries and
Secretaries of Panchayati Raj Departments of various States were
invited. The Ministry has also taken up the matter individually
with all Chief Secretaries of States requesting them to forward
the requisite information to the Ministry of Finance and to ensure
that funds are released to the Panchayats. The Monitoring
Committee is also regularly reviewing the matter.”
2.64 The Committee note that Rs. 20,000 crore payable during
2005-2010 has been recommended by the Twelfth Finance Commission
to supplement the resources of the Panchayati Raj Institutions.
Whereas one year has already passed since the grants were due, the
Ministry is encountering obstacles in the way of release of funds as
the States are delaying details of allocation of these funds at all
three levels as aggregated up to district level as required in the
guidelines. A Monitoring Committee has been set up to supervise
the monitoring of the releases of local body grants to Panchayats.
The said Committee is holding meetings. Besides the Ministry has
also taken up the matter individually with all Chief Secretaries of
States requesting them to forward the requisite information to the
Ministry of Finance so as to ensure that funds are released to the
local bodies.
The Committee would like the Ministry to further pursue with
the State Governments so that the grants envisaged by the Twelfth
Finance Commission could be released to supplement the resources
of Panchayati Raj Institutions. The Committee further note that the
first and second instalments of Twelfth Finance Commission outlay
was released to the State Governments. The Ministry has also stated
that the details of utilisation of funds is not available as of now.
The Committee would like the Ministry to get the information from
the State Governments and furnish to the Committee. Further the

26
Committee would also like to be apprised of the names of State
Governments which are delaying the information with regard to the
allocation of these funds at all three levels as aggregated up to the
district level due to which the release of funds is being delayed by
the State Governments.

27
CHAPTER III
SCHEME WISE ANALYSIS
A. Existing Schemes
Panchayat Development & Training
The Scheme of Panchayat Development and Training, which was
implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development during the Ninth
Plan, was transferred to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj when it was
created in May 2004. It is a holistic programme, which includes:
(a) Training of elected representatives and officials of Panchayati
Raj Institutions.
(b) Scheme on Awards to best Performing States and
Panchayats.
(c) Panchayat Development and Research
(d) Conferences, Seminars, Workshops etc.
(e) Information Technology
(f) Information, Education and Communication.
(g) Projects Assisted by UN Agencies
(h) Management Cell
The component wise analysis of the scheme ‘Panchayati Raj
Development & Training’ is detailed in succeeding paragraphs.
Training of elected representatives and officials of Panchayati Raj
Institutions
3.2 The budget provision for training of elected representatives
and officials of Panchayats for the year 2005-06 was Rs. 24.40 crore
out of which Rs. 12.00 crore was earmarked for Grants-in-aid for
training directly to the State Governments and Rs. 12.40 crore was
earmarked for release to Autonomous Training Institutions in States/
NGOs. The Revised Estimates are Rs. 9.50 crore for release to State
Governments and Rs. 9.90 for release to Institutions. Out of the total
Rs. 19.40 crore allotted to the Ministry for provision of training the
Ministry has utilized 19.36 crore which is more than 99 per cent. About

28
5.65 lakh people out of the total of 31 lakh functionaries have been
provided training with the efforts of the Ministry, during 2005-06.
Similarly during 2004-05, 6 lakh people were imparted training, and
in 2003-04, 6.03 lakh people were imparted training. During 2005-06,
the outlay for the training component of this scheme was Rs. 19.40 crore
of which Rs. 19.36 had been utilised by the Ministry unto 31 March,
2006. This shows a utilisation percentage of 99.81 percent. As regards
the allocation for 2006-07, the scheme has been merged with Gram
Swaraj. Under this scheme, for the component of training and capacity
building Rs. 30 crore has been earmarked. As regards the total number
of Panchayati Raj functionaries, the tier wise data as given in the
preceding part of the report indicate that there are 21,95,610 elected
member of Panchayati Raj Institutions. However, in the annual report
2005-06 of the Ministry the number is given as 31 lakh.
3.3 The Committee find that out of an allocation of Rs. 19.40 crore
for the scheme ‘Panchayat Development and Training’ during the
year 2005-2006, Rs. 19.36 crore has already been utilised. This training
involves the components of various schemes of different Ministries.
Besides NIRD and SIRD have been identified as the main
institutions for imparting training. For these institutions also the
Department of Rural Development has certain specific allocations.
Besides this, certain State Governments may also have some training
schemes. If the allocation of all these schemes of different Ministries
and State Governments are added together, the allocation for training
may be immense. In view of this scenario, the Committee feel that
the resource constraint for training is not the major area of concern.
Rather there is an urgent need for having some coordinated approach
with regard to providing training to Panchayati Raj functionaries
and officials. While noting that training is the basic input for the
successful implementation of different Centrally Sponsored Schemes,
the Committee strongly recommend to the Ministry to find out ways
how the funds allocated for training under various schemes of the
different Ministries can be coordinated and apprise the Committee
accordingly alongwith the mechanism for training of PRIs.
3.4 As indicated in a preceding para of the report, the data with
regard to elected representatives of three-tiers of Panchayats when
added together comes to 21,95,610. However, in the Annual Report
(2005-2006) of the Ministry, the said data has been indicated as
31 lakh elected representatives. The Ministry may clarify the position
with regard to the number of elected representatives of Panchayati
Raj Institutions and inform the Committee.

29
Scheme on awards to best Panchayats
3.5 The allocation under this programme was Rs. 9.20 crore for
2005-06, which was fully utilised. This scheme was formulated for
recognising States that implement the provisions of Part IX A of the
Constitution in letter and spirit so as to enable Panchayats to function
as institutions of local self Government.
3.6 The scheme of the award is:
First Prize — Rs. 5 crore
Second Prize — Rs. 3 crore
Third Prize — Rs. 1.20 crore
3.7 The State which is elected for the first prize, is allowed to use
30 per cent of the award amount for schemes to promote Panchayati
Raj and the remaining amount would be used to award the best
performing Panchayats in the State. The States that win the Second
and Third Prize are allowed to keep 20 per cent of the award amount
for promotion of Panchayati Raj and the rest would go to awarding
the best performing Panchayats. The States can use their own share of
the award money for the following purposes:
—C reation of State level training infrastructure.
—C reation of infrastructure for e-governance and distance
learning education facilities.
— Construction of Panchayat Ghars.
3.8 On the recommendations of a Committee constituted for the
purpose of selection of States for these awards, the States of Kerala,
Karnataka and Sikkim are being given the First, Second and Third
prizes respectively for the period 2005-2006. These States, in turn, would
award the best performing Panchayats in their respective States.
3.9 The Committee are glad to note that the entire outlay of
Rs. 9.20 crore for the scheme of giving awards to best panchayats
was utilised. They also find that the States of Kerala, Karnataka and
Sikkim have been awarded the First, Second and Third prizes
respectively during the year 2005-2006. This is in recognition of their
having achieved the parameters set for this award satisfactorily. The
Committee recommend that greater publicity be given to this scheme
so that Panchayats at all levels are encouraged to strive for these
awards.

30
Panchayat Development and Research
3.10 Panchayat Development and Research had an outlay of Rs. 2
crore in 2005-06 and the Ministry utilized Rs. 1.91 crore during the
year. The intention of the Ministry is to conduct research (including
Action Research) concerning the role of PRIs in local self-governance
and implementation of programmes of economic and social justice.
When the Ministry was asked to state the action it had taken in this
regard it stated:
“The Ministry has got conducted research studies on varied
subjects such as status of implementation of Panchayati Raj Acts
in various parts of the country, capacity building of PRI
representatives, and generating awareness amongst various
stakeholders in Panchayat areas as well as various gender issues
relevant for effective functioning of PR system.”
3.11 As many as 54 proposals comprising Research Studies/
Seminars/Work Shops, Pre-Election Voters’ Awareness Campaigns/
Training were considered by the Training & Research advisory
Committee during 2005-06 and 23 projects were finally approved.
Regarding the implementation of these proposals the Ministry has
informed.
“All the approved projects are under implementation/being
implemented and have at least a year’s gestation period. While
the reports of the outcome of the seminars/workshops conducted
are awaited, the reports of study projects, which take
comparatively longer time, are expected to be submitted to the
Ministry after their due completion. Thereafter, the Ministry will
undertake an impact assessment of such projects.”
3.12 The following thrust areas on which research studies are
expected to prove beneficial on which the research would be done has
been identified.
(i) Fiscal devolution
(ii) Financial accountability
(iii) Impact of training programmes
(iv) Conformity of laws State-wise to Panchayati Raj Legislation
(v) Service Delivery Studies
(vi) Implementation of PESA

31
(vii) Implementation of the Right to Information
(viii) Elections
(ix) Planning by Panchayats
(x) Rural Business Hubs.
3.13 The Committee note that under ‘Panchayat Development
and Research’ out of an allocation of Rs. 2 crore for 2005-06, the
Ministry has showed an utilisation of Rs. 1.91 crore. During the said
period the Training and Research Advisory Committee of the Ministry
is stated to have considered 54 proposals out of which 23 were
approved. All the approved projects are at various stages of
implementation. On receipt of the reports, the Ministry would
undertake impact assessment studies. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the follow up of these projects and also the
outcome of the impact assessment study in due course. The
Committee further find that the Ministry has identified certain thrust
areas to prioritise studies. The Committee recommend that studies
on the prioritised areas should be taken up at the earliest.
Conferences, Seminars, Workshops etc.
3.14 The Budget Estimates of 2005-06 for this component was
Rs. 2 crore. The utilisation under this scheme was Rs. 1.3 crore which
was about 67 per cent of total allocation. When asked the reasons for
short fall the Ministry has stated:
“The number of Committee of Chief Secretary’s meeting and the
Council of State Ministers of Panchayati Raj and other conferences
is not fixed. These meetings are organized as per the requirement.
The meetings, which are organized, were quite purposeful and
useful. The saving does not mean that the Ministry could not
achieve its purpose”.
3.15 In reply to a question the Ministry has outlined the following
activities undertaken under the scheme during 2005-2006:
(i) Meeting of the Council of State Ministers of Panchayati Raj
was held on 5-6 August, 2005 at Kochi;
(ii) Meetings of the Committee of Chief Secretaries of States
and State Panchayati Raj Secretaries—four review meetings
have been held so far on 11.04.2005, 29.6.2005, 9.9.2005 and
18.11.2005, respectively; and
(iii) Conference on the ‘State of the Panchayats and the Way
Forward’ held from 16-18 December, 2005 at New Delhi.

32
3.16 In addition to the above, several other conferences on issues
ranging from promotion of Bio Diesel, implementation of Jan Kerosene
Pariyojana and facilitation for implementation of Rural Business Hubs
in different States have been held with a view to creating awareness
about Panchayati Raj, its powers and responsibilities.
3.17 The Committee note that out of the allocation of Rs. 2 crore
under the component of Conferences/Seminars/Workshops, Rs. 1.3
crore i.e. 67 per cent of the allocation was utilized during 2005-2006.
The Committee also note that this amount was utilised in high level
meetings and Conferences (represented by State Ministers of
Panchayati Raj, Chief Secretaries of States and State Panchayati Raj
Secretaries). Though Panchayats exist at the grass root level no
interaction of the higher officials with the Panchayats appear to have
taken place. Besides no workshop where the grass root level
Panchayati Raj functionaries could represent were undertaken during
this period. Since all actions of the Government are eventually
implemented and aimed at the micro level, interaction between
officials and grass root level functionaries should be more vigorous.
The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry should evolve
a mechanism whereby they can have direct interaction with people
at micro level at regular intervals of time.
Information Technology/Information, Education and Communication
(IEC)
3.18 The Ministry has managed to achieve cent per cent utilisation
of the outlay of Rs. 2 crore for IT during 2005-06. This Scheme was
formulated to bring about transparency in the implementation of
various developmental programmes by effective monitoring of flow of
funds to PRIs as well as physical implementation of various
programmes by initiatives through e-governance. Under this scheme
the Ministry has supported the “Info Gram Scheme” of the Government
of Goa which aims to provide comprehensive IT solutions, covering
major activities of the Panchayats such as Water Supply, Public Health,
Family Welfare, Sanitation, Creation and Maintenance of Roads.
3.19 The outlay of Rs. 1.5 crore for IEC was fully utilised during
2005-06. The objective of this scheme is to fill the gaps about awareness
of the functions and powers of PRIs at various levels. Under the scheme
several advertisements have been released through DAVP for spreading
awareness about general sensitive issues among the elected
representatives of PRIs, awareness of concept of Rural Business Hubs
etc. Under this scheme the entire allocation were utilised in publicity
campaigns and advertisements through DAVP and Doordarshan.

33
3.20 The Committee note that the outlay for IT and IEC was
fully utilized during 2005-2006. The Committee would like to point
out for such a vast network of PRIs as exists in India, e-governance
is the best option for establishing an interface between the Central/
State Ministries and actual functionaries at Panchayat level. The
Committee would like to recommend that in the present day scenario
where IT has reached such a high degree of advancement the
Ministry should take full advantage of it and promote its maximum
use. This would not only lead to greater transparency but increase
accountability as well.
3.21 The Committee note that under IEC the Ministry creates
awareness of the powers and responsibilities of Panchayats. The
Committee would like to point out that the dissemination of
information is primary to effective governance. It is vital that people
receive accurate information through various sources regarding the
various developmental initiatives to ensure their success. The
Committee would like to recommend that the Ministry should look
beyond Doordarshan and DA VP for publicity purposes. They should
also explore other interactive media for the same. The Ministry
should encourage the use of local language and traditional media
such as drama song and dance as it would create a greater impact
among the masses.
Projects assisted by UN Agencies
3.22 A project ‘Capacity Building of Elected Women Representatives
and Official Functionaries of PRIs’ is being undertaken with the
assistance of UNDP in the districts of Muzaffarpur in Bihar,
Rajnandgaon in Chhattisgarh, Rewari in Haryana, Palamu in Jharkhand,
Gadchairoli in Maharashtra, Dewas in Madhya Pradesh, Angul in
Orissa, Jodhpur in Rajasthan, Gazipur in Uttar Pradesh and Tehri in
Uttaranchal. Out of the allocation of Rs. 5 crore during 2005-06, the
Ministry has utilised 4.7 crore under the scheme. The Project is being
implemented by NGOs. The Ministry and UNDP monitor it from time
to time. Further the UNDP has funded a ‘study on Jurisprudence of
Panchayati Raj Institutions’ being implemented by Rural Litigation and
Entitlement Kendra (RLEK) and the Institute of Social Studies (ISS)
New Delhi. The study was undertaken to analyse the State Panchayati
Raj Acts, status of decentralisation and Progressive judgements related
to Panchayats has been completed. The Task Force on Jurisprudence is
currently examining the report. The Ministry with the assistance of
UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund) is also implementing a
project to create awareness about gender sensitization reproductive

34
health etc. by the Indira Gandhi Panchayati Raj & Gramin Vikas
Sansthan, Rajasthan, Mahatma Gandhi State Institute of Rural
Development, Madhya Pradesh and Yashwantrao Chavan Academy of
Development Administration, Maharashtra.
3.23 The Committee note that out of the allocation of Rs. 5 crore
under ‘Projects Assisted by UN Agencies’ the Ministry has managed
to utilise Rs. 4.7 crore during 2005-2006. The Committee further note
that the Ministry in collaboration with the UNDP is undertaking
several projects with a view to improving the Panchayati Raj system.
UNDP has also funded a study on jurisprudence of Panchayati Raj
Institutions which is being implemented by Rural Litigation and
Entitlement Kendra (RLEK) and the Institute of Social Studies (ISS),
New Delhi. The Report of the study has been reviewed by the
Ministry and the task force on Jurisprudence is examining the report.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the main findings of
the said study and the views of the task force therein. Further the
Ministry with the assistance of UNFPA (United Nations Population
Fund) is also assisting one study on gender sensitization and
reproductive health etc. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the findings of the said study.
B. New Schemes
(i) Backward Regions Grants Fund
3.24 The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech (2006-2007) has
announced the establishment of a Backward Regions Grant Fund
(BRGF) with an initial allocation of Rs. 5,000 crore for 2006-2007 and
an equal amount every year for the next four years. Out of this the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been provided an outlay of Rs. 3,750
crore during 2006-07 and the remaining provision of Rs. 1,250 crore is
meant for the Special Plans for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa to
be handled by Planning Commission. The Backward Regions Grant
Fund would be implemented in 170 backward districts identified by
an Inter-Ministerial Group based on certain socio-economic factors.
Further, there is a proposal that the BRGF would be implemented in
the 200 districts identified for coverage by the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme.
3.25 The Backward Regions Grants Fund has been initiated for
putting in place programmes and policies with the joint efforts of the
Centre and the States, which would remove barriers to growth,
accelerate the development process and improve the quality of life of
the people. The Scheme aims at focused and equitable development of

35
identified backward districts with a view to reducing imbalances and
speeding up development. The main objectives of the scheme are to
address the problems of low agricultural productivity , unemployment
and to fill critical gaps in physical and social infrastructure. The
Planning process for the programme will be by a participative bottom
up process through the Panchayats at all levels with the draft
development plans of the districts being consolidated by the District
Planning Committees constituted in accordance with Article 243ZD of
the Constitution. Panchayats at all levels will be central to the process
of implementation of the schemes of economic development and social
justice. There will be a high degree of peoples’ participation through
building organic linkages between Panchayati Raj Institutions, Self-
Help Groups (SHGs), and community based organisations and non-
governmental organisations. Programmes will be monitored for
outcomes on poverty indicators and there will be a high degree of
local accountability through social audit and implementation of the
Right to Information Act.
3.26 The Committee inquired from the Ministry about the
mechanism that would be followed for monitoring of this scheme as
well as the modus operandi of disbursement of funds under the scheme.
The Ministry in reply has stated that they have just begun the exercise
to formulate operational guidelines and the capacity building
framework for local planning. As an advance action the Ministry has
constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary,
Panchayati Raj for drafting the guidelines for the Backward Regions
Grant Fund.
3.27 The BRGF replaces the Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY)
which was under the Planning Commission. It is proposed to subsume
the RSVY in the Backward Regions Grant Fund. The Backward Districts
initiative under the RSVY has the same objectives as the BRGF and
was implemented in 147 districts.
3.28 The RSVY was being implemented by the Ministry of Finance
earlier. During 2005-06 against the release for Rs. 3,251 crore the
expenditure by State Government was for Rs. 1,835 crore. Under the
scheme each district was to be provided with Rs. 45 crore by yearly
allocation of Rs. 15 crore. The scheme was approved in 2004-05 and
the actual implementation was during 2005-06.
3.29 When questioned about the physical and financial
achievements of RSVY the Ministry in reply stated:
“It is reported by Planning Commission that the schemes are at
various stages of implementation and progress reports in physical

36
and financial terms are mandatory for release of further
instalments. Complete picture in physical terms will be available
only after a district receives the full amount of Rs.45 crore.”
3.30 The Committee note from the position as indicated above
that Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana, a scheme meant for the upliftment
of backward districts was approved in the year 2004-05 and was
actually implemented during the year 2005-06. The scheme was under
the administrative control of Planning Commission. During 2005-06
the releases for Rs. 3,257 crore were made to 147 districts identified
as backward districts. The criteria for allocation to each district was
Rs. 45 crore per district. The allocation was to be made at the rate
of Rs. 15 crore per year. It seems from the data that the first
instalment of Rs. 15 crore to 147 districts has been released by the
Planning Commission under RSVY. Further the Committee note that
RSVY now has been subsumed into ‘Backward Regions Grant Fund’
which is under the administrative control of Ministry of Panchayati
Raj. Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Budget speech for the year
2006-07 has informed that Rs. 5,000 crore is being allocated for
Backward Regions Grant Fund during the year 2006-07 and the
amount would be released in the coming four years. The Ministry
of Panchayati Raj has further clarified that out of Rs. 5,000 crore,
Rs. 3,750 crore are under the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the
remaining provision of Rs. 1,250 crore is meant for the special plans
for Bihar and KBK districts of Orissa to be handled by the Planning
Commission. The Committee disapprove of the fragmented approach
of the Government in handling one of the important schemes meant
for the backward districts and shifting it from one Ministry to the
other. The Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Government that the scheme should be transferred wholly to one
Ministry.
3.31 Further with regard to the transfer of the scheme from
Planning Commission to Ministry of Panchayati Raj the bigger
concern is to monitor the funds allocated under the earlier scheme
i.e. RSVY. It has been stated that Rs. 45 crore was to be released to
each district under RSVY. Out of Rs. 45 crore, Rs. 15 crore has already
been released and now under the new scheme i.e. Backward Regions
Grant Fund the allocation will be made for five years. Besides the
Committee also note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is
formulating new mechanism and guidelines in the scheme Backward
Regions Grant Fund. In this scenario, the Committee strongly
recommend to the Department to find out some mechanism to
coordinate the newly named scheme i.e. Backward Regions Grants

37
Fund with the allocations made under the earlier scheme i.e. RSVY
so that the real objective of bringing the backward districts at par
with the progressive districts by providing social and economic
infrastructure is really achieved.
(ii) Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana
3.32 ‘Gram Swaraj’ is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme and has been
launched with the objective to assist the States to improve the capacity
of Panchayats and provide the necessary administrative and
infrastructure support to them so that they can effectively perform the
functions devolved and the schemes entrusted to them. This would be
accomplished through action in the following vital areas viz.,
• Improving infrastructure at Panchayat level;
• Support the minimum staffing required for every Panchayat,
including augmenting technical staff and competence;
•T raining and Capacity Building elected representatives of
Panchayats and Staff;
• E-Governance for all Panchayats;
• Building of Capacity at State and Panchayat level to manage
issues consequent on devolution, particularly financial
accountability of Panchayats.
3.33 This is a newly launched Scheme of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj with an initial outlay of Rs. 50.50 crore. The proposed allocation
under the different components of the scheme for 2006-07 as approved
by the Planning Commission is as under:
Sl.No. Components Allocation
(Rs. in crore)
1. Training and Capacity building 30.00
2. Research Studies 2.00
3. Information Technology 8.00
4. Infrastructure Development 10.50
Total 50.50
3.34 The funding of the ‘Gram Swaraj Scheme’ would be on the
pattern of 75 per cent of the funds being provided by the Central
Government and 25 per cent by the State Governments. The funds

38
will be transferred to the Consolidated Funds of State Governments
for onward transmission to the Panchayats following the same
stipulations as prescribed for the devolution of Twelfth Finance
Commission Grants. From the State level, the funds will be directly
deposited into the Bank accounts of the Panchayat concerned, using
the mechanism suggested by the Task Force of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj to study the feasibility of direct transfer of funds
through Banks. The components of Training, Research, IT and Projects
assisted by UN Agencies in the current year would get merged in this
scheme from 2006-2007. The guidelines of this scheme are still in the
stage of preparation. When asked about the method of monitoring of
this scheme the Ministry replied.
“The implementation of the scheme would be monitored by
officers in the Ministry with the Secretary and Minister overseeing
the implementation”.
3.35 Capacity Building of Panchayats, which is integral to its
effective functioning, is central to this scheme. This would be achieved
by strengthening existing institutional arrangements and creating new
institutional arrangement such as permanent State Finance Commission
Cells in the Finance Departments as recommended by the Twelfth
Finance Commission. When the Committee enquired on the efforts
made by the Government on obtaining a preliminary database of
capacity of Panchayats, the Ministry replied:
“The Ministry has circulated a format to the States for collecting
the basic data of the capacity of each Panchayat. The responses
from few States have been received. The matter will be taken up
with the States during the next interaction in the meeting of
Committee of Chief Secretaries”.
3.36 The Committee find that four schemes (i) Training and
Capacity building (ii) Research Studies (iii) Information Technology
and (iv) Infrastructure Development implemented by the Ministry
have been brought under one scheme i.e. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Yojana. The allocation during the year 2006-07 for this scheme is
Rs. 50.50 crore. The Committee appreciate the objectives of the
scheme according to which the real issues involved with the capacity
building of Panchayats i.e. improving the infrastructure, augmenting
technical staff and competence, training, e-governance would be
handled by one scheme. Besides a format is being circulated to the
States for collecting the basic data of the existing capacity of each
Panchayat. The Committee would like to be informed of the progress
made in the implementation of this scheme.

39
(iii) Panchayat Empowerment Incentive Scheme
3.37 The objective of the Panchayat Empowerment Incentive Scheme
(PEIS) is to incentive State Governments to undertake reforms and
devolve powers upon Panchayats, in accordance with the
recommendations of the seven Round Tables of State Ministers of
Panchayati Raj and also for Panchayats empowered by such reforms
to effectively assume the responsibilities devolved upon them.
Milestones for reforms will be identified, benchmarks standardized and
releases will be made in accordance with the progress achieved by
States against milestones and bench marks in the reform aspects
identified.
3.38 The guidelines of this new scheme have been formulated and
given in Appendix V . The Scheme was introduced at the Revised
Estimate stage of 2005-06 with an outlay of Rs. 5 crore taken from the
training component of the Budget Estimates 2005-06. For 2006-07 an
allocation of Rs. 10 crore has been made for the implementation of
this scheme. For 2005-06 the Ministry has identified seven Reforms
Areas on which the weightage and pattern of release of funds for this
Scheme would be based. The Reform areas identified are:
(i) Signing of MoU with Union Government detailing
completion of Activity Mapping of functions to be devolved
to Panchayats and issue of government orders for the
transfer of funds in accordance with devolved functions and
activity mapping. It is presumed that legislation has already
been passed;
(ii) Deputing functionaries to the administrative control of
Panchayats, so as to enable them to carry out the functions
assigned to them through Activity Mapping. Issuing orders
that subsequent recruitment and administrative control of
employees will be by the Panchayats;
(iii) T ransferring funds in the State budget directly to the
Panchayat accounts for the functions devolved to them and
putting in place a transparent mechanism to transfer funds,
monitor their use and make public information on funds
allotted to Panchayats;
(iv) Assigning taxing powers to Panchayats along with a
mechanism to empower collection of taxes due;
(v) Ensuring that each Village Panchayat has a Secretary , or
framing rules to allow the Village Panchayat to recruit a
Secretary;

40
(vi) Assigning powers to the Gram Sabhas to approve plans,
select beneficiaries, authorise utilisation certificates, be
consulted for land alienation etc., and to ensure that the
meetings are conducted with due procedure;
(vii) Appointing DPCs and activating them as per 243ZD of the
Constitution;
3.39 The weightages and the amount earmarked for achievements
of each of the areas given above are furnished in the following table:
Amounts earmarked for the Achievement of each
Milestone (for 2005-2006)
Sl.No. Reform Area Incentive for state Incentive for Panchayats
Percentage Amount Percentage Amount
(%) (Rs. Lakhs) (%) (Rs. Lakhs)
1. Signing of MoU with 25 37.5 0 0.0
Union Government
2. Department 10 15.0 15 52.5
functionaries to the
administrative control
of Panchayats
3. Transferring funds in 25 37.5 0 0.0
the state budget
directly to the
Panchayat accounts
4. Assigning taxing 5 7.5 20 70.0
powers to Panchyats
along with a
mechanism to
empower collection
of taxes due
5. Ensuring that each 10 15.0 10 35.0
Village Panchayat has
a Secretary
6. Assigning powers to 10 15.0 30 105.0
The Gram Sabhas to
select beneficiaries
7. Appointing and 15 22.5 25 87.5
activating DPC’s
Total 100 150.0 100 350

41
3.40 When the Committee desired to know whether any
achievement has been made under this scheme, the Ministry replied:
“For 2005-06, Seven Reform Areas were identified along with
weightage and pattern of release assigned to these. Proposals
were invited for the scheme of 2005-06 from all the States to
whom part IX of the Constitution applies. Proposals were received
from 8 States, namely, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala,
Orissa, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Based on the
commitment of the States concerned to the reform measures in
the form of an agreement/joint statement and the progress made
by the States in the respective reform areas, an Empowered
Committee headed by Secretary, Panchayati Raj assessed the
proposals.”
3.41 It came out during the course of examination that this scheme
seeks to secure the devolution of funds, functions and functionaries to
Panchayats, which is the basic objective of the Seventy Third
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992.
3.42 The Committee note that the Ministry has launched a new
scheme viz. Panchayat Empowerment Incentives Scheme meant to
reward the State Governments which are serious on the issue of
implementation of various provisions of Part IX of the Constitution.
Seven reform areas based on which the incentives will be provided
to State Governments have been identified. The Committee are glad
to observe that as many as 8 States namely Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Karnataka, Kerala, Orissa, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal
have come forward by putting proposals to the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj. The Committee hope that the initiatives taken by the Ministry
would motivate State Governments to really empower the Panchayati
Raj Institutions.
(iv) Scheme for Media, Publicity and Advocacy
3.43 This is a new scheme of the Ministry with an outlay of
Rs. 3 crore for 2006-07 and has the following major objectives:
(a) To empower the community and PRIs with information and
knowledge about their roles, rights and responsibilities,
especially keeping the objectives of devolution as envisaged
in the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act. 1992 and the
provisions of the Right to Information Act in view.

42
(b) To disseminate information on innovative approaches and
findings of research and impact evolution undertaken in
the field of Panchayati Raj to a wide range of PRI
stakeholders, including elected representatives, NGOs,
Panchayat staff and the public.
(c) To undertake advocacy to promote greater and more
effective devolution of functions, funds and functionaries to
Panchayats.
3.44 From 2006-07 this scheme would subsume the components of
Information, Education and Communication, and Conferences, Seminars,
Workshop etc. of the erstwhile ‘Panchayat Development and Training’
Scheme. The argument of the Government in favour of creating a
separate scheme for media, publicity and advocacy is that earlier, these
existed as individual aspects and now there will be a flow of funds
under a comprehensive or holistic programme.
3.45 This scheme would be implemented through agencies like
Prasar Bharati and its associated organisations. Moreover, the State
Governments, their Media Resource Cells and through them Zonal
Cultural Centres, administrative training institutes, and specialized
Panchayati Raj training institutes, NGOs etc are also included in this
scheme.
3.46 The guidelines of the scheme are yet to be formulated,
however, a draft media policy has been formulated. This has been
circulated to request responses and suggestions from the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting for the attainment of certain objectives.
3.47 The Ministry proposes to set up a Media Advisory Group
comprising of a group of experts under the Chairmanship of the
Minister of Panchayati Raj to monitor the implementation of the scheme
for media, publicity and advocacy.
3.48 The Committee note that the ‘Scheme for Media, Publicity
and Advocacy’ which has been newly launched includes components
of the erstwhile Panchayat Development and Training Scheme. This
scheme is intended to empower the community and PRIs with
knowledge about their roles and responsibilities keeping in mind
the tenets of the 73rd Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1992 and the
Right to Information Act. Though guidelines of this scheme are yet
to be finalised, the Government has drafted a media policy and the
views of the Ministry of the Information and Broadcasting are being
solicited. Further the Ministry proposes to set up a Media Advisory
Group for monitoring this scheme. The Committee would like to
recommend here that the guidelines of the scheme be finalised in
the shortest possible time so that the pattern of allocation and

43
utilisation of the earmarked outlay can be done meaningfully. Further
the Committee would like to be informed of the views of the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on the media policy. The
Committee note that this scheme is to be monitored by a Media
Advisory Group headed by the Minister of Panchayati Raj. They
would like to be apprised of the composition of the Media Advisory
Group and any action taken by it.
C. Miscellaneous
(i) Public-Private Panchayat Partnership Initiatives (Rural Business
Hubs)
3.49 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj in association with
Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) had launched the initiative of
Rural Business Hubs (RBHs) for facilitating and building linkage
between Panchayats with private industries and businesses. A Rural
Business Hubs Council has been set up with the Minister of Panchayati
Raj as Chairman and Shri Sunil Kant Munjal past president CII as Co-
Chairman for the purpose of overseeing the task of Business Hubs
and reviewing action taken. The first meeting of the Council was held
on 29 July, 2005. This initiative was initially limited to 9 States but has
since been extended to all States/UTs covered by Part IX of the
Constitution. The process of setting up of RBHs has already begun
with the signing of three Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) in the
States of Uttaranchal and Haryana. The first MoU under the RBH
initiative was signed in Dehradun (Uttaranchal) for setting up of a
Rural Business Hub for processing fruit grown in the Ramgarh Block
and few other Blocks of Nainital District. Thereafter, three more MoUs
have been finalised and signed to set up RBHs for Jatropha plantation
and production of Bio-Diesel in Faridabad and Mewat Districts of
Haryana as well as Dungarpur District of Rajasthan.
3.50 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry is
making efforts to ensure the success of Rural Business Hubs with
Public-Private Panchayat Partnership. This initiative will on the one
hand enable better market access for locally available resources and
skills and on the other hand it will involve Panchayats at all levels
as facilitators, which would enhance their scope as well as bring
about definite economic gains. The Committee hope that such efforts
are continued further. The Committee would also like to be kept
apprised of the progress regarding the new initiatives undertaken.
(ii) Jan Kerosene Pariyojana
Objectives
3.51 The Jan Kerosene Pariyojana has been launched with a view
to bring about a system where the diversion of PDS supplied subsidised

44
kerosene to the black market and misuse through adulteration is
minimized. The argument of the Ministry in favour of this scheme is
that it would introduce a measure of transparency and public
accountability by way of involvement of PRIs.
Role of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
3.52 The Jan Kerosene Pariyojana has been launched with the joint
efforts of the Ministries of Petroleum and National Gas and Panchayati
Raj. The role of the Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies is limited to
the issuing of Guidelines to the State Ministries of Food and Civil
Supplies for ensuring the linkages of local authorities of civil supply
departments with the functionaries of Vigilance Committee and
representatives of oil marketing companies.
Coverage and Mechanism
3.53 A pilot project has been launched in 548 blocks across several
States in the country. Under this scheme the Vigilance Committees of
the PRIs at all the three levels i.e., village, block and district have
been given the responsibility of monitoring and ensuring the proper
distribution of the subsidized kerosene to the targeted sections of the
society. Moreover, a massive awareness campaign through TV/Radio
and Zonal Culture Centres (ZCCs) has been launched. The campaigns
through ZCCs are carried out in the local language of the region.
3.54 The Committee note that the Jan Kerosene Pariyojana is a
novel initiative launched with the joint efforts of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas with a
view to minimise adulteration of subsidised kerosene and preventing
diversion of PDS supply of kerosene to black market. The Ministry
of Food and Civil Supplies is entrusted with the framing of
guidelines. The pilot project of this initiative has been launched in
about 458 blocks across the country. Further, awareness campaigns
are being organised in various media in the local language to create
greater impact. The Committee appreciate the efforts of the
Government to secure a central role for Panchayats in such
developmental initiatives. The Committee would like to be informed
of the progress in respect to this project and whether the Government
intends to cover the entire country by this scheme.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
17 May, 2006 Chairman,
27 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

45
APPENDIX I
PROGRESS OF ACTIVITY MAPPING IN STATES/UNION
TERRITORIES AS ON 15.3.2006
Sl. No. State Transfer of Latest position
Subjects
transferred
through
legislation
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 17 subjects Committee constituted under
Special Chief Secretary has
submitted its formulation
which is being considered by
a Group of Ministers.
2. Assam 29 subjects Assam claims that it has
done activity mapping more
than 3 years back. However,
This Activity mapping was in
the form of a consolidated
executive order, not in the
matrix that MoPR have
prepared. After the 7 RTs,
Activity Mapping is being
monitored by Additional
Chief Secretary. It is reported
by Secretary, PR, that about
8 departments have passed
partial orders.
3. Arunachal Pradesh 29 subjects The Ministry is assisting the
State through an NGO PRIA
for conducting the Activity
Mapping exercise.
4. Bihar 25 subjects Discussions towards activity
mapping between PRIA and
Government of Bihar have
been held. Work is in
progress.

46
12 3 4
5. Chhattisgarh 29 subjects Activity Mapping for 27
items has been prepared.
However, the necessary
executive orders in this
regard are yet to be issued.
6. Goa 6 subjects 18 functions have been
devolved to village
Panchayats and 6 to ZPs.
However, these are not in
terms of the items listed in
the Eleventh Schedule, but in
terms of actual civic
functions.
7. Gujarat 15 subjects Activity Mapping has been
done for 14 subjects.
5 subjects have been partially
devolved.
8. Haryana 10 subjects Activity Mapping in respect
of 10 subjects released on
17.2.2006 in the joint presence
of the Chief Minister,
Haryana and MPR.
9. Himachal Pradesh 26 subjects 15 departments had issued
delegation orders delegating
powers to Panchayats in
respect of their schemes.
10. Karnataka 29 subjects Activity Mapping completed
in respect of all 29 items in
August 2003. This was
followed by another exercise
of devolution of funds
through the State Budget. A
GO was issued in October,
2005. The Activity Mapping
has been given full effect
through Fiscal devolution in
the budget of pertaining to
26 subjects completed with
effect from 2005-06.

47
12 3 4
11. Kerala 26 subjects 119 activity relating to
19 functions have been
devolved earlier. In this respect
a new activity Mapping
matrix has been prepared,
which is very detailed and
unique, in the sense that it
also covers Municipalities, as
well as lists out the Activities
in respect of each function
that ought to be performed
at the three levels.
12. Madhya Pradesh 23 subjects For 7 activities, Activity
Mapping was prepared by an
NGO, Samarthan. The
Activity Mapping for the
remaining subjects is being
undertaken.
13. Maharashtra 18 subjects There has been no move on
Activity Mapping after the
Round Table.
14. Manipur 22 functions It is r eported that activity
Mapping of 22 subjects
completed.
15. Orissa 25 subjects Activity mapping has been
issued in October in respect
of 9 subjects, in the presence
of the Minister and the Chief
Minister.
16. Punjab 7 subjects Draft Activity Mapping has
been prepared for all
departments in a detailed
fashion. In certain sectors
such as Health and
Education, significant work
has been undertaken.
1300 doctors and rural
dispensaries have been

48
12 3 4
handed over to ZPs. Existing
doctors have been shifted to
city hospitals and new
recruitments will be at the
ZP leve. 4000 primary
schools are being transferred
to the Panchayat Samiti and
10000 teachers being
recruited at that level.
17. Rajasthan 29 subjects The Activity Mapping
exercise was started for
18 departments and has now
been completed for 12.
Executives orders are to be
issued in this regard.
18. Sikkim 28 functions Activity mapping has just
started and is expected to be
completed in a few months.
19. Tamilnadu 29 subjects T amilnadu reports to have
issued instructions for
devolving all subjects to
Panchayati Raj. GOs have
been issued to devolve
certain activities relating to
the functions devolved.
20. Tripura 29 subjects In 1994 orders were issued
devolving for 21 subjects.
With respect of 8 subjects
orders are awaited because of
operational problems related
to 6th Schedule. Activity
Mapping exercise is on.
21. Uttar Pradesh 12 subjects Activity Mapping has been
completed in respect of 32
departments as part of the
recommendations of a
Committee (Bholanath Tiwari
Report). The report is being
considered by the
Government.

49
12 3 4
22. Uttaranchal 14 subjects Activity Mapping in respect
of 9 departments completed
and under consideration of
the Government. GOs for
devolution of 3 departments
issued.
23. West Bengal 29 subjects Activity Mapping has been
completed and orders issued
in respect of 15 subjects on
7.11.2005.

50
APPENDIX II
THE STATEMENT INDICATING THE FUNDS FUNCTIONS AND
FUNCTIONARIES DEVOLVED BY THE STATES/UNION
TERRITORIES INDICATING LATEST POSITION
UPTO 29 JUNE, 2005
State Subjects Activity Latest position
transferred mapping (29.6.2005)
through undertaken
legislation
12 3 4
Andhra Pradesh 17 Subjects 9 Subjects Committee constituted under
Special Chief Secretary has
yet to meet to consider
activity mapping.
Assam 29 Subjects 29 Subjects on Activity mapping not
26.7.2002 operationalised through
executive orders and funds
transfer.
Arunachal Pradesh Nil 6 Subjects —
Bihar 25 Subjects 20 Subjects —
Chhattisgarh 29 Subjects 6 Subjects Activity mapping for six
completed and the remaining
to be completed by October,
2005.
Goa 6 Subjects 18 Subjects —
Gujarat 14 Subjects 14 Departments Activity in respect of 5
subjects have been devolved
partially. With respect to 10
functions, activities are yet to
be devolved.
Haryana 16 16 Subjects Draft Activity mapping
prepared. Final decision of
Government of Haryana
awaited.

51
12 3 4
Himachal Pradesh 26 subjects — Preliminary discussions held
draft activity mapping.
Jammu & Kashmir — — —
Jharkhand
Karnataka 29 Subjects 29 Subjects Devolution of funds
pertaining to 26 subjects
completed with effect from
2005-06.
Kerala 26 Subjects 26 Subjects United funds devolved in
respect of devolved functions.
Maharashtra 19 Subjects 9 Departments —
Madhya Pradesh 25 Subjects 7 Subjects Draft Activity Mapping under
consideration of Government.
Manipur 22 Subjects 22 Subjects Activity Mapping of 22
subjects completed.
Orissa 25 Subjects 8 Subjects Meeting of 11 Departments
have been called and activity
mapping of 8 Departments
are in progress.
Pondicherry
Punjab 7 Subjects 6 Draft Activity Mapping
prepared. Final decision of
Government awaited.
Rajasthan 29 Subjects 18 Subjects Activity Mapping is in
transferred progress.
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Tripura
UIttar Pradesh 12 Subjects 10 Subjects Activity Mapping is in
progress.
Uttaranchal 14 Subjects 14 Subjects Activity Mapping in respect
of 9 departments completed
and under consideration of
the Government. GOs for
devolution of 3 departments
issued.

52
12 3 4
West Bengal 29 Subjects 29 Activity Mapping is
completed, awaiting approval
of Cabinet.
Dadar & Nagar 29 Subjects 29 Subjects Activity Mapping is
Haveli completed.
Daman & Diu 29 Subjects 29 Subjects Activity Mapping is
completed.
Andaman & Nicobar
Islands
Lakshadweep
Chandigarh UT

53
APPENDIX III
SHARES OF STATES IN ALLOCATION (2005-10) IN RESPECT OF
TWELFTH FINANCE COMMISSION
Sl.No. State Panchayats Municipalities
Per cent (Rs. Crore) Per cent (Rs. Crore)
1. Andhra Pradesh 7.935 1587.00 7.480 374.00
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0.340 68.00 0.60 3.00
3. Assam 2.630 526.00 1.100 55.00
4. Bihar 8.120 1624.00 2.840 142.00
5. Chhattisgarh 1.075 615.00 1.760 88.00
6. Goa 0.090 18.00 0.240 12.00
7. Gujarat 1.655 911.00 8.280 414.00
8. Haryana 1.940 188.00 1.820 91.00
9. Himachal Pradesh 0.735 147.00 0.160 8.00
10. Jammu & Kashmir 1.405 281.00 0.760 38.00
11. Jharkhand 2.410 482.00 1.960 98.00
12. Karnataka 4.440 888.00 6.460 323.00
13. Kerala 4.925 985.00 2.980 149.00
14. Madhya Pradesh 8.315 1663.00 7.220 361.00
15. Maharashtra 9.915 1983.00 15.820 791.00
16. Manipur 0.230 46.00 0.180 9.00
17. Meghalaya 0.250 50.00 0.160 8.00
18. Mizoram 0.100 20.00 0.200 10.00
19. Nagaland 0.200 40.00 0.120 6.00
20. Orissa 4.015 803.00 2.080 104.00
21. Punjab 1.620 324.00 3.420 171.00
22. Rajasthan 6.150 1230.00 4.400 220.00
23. Sikkim 0.065 13.00 0.020 1.00
24. Tamil Nadu 4.350 870.00 11.440 572.00
25. Tripura 0.285 57.00 0.160 8.00
26. Uttar Pradesh 14.640 2928.00 10.340 517.00
27. Uttaranchal 0.810 162.00 0.680 34.00
28. West Bengal 6.355 1271.00 7.860 393.00
Total 100.000 20000.00 100.000 5000.00

54
APPENDIX IV
RELEASE OF INSTALMENTS OF TWELFTH FINANCE
COMMISSION GRANTS TO PANCHAYATI RAJ
INSTITUTIONS AS ON 15.03.2006
2005-06
Released
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl.No. State Total Amount of 1st 2nd
allocation one instal- instal-
instalment ment ment
(6 monthly)
12 3456
1. Andhra Pradesh 158700 15870 15870 15870
2. Arunachal Pradesh 6800 680 — —
3. Assam 52600 5260 5260 —
4. Bihar 162400 16240 16240 —
5. Chhattisgarh 61500 6150 6150 6150
6. Goa 1800 180 180 —
7. Gujarat 93100 9310 9310 —
8. Haryana 38800 3880 3880 3880
9. Himachal Pradesh 14700 1470 1470 1470
10. Jammu & Kashmir 28100 2810 1761.97 ** —
11. Jharkhand 48200 4820 — —
12. Karnataka 88800 8880 8880 —
13. Kerala 98500 9850 9850 9850
14. Madhya Pradesh 166300 16630 16630 16630
15. Maharashtra 198300 19830 19830 —
16. Manipur 4600 460 211.6 * —
17. Meghalaya 5000 500 — —
(1) Ist
Instalment has
not been
released to
Arunachal
Pradesh,
Tripura.
(2) 2nd
Instalment has
been released
to only 10
States so far.

55
12 3456
18. Mizoram 2000 200 200 —
19. Nagaland 4000 400 400
20. Orissa 80300 8030 8030 8030
21. Punjab 32400 3240 3240 —
22. Rajasthan 123000 12300 12300 12300
23. Sikkim 1300 130 130 —
24. Tamil Nadu 87000 8700 8700 8700
25. Tripura 5700 570 — —
26. Uttar Pradesh 292800 29280 29280 29280
27. Uttaranchal 16200 1620 1620 —
28. West Bengal 127100 12710 12710 —
Total 2000000 200000 190160 112160
* Excluding share of PRI Grants pertaining to Hill areas amounting to Rs. 248.40 lacs.
** After deducting Rs. 1048.03 lakhs being share of PRIs where elections have not been
held. In Jammu and Kashmir and Jharkhand elections are yet to be held Meghalaya,
Mizoram and Nagaland are not covered under Part IX of the Constitution.

56
APPENDIX V
PANCHAYAT EMPOWERMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
INCENTIVE SCHEME-GUIDELINES
1. Background
1.1 It is widely recognized that the process of devolution upon
Panchayats is incomplete and requires further facilitation by Central
Government. State Governments will need to inter-alia move further
on the path of devolving Functions, Functionaries and Finances to
Panchayats and make Panchayats central to planning and implementing
of plans for economic development and social justice on matters listed
in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution, empower Gram Sabhas
to ensure a transparent, responsive and accountable grass-roots
democracy and ensure formulation of plans through the institution of
District Planning Committees (DPCs). At the present stage of evolution
of Panchayati Raj, the recommendations jointly agreed with regard to
these at the seven round Tables of the State Ministers of Panchayati
Raj represent the crucial areas where states need Central support.
2. Objective of the Scheme:
2.1 The Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme aims to provide incentives to the States to undertake reforms
as set out in the recommendation of the Seven Round Tables of State
Ministers of Panchayati Raj and to empower Panchayats as institutions
of local self-government in accordance with the letter and spirit of
Article 243G of the Constitution. It is proposed to support, encourage
and facilitate States to devolve more functions, functionaries and
finances to the Panchayats and to restructure the system of self-
government at the Panchayat Level.
3. Fund Allocation:
3.1 The Scheme has an allocation of Rupees 5 crores during the
financial year 2005-06. Drawal of funds from the Scheme will be entirely
based on the pace of reform of Panchayati Raj in States.
4. Description of the Scheme:
4.1 The Panchayat Empowerment and Accountability Incentive
Scheme aims to both incentives State Governments to devolve powers

57
upon Panchayats in accordance with the recommendations of the seven
Round Tables as also for Panchayats empowered by such reforms to
effectively assume the responsibilities devolved upon them. Releases
of funds under the Scheme will be made in accordance with the
progress achieved by States against milestones and bench marks in
the reform aspects identified. The following areas (with weightage and
pattern of release of funds indicated against each) have been identified
as in Table given below.
Table 1
Sl.No. Reform Area Release for funds for State Release of funds for
as per percentage Panchayats as per
indicated & purpose (Rs. percentage
1.50 crores) indicated & purpose
(Rs. 3.50 crores)
12 3 4
1. Signing of MOU with Union
Government detailing
completion of Activity
Mapping of functions to be
devolved to Panchayats
and issue of government
orders for the transfer of
funds in accordance with
devolved functions and
activity mapping, (It is
presumed that legislation
has already been passed.)
2. Deputing functionaries to
the administrative control
of Panchayats, so as to
enable them to carry out
the functions assigned to
them through Activity
Mapping; Issuing orders
that subsequent
recruitment and
administrative control of
employees will be by the
Panchayat
25% to the State Government
to be utilized for overseeing
and coordinating activities
mentioned from Sl.No. 1 to
Sl.No. 7
10% to the State Government
to assist in measures needed
for this.
15% to Panchayats for
setting up Panchayat
Secretariats and to meet
office expensed to support
them financially with
regard to the administrative
staff which has been placed
under their control

58
12 3 4
3. Transferring funds in the state
budget directly to the
Panchayat accounts for the
functions devolved to them
and putting in place a
transparent mechanism to
transfer funds, monitor their
use and make public
information on funds allotted
to Panchayats
4. Assigning taxing powers to
Panchayats alongwith a
mechanism to empower
collection of taxes due
5. Ensuring that each Village
Panchayat has a Secretary, or
framing rules to allow the
Village Panchayat to recruit a
Secretary
6. Assigning powers to the Gram
Sabhas to approve plans, select
beneficiaries, authorize
utilization certificates, be
consulted for land alienation
etc., and to ensure that the
meetings are conducted with
due procedure.
7. Constituting DPCs and
activating them as per 243ZD
of the Constitution
25% to the State
Government for reforming
Treasury and banking
procedures relating to
Panchayats
5% to the State
Government for capacity
building and overseeing
reform of tax mobilization
by Panchayats
10% to the State
Government for
implementing steps to
ensure a Secretary for each
Gram Panchayat
10% to the State
Government for
strengthening Gram
Sabhas
15% to the State
Government for
Strengthening DPC’s
20% to Panchayats to assist
them in strengthening the
infrastructure and capacity
to activate the mechanism
to collect and account to
taxes.
25% to Panchayats to assist
them partially for the
services of a Panchayat
Secretary.
30% to Panchayats to assist
them in appointing Village
Secretaries and conducting
Gram Sabha meetings with
due procedure.
10% to Panchayats for
assisting them to draw up
their plans for economic
development and social
justice, which will be
consolidated by the DPCs.

59
4.3 The above percentages of allocation would translate into the
following amounts earmarked for the achievement of each milestone
proposed, as described in Table 2 below:
Sl.No. Reform Area Incentive for Incentive for
State Panchayats
Percen- Amount Percen- Amount
tage (Rs. Lakhs) tage (Rs. Lakhs)
1. Signing of MoU with Union 25 37.5 0 0.0
Government
2. Deputing functionaries to the 10 15.0 15 52.5
administrative control of
Panchayats
3. Transferring funds in the 25 37.5 0 0.0
state budget directly to the
Panchayat accounts
4. Assigning taxing powers to 5 7.5 20 70.0
Panchayats along with a
mechanism to empower
collection of taxes due
5. Ensuring that each Village 10 15.0 10 35.0
Panchayat has a Secretary
6. Assigning powers to the 10 15.0 30 105.0
Gram Sabhas to select
beneficiaries
7. Appointing and activating DPCs 15 22.5 25 87.5
Total 100 150.0 100 350.0
5. This is a demand driven scheme and the States which
undertake to take the reform measures in the spirit of the
Constitutional provisions, will be eligible for funding under
the scheme.
6. The above identified milestones except signing of MoU need
not be sequential steps and may be concurrent or may be
undertaken in a different order by the States.
7. The States will be required to send their proposals with a
time bound action plan to achieve the identified milestones.
The States which have already achieved some of the
milestones, will indicate the next steps proposed in the
direction of empowerment of Panchayats.

60
8. Transfer of funds to States eligible to receive the incentive
grants would be to the Consolidated fund of the State. In
respect of funds that are to be transferred in turn to the
Panchayats, the procedure of electronic transfer of funds
proposed by the Ministry would be put in place, so as to
ensure transfer of these funds to Panchayats within 15 days
of their having been credited to the State, in the manner as
prescribed in the guidelines issued by the Ministry of
Finance in respect of local body grants recommended by
the 12th Finance Commission.
9. Empowered Committee to monitor progress.
Funds will be released after assessing the proposal of each State
by an Empowered Committee, the composition of which is described
below:
A. Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Chairperson
B. Advisor (RD & PR), Planning Commission. Member
C. Additional Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Member
D. JS & FA, Ministry of Panchayati Raj member
E. Joint Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Member-Secretary

61
APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,
THE 22 MARCH, 2006
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Room
No. G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hannan Mollah
3. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
4. Smt Tejaswini Seeramesh
5. Shri Mohan Singh
6. Shri Sita Ram Singh
7. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
8. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
9. Shri Penumalli Madhu
10. Shri Kalraj Mishra
11.D r. Faguni Ram
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
*** *** ***
***Not related with the Report.

62
Representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Shri B.S. Lalli, Secretary
2. Shri M.K.Khanna, Additional Secretary
3. Shri P .K. Sinha, Joint Secretary & FA
4. Shri P .D. Sudhakar, Joint Secretary
5. Ms. Aditi Mehta, Joint Secretary
6. Shri T.R. Raghunandan, Joint Secretary
3. *** *** ***
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj and drew their attention to the provisions of direction
55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker.
5. The Secretary , Ministry of Panchayati Raj briefed the Committee
about various highlights of the Demands for Grants (2006-2007) and
various activities of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj through a power-
point presentation. The main issues that came up during the course of
briefing were reasons for under utilization of funds during 2005-2006,
especially under the scheme of ‘Panchayati Raj Development &
Training’, the methodology for implementation of new schemes viz.
(i) Backward Regions Grants Fund and (ii) Gram Swaraj, steps initiated
by the Ministry for bringing about devolution of functions, functionaries
and finances to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) by respective State
Government in the true spirit of Article 243 (G) read with Eleventh
Schedule of the Constitution. The Secretary while explaining the
position of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on each of the aforesaid
issues also responded to the various queries of the members of the
Committee in this regard.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related with the Report.

63
APPENDIX VII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 13 APRIL, 2006.
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mohan Jena
3. Shri Dawa Narbula
4. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
5. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
6. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
7. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
8. Shri Mohan Singh
9. Shri Sita Ram Singh
10. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
14. Shri Penumalli Madhu
15. Dr. Chandan Mitra
16. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary

64
Representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Smt. Meenakshi Dutta Ghosh, Secretary
2. Shri M.K.Khanna, Additional Secretary
3. Shri P .K. Sinha, JS & FA
4. Shri P .D. Sudhakar, Joint Secretary
5. Ms. Aditi Mehta, Joint Secretary
6. Shri T.R. Raghunandan, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened for taking oral evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Panchayati Raj on Demands for Grants
(2006-2007).
[The representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
were then called in.]
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj and drew their attention to the provisions of Direction
55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on Demands for Grants (2006-2007).
The Secretary, Panchayati Raj, briefly explained to the Committee the
overall position with regard to the allocation and utilization during
the Ninth and Tenth Plan period. She also dealt with the issues relating
to the implementation of the various provisions of Part IX of the
Constitution and underlined the various efforts being made by the
Ministry to implement the 150 recommendations made during the
Seven Round Table Conferences organised by the Ministry. The
Committee expressed their concerns on the slow progress of
implementation of the 73rd Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 and
activity mapping exercise being done in all States/UTs. The Secretary
in reply stated that they were impressing upon the States to expedite
the works relating to these two provisions.
5. The Committee then discussed in detail the various issues
relating to the examination of Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj with special emphasis on the need for
training of the representatives of PRIs and effective devolution of funds,
functions and functionaries. Further, the issues relating to the newly
introduced schemes of the Government were also discussed in detail.
The allocations relating to the Eleventh and Twelfth Finance

65
Commission were discussed. The representatives of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj replied to the queries raised by the members and were
asked to send any suggestions and replies for the points which could
not be made available during the sitting.
6. A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

66
APPENDIX VIII
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2005-2006)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 9 MAY, 2006
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Prabodh Panda— In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Dawa Narbula
5. Shri Sita Ram Singh
6. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
7. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
9. Shri Penumalli Madhu
10. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
2. In the absence of Chairman, the Committee chose Shri Prabodh
Panda, M.P . to act as Chairman for the sitting under Rule 258 (3) of
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.

67
3. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the draft Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj and adopted the draft Report with slight modifications.
4. *** *** ***
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Reports on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related with report.

68
APPENDIX IX
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.5 The Committee note that the primary objective
of inserting direction 73A in the Directions by
the Speaker was to make the Government more
accountable for implementation of the various
recommendations of the Committee. The
Committee are concerned to note that even after
elapse of around six months when the
statement on Twelfth Report has fallen due and
about three months when the Ministry was
requested for making the revised statement in
respect of Fourth Report, the statements are yet
to be made by the Hon’ble Minister. The
Committee find that the Ministry is taking the
desired action to make the statements in the
Second part of the Seventh Session. The
Committee would like to recommend to the
Ministry to ensure that the statements are made
at the earliest during the Second part of the
Seventh Session. The Committee further
strongly recommend to the Ministry to ensure
that the statements on each of the reports are
made within the specified period i.e. six months
after the presentation of the Report to
Parliament as per direction 73A of the
Directions by the Speaker, in future.
2. 2.9 The Committee note that the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj was created on 27 May, 2004 to
oversee the implementation of various
provisions made under Part IX of the
Constitution by way of the 73rd Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 1992. The Committee further
note that till 2005-2006 the Ministry of

69
12 3
Paanchayati Raj was administering only one
scheme namely, ‘Panchayat Development and
training’. The detailed component-wise analysis
of this scheme has been dealt with in the next
chapter of this Report. The Committee while
analysing the overall position of allocation and
utilisation under the scheme as indicated above
find that during 2004-05, i.e. the first year of
the newly created Ministry, the Ministry was
able to utilise only about 84 per cent of the
total allocation even though the initial allocation
made at the Budget Estimates stage was
reduced to Rs. 10.24 crore at the Revised
Estimate stage. The delay in the
operationalisation of the account of the Ministry
(which became functional only in November
2004) has been given as the reason for the low
rate of utilisation.
3. 2.10 The Committee further note that during the
year 2005-2006 the Ministry was allocated
Rs. 50.44 crore out of which Rs. 50 crore was
plan outlay and Rs. 44 lakh was non-plan
outlay. The Revised Estiamtes remained
unchanged at Rs. 50 crore. Out of this the total
utilisation was to the tune of Rs. 48.71 crore.
Thus there has been an overall utilisation of
more than 97 percent. Except in the utilisation
for the components of Conferences, Seminars,
Workshops and for Management Cell (the
detailed analysis of which has been done in
the succeeding chapter of the Report), the
Ministry has managed to utilise more than
95 per cent of outlay.
4. 2.11 The Committee find that huge added
responsibilities have been entrusted to the
Ministry by way of new schemes. The allocation
of the Ministry has substantially been enhanced
from Rs. 50.44 crore to Rs. 3825.73 crore during
the year 2006-07. The Committee hope that the

70
12 3
initial teething problems involved with the
setting up of the new Ministry would have
been solved by now. They, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should now gear
themselves up, to shoulder the added
responsibilities.
5. 2.17 The Committee note that the National Common
Minimum Programme (NCMP) of the UPA
Government has given a prominent place to
Panchayats and stressed on the need for
devolution of funds, functions and functionaries
to Panchayati Raj Institutions in the true spirit
of article 243 G of the Constitution. The NCMP
has stressed on activity mapping spelling out
clearly the functional domain of the three tiers
of the Panchayats viz . Gram Panchayat,
Intermediate Panchayat and District Panchayat.
Besides, it has also stressed that the transfer of
functions should be matched by transfer of
funds and functionaries. In this regard the
initiative was taken by the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj for creation of the data base of
Panchayat Bank accounts so that the funds
under Centrally Sponsored Scheme can be
electronically transferred to Bank accounts of
all 2,40,000 Panchayati Raj Institutions. To
examine the feasibility in this regard a
Committee was set up under the Chairmanship
of Additional Secretary of the Ministry, which
found that said electronic transfer of outlay was
possible.
As a further initiative some of the schemes
particularly the wage employment and drinking
water and sanitation schemes of the Ministry
of Rural Development were initially selected.
The initiative taken by the Ministry was not
successful as the concerned Ministries have
certain reservations and want to continue with
the existing system of transfer of funds. Though

71
12 3
the Ministry of Finance is agreeable in principle
and has stressed that administrative
arrangement and flow of funds should be in
consonance, it has also shifted the onus of
getting the various Ministries agree to the
proposed way of transfer of funds on the
Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken
by the Ministry to get the funds under different
Central and Centrally Sponsored Schemes
transferred electronically to the Bank accounts
of Panchayats. However, the Committee feel
that the said transfer of funds to Panchayats is
feasible only in case of the schemes which are
currently being implemented by the Panchayats.
The Committee agree with the views expressed
by the Ministry of Finance that administrative
arrangements and flow of funds should be in
consonance. Besides, another major area of
concern is the need to empower the Panchayats
for enabling them to shoulder the
responsibilities of handling schemes for which
huge outlays are being provided by the Central
Government. In view of this, the Committee
feel that the transfer of funds for
implementation of various schemes should be
done in phases. First of all the Ministry should
ensure that the funds for the scheme, for which
the PRIs are directly responsible for
identification, execution and implementation,
are transferred electronically to Bank accounts.
Moreover the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has
to work in tandem with the concerned
Ministries. Thus the challenge is great to make
the Ministries agreeable for which the Ministry
has to work in mission mode.
The Committee further appreciate the initiatives
of the Ministry to empower Gram Sabhas.
While reviewing the Centrally Sponsored

72
12 3
schemes, it is being insisted that the Gram
Sabhas should have a major role to play in
selection of beneficiaries, works, monitoring of
programmes and approving the utilisation
certificate etc. Besides, during the visits to States
by the Minister of Panchayati Raj also the role
of Gram Sabhas is being emphasised. The
Committee would like the Ministry to continue
the said initiatives and keep the Committee
informed about the further progress made with
regard to implementation of Centrally
Sponsored Scheme in this regard.
6. 2.18 The Committee further note that with regard
to the electronic transfer of funds to PRIs in
respect of Twelfth Finance Commission funds
some progress has been made. A data base has
been prepared by NIC and the system is being
prepared for implementation at the State level
onwards to Panchayats. The Committee would
like the Ministry to continue the efforts more
vigorously and keep the Committee informed
about the results achieved in this regard.
7. 2.25 The Committee find from the data made
available by the Ministry that at present there
are 21,95,610 elected representatives spread over
three tiers of Panchayats. The training of large
number of representatives of Panchayati Raj
Institutions alongwith a large number of
Panchayati Raj functionaries is an immense
challenge before the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
The review of the scheme related to Panchayati
Raj Training of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
in the context of Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) has been done in the succeeding
chapter of the report. As regards the overall
scenario, the Committee find that a lot still
needs to be done in this regard.

73
12 3
8. 2.26 The Committee further observe that election of
PRIs is a Constitutional process and every year
a number of newly elected representatives may
add to the persons requiring training making
the task rather more difficult. In view of this
scenario, there is an urgent need to have a
regular system of training. In this direction
certain initiatives are being taken by the
Ministry. The Committee would recommend for
early finalisation of the strategy for imparting
training to such a large numbers of PRIs. The
Committee may be kept apprised of the status
of finalisation of the issue as stated above in
due course.
9. 2.27 The Committee further find that at present the
period of training imparted to PRIs is between
2-5 days. The Committee appreciate the fact
that different days of training may be required
for different levels of PRIs. For example for a
newly elected representative, there is need of
exhaustive training, but for an old
representative who has the experience of
holding such office, the training period may be
for fewer days. Still the Committee are of the
firm opinion that two to five days are
insufficient to impart training which includes a
lot of issues like transparency, accountability ,
PESA, Right to Information Act and the
knowledge of the important Centrally
Sponsored Schemes/Programmes. Even the
Secretary, Panchayati Raj has also agreed that
the said period of training is not adequate. The
Committee therefore recommend that while
deciding the module for training, it should be
ensured that sufficient time period is allocated
for a particular level of Panchayati Raj
representative/functionary. While deciding the
strategy for training, the Ministry may take into
consideration the concerns of the Committee
in this regard.

74
12 3
10. 2.28 Besides deciding the module of imparting
training, an important issue which needs to be
addressed critically is the infrastructure for
training. Apart from the issues related to
training which have been dealt with in the next
part of the Report, there is an urgent  need for
accommodation and the requisite infrastructure
for training. The Committee feel that the
existing infrastructure available with Panchayats
like Panchayat Ghars  which can be utilised for
the purpose is quite inadequate. There is an
urgent need to collect the data base in this
regard and augment the infrastructure.
11. 2.29 As regards, the issue of trainers, the Committee
feel that NIRD and SIRD may not be equipped
sufficiently to meet the need for a large number
of trainers. The Ministry has informed that they
have a system of training of tutors which can
address the problem of paucity of trained
tutors. The Committee would like to be
informed about the details of the system
indicating how the trainers are being tutored.
Besides the data as to how many trainers could
be tutored and the field to which these trained
tutors belong may be furnished to the
Committee to enable them to analyse the
system.
12. 2.30 The Committee also note that satellite
communication is being used by rural public
to interact with their Panchayat Members in
Karnataka. This is a laudable initiative as it
provides a medium for people at the grassroots
level to get a quick solution to their problems
by specialised resource-persons. The Committee
appreciate this initiative and recommend that
the Ministry should frame the feasibility of
undertaking similar exercise in all parts of the
country. Moreover the Central Ministry can also
be connected to this network and can interact

75
12 3
with all people at given intervals of time. The
Committee are of the opinion that this medium
can be used for twin purposes of interacting
with PRI functionaries as also for imparting
training. This would greatly reduce costs as
well as tackle the problem of training.
13. 2.45 The Committee find that the overall aim of Part
IX is to endow the Panchayats with such
powers and responsibilities as may be necessary
to enable them to function successfully as
institutions of self-government, as per Article
243G of the Constitution. State Legislatures
have been empowered to endow Panchayats by
low with such powers and authority as may
be necessary to enable them to prepare plans
for economic development and social justice
and implement schemes for economic
development and social justice, including those
in relation to the matters contained in the
Eleventh Schedule.
14. 2.46 The Committee in their reports have repeatedly
been expressing concern about the slow
progress of devolution of funds, functions and
functionaries to Panchayati Raj Institutions.
Besides, the Committee feel that endowing
Panchayats with certain functions is fruitful
only if the Panchayats are equipped with
trained functionaries and adequate finances are
also made available to them. Thus devolution
of functions has to be matched by devolution
of funds and functionaries. The Committee in
their 37th Report have reviewed the position
in detail in this regard and found that only
one State viz. Karnataka has transferred funds,
functions and functionaries for all the 29
subjects enlisted in the Eleventh Schedule.
Other States like Kerala and West Bengal are
doing well. To have an exact idea of the work
done with regard to devolution of funds,

76
12 3
functions and functionaries, the Ministry should
furnish to the Committee the latest status in
this regard. The Committee further appreciate
the work done by the Ministry to ensure the
devolution in the true spirit of Article 243G of
the Constitution, whereby a lot of work by way
of high level interaction with the State
governments has been done by the Ministry in
spite of this, there is not considerable
improvement in the number of subjects
devolved by the various State Governments as
could be seen from the comparison of
Appendices I & II  (which indicate the status of
devolution as on 15.03.2006 and 29.06.2005).
There is improvement in the number of subjects
devolved in the States of Guajrat and
Maharashtra. But the devolution by some of
the States such as Haryana where the number
of functions has decreased from 16 to 10 and
Madhya Pradesh where the number of subjects
decreased from 25 to 23 is a major area of
concern. The Committee find that one of the
resolutions adopted in the Round Table
Conference was that devolution could be routed
through legislative measures or alternatively by
providing a strong legislative framework for
devolution through executive orders. The
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to
ensure that the various resolutions adopted in
different Round Table Conferences where the
State Governments are also represented are
strictly implemented. The Ministry should
motivate the State Governments as well as take
some strict actions in this regard.
15. 2.47 The erstwhile Committee on Urban and Rural
Development in their 37th Report (13th Lok
Sabha) had noted that a Task Force was
constituted by the Ministry to prepare an
activity mapping with regard to responsibilities
to be devolved to the three-tiers of Panchayats.

77
12 3
The Committee had noted that State
Governments/Union Territories administration
had been advised to complete devolution of
powers upon Panchayats by 31 March, 2002.
Further it has been mentioned by the Ministry
that a deadline for States to complete the
activity mapping was set for 31 March, 2005
and later extended to 30 June, 2005. The current
status of activity mapping indicates that only
four States i.e. The States of Kerala, Karnataka,
West Bengal and Manipur have managed to
satisfactorily complete the task of activity
mapping. Though the States of Gujarat,
Haryana and Chhattisgarh have achieved some
progress in respect to activity mapping, yet a
large number of States are lagging behind.
While expressing their concern at the slow pace
of activity mapping, the Committee urged the
Government to impress upon the State
Governments the need to complete this
important task with a sense of urgency .
16. 2.48 The Committee find that inspite of holding as
many as 7 Round Table Conferences and
adopting as many as 150 action points
pertaining to 18 dimensions of Panchayati Raj
unanimously at the conclusion of the last
Round Table Conference in Jaipur, the way the
Ministry has tried to respond to certain issues
is far from satisfactory. At many places the
Ministry has attributed the reasons for slow
progress with regard to devolution of funds,
functions and functionaries and activity
mapping to the Panchayati Raj being a State
subject. While appreciating the fact that various
State Governments have to implement the
provisions in pursuance of Article 243 G in their
respective laws, the Committee wish to
emphasise that implementation of Part IX of
the Constitution is the responsibility of the

78
12 3
Union Government. The Committee therefore
recommend for more serious and concerted
initiatives by the Ministry to give focused
attention to the implementation of the various
provisions of Part IX of the Constitution.
17. 2.51 The Committee note that the ‘Bharat Nirman
Programme’ seeks to build an effective rural
infrastructure in which the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj is an important partner. The
Ministry outlined the role it could play to the
National Committee on Rural Infrastructure
chaired by the Prime Minister. The Committee
note that this body has duly recognized the
significance of Panchayats in the
implementation of the Bharat Nirman
Programme. The Committee on Rural
Infrastructure has asked the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj to discuss and receive the
feedback regarding this aspect from other
concerned Ministries. The Ministry accordingly
in consultation with the concerned Ministries
worked out the details of the institutional
structure proposed for involvement of
Panchayats in respect of each item in Bharat
Nirman Scheme. Specific formulation that
emerged from the discussion with the Ministries
were discussed in the group of Secretaries
chaired by Member Secretary, Planning
Commission on 1 March, 2006. The outcome of
these deliberations has been placed before the
National Committee on Rural Infrastructure for
consideration.
18. 2.52 The Committee feel that since Bharat Nirman
Programme seeks to revamp the entire rural
sector infrastructure, there is an urgent need to
provide a central role to Panchayats. The
Committee therefore recommend that concrete
steps should be taken by the Ministry to secure
a central role for Panchayts in Bharat Nirman

79
12 3
Programme. They would like the Ministry
apprise the Committee about the follow up
action in this regard.
19. 2.57 The Committee find that the constitution of
District Planning Committees is a mandatory
provision of Part IX of the Constitution. Even
after elapse of more than 14 years of the
enactment of Part IX of the Constitution, in as
many as 10 States viz  Andhra Pradesh,
Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Jharkhand,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Tripura, Uttar
Pradesh and Uttaranchal, DPCs have not been
constituted. Besides in Assam and Manipur, the
DPCs have not been constituted for all the
districts. Not only that, the Committee are
surprised to observe from the information
provided by the Ministry that no legal
provision with regard to constitution of DPCs
exist in the States of Gujarat, Arunachal
Pradesh, Tripura and Orissa. The Committee
would like to stress that District Palanning
Committees are an important mechanism
enshrined in Part IX of the Constitution to
consolidate the plans prepared by Panchayats
and Municipalities. As per strategy worked out
for the 11th Plan it is proposed to reorient the
planning process to ensure that plans are built
from the level of each Gram Panchayat
upwards in a participative manner. In view of
this the Committee fail to understand how the
objectives set by the Ministry would be
achieved in the absence of constitution of
District Planning Committees by many of the
State Governments. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend to the Government to find
out ways and means whereby State
Governments could be impressed upon to
implement the various provisions of Part IX of
the Constitution so that the objective of
decentralization as envisaged in the
Constitution can be achieved.

80
12 3
20. 2.64 The Committee note that Rs. 20,000 crore
payable during 2005–2010 has been
recommended by the 12th Finance Commission
to supplement the resources of the Panchayati
Raj Institutions. Whereas one year has already
passed since the grants were due, the Ministry
is encountering obstacles in the way of release
of funds as the States are delaying details of
allocation of these funds at all three levels as
aggregated up to district level as required in
the guidelines. A Monitoring Committee has
been set up to supervise the monitoring of the
releases of local body grants to Panchayats. The
said Committee is holding meetings. Besides
the Ministry has also taken up the matter
individually with all Chief Secretaries of States
requesting them to forward the requisite
information to the Ministry of Finance so as to
ensure that funds are released to the local
bodies.
The Committee would like the Ministry to
further pursue with the State governments so
that the grants envisaged by the 12th Finance
Commission could be released to supplement
the resources of Panchayati Raj Institutions. The
Committee further note that the first and
second instalments of Twelfth Finance
Commission outlay was released to the State
Governments The Ministry has also stated that
the details of utilisation of funds is not available
as of now. The Committee would like the
Ministry to get the information from the State
Governments and furnish to the Committee.
Further the Committee would also like to be
apprised of the name of State Governments
which are delaying the information with regard
to the allocation of these funds at all three level
as aggregated up to the district level due to
which the release of funds is being delayed by
the State Governments.

81
12 3
21. 3.3 The Committee find that out of allocation of
Rs. 19.40 crore for the scheme ‘Panchayat
Development and Training’ during the year
2005-2006 Rs. 19.36 crore has already been
utilised. This training involves the components
of various schemes of the different Ministries.
Besides NIRD and SIRD have been identified
as the main institutions for imparting training.
For these institutions also the Department of
Rural Development has certain specific
allocations. Besides this, certain State
Governments may also have some training
schemes. If the allocation of all these schemes
of different Ministries and State Governments
are added together, the allocation for training
may be immense. In view of this scenario, the
Committee feel that the resource constraint for
training is not the major area of concern. Rather
there is an urgent need for having some
coordinated approach with regard to providing
training to Panchayati Raj Institutions. While
noting that training is the basic input for the
successful implementation of different Centrally
Sponsored Schemes, the Committee strongly
recommend to the Ministry to find out ways
and means how the funds allocated for training
under various schemes of the different
Ministries can be coordinated and apprise the
Committee accordingly alongwith the
mechanism for training to PRIs.
22. 3.4 As indicated in a preceding para of the report,
the data with regard to elected representatives
of three-tiers of Panchayats when added
together comes to 21,95,610. However, in the
Annual Report (2005-2006) of the Ministry, the
said data has been indicated as 31 lakh elected
representatives. The Ministry may clarify the
position with regard to the number of elected
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions
and inform the Committee.

82
12 3
23. 3.9 The Committee are glad to note that the entire
outlay of Rs. 9.20 crore for the scheme of giving
awards to best panchayats was utilised. They
also find that the States of Kerala, Karnataka
and Sikkim have been awarded the First,
Second and Third prizes respectively during the
year 2005-2006. This is in recognition of their
having achieved the parameters set for this
award satisfactorily. The Committee recommend
that greater publicity be given to this scheme
so that Panchayats at all levels are encouraged
to strive for these awards.
24. 3.13 The Committee note that under ‘Panchayat
Development and Research’ out of an allocation
of Rs. 2 crore for 2005-06, the Ministry has
showed an utilisation of Rs. 1.91 crore. During
the said period the Training and Research
Advisory Committee of the Ministry is stated
to have considered 54 proposals out of which
23 were approved. All the approved projects
are at various stages of implementation. On
receipt of the reports, the Ministry would
undertake impact assessment studies. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the
follow up of these projects and also the
outcome of the impact assessment study in due
course. The Committee further find that the
Ministry has identified certain thrust areas to
prioritise studies. The Committee recommend
that studies on the prioritised areas should be
taken up at the earliest.
25. 3.17 The Committee note that out of the allocation
of Rs. 2 crore under the component of
Conferences/Seminars/Workshops, Rs. 1.3 crore
i.e. 67 per cent of the allocation was utilized
during 2005-2006. The Committee also note that
this amount was utilised in high level meetings
and Conferences (represented by State Ministers
of Panchayati Raj, Chief Secretaries of States

83
12 3
and State Panchayati Raj Secretaries). Though
Panchayats exist at the grass root level no
interaction of the higher officials with the
Panchayats appear to have taken place. Besides
no workshop where the grass root level
Panchayati Raj functionaries could represent
were undertaken during this period. Since all
actions of the Government are eventually
implemented and aimed at the micro level,
interaction between officials and grass root level
functionaries should be more vigorous. The
Committee therefore recommend that the
Ministry should evolve a mechanism whereby
they can have direct inter-action with people
at micro level at regular intervals of time.
26. 3.20 The Committee note that the outlay for IT and
IEC was fully utilized during 2005-2006. The
Committee would like to point out for such a
vast network of PRIs as exists in India,
e-governance is the best option for establishing
an interface between the Central/State
Ministries and actual functionaries at Panchayat
level. The Committee would like to recommend
that in the present day scenario where IT has
reached such a high degree of advancement the
Ministry should take full advantage of it and
promote its maximum use. This would not only
lead to greater transparency but increase
accountability as well.
27. 3.21 The Committee note that under IEC the
Ministry creates awareness of the powers and
responsibilities of Panchayats. The Committee
would like to point out that the dissemination
of information is primary to effective
governance. It is vital that people receive
accurate information through various sources
regarding the various developmental initiatives
to ensure their success. The Committee would
like to recommend that the Ministry should

84
12 3
look beyond Doordarshan and DAVP for
publicity purposes. They should also explore
other interactive media for the same. The
Ministry should encourage the use of local
language and traditional media such as drama,
song and dance as it would create a grater
impact among the masses.
28. 3.23 The Committee note that out of the allocation
of Rs. 5 crore under ‘Projects Assisted by UN
agencies’ the Ministry has managed to utilise
Rs. 4.7 crore during 2005-2006. The Committee
further note that the Ministry in collaboration
with the UNDP is undertaking several projects
with a view to improving the Panchayati Raj
system. UNDP has also funded a study on
jurisprudence of Panchayati Raj Institutions
which is being implemented by Rural Litigation
and Entitlement Kendra (RLEK) and the
Institute of Social Studies (ISS) New Delhi. The
Report of the study has been reviewed by the
Ministry and the task force on Jurisprudence is
examining the report. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the main findings of the
said study and the views of the task force
therein. Further the Ministry with the assistance
of UNDP is also assisting one study on gender
sensitization and reproductive health etc. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of
the findings of the said study.
29. 3.30 The Committee note from the position as
indicated above that Rashtriya Sam Vikas
Yojana, a scheme meant for the upliftment of
backward districts was approved in the year
2004-05 and was actually implemented during
the year 2005-06. The scheme was under the
administrative control of Planning Commission.
During 2005-06 the releases for Rs. 3,257 crore
were made to 147 districts identified as
backward districts. The criteria for allocation

85
12 3
to each district was Rs. 45 crore per district.
The allocation was to be made at the rate of
Rs. 15 crore per year. It seems from the data
that the first instalment of Rs. 15 crore to
147 districts has been released by the Planning
Commission under RSVY. Further the
Committee note that RSVY now has been
subsumed into ‘Backward Regions Grant Fund’
which is under the administrative control of
Ministry of Panchayati Raj. Hon’ble Finance
Minister in his Budget speech for the year
2006-07 has informed that Rs. 5,000 crore is
being allocated for Backward Regions Grant
Fund during the year 2006-07 and the amount
would be released in the coming four years.
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has further
clarified that out of Rs. 5,000 crore, Rs. 3,750
crore are under the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
and the remaining provision of Rs. 1,250 crore
is meant for the special plans for Bihar and
KBK districts of Orissa to be handled by the
Planning Commission. The Committee
disapprove of the fragmented approach of the
Government in handling one of the important
schemes meant for the backward districts and
shifting it from one Ministry to the other. The
Committee would like to strongly recommend
to the Government that the scheme should be
transferred wholly to one Ministry .
30. 3.31 Further with regard to the transfer of the
scheme from Planning Commission to Ministry
of Panchayati Raj the bigger concern is to
monitor the funds allocated under the earlier
scheme i.e. RSVY. It has been stated that Rs. 45
crore was to be released to each district under
RSVY. Out of Rs. 45 crore, Rs. 15 crore has
already been released and now under the new
scheme i.e. Backward Regions Grant Fund the
allocation will be made for five years. Besides
the Committee also note that the Ministry of

86
12 3
Panchayati Raj is formulating new mechanism
and guidelines in the scheme Backward Regions
Grant Fund. In this scenario, the Committee
strongly recommend to the Department to find
out some mechanism to coordinate the newly
named scheme i.e. Backward Regions Grant
Fund with the allocations made under the
earlier scheme i.e. RSVY so that the real
objective of bringing the backward districts at
par with the progressive districts by providing
social and economic infrastructure is really
achieved.
31. 3.36 The Committee find that four schemes:
(i) Training and Capacity Building, (ii) Research
Studies, (iii) Information Technology, and
(iv) Infrastructure Development implemented by
the Ministry have been brought under one
scheme i.e. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Yojana. The
allocation during the year 2006-07 for this
scheme is Rs. 50.50 crore. The Committee
appreciate the objectives of the scheme
according to which the real issues involved
with the capacity building of Panchayats i.e.
improving the infrastructure, augmenting
technical staff and competence, training,
e-governance would be handled by one scheme.
Besides a format is being circulated to the States
for collecting the basic data of the existing
capacity of each Panchayat. The Committee
would like to be informed of the progress made
in the implementation of this scheme.
32. 3.42 The Committee note that the Ministry has
launched a new scheme viz . Panchayat
Empowerment Incentives Scheme meant to
reward the State Governments which are
serious on the issue of implementation of
various provisions of Part IX of the
Constitution. Seven reform areas based on
which the incentives will be provided to State

87
12 3
Governments have been identified. The
Committee are glad to observe that as many
as 8 States namely Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Karnataka, Kerala, Orissa, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh
and West Bengal have come forward by putting
proposals to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. The
Committee hope that the initiatives taken by
the Ministry would motivate State Governments
to really empower the Panchayati Raj
Institutions.
33. 3.48 The Committee note that the ‘Scheme for
Media, Publicity and Advocacy’ which has been
newly launched includes components of the
erstwhile Panchayat Development and Training
Scheme. This scheme is intended to empower
the community and PRIs with knowledge about
their roles and responsibilities keeping in mind
the tents of the 73rd Constitution (Amendment)
Act, 1992 and the Right to Information Act.
Though guidelines of this scheme are yet to be
finalised, the Government has drafted a media
policy and the views of the Ministry of the
Information and Broadcasting are being
solicited. Further the Ministry proposes to set
up a Media Advisory Group for monitoring this
scheme. The Committee would like to
recommend here that the guidelines of the
scheme be finalised in the shortest possible time
so that the pattern of allocation and utilisation
of the earmarked outlay can be done
meaningfully. Further the Committee would like
to be informed of the views of the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting on the media
policy. The Committee note that this scheme is
to be monitored by a Media Advisory Group
headed by the Minister of Panchayati Raj. They
would like to be apprised of the composition
of the Media Advisory Group and any action
taken by it.

88
12 3
34. 3.50 The Committee have been informed that the
Ministry is making efforts to ensure the success
of Rural Business Hubs with Public Private
Panchayat Partnership. This initiative will on
the one hand enable better market access for
locally available resources and skills and on the
other hand it will involve Panchayats at all
levels as facilitators, which would enhance their
scope as well as bring about definite economic
gains. The Committee hope that such efforts
are continued further. The Committee would
also like to be kept apprised of the progress
regarding the new initiatives undertaken.
35. 3.54 The Committee note that the Jan Kerosene
Pariyojana is a novel initiative launched with
the joint efforts of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
with a view to minimise adulteration of
subsidised kerosene and preventing diversion
of PDS supply of kerosene to black market.
The Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies is
entrusted with the framing of guidelines. The
pilot project of this initiative has been launched
in about 458 blocks across the country. Further,
awareness campaigns are being organised in
various media in the local language to create
greater impact. The Committee appreciate the
efforts of the Government to secure a central
role for Panchayats in such developmental
initiatives. The Committee would like to be
informed of the progress in respect to this
project and whether the Government intends
to cover the entire country by this scheme.