10
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
TENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.4.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 19.4.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Chaitra, 1927 (Saka)


C.R.D. No. 013
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory ............................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Analysis of the overall allocation of the
Department of Land Resources............................ 4
CHAPTER III Scheme-wise Evaluation ......................................... 28
APPENDICES
I. Statement showing Budget Estimates, Revised
Estimates and Actual Expenditure during 9th
Plan by the Department of Land Resources..... 60
II. Statement showing proposed outlay, outlay
agreed to, total release, Budget Estimate, Revised
Estimate and Actual Expenditure, during 10th
Plan by the Department of Land Resources..... 62
III. Overall position of the proposed, agreed to
allocation during 9th and 10th Plan ................... 64
IV . State-wise Wastelands of India ............................. 65
V. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 29 March, 2005 ................................................... 68
VI. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 8 April, 2005........................................................ 70
VII. Statement of Observations/Recommendations..... 72

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
Shri Kalyan Singh —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri L. Ganesan
5. Shri Mohan Jena
6. Shri Shrichand Kriplani
7. Shri Subhash Maharia
8. Shri Hannan Mollah
9. Shri Dawa Narbula
10. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
11. Shri K.C. Palanisamy
12. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
13. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
14. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
15. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
16. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
17. Shri Mohan Singh
18. Shri Sita Ram Singh
19. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
20. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
21. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
23. Shri Ghanshyam Chandra Kharwar
24. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
25. Shri Penumalli Madhu
(iii)

(iv)
26. Vacant @
27. Shri Kalraj Mishra
28. Dr. Chandan Mitra
29. Vacannt*
30. Dr. Faguni Ram
31. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
@Vice Shri Stephen Marandi, ceased to be a member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 16 March,
2005 consequent upon his election to the Jharkhand Legislative Assembly vide
Rajya Sabha Secretariat notification No. RS. 10/2005-T, dated 11 April, 2005.
*Vice Shri Keshubhai S. Patel ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 22 March,
2005 consequent upon his resignation from the membership of Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

ABBREVIATIONS
BE — Budget Estimates
BPL — Below Poverty Line
CAPART — Council for Advancement of People’s Action and
Rural Technology
CLR — Computerisation of Land Records
CRS — Centre for Rural Studies
CSIR — Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
DDP — Desert Development Programme
DFID — Department for International Development
DOAC — Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
DoLR — Department of Land Resources
DoWD — Department of Wastelands Development
DPAP — Drought Prone Areas Programme
DRDA — District Rural Development Agency
EAS — Employment Assurance Scheme
EFC — Expenditure Finance Committee
IAY — Indira Awaas Yojana
ICAR — Indian Council for Agricultural Research
IPS — Investment Promotional Scheme
IWDP — Integrated Wastelands Development Programme
LBSNAA — Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration
NABARD — National Bank of Agriculture and Rural
Development
NALRM — National Agency on Land Resources Management
NIC — National Informatics Centre
NIRD — National Institute of Rural Development
NGO — Non-Governmental Organisation
NRSA — National Remote Sensing Agency
NWDB — National Wastelands Development Board
(v)

PIA — Project Implementation Agency
PMGJSY — Pradhan Mantri Grameen Jal Samvardhan Yojana
PRIs — Panchayati Raj Institutions
RE — Revised Estimates
SAUs — State Agriculture Universities
SGSY — Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
SGHs — Self-Help Groups
SRA & ULR — Str engthening of Revenue Administration and
Updating of Land Records
TDET — Technology Development Extension and Training
TERI — The Energy and Resources Institute
UGs — User Groups
UT — Union territory
WA —W atershed Association
WC — Watershed Committee
WDF — Watershed Development Fund
ZP — Zilla Parishad
(vi)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Rural Development
(2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Tenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural
Development).
2. Demands for Grants have been examined by the Committee
under Rule 331E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) on
29 March, 2005.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 8 April, 2005.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
for placing before them the requisite material and their considered
views in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. They would also like to place on record their deep sense of
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 April, 2005 Chairman,
25 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.
(vii)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The Ministry of Rural Development consists of three Departments
(i) Department of Rural Development (ii) Department of Land Resources
and (iii) Department of Drinking Water Supply.
Responsibility of the Government
1.2 The Department of Land Resources implements schemes for
development of non-forest wastelands and degraded lands and other
area development programmes such as Desert Development Programme
and Drought Prone Areas Programme to increase bio-mass production
as also to create opportunities for providing rural employment. It also
implements scheme for Technology Development Extension and
Training. Besides, the Department also monitors implementation of land
reform measures and implement the scheme of Modernisation of
Revenue and Land Administration.
Functions of the Department
1.3 The following functions have been assigned to the Department
of Land Resources:
(i) National Land Use and Wasteland Development Council;
(ii) Pr omotion of Rural Employment through Wastelands
Development;
(iii) Promotion of production of fuel-wood, fodder and timber
on non-forest lands, including private wastelands;
(iv) Research and development of appropriate low cost
technologies for increasing productivity of wastelands in
sustainable ways;
(v) Inter-departmental and inter-disciplinary coordination in
programme planning and implementation of the Wastelands
Development Programme including training;

2
(vi)  Promotion of people’s participation and public cooperation
and co-ordination of efforts of Panchayats and other
voluntary and non-Government agencies for Wastelands
Development;
(vii)  Area specific development programmes to counter endemic
problems due to adverse climatic conditions and
degeneration of the eco-system (DPAP , DDP);
(viii) Administration of Land Acquisition Act, 1894;
(ix)  Exa mination of Central and State Legislations on
Acquisition and Requisition of Properties;
(x)  Examination of other land laws;
(xi)  National Policy on Resettlement & Rehabilitation;
(xii)  Distribution of ceiling surplus land;
(xiii)  Distribution of Government wastelands and Bhoodan land;
(xiv)  Conferment of Ownership Rights to tenants;
(xv)  Prevention of alienation and restoration of alienated tribal
land; and
(xvi)  Consolidation of land holdings;
1.4 The Department of Land Resources comprises of two divisions
namely Wastelands Development Division and Land Reforms Division
and implements the following important programmes under these
divisions:
1. Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP);
2. Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP);
3. Desert Development Programme (DDP);
4. Modernisation of Revenue and Land Administration;
(a) Computerisation of Land Records (CLR); and
(b) Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating
of Land Records (SRA & ULR).
5. Technology Development, Extension and Training Scheme
(TDET);

3
1.5 The overall Demands for Grants of the Department for the
year 2005-2006 are Rs. 1,399.44 crore both for plan and non-plan.
1.6 The Demands for Grants of the Department were presented to
Lok Sabha under Demand No. 80.
1.7 The detailed Demands for Grants of the Department were laid
in Lok Sabha on 18 March, 2005.
1.8 In the present Report, the Committee have restricted their
examination only to the major issues concerning the over – all analysis
of the Department with regard to programmes/schemes being
implemented by the Department in the context of the Demands for
Grants 2005-2006.

CHAPTER II
ANALYSIS OF THE OVERALL ALLOCATION OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES (MINISTRY
OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
The information regarding 9th Plan (1997–2002) outlay and
expenditure, 10th Plan (2002–2007) outlay as proposed by the
Department and as agreed to by Planning Commission, BE, RE and
actual expenditure during 2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 (upto
22.03.2005) and BE 2005-2006 overall as well as scheme-wise has been
indicated in Appendices – I & II .
2.2 The following analysis of the comparative position of outlay
during 9th and 10th Plans for plan and non-plan can be made:
Plan + Non-Plan (Rs. in Crore)
The 9th Plan (1997–2002)
Outlay 2769.90
Actual expenditure  2479.11
Underspending  290.79
The 10th Plan (2002–2007)
Proposed outlay 5965.00
Agreed to outlay 6526.00
Difference between proposed and agreed
to outlay +561.00
2.3 Year-wise BE, RE, cut at RE stage, actual expenditure
and underspending during first three years of the 10th Plan
(2002–2007) viz. 2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 as also proposed,
4

5
agreed outlay and BE for fourth year (2005-2006) of the 10th Plan are
as under:
(Plan + Non-Plan) (Rs. in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Cut at Actual Under
R.E. stage Expenditure spending
as compared
to RE
10th Plan (2002–2007)
2002-2003 1003.81  953.62  50.19 919.87  33.75
(1st Year)
2003-2004 1053.66  953.43 100.23 957.28 —
(2nd year)
2004-2005 1264.48 1053.43 211.05    1010.61(Plan) 42.82
(3rd year) (releases
upto
31.03.2005)
2005-2006
(4th year)
Proposed Agreed B.E. Difference
Outlay Outlay (between proposed
and agreed outlay)
1588 1396 1399.44 188.56
(including
Rs. 3.44 crore
under non-plan)
2.4 The following conclusions can be drawn by analysing the
aforesaid data:
(1) The outlay of the 10th Plan is more than two times of the
allocation made during the 9th Plan;
(2) The Department has got Rs. 561 crore more than what was
proposed during 10th Plan;
(3) Underspending is the recurrent feature during 9th Plan and
during 1st and 3rd year of 10th Plan;

6
(4) Whatever is allocated at BE stage is further reduced at RE
stage;
(5) Although 10th Plan outlay is more than what was proposed,
the outlay earmarked during 2005-2006 is Rs. 188.56 crore
lesser than what was proposed;
(6) Although 3 years of the 10th Plan are already over, the
expenditure position indicates that around 
1/2 of the total
resources were utilised; and
(7) The expenditure position during 2004-2005 is also not very
encouraging leaving an under spending of Rs. 42.82 crore.
2.5 The reasons for under-utilisation during 9th Plan have been
submitted by the Department as under:
“The under utilisation of funds during the 9th Plan was because
(i) the grounding of projects under the new guidelines of Watershed
Development, which envisaged a high level of community
participation for planning, implementation, monitoring, etc. of the
projects took time. The development of community organisations
and institutional mechanisms like Watershed Associations,
Watershed Committee, Watershed Development Team, Self-Help
Group, User Group, etc. is a time consuming process and caused
delay in take off of the projects. (ii) The cuts imposed by the
Ministry of Finance in the Budget outlay of the Department were
quite substantial and led to lower release of funds. (iii) The funds
earmarked for North Eastern States could not be fully released
due to non-submission of proposals and poor fund absorption
capacity.”
2.6 While the detailed analysis of each of the scheme has been
done in the succeeding chapters of the Report, the overall position of
the proposed, agreed to allocation during each year of 9th and 10th
Plan is at Appendix –III .
2.7 While analysing the data as indicated at Appendix III , the
following is observed:
(i) Although the overall agreed to allocation during 10th Plan
is more than what was proposed, the same is not the
position when outlay for individual schemes is analysed.
The agreed to outlay is more due to Rs.1,000 crore
earmarked for ‘New Initiatives’;

7
(ii) The comparative position of outlay during 9th and 10th
Plan scheme-wise indicate that in each of the schemes of
the Department there is considerable hike. In DPAP , DDP ,
CLR, SRA & ULR and TDET, the outlay has almost been
doubled.
2.8 The Committee during the course of examination pointed out
that as against budget estimates for 2005-2006 of Rs. 1,399.44 both for
plan and non-plan, Rs.1,053.43 crore were the revised estimate for the
previous year showing an increase of Rs. 346.01 crore over the previous
year. When Committee wanted to know the details of programmes/
schemes for which enhanced funds were made available, the
Department in a written note stated as under:
“The broad programmes/schemes of DoLR for which enhanced
funds have been made in the outlay of 2005-2006 over the previous
year 2004-2005 are given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of the Programme Outlay Outlay Percentage of
(2004-05) (2005-06) increase
1. Integrated Wastelands Development
Programme 448.00 565.00 26.12
2. Drought Prone Areas Programme 300.00 353.00 17.67
3. Desert Development Programme 215.00 268.00 24.65
4. Computerization of Land Records 50.00 100.00 100.00
5. Strengthening of Revenue Administration
and Updating of Land Records 20.00 40.00 100.00
6. Technology Development, Extension
and Training 15.00 17.00 13.33
7. Bio Fuels 10.00 50.00 400.00
The increment in respect of watershed/wasteland programmes i.e.
IWDP , DPAP and DDP are around 26, 18 and 25 per cent
respectively for meeting the liabilities of on-going projects and
sanctioning of new projects. The outlays of CLR and SRA & ULR
schemes are doubled for taking up additional activities such as
survey with the use of modern survey equipment and mapping

8
techniques, improvement in infrastructure facilities, etc. States will
also require additional funds for completion of data entry work,
organization of training programmes for revenue staff, covering of
additional tehsils/taluks/blocks, setting up of monitoring cells at
State Headquarters, etc.
Under the Bio Fuel Scheme, a tentative outlay of Rs.10 crore was
earmarked during the year (2004-05). However, the preparation of
DPR and subsequent clearance of the scheme by Planning
Commission, EFC, etc. is likely to be obtained during the financial
year (2005-2006) and hence a provision of Rs. 50 crore has been
made.”
2.9 As per the information furnished by the Department a lump-
sum provision of Rs. 140 crore representing 10 per cent of the Plan
Outlay has been earmarked for the North-Eastern States out of the
total budget allocation of Rs. 1,396 crore made for the Department of
Land Resources during 2005-2006. The allocation scheme-wise as
furnished by the Department indicate that 10 per cent allocation to
North-East is not scheme specific. Lump-sum 10 per cent of the total
outlay of the Deparment is earmarked to North-Eastern States.
2.10 Clarifying about the reasons for underspending in respective
schemes during 2004-2005, the Secretary, during evidence stated as
under:
“In the Drought Prone Areas programme this year out of Rs. 300
crore we have spent Rs. 297.45 crore and remaining amount will
be spent in the remaining days of the current year. Entire amount
would be utilised. In Desert Development Programme there would
be 100 per cent utilisation. In IWDP we are unable to utilise
Rs. 34 crore reason being 10 per cent is earmarked for North-East.
We have spoken a number of times to the concerned Ministry that
since DPAP and DDP programmes are not being run in all the
States but in selected blocks in a few States. We told them there
is no need of earmarking 10 per cent for North-East. However,
they have not accepted it till now. We have not received any
proposal from their side. Therefore, this amount of Rs. 34 crore is
not being spent. This matter is to be considered by the Committee
and they may recommend that some amount should be earmarked
for Drought Prone Areas Programme.”

9
2.11 In reply to another question, the Ministry furnished the
scheme-wise releases for 2004-2005 as on 31 March, 2005 as follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Scheme BE RE Expenditure
Integrated Wastelands Development Programme 448.00 448.00 414.42
Drought Prone Areas  Programme 300.00 300.00 300.19
Desert Development  Programme 215.00 215.00 215.19
Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) 50.00 50.00 45.62
Strengthening of Revenue Adm. and Updating of
Land Records 20.00 20.00 19.66
Technology, Development, Extension & Training 15.00 15.00 14.99
Pradhan Mantri Grameen Jal Samvardhan Yojana 200.00 — —
Bio-fuels 10.00 0.20 —
Others 3.00 1.80 0.54
Total (Plan) 1261.00 1050.00 1010.61
2.12 The Committee note that the concept of allocation of 10 per
cent exclusive outlay of each Department/Ministry of the Union
Government for North Eastern Region including Sikkim was started
since 2000-2001. After that, whenever the attention of the Department
has been drawn towards underspending, a common reply stating
that allocation for two area specific programmes DDP and DPAP is
being made every year, whereas these schemes are not in operation
in these States has been furnished. The Committee while noting the
concept of allocation for North Eastern Region find that 10 per cent
lump-sum allocation of the overall outlay of a Department is
earmarked exclusively for these areas. No scheme-wise allocation is
being made. If that is the state of affairs, the Committee fail to
understand the logic of the Department in this regard. The Committee
feel that instead of furnishing such reasons, the Department should
stress for increasing the scope of the schemes viz IWDP and land
records. The position of land records in said States is very poor and
hence need more attention. The detailed analysis in this regard has
been done in the subsequent part of the report. Here the Committee
would like to emphasise that the outlay can be used for this sector

10
after having consultations with the concerned State Governments.
The Committee would like the Department to explain the position
in view of their aforesaid observation so as to enable them to analyse
the position and comment further in this regard.
2.13 The Committee after analysing the data as indicated in the
aforesaid paras of the report find that Rs. 561 crore has been allocated
more than the proposed outlay during 10th Plan. Not only that, the
outlay provided during 10th Plan is more than two times of the
allocation made during 9th Plan. The scheme-wise analysis further
indicates that the allocation during 2005-06 has been increased in all
the schemes specifically under the schemes meant for computerisation
and updation of land records where the hike is 100 per cent.
However, if allocation scheme-wise is analysed in the context of
proposed allocation, the data indicate that excepting scheme meant
for land records the allocation provided is lesser than the proposed
allocation. Further if the trends of what was proposed scheme-wise
by the Department and what was eventually allocated scheme-wise
during 10th Plan is compared to 9th Plan, the data indicate that the
difference between proposed and agreed to allocation under each of
the schemes is much less as compared to 9th Plan.
2.14 With regard to the position of expenditure, the Committee
note that during 9th Plan the underspending was to the tune of Rs.
290 crore. The reasons as indicated by the Department include cut
imposed by the Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimates stage.
Further if the expenditure is compared to Revised Estimates during
9th Plan, the underspending comes to the tune of Rs. 36.48 crore.
During 10th Plan the underspending is due to lesser utilisation in
North Eastern States.
2.15 The Committee conclude from what has been stated above
that the data indicate quite a favourable performance of the
Department as compared to the other counterpart Departments of
the Ministry of Rural Development viz the Department of Rural
Development and Drinking Water Supply where the actual allocation
is far less than the proposed outlay of those Departments. The better
allocation position is also due to very good expenditure position
shown by the Department under several schemes. The allocation
and the efforts made by the Department need to be continued in a
bigger way keeping in view the gigantic task of huge areas falling
under wastelands in the country. The analysis in this regard has
been made in the subsequent part of the Report.

11
2.16 The scheme wise analysis has also been made in the
subsequent part of the report. Here the Committee may like to
highlight that the Budget documents of the Department indicate that
the releases to the State Governments/implementing agencies are
considered as spending. There is no mechanism to analyse the
performance of projects being undertaken under different schemes
due to long gestation period. Further the foreclosure of projects
specifically under watershed schemes indicate that the physical
performance of the projects may not be so satisfactory as the data
with regard to financial achievement indicate. The Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to evolve some sort of mechanism for
evaluating the performance of different projects. Some sort of grading
indicating poor, satisfactory or very good may be indicated against
the number of projects being undertaken in various States. Besides,
another mechanism can be to have some system indicating the
projects at First stage, Second stage, Third stage etc. Such type of
analysis would enable a critical evaluation of the projects. The
Committee would like the Department to consider the said aspect
and apprise the Committee accordingly.
New Initiatives
2.17 Rs.1,000 crore have been earmarked for ‘New Initiatives’
during 10th Plan. As against this, Rs. 200 crore were allocated under
‘Pradhan Mantri Grameen Jal Samvardhan Yojana’ (PMGJSY) during
2004-2005. However the utilisation was nil. Similarly during 2005-2006
a sum of Rs. 50 crore have been proposed under the scheme ‘Bio
fuel’. When asked for the reason for non-utilisation of Rs. 200 crore
under PMGJSY during 2004-2005, the Department has stated as under:
“The Planning Commission had made a lumpsum provision of
Rs.1,000 crore for ‘New Initiatives’ during the 10th Plan period
out of which Rs. 210 crore was allocated for 2004-05 (Rs. 200 crore
for PMGJSY and Rs. 10 crore for Biofuels). Two new schemes
namely Renovation of Traditional Water Bodies and Development
of Bio-Fuel were proposed to be taken up under this head. …..”
2.18 The Department in a written note further clarified as under:
“The Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance were of the view
that strengthening the water resource development component of
watershed development programmes of the Department of Land
Resources by supplementing the budget provisions of these
programme would be a better proposition rather than launching a

12
separate scheme with the same objective. It was proposed to utilise
the funds available for the purpose by supplementing the budgetary
allocations to DPAP , DDP and IWDP .”
2.19 At this the Committee further pointed out that as per the
document Implementation of Budget Announcements (2004-2005), the
Scheme Renovation of Traditional Bodies linked with Agriculture was
approved by the Government on 27th January, 2005. The Committee
wanted to know the details for which Rs. 1000 crore allocated during
10th plan for ‘New Initiatives’ were made and the reasons for
rethinking on the aforesaid new schemes Department has informed as
under:
“……In the Budget speech of the Union Finance Minister in July
2004 a massive scheme to repair, renovate and restore all the water
bodies that is directly linked to Agriculture was announced. It
was thought that PMGJSY could be tailored to this end. The Bio-
Fuel Project was taken up when this Ministry was identified as
the Nodal Ministry for processing the recommendations of the
Report of the Planning Commission on Development of Bio-Fuel.
However, when the Ministry of Water Resources was finally
identified for launching the scheme for renovation of traditional
water bodies, the proposal of this Ministry on the same subject
could not be pursued further. So far as the Development of the
Bio-Fuel Project is concerned, the same is being actively followed-
up. The Detailed Project Report (DPR) for bio-fuel is now ready
and the case is being processed for obtaining clearance from the
Planning Commission and the EFC. In this background, in the
Performance Budget for 2004-2005, the allocation for New Initiatives
was made for the Bio-Fuel Project. Nevertheless, no release/
expenditure can be booked against this allocation until the detailed
programme is approved by the EFC and the Union Cabinet.
Due to non-pursuance of the PMGJSY scheme and following the
Budget Speech of the Finance Minister in July 2004, it was proposed
to utilize the allocation available under PMGJSY for the new scheme
on renovation of traditional water bodies. This Ministry was aware
that the Ministry of Water Resources (not the Ministry of
Agriculture) was proposing to launch the same scheme as per
FM’s announcement. The idea at that time was to take up for
renovation of small village water bodies under the control of Gram
Panchayats, which do not come under the purview of the Ministry
of Water Resources/State Minor Irrigation Departments.”

13
2.20 On further enquiry regarding the justification of initiating a
scheme and allocating an outlay for a scheme under the Department
of Land Resources, which was basically related to Ministry of Water
Resources, the Ministry in a written note informed as under:
“Water harvesting and conservation is one of the thrust areas for
development under the watershed development programmes of
this Ministry. Renovation/desilting of water bodies is, therefore,
an integral component of this thrust area. Accordingly, it was felt
that a new scheme exclusively for renovation of small traditional
water bodies in the watershed areas would be appropriate to give
added thrust to the efforts already being made by the Ministry in
water harvesting and conservation. These small water bodies do
not come under the purview of the Ministry of Water Resources.”
2.21 During the course of evidence of Department of Land
Resources, the Secretary stated as under :
“The last point is about bio-fuel, the Planning Commission had
prepared a report and submitted to the then Prime Minister, who
had decided that the Department of Land Resources will be the
nodal Department for implementing the scheme. As is required,
we are following the procedure of preparing an EFC before which
we need a detailed project report. Recently, we had asked TERI to
prepare it. As soon as the scheme is sanctioned, we will be in a
position to implement it.”
2.22 A representative of the Department of Land Resources further
added:
“With the present increase in the consumption of fuel in the
country, more so with the ever increasing imports of petroleum
products, as part of energy security, the Government has decided
to implement bio-fuel project. It is already there in vogue in most
of the various countries like Europe, USA but the only difference
is that in those countries, they are making use of edible oils for
production of bio-fuel, while in our country since edible oil is
very expensive and not so easily affordable, we have decided to
go in for non-edible oils. There are several non-edible oils available
in our country. Taking into account the production of oil-seed and
oil content, we have more or less zeroed on a plant called Jatropha.
Again, a peculiar feature about Jatropha crop is that this is not a
crop whose origin is from India. It is basically from Brazil and
other countries in South America. Though we are having this crop

14
for a long period in this country, still we do not have established
research data.
Actually, this is area case where research is going to be
simultaneously done with the development of the crop programme.
It has already been mentioned that a detailed project report on
this issue has been prepared. It is stated that even to meet a 5 per
cent blending requirement of diesel we need about 2 million
hectares of land under Jatropha cultivation. As a pilot project, this
is something that has got to be done primarily by making use of
the wastelands. So, it will be a wastelands development
programme, and it will be done naturally by the farmers in this
country. It is proposed that we take up initially a demonstration
project with about 4 lakh hectares of land, and we are ready with
our plans. This plan has already been sent to the Planning
Commission for its approval. It is going to be a Rs.1,500 crore
project after we secure the necessary clearance for it. As per the
business rules further action will be taken with regard to this
issue.”
2.23 The Committee further wanted to know where the plant
variety called Jatropha is being cultivated in the country , the
representative of the Department of Land Resources clarified as under:
“It is being done in States like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, etc.”
2.24 The Committee also wanted to know about the policy with
regard to the land use for cultivation of Jatropha, whether it has to be
distributed to poor farmers so that they can grow and sell the products
to Petroleum Companies, the Secretary informed that :
“We have to ensure that the seed received after cultivation of
Jatropha is well remunerative. Therefore, we are pressurising the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to recommend a price for
bio diesel and communicate the same to us. Five rupees per kg.
of Jatropha would not be remunerative thus higher must be given.”
2.25 In reply to another question the Secretary, DoLR stated:
“This crop is not tested.”
2.26 In reply to another question whether any other plant is being
cultivated in other States, the Secretary, DoLR informed as under:
“Sir, each State has different arrangement. In Uttaranchal, the
Government has evolved a programme for developing 2 lakh

15
hectares of degraded hills by cultivating Jatropha in it. They have
formed Self-Help Groups in Van Panchayats. The Government will
give the beneficiary maintenance charge for 2 hectares of land.
The plant material will be provided free of cost to them, and
three-year maintenance cost is also provided as a subsidy to the
Self-help Groups.”
2.27 The witness further added:
“There is one Pongamia tree in South India which produces similar
kind of seed which is useful for the same purpose.”
2.28 The Committee wanted to know whether the Jatropha
cultivation require irrigation, the Secretary, Land Resources clarified as
under:
“This is the biggest problem. Today’s Jatropha plants do not require
water. However, it has been mentioned in the Report that if 5
kg.of Jatropha is made available only then the scheme would be
viable. For that irrigation is necessary. For this Rs.30,000 per hectare
would be the expenditure. This poses a question whether we should
go for Jatropha plantation with such huge expenditure.”
2.29 At this the Committee also wanted to know who will bear
the cost, the witness clarified.
“Initially the cost will be borne by the Government.”
2.30 The Committee disapprove the way the new schemes are
proposed and outlay earmarked without any planning or
preparedness on the part of the Government resulting in blockage
of outlay in the resources starved economy of the country. They
note that Rs.1,000 crore were earmarked during 10th Plan for the
‘New initiative’. The two new schemes viz (i) Renovation of
Traditional Water Bodies and (ii) Development of Bio-fuel were to
be launched. Initially Renovation of Traditional Water Bodies was
proposed to be under the Ministry of Land Resources but finally
the Ministry of Water Resources was chosen as the Ministry to handle
the aforesaid scheme. The Committee find that the handling of
watershed projects by various Ministries of the Union Government
viz Ministries of Agriculture, Water Resources and Land Resources
is the main cause of such a state of affairs. The Committee in their
earlier reports have been expressing their concern in this regard.
The issue of convergence although decided in principle, is being
delayed by the Government.

16
2.31 There is uncertainty over the fate of another new scheme
‘Bio fuel’, for which Rs. 50 crore have been allocated during 2005-
2006. The Secretary during the course of oral evidence acknowledged
that Jatropha plantation envisaged under the scheme is neither proven
nor cost effective. The use of Jatropha plant for Bio-fuel is still at
the experimental stage and TERI is preparing the project report. Not
only that, the viability of Jatropha plant and other issues relating to
its plantation like the need for irrigation, farmers willingness to
plantation etc. are still to be debated. Without examining all these
issues, the detailed Project Report (DPR) for the scheme is being
prepared for obtaining clearance from the Planning Commission.
Although it is acknowledged that no expenditure can be made under
the scheme, an allocation of Rs. 50 crore has already been made
during 2005-2006, thereby blocking the resources. While the
Committee are not against initiating novel schemes as part of energy
security like Bio fuel, they feel that before launching the scheme, its
viability should be ascertained. The technology should be tested
and proven only then the decision to launch the scheme should be
taken and allocation for the purpose provided.
2.32 In the aforesaid state of affairs the Committee express their
strong reservations on the issue of handling of new schemes. They
strongly recommend that before launching a new scheme Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance should analyse the proposals of the
concerned Ministry. Only after initial home work is done, and all
the things are ready for implementation, allocation should be made
as blockage of outlay earmarked for non-viable schemes deprives
the other established schemes of their due allocation. The Committee
strongly recommend that their concerns in this regard should be
duly communicated to the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance
and also to the Cabinet Secretariat.
Need for wastelands development in a big way
2.33 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence while
presenting the position of wastelands in the country stated as under:
“Total wastelands area is 63.85 million hectare out of which 14.06
million hactares is forest land and non-forest area is 36.98 million
hactares we can treat. Besides if we can count rocky, stony and
snow covered areas which cannot be developed. Around 30 million
hectares remains to be treated. If we make a cost norm of Rs.6,000
per hectare, it will require Rs.17,000 crore for this purpose. A sum
of Rs.1,000 crore is provided for wasteland treatment of treatable

17
wastelands area. For this we get the budget accordingly we frame
the programme.”
2.34 While examining Demands for Grants (2004-2005), it has been
indicated that the Department of Land Resources proposes to develop
40 million hectare as per the following schedule:
Sl.No. By the end of the plan Target
(in million hectare)
1. 9th Plan (1997-2002) 5
2. 10th Plan (2002-2007) 15
3. 11th Plan (2007-2012) 20
TOTAL 40
2.35 The Department of Land Resources had brought an Atlas
indicating District wise details of Wastelands. The data was generated
by employing scientific remote sensing satellite data products. On the
issue of updating of such data, the Department has informed that a
project for the purpose has been sanctioned to National Remote Sensing
Agency (NRSA) during 2002, which is nearing completion now. Further
updation of the Atlas can be taken as and when felt necessary.
2.36 On the issue of slippage of treated land again into wastelands,
the Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated that there is a
provision in the guidelines for post project maintenance.
2.37 The Committee find that total wastelands in the country is
63.85 million hectare. If forest area (under the jurisdiction of the
Ministry of Forest) and untreatable land is deducted, the total
treatable area comes to around 30 million hectares. The Committee
find that as informed earlier [reference para 2.18 of 2nd report (2004-
2005)], the Government had planned development of wastelands
amounting to 40 million hectares. Further as per Wastelands Atlas
there are varying estimates of total wastelands in the country,
however, no less than 37.5 million hectares are currently expected to
be available for viable treatment.
The Committee find from the position as given above that
perhaps there is no clarity on the issue of minimum wastelands that
could be developed in the country. The Committee would like the
Department to clarify the position in this regard since the data with

18
regard to minimum treatable wastelands is the necessary input for
future planning.
2.38 Besides the Committee find that Atlas indicating the district
wise data of wastelands by employing the scientific remote sensing
satellite data products was finalised on 9 March, 2000. Five years
have passed since then, as per Department’s reply, efforts are being
made to update the data. The Committee would like to be apprised
when the exercise of updation would be completed. Besides the
Committee also feel that there should be some mechanism to update
the data periodically so as to know how far the efforts of the
Government could result in actual treatment of land. Besides
updation of data would also make the position of slippage of treated
land again into wastelands clear.
Overall position of outlay vis-à-vis the position of coverage of
wastelands
2.39 As per the information provided by the Department the
allocation position regarding wastelands development is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
9th Plan allocation  - 2,769.90
Proposed outlay during 10th Plan  - 5,965
Agreed outlay during 10th Plan  - 6,526
The Department got Rs. 561 crore more than what was proposed.
Total projection for coverage of wastelands -
At the rate of Rs.6000 per hectare. 17,000
Average yearly allocation 1,000
2.40 During the course of examination, the Committee were
informed that the area covered during a Plan period will depend upon
the budget allocated.
2.41 The Secretary during the course of oral evidence stated that
it will take 17-18 years to treat the wastelands area at the existing
place of allocation.

19
2.42 The detailed analysis of the allocation proposed by the
Department, Budget Estimates indicating the availability of data and
expenditure position has been made in the preceding part of the
report. So far as the overall scenario of wastelands development
vis-a-vis outlay required is concerned, the Committee find that there
is an urgent need to allocate more funds to complete the development
of total wastelands in a stipulated time frame. The Committee note
that wastelands when developed can be a major economic resource
for the country. Besides there is an urgent need for the proper and
integrated planning for the purpose.
2.43 The Committee were informed that it will take 17- 18 years
to develop the wastelands with the existing pace and outlay of the
Department. The Committee find that other Ministries/Departments
of the Union Governments viz Agriculture, Water Resources etc. are
also having schemes for watershed development. Huge resources are
being allocated to these Ministries also. Besides State Governments
may be having some schemes for tackling the issue of development
of wastelands. Unless there is some sort of coordinating mechanism,
no meaningful conclusion indicating the position of coverage of
wastelands in the country can be arrived at. As indicated in the
preceding para, the final decision on the issue of convergence of the
efforts being made by Union Government cannot be arrived at even
after the concurrence of the Planning Commission in this regard.
Pending decision in this regard, the Committee may like to
recommend to the Department to evolve some sort of mechanism by
which the efforts made by several Ministries/Department/State
Government could be coordinated so as to have a clear cut position
of scenario of wastelands development. Only when such a data is
available, a time bound programme for tackling the issue of
wastelands development can be made.
Stata-wise position of wastelands in the country
2.44 The position regarding the State-wise extent of wastelands
identified has been given in Appendix-IV . The following are the State-
wise districts having wastelands in major States:
Sl.No. State Wastelands
(in terms of districts)
12 3
1. Uttar Pradesh 83
2. Bihar 55

20
12 3
3. Madhya Pradesh 62
4. Maharashtra 32
5. Orissa 30
6. Tamil Nadu 29
7. Andhra Pradesh 23
8. Gujarat 25
2.45 In view of the large number of wastelands in the country the
Department had (28th December, 2004) informed that it is taking
necessary steps to study international experiences in the field of
wasteland development. When the Committee wanted to know the
latest update in this regard the Department stated as under:
“Efforts are being made to send officers for international
workshops/seminars for getting exposure to developments in the
watershed area.”
2.46 The Committee find that a large part of wastelands to be
treated are is in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh in
terms of districts. The Committee feel that there is a need to frame
a State-wise and phase-wise programme for development of
wastelands in consultation with the concerned State Governments
on priority basis.
2.47 The Committee would also like to recommend to study
international experience in the field of wastelands development so
as to have exposure of the technologies and policy formulation being
made in this regard in those countries. Such a study will help the
Government to take the benefit of the positive experiences of these
countries.
Impact of Wastelands Development Programmes on employment
generation
(i) Scope of employment in watershed programme in post National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scenario
2.48 The Government has introduced ‘The National Rural
Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ in Lok Sabha which aims at

21
providing 100 days wage employment to each household below the
poverty line in rural areas. The aforesaid Bill is being examined by
the Standing Committee. During the course of examination it was found
that around 60 per cent of the expenditure of wastelands development
programmes of IWDP , DDP and DPAP in execution of watershed
projects went into wage employment. While clarifying how the schemes
of the Department can help in availing the objective of aforesaid
legislation, the Department stated as under:
“About sixty per cent of the expenditure under all area
development programmes of the Department of Land Resources
goes for wage employment using indigenous technologies and
active participation of the people of the project area. Since most of
the works are simple in nature, the employment of unskilled adults
for the project period may be ensured through area development
programmes. The food grain component under the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Bill, will increase wage employment in
water harvesting and conservation programmes. The support of
the SHGs under watershed programmes would enhance the
opportunity of self-employment.”
2.49 The Department has also informed that about 60 per cent of
the expenditure under all area development programmes goes for wage
employment in the project area.
(ii) Convergence of various employment generation schemes
2.50 On the issue of convergence of schemes at the field level the
Department has informed as under:
“The Department of Land Resources in the Ministry of Rural
Development has been emphasising for convergence of different
Government of India schemes at the field level, which would
enhance the sustainable economic development of village
community. Accordingly, a provision has been made in the Hariyali
Guidelines for implementation of watershed development
programmes. The Para 39 of Hariyali Guidelines is reproduced as
follows:—
As the Watershed Development Programmes aim at holistic
development of watershed areas, the convergence of all other non-
land based programmes of Government of India, particularly those
of the Ministry of Rural Development would enhance the ultimate
output and lead to sustainable economic development of the village

22
community. The ZP/DRDA, therefore, shall take all possible
measures to ensure convergence of other programmes of the
Ministry of Rural Development such as the Sampoorna Grameen
Rozgar Yojana (SGRY), the Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana
(SGSY), the Indira Awas Yojana (IAY), the Total Sanitation
Campaign (TSC) and the Rural Drinking Water Supply Programme
in the villages chosen for the implementation of the watershed
development projects. It would also be worthwhile to converge
programmes of similar nature of the other Ministries e.g. Health &
Family Welfare, Education, Social Justice and Empowerment and
Agriculture, as also of the State Governments, in these villages.
The State Government, while implementing programmes, have to
ensure convergence of schemes at field level.”
Impact Assessment Studies
2.51 The Committee have been informed earlier that the
Department had commissioned nation-wide studies on the impact of
watershed development programmes i.e. DPAP , DDP and IWDP . For
this purpose 230 districts in 16 States were covered on a sample basis
and 20 independent Field Agencies were engaged.
2.52 The Department has informed that the reports of the studies
were submitted in the first quarter of 2002.
2.53 On the issue of wage employment these studies revealed as
under:
“The impact assessment studies have observed that there was an
overall increase in employment opportunities due to watershed
projects. The watershed development projects contributed to
employment generation through an increase in agriculture
production activities, dairy farming, poultry/piggery and other non-
farm activities. In general, about sixty percent of the expenditure
under watershed projects goes for wage employment during the
project period.”
2.54 When asked about the major outcomes of the aforesaid survey,
the Department in a written note submitted as under:
 “Major outcomes of the impacts assessment study are as given as
under:—
Impact on land, water & biomass
Land Use An overall improvement in land use was
reported from all States following

23
implementation of the watershed development
programmes. Increase in net sown area, gross
cropped area and area sown more than once
was reported from Andhra Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh.
Irrigation The number of irrigation options increased in
all areas where watershed projects were
undertaken. This was especially the case in
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttaranchal, Uttar
Pradesh, West Bengal.
Fuelwood & fodder Fuelwood and Fodder availability increased
availability especially in IWDP areas where considerable
attention was paid to wasteland development
and catchment area treatment. Several States
including Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh reported a positive increase in
fuelwood and fodder availability.
Cropping pattern Several States reported change in cropping
pattern from one to two crops annually. This
was directly attributed to the availability of
water in the dry season for irrigation. Some
States have reported adoption of improved crop
varieties. Only a few States have recorded pre
and post-project yields for dominant crops in
the annual cropping cycle. Where data is
available, an increase in yields has been
reported.
Livestock While there was some change in actual number
of livestock owned reported from some States,
there was a marked preference for improved
breeds post-project. Some States also reported
the development of fisheries potential following

24
the development of tanks and other water
bodies.
Socio-economic impact
Income and Several States reported an increase in
employment agriculture related employment opportunities
generation among beneficiaries and in other sectors for
non-beneficiaries. These included trade, dairy,
poultry, masonry, artisans etc. The physical
works carried out under the watershed
development programme provided varying
number of mandays of work in nearly all
States. Changes in household income levels
varied from none at all in some States to over
50% compared to pre-project levels in other
States.
Capacity building & people’s participation
Institutional All States reported having established
arrangements institutional arrangements to undertake the
watershed development programme. Watershed
Development Advisory Committees were set up
at the district level in all the watershed districts.
Line departments including Forest, Agriculture,
Animal Husbandry, Soil Conservation, Planning,
Revenue, Rural Development and Minor
Irrigation assisted in the implementation of the
projects. In some States, NGOs were also
appointed as PIAs.
People’s Participation UGs/SHGs were set up in some States.
Similarly WCs and WAs also were established
in most watershed areas.
Capacity building All States reported investing in capacity
building at various levels including
beneficiaries, WC and WA members and PIAs.
In some States this led to a positive outcome
while in others it was felt that the quality of
training received needed to be improved and
the frequency of training increased. Mostly State
agriculture departments, universities and in
some cases NGOs were engaged in capacity
building.

25
2.55 The Committee are pleased to note the results of impact
assessment studies commissioned by the Department in 16 States
covering two hundred districts. These studies evaluated the impact
of watershed programmes IWDP , DPAP and DDP in the areas
covered. As revealed by said studies, the programmes have positive
impact on net sown area, gross cropped area sown more than once,
the increasing of option of irrigation, fuelwood and fodder
availability. Besides the studies reveal favourable impact by way of
increase in household income and wage employment. The Committee
note that the favourable impact of these studies should be widely
publicised. The various field level agencies, State Governments,
NGOs and all those involved with the watershed programme should
be made aware of the findings of the evaluation studies. Such an
exercise will definitly motivate the State Governments and all other
concerned to take more and more projects for the purpose. Besides
emphatic reports should be presented to the Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance while presenting budget projections so that
adequate outlay could be provided for different schemes.
2.56 The Committee further find that the Union Government has
brought an ambitious legislation viz.  ‘The National Rural
Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ which is being examined by the
Committee. The said legislation seeks to provide 100 days of wage
employment to each BPL family in rural areas. The Committee find
that 60 per cent of expenditure under all area development
programmes goes for wage employment in the project area. Further
the impact assessment studies have indicated a favourable impact
on employment generation in the areas covered by the programmes
of the Department. The Committee observe that the watershed
programmes can help the Government in achieving the objectives of
the aforesaid legislation. The related issues will be examined in
detail while the aforesaid Bill will be examined by the Committee.
The Committee would like to recommend here that the various
revealations regarding wage employment should be discussed with
the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission and the Department
of Rural Development so as to have some integrated planning to
achieve the objectives of the aforesaid legislation.
2.57 Further the Committee find that ‘Hariyali’ guidelines of the
Department emphasise the convergence of all the programmes of
not only of Union Government but also those being implemented
by the State Governments at the field level. While appreciating the
formulation of said guidelines the Committee feel that there is an

26
urgent need to implement the aforesaid guidelines since the other
Ministries and State Governments are involved in this regard. There
is an urgent need to discuss and debate this issue during the various
conferences, seminars held where State Governments and other
Ministries represent. Besides the said guidelines should be publicised
widely. To motivate the State Governments, the impact of convergence
should be studied carefully and the success of the States/districts
which could have positive impact, should be replicated in other
States/districts.
Review of DPAP/DDP Blocks
DPAP Blocks
2.58 As per the Performance Budget, the basic objective of DPAP
is to minimise the adverse effects of drought on production of crops
and livestock and productivity of land, water and human resources
ultimately leading to the drought proofing of the affected areas. 972
DPAP blocks were identified and DPAP programme is being
implemented in the aforesaid blocks since 1994. These blocks were
identified in the report submitted by Prof. C.H. Hanumantha Rao, ex-
Member, Planning Commission.
2.59 When asked whether some of the States have requested for
coverage of additional blocks, the Department has informed that since
the implementation of DPAP on watershed basis in identified areas,
an increase in the drought prone areas in the interregnum cannot be
ruled out. Some States may require additional blocks under the
programme. States like Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh have made requests in this regard.
DDP Blocks
2.60 DDP is being implemented in 235 DDP blocks in the country
in 40 districts of 7 States.
2.61 On a query whether any of the State Government has
requested for coverage of additional blocks, the Department has replied
that since the implementation of DDP on watershed basis in identified
areas, the spread of these areas in the intervening period, cannot be
ruled out and programme States may require additional blocks under
the programme. States like Gujarat have requested to include some
more blocks. The Department of Land Resources (DoLR) has set up
an Expert Committee recently to review the existing criteria of coverage
identification and identify the coverage afresh.

27
2.62 During the course of oral evidence the Secretary further
apprised the Committee that:
“….DPAP and DDP is being run in those blocks based on the
recommendations of a Committee headed by Hanumantha Rao
which identified these blocks. Now from the last few years a
demand is being raised and the today’s situation is that there is
a lot of difference evident between 1994 position and that of today.
Therefore, the issue has to be seen a fresh. Accordingly Government
recently on 14th February, 2005 has appointed a Committee under
the Chairmanship of a farmer Shri S. Partha Sarathi. He has been
asked to submit the report within six months. The term and
reference of the Committee include identification of blocks afresh.
The inclusion, exclusion of the blocks from the existing blocks has
also to be considered.”
2.63 The Committee in their earlier reports have been
recommending to review the position of DDP and DPAP blocks
since these blocks were identified a decade back. Since then the
situation may have changed. Many more blocks may need assistance
under DDP & DPAP programmes. Besides, State Governments have
been requesting for coverage of additional blocks. The Committee
appreciate that a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri S. Partha
Sarathi has been appointed for this purpose. The said Partha Sarathi
Committee will submit the report within six months. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the recommendations of the said
Committee when finalised.

CHAPTER III
SCHEME-WISE EVALUATION
Integrated Wastelands Development Programme (IWDP)
3.1 IWDP is a Centrally Sponsored Programme for the Department
of Land Resources for the development of non-forest wastelands in
the country. The basic approach in implementation of this programme
has been modified from 1st April, 1995 when the guidelines for
Watershed Development through Watershed Approach came into force.
Since then, projects for development of wastelands on watershed basis
are sanctioned. The projects have to be implemented over a period of
five years at an overall cost of Rs. 4,000 per hectare for projects
sanctioned up to 31st March, 2000 and at an overall cost of Rs. 6,000
per hectare for projects sanctioned after 1st April, 2000.
3.2 The Guidelines for Watershed Development have been revised
in September, 2001. Consequent upon the revision of cost norm from
Rs. 4,000 per hectare to Rs. 6000 per hectare, the funding pattern of
IWDP has also been modified. The project cost would now be shared
at the rate of Rs. 5,500 per hectare and Rs. 500 per hectare between
Central and State Governments respectively. Previously, the total cost
of the projects under the Programme was funded by the Central
Government. The revised guidelines of 2001 were replaced by
guidelines for Hariyali w.e.f. 1st April, 2003 with a view to empower
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in planning, execution and managing
developmental activities relating to all watershed programmes.
(i) Scenario during 9th Plan (1997-2002)
Allocations and Releases
3.3 The details of funds and their releases during 9th Plan period
are as detailed below:—
Sl.No. Outlay/Expenditure Amount (Rs. in crore)
1. As proposed by Department 3360
2. BE 1148.60
3. RE 986.10
4. Actual/Releases 962.27
5. Shortfall 186.33
28

29
 3.4 It is evident from the above figures that there has been a
shortfall in utilisation of Budget allocation to the tune of Rs. 186.33
crore during 9th Plan.
Funds for committed liabilities of on-going watershed programmes
3.5 During the 9th Plan period 65 to 70 per cent funds were
used for on-going projects. For instance during 2000-2001 and
2001-2002 out of total outlays of Rs. 480 crore and Rs. 430 crore as
much as Rs. 350 crore and Rs. 200 crore were for committed liabilities.
As per information furnished by the Department, the gestation period
of watershed project is four to five years. When asked about the
number of projects under IWDP which are more than 5 years old, the
Department has informed that there are 46 such projects the details of
which are given as under :—
On-going projects for more than five years during 9th Plan
Year of Sanction No. of Projects (on-going)
1997 15
1998 28
1999 3
Total 46
3.6 The Committee also wanted to know how the Department
would achieve the targets of development of wastelands if the major
portion of the allocation is earmarked for the committed liabilities.
The Department in a written note stated as under:
“Committed liabilities are funds required for release of subsequent
instalments for ongoing projects sanctioned in previous years. New
projects form about 30 to 35 per cent of the budget allocation and
the remaining funds are utilized for release of instalments for
ongoing projects. Only 15 per cent of the total costs of the project
is released as first instalment along with the sanction of the project.
The total cost of the project is released in five instalments which
follow in succeeding years. The sanction of new projects is
demand driven depending upon the absorptive capacity of the
States to undertake works under new projects as well as budget
allocations.”

30
3.7 In reply to a query about committed liability to DoLR in a
written note stated as under:
“Since the project period is for 5 years and funds are released in
7 instalments for projects sanctioned prior to 31.03.2003 and
5 instalments for projects sanctioned after 01.04.2003, first instalment
amounting to 15 per cent is released along with Sanction Order of
each project. Every subsequent instalment is released on receipt of
Utilisation Certificate showing utilization of more than 50 per cent
of previous instalment and full amount of earlier instalments
released. Since projects are demand driven and based on
participatory approach, next instalment is released as and when
demanded by implementing agency (ZP/DRDA) fulfilling
requirements of UC and other documents. Therefore, funds are
required each year to account for projects of earlier four or more
years (in case not completed in time due to the reasons stated
above). The committed liability worked out for next five years is
as given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Programme 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
IWDP (on-going) 285.50 339.42 286.20 292.46 224.80
IWDP –new (1st instalment) 82.50 82.50 82.50 82.50 82.50
Subsequent instalments 165.00 330.00 330.00
Total for IWDP 368.000 421.920 533.700 704.960 637.300
3.8 From the above table, it is evident that on-going liability is
on actual based on timely further release of instalment under ongoing
projects. New Projects to be sanctioned have been worked out for
treatment of 10 lakh Hectares area each year, and instalments due for
this has been indicated above.
Projects sanctioned/foreclosed/ongoing under IWDP since 1995-96
3.9 Out of the 630 projects sanctioned to non-North Eastern States,
558 projects are continuing, funding has been completed in 59 projects

31
and 13 projects have been foreclosed due to unsatisfactory performance.
The year-wise break-up is given below:—
Year of Sanction No. of Sanctioned No. of Projects No. of Projects On-Going
projects Completed Foreclosed/Closed Projects
1995-96 7 4 1 2
1996-97 17 8 5 4
1997-98 38 19 5 14
1998-99 41 14 2 25
1999-2000 63 13 0 50
2000-01 78 1 0 77
2001-02 97 0 0 97
2002-03 8 0 0 8
2003-04 141 0 0 141
2004-05 140 0 0 140
Total 630 59 13 558
3.10 As regards data regarding sanctioned/completed/foreclosed
and on-going projects in North-East Region the following data has
been given:—
(as on 31.3.2005)
Year No. of IWDP Completed Foreclosed On-going
12 345
Projects sanctioned (as on 31.1.05)
1995-96 1100
1996-97 2200
1997-98 7313
1998-99 7412
1999-2000 10 2 0 8
2000-01 29 0 0 29

32
12 345
2001-02 28 0 0 28
2002-03 41 0 0 41
2003-04 49 0 0 49
2004-05 25 0 0 25
Total 199 12 2 185
3.11 State-wise details of status of foreclosed of IWDP projects
sanctioned prior to 01 April, 1995 and their financial performance is
as under:—
Funds (Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. States Projects Released Utilised To be Recovered
Cost recovered
1. Andhra Pradesh 4.02 3.80 3.74 0.05 0.05
2. Bihar 7.21 6.07 6.09 0.0 0.0
3. Chhattisgarh 8.82 3.81 3.94 0.03 0.03
4. Delhi 0.55 0.15 0.15 0.0 0.0
5. Gujarat 24.40 11.82 8.84 3.25 1.35
6. Haryana 3.04 1.96 2.02 0.0 0.0
7. Jharkhand 10.66 5.94 4.37 1.58 0.00
8. Karnataka 4.36 3.84 3.84 0.00 0.00
9. Kerela 12.46 9.58 4.57 5.00 0.00
10. Madhya Pradesh 14.52 5.89 5.17 0.77 0.66
11. Orissa 13.55 7.84 7.55 0.25 0.34
12. Punjab 6.96 3.19 2.13 1.67 0.00
13. Rajasthan 15.06 9.86 8.50 0.63 0.64
14. Tamil Nadu 9.16 5.58 3.97 2.69 1.13
15. Uttar Pradesh 9.18 6.13 5.21 0.91 0.95
16. West Bengal 12.14 8.07 6.87 1.29 0.65
North East 1.17 0.57 0.20 0.36 0.46

33
3.12 The DoLR further stated that DPAP and DDP blocks are not
in North-Eastern region and 10 per cent of the total funds under
watershed development programmes are invested in IWDP projects
for North-Eastern region. With the pro-active role of the Department,
a large number of projects were sanctioned to the NE States in the
last few years. These projects are still within the 5 year project
implementation period for completion and that is why they are going
on.
3.13 When asked how many projects were completed before time
the Secretary, Land Resources stated as under:
“Every year some projects are completed and these are for this
year.”
(i) Scenario during 10th Plan (2002-2007)
Allocations and Releases
3.14 The following are the BE, RE, Actual vis-a-vis target and actuals
wasteland developed under IWDP (including Externally Aided Projects)
during first three years of the 10th Plan.
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE Releases Target Actual
2002-2003 450.00 440.00 413.45 05.17 03.35
2003-2004 401.00 384.28 368.17 11.00 10.06
2004-2005 448.00 448.00 331.48 (upto 10.00 10.91
28th Feb. 2005)
2005-2006 565.00 - - 15.00 -
3.15 The Committee pointed out that releases during all the three
years have been below the Budget and Revised Estimates. The
Committee inform the reasons for lesser releases in all the three years
the Department in a written note stated as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year RE Releases
NNE NE  Total NNE NE  Total
2002-03 357 83.00  440.00 357.00 56.45 413.45
2003-04 301.28 83.00  384.28 301.97 66.20 368.17
2004-05 333 115.00  448.00 332.99 77.63 410.62
            (up to 22.3.2005)

34
3.16 It is evident from the above table that the funds allocated for
non-North East Region were completely utilized in the last three years.
However, the funds allocated to the North East Region could not be
utilized fully due to the relative poor absorption capacity of these
States.
3.17 The details of the financial/physical targets vis-a-vis
achievements so far during the 10th Plan are as under:
“The information in respect of Physical/Financial targets and
achievements during 10th Plan is given as below:
Year Physical (in lac ha.)  Financial (Rs. in crores)
Target  Achievement Target  Achievement
10th Plan
(2002-07) 68.00 1800.00
2002-03  5.17 3.35  450.00 413.45
2003-04 11.00  10.065  401.00 368.17
2004-05* 10.00  11.18  448.00 410.62
2005-06 15.00 565.00
*Upto 22.3.2005
3.18 The Committee also wanted to know whether the Department
inter-act with implementing agencies to find their problems so that
releases of instalment made to different State Government in time.
The Department has replied as below:
“Yes, a proactive approach is followed. A continuous dialogue is
maintained with State Governments and DRDAs/ZPs to release
maximum funds and to sort out problems resulting in shift of
areas/dropping of areas/taking up new projects/project formulation
and problems related to planning and execution of the projects.
Senior officers of the Department discuss and sort out the problems
during their visits to the States, through video conferencing and
when they participate in the workshops organized by the States.”

35
3.19 The Committee further enquired about the difficulties being
faced by the implementing agencies, the Department of Land Resources
in a written note has stated as under: —
(i) Coordination with the State Governments.
(ii) Shortage of trained staff for training and implementation of
projects.
(iii) Panchayats are dealing with a number of developmental
schemes, so adequate attention may not be paid to
watershed programmes.
(iv) Coordination with departments/NGOs for constitution of
multi disciplinary teams of experts from plant sciences,
animal sciences, engineering and sociologist for capacity
building.
(v) Identification of the appropriate local institutions for
imparting training to stake holders viz., district, block,
panchayat level functionaries and people residing in the
project area.
3.20 While indicating the efforts made by several State
Governments for effective implementation of IWDP , the Department
has stated as under:
“Some of the States such as Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa,
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Nagaland have created
special directorates/watershed missions/commissionerates/
watershed development departments to deal with watershed
development programmes. Others have yet to come up with such
coordinating units at the State level. States are being requested to
form such units at the State level. States should execute watershed
projects in mission mode at the State level with a perspective
plan. District Level Advisory Committees should have proper
schedules for training to be imparted to the stake-holders in the
project area for capacity building. Homogenous group formation
(users group/self help groups) is essential for successful execution
of works in the watershed projects. Management/improvement of
livestock and pasture development should get due share in
watershed projects. Formulation of a strong multi disciplinary team
is very essential for implementation of the project. Some of the
States such as Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh have identified
district level institutes/NGOs and are drawing from their strength
for imparting training skills to the stake-holders.”

36
3.21 The Committee note that around 65 percent to 70 per cent
of IWDP funds are meant for committed liabilities for on-going
projects during entire 9th Plan (1997-2002). For instance the Committee
find that during 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 out of the total outlay of
Rs. 480 crore and Rs. 430 crore the major portion of Rs. 350 crore
and Rs. 200 crore was for committed liabilities.
The Committee feel that with more and more committed
liabilities for the ongoing projects, it will be difficult to achieve the
set targets of development of wastelands. Since more and more
money would be needed for committed liabilities, it would result in
lesser new projects and similarly lesser coverage of additional
wastelands.
The Committee further note that on an average the gestation
period of a project is four to five years as indicated by the
Department. However, the data show that some of the projects started
in 1997, 1998 are yet to be completed. Thus a project may continue
even after completion of seven to eight years. In this scenario the
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to periodically evaluate
the performance of projects. As recommended in the earlier part of
the Report, the projects should be evaluated at certain specified
stages, say first stage, second stage and some sort of grading should
be given. The Committee urge for stricter monitoring on the lines
suggested above.
3.22 The Committee note with concern the issue of foreclosure
of projects. They find from the data made available to them that out
of 630 projects sanctioned since 1995-1996, 13 projects were foreclosed.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the funds
allocated for the said projects and the stage at which these were
foreclosed. Beside the detailed reasons for foreclosure of the these
projects should also be indicated so as to enable the Committee to
come to some meaningful conclusion on wastage of national resources
and comment further in this regard.
3.23 The Committee find from the State-wise data furnished by
the Department that certain amount has been indicated as to be
recovered and recovered from each of the States. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the details on which account the outlay
was to be recovered and recovered from these States to enable the
Committee to review the position in this regard.

37
3.24 The Committee further note that in North-Eastern States
during 2004-2005, the number of projects sanctioned is almost half
of the number of projects sanctioned during previous year.
Underspending in North-Eastern region is the major area of concern
as pointed out in the previous Reports, and indicated in the earlier
part of the report. Not only that in North-Eastern States, 10 per cent
of the allocation for DPAP and DDP is also being made available
although no DDP and DPAP areas are there in that region. In view
of the aforesaid position there is an urgent need to sanction more
and more additional projects under IWDP in North-Eastern Areas.
The Committee would like the Department to take the desired action
in this regard and apprise the Committee accordingly.
3.25 The Committee find that some of the States have taken
laudable action like coordinating units at the State level as has been
done by Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, T amil Nadu,
Karnataka and Nagaland, identification of district level Institutions/
NGOs as has been done by Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh
need to be replicated by other States urgently. The Committee would
like the Department to take desired steps in this regard.
Special Area Programmes
(i) Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP)
3.26 The Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP) was launched
in 1973-74 to tackle the special problems faced by those fragile areas
which are constantly affected by the drought conditions. These areas
are characterized by large human and cattle population which are
continuously putting heavy pressure on the already fragile natural
resources base for food, fodder and fuel. This continuous biotic pressure
is leading to fast and continuous depletion of vegetative cover,
increasing soil erosion and fast receding ground water levels due to
continuous exploitation without any effort to recharge the underground
aquifers.
Objectives
3.27 The basic objective of the programme is to minimize the
adverse effects of drought on production of crops and livestock and
productivity of land, water and human resources ultimately leading to
the drought proofing of affected areas. The programme also aims to
promote overall economic development and improve the socio-economic
conditions of the resource-poor and disadvantaged sections inhabiting
the programme areas.

38
Allocation and Releases
3.28 The year-wise allocation vis-a-vis release of DPAP projects
during the 9th Plan (1997-2002) along with projects sanctioned is as
detailed below:
Year B.E. Amount released Percentage Projects sanctioned
1997-1998 115.00 90.75 78.91 406
1998-1999 95.00 73.00 76.84 880
1999-2000 95.00 94.99 99.99 2278
2000-2001 190.00 189.58 99.77 3371
2001-2002 210.00 208.99 99.51 2052
Total 8987
3.29 The year-wise allocations and releases along with projects
sanctioned during first three years of the 10th Plan are as detailed
below:
Year B.E. R.E. Expenditure Target(no. of Projects
projects) sanctioned
2002-2003 250.00 250.00 250.00 2400 2478
2003-2004 295.00 295.00 295.00 2600 2535
2004-2005 300.00 300.00 297.00 2800 2550
2005-2006 353.00 — — 2900 —
3.30 As regards 9th Plan performance, outlay during 2000-2001
was doubled, but equal number of increase is not seen in the number
of projects. Similarly , during 2001-2002, the allocation has been increased
by 20 crore, however, the number of projects sanctioned has decreased.
The Department while clarifying the position in this regard stated as
under:
“The allocated annual budget under DPAP is utilized to meet the
committed liability of ongoing projects and towards sanctioning of
new projects. DPAP being a demand driven programme, there may
a year-to-year variations in proportion of funds released for ongoing
projects thereby affecting the number of new projects sanctioned

39
in that year. It may, therefore, not be possible to establish a trend
between allocated budget and number of new projects sanctioned.”
3.31 When asked as to how far the objectives of the DPAP
programme have been achieved during 9th Plan period, it has been
stated that the concurrent Mid Term Evaluation Reports indicate that
with the implementation of watershed projects the overall productivity
of land, vegetative cover and water table have increased and there has
been a positive and significant impact on overall economic development
in the projects areas. The evaluation reveals positive outcome of the
programme in consonance with the objective. The Central share is
released in 5 annual instalments @15 per cent in the first year, 30 per
cent each in the second and third years, 15 per cent in the fourth year
and 10 per cent in the fifth year.
3.32 When asked about the targets of sanctioning DPAP projects
during 9th Plan period the Department has stated that during five
years of the 9th Plan, no targets were fixed under DPAP . However, a
target of 5 million hectares was set for watershed programmes, against
which 4.49 million hectares was sanctioned for treatment under DPAP
alone. Further, new projects are sanctioned block-wise taking into
account identified coverage, performance of ongoing projects,
availability of budget and claims received to meet the committed
liability of ongoing projects.
3.33 As per the information furnished to the Committee during
the 9th Plan period 8987 projects were sanctioned. When asked about
the number of projects completed, ongoing and foreclosed during
9th Plan period year-wise the Department in a written note has stated
as under:
“The project period under DPAP is 5 years taken from the date of
sanctioning of new projects. Accordingly, the project period for the
projects sanctioned during 1999-2000 (V batch) 2000-01(VI batch)
and 2001-02 (VII batch) is still continuing, yet 635 projects of these
batches have claimed all the 7 instalments of the Central share
and are deemed to be complete. The remaining 7,066 projects of
these batches are at various stages of implementation. The projects
sanctioned during 1997-98 (III batch) and 1998-99 (IV batch) have
completed their project period. Of these 1,286 projects, 1,149 have
been completed and 137 foreclosed.”
3.34 The Department has informed that in total 21,353 projects
have been sanctioned under DPAP till date, out of these 4,960 projects

40
have claimed the entire Central funds due to them and are deemed to
be complete, 1,764 projects have been foreclosed, and 14,629 are
ongoing.
3.35 On being asked as to how many blocks could actually be
provided drought proofing since the inception of the scheme thereby
achieving the ultimate aim of the scheme the Department has stated
as under :
“The achievement of DPAP may not be visualized in terms of
number of blocks totally covered for drought proofing. For equity
considerations, every year, DoLR has been sanctioning number of
projects to almost every block corresponding to its DPAP area and
performance of ongoing projects subject to the available budget.
The new watershed projects sanctioned to the blocks may be
selected by the District Agencies in contiguity to another watershed
that has already developed to realize a composite impact in the
area. The Department has laid emphasis on adopting a cluster
approach in choosing and treating the watersheds. A total of 21,353
projects for treating an area of 106.76 lakh hectares have been
sanctioned to these identified blocks out of which 50.15 lakh
hectares is estimated to be treated.”
3.36 The Department has further informed that under the latest
guidelines applicable since 1st April, 2003, some amendments have
been carried out giving more powers to Gram Sabha/Gram Panchayats.
While giving details of these guidelines called Hariyali, the Department
has stated as below:
“Under Hariyali Guidelines, an effort has been made to empower
the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) by giving them a pivotal
role in the implementation of the programme. The Gram Panchayats
have been authorized to execute the projects in watersheds with
Block/ Zila Panchayats acting as project Implementing Agencies
(PIAs).”
3.37 When asked about the impact noticed in the implementation
of DPAP projects after giving more power to Panchayats by Hariyali
Guidelines, the Department has stated as under :
“It is only the second year of project implementation under the
Hariyali Guidelines. The actual impact can be seen after some
time only.”

41
3.38 When asked how the Department ensures post projects
maintenance of completed DPAP projects, the Committee are informed
that under the guidelines, there is a provision for exit protocol. The
watershed projects are to be managed by the Watershed Committees/
Gram Panchayats after the project period is over and external
supporting agencies have withdrawn. To support maintenance work,
the Watershed Development Fund (WDF) raised under the provisions
of the guidelines is utilized. The fund being organic in nature, keeps
on accruing even during the post project period by way of charges
paid by the community for the use of assets generated and contribution
made by the village panchayat in respect of community property.
3.39 When asked whether any evaluation/review of DPAP has ever
been made, the Department has informed that there is a provision in
the guidelines for concurrent Mid Term Evaluation of ongoing projects
through approved independent evaluators. Besides, the Department
through independent Agencies has also commissioned Impact
Assessment Studies. These Evaluation Studies, by and large indicate
positive impact in rejuvenating the natural resource base of the project
areas and socio-economic upliftment of the project villages.
3.40 The major findings of the concurrent Mid Term Evaluations
of the 9th Plan as indicated by the Department are as under:
“Mid term evaluation is mandatory for all projects sanctioned under
DPAP w.e.f. 1998-99. Fourth instalment of funds (3rd instalment in
case of Hariyali projects sanctioned from 2003-04 onwards) is
released only after receipt of mid term evaluation report showing
satisfactory performance. As already stated, findings of the
concurrent Mid Term Evaluation indicate that with the
implementation of watershed projects, the overall productivity of
land, vegetative cover and water table have increased and there
has been a positive and significant impact on overall economic
development in the projects areas.”
(ii) Desert Development Programme (DDP)
3.41 In pursuance of the recommendations of National Commission
on Agriculture, the Desert Development Programme (DDP) was started
in 1977-78 both in hot desert areas of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana and
cold desert areas of Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh
for treatment of land with soil erosion and depletion of vegetative
cover.

42
 3.42 The Programme now covers 235 blocks in 40 districts of
7 States covering 4.58 lakh sq.km.
The State-wise details as an under:
S.No State Districts Blocks Area in (Sq.Km.)
1. Andhra Pradesh 1 16 19,136
2. Gujarat 6 52 55,424
3. Haryana 7 45 20,524
4. Himachal Pradesh 2 3 35,107
5. J & K 2 12 96,701
6. Karnataka 6 22 32,295
7. Rajasthan 16 85 198,744
Allocation and Releases
3.43 The year-wise allocation and releases under DDP projects
along with projects sanctioned during 9th Plan period is as under:
Year B.E. Amount released Percentage Projects sanctioned
1997-1998 70 70.01 100.01 36
1998-1999 90 79.80 88.66 400
1999-2000 85 84.99 99.99 1500
2000-2001 135 134.99 99.99 1659
2001-2002 160 149.88 93.67 1359
Total - - - 4954
3.44 The year-wise allocation and releases under DDP projects
along with physical performance so far during the 10th Plan period is
as detailed below:
(Rs. in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Expenditure Target (no. Projects
projects sanctioned
2002-2003 185.00 185.00 185.00 1600 1602
2003-2004 215.00 215.00 215.00 1700 1562
2004-2005 215.00 215.00 196.78* 1800 1600*
2005-2006 268.00  -  — 1800 —
*Till 10.03.2005

43
3.45 As r egards performance of DDP during 9th Plan the
increased/decreased data with regard to the number of projects did
not commensurate with increase/decrease in allocation in each of the
year of the 9th Plan. During 1998-99, the sanctioned projects
were more than 11 times whereas, there was marginal increase
(i.e. Rs. 20 crore) in allocation. In the following year, there is three and
half time increase in number of projects, whereas, the decrease in
allocation Rs. 5 crore. During 2001-2002, the allocation is increased by
Rs. 25 crore, but the number of projects sanctioned has decreased.
When asked the reasons for said anomalies, the Department has stated
that DDP being a demand driven scheme, that it may not be possible
to establish a trend between allocated budget and number of new
projects sanctioned. The number of new projects sanctioned within the
allocated annual budget depends on the claims received towards
ongoing projects.
3.46 The new projects are sanctioned block-wise taking into account
identified coverage, performance of ongoing projects, availability of
budget and claims received to meet the committed liability of ongoing
projects.
3.47 When asked about the year-wise target of number of DDP
projects sanctioned during 9th Plan period, the Department has stated
that during five years of the 9th Plan, no targets were fixed under
DDP . However, target of 5 million hectares was set for watershed
programmes, against which 2.47 million hectares was sanctioned for
treatment under DDP .
3.48 As regards the performance of DDP during first three years
of 10th Plan the Committee pointed out that although utilisation of
allocations during first two years of 10th Plan has been hundred
per cent the physical achievement has been below the targets during
2003-2004 and 2004-2005.
3.49 When enquired about the reasons for under-achievement of
targets during the above two years, the Department has stated that
the number of projects sanctioned during 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 is
less than the envisaged number on account of meeting the committed
liability of ongoing projects for which claim proposals were received
from ZPs/DRDAs during these years.
Review of DDP projects
3.50 When asked whether any of the DDP blocks could convert
into greener area thereby indicating that there was no need for help

44
under DDP programmes, the Department has stated that the
achievement of DDP may not be appreciated in terms of number of
blocks totally covered for control of desertification. For equity
considerations, every year, DoLR has been sanctioning number of
projects to almost every block corresponding to its DDP area and
performance of ongoing projects subject to the available budget. The
new watershed projects sanctioned to the blocks may be selected by
the District Agencies in contiguity to another watershed that has already
developed to realize a composite impact in the area. The Department
has laid emphasis on adopting a cluster approach in choosing and
treating watersheds. A total of 11,476 projects for treating an area of
57.38 lakh hectares have been sanctioned to these identified blocks out
of which Rs. 24.41 lakh hectares is estimated as treated.
3.51 The details of State-wise number of DDP projects sanctioned/
completed/foreclosed and ongoing are as under:
State No. of No. of No. of No. of
Projects Projects Projects ongoing
sanctioned completed foreclosed projects
Andhra Pradesh 772 206 - 566
Gujarat 2272 542 - 1730
Haryana 890 180 50 660
Himachal Pradesh 458 80 - 378
Jammu & Kashmir 617 94 85 438
Karnataka 1164 65 165 934
Rajasthan 5303 1088 - 4215
Total 11476 2255 300 8921
3.52 As r egards the position of review/evaluation of DDP
programme the following information has been furnished:
“There is a provision for concurrent Mid Term Evaluation of the
ongoing projects through approved independent evaluators. Besides,
the Department through independent Agencies has also
commissioned Impact Assessment Studies. These Evaluations/
Studies, by and large indicate that with the implementation of
watershed projects the overall land and water table have gone up

45
and there has been a positive and significant impact on the overall
economic development in the project areas. The studies also
revealed that green vegetative cover has improved in watershed
areas and there has been a positive impact in checking soil erosion
by water and wind. The availability of fuel wood and fodder has
also increased. The impact assessment studies reveal positive
outcome of the programme.”
3.53 The Committee find that though the utilisation performance
under DPAP and DDP programme has been satisfactory during
9th Plan and first three years of the current plan, a lot more is to
be done in DDP areas in some of the States. The Committee find
that keeping in view the area as large as around 199 thousand square
km. in Rajasthan, 96 square km. in J&K, 55 thousand square km. in
Gujarat, the quantum of funds are barely sufficient to accomplish
the task. In this connection there is a need to enhance the funds for
DPAP and DDP programmes. The Committee hope that Government
will do the needful in this regard.
3.54 The Committee find from the data furnished by the
Department that the problems under three watershed programmes
viz. IWDP , DDP and DPAP are common. As pointed out in the
earlier part of the report relating to IWDP , the major area of concern
is foreclosure of projects. Under DPAP 1764 projects have been
foreclosed till date. Similarly under DDP , 300 projects have been
foreclosed till date. The Committee feel that huge national resources
are being wasted by foreclosing the projects under such important
schemes of the Department. The Committee would like to be
informed of the outlay spent on these projects, alongwith the stage
at which these projects were foreclosed. The Committee would also
like to be informed of the specific reasons for the foreclosure of
these projects so as to enable them to analyse the position and
comment further in this regard.
3.55 Another important area, the Committee would like to
comment upon is the need for active involvement of Panchayati Raj
Institutions in DPAP and DDP programmes. The Committee find
that Mid Term Evaluation of DPAP and DDP programmes has
indicated favourable results in covered blocks in terms of productivity
of land, vegetative cover and water table. The Committee recommend
that DPAP and DDP projects should be so framed which may take
into account the needs of common man at grass roots level.

46
Computerisation of Land Records
3.56 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Computerisation of Land
Records (CLR) was started in 1988-1989 with 100 per cent grant-in-aid
basis financial assistance as a pilot project in eight districts of the
country to remove the problems and inherent flaws of the existing
land records system and to bring transparency and easy accessibility
of land records to the land holders. Keeping in view the encouraging
results, this scheme was made separate Centrally Sponsored Scheme
during the Eighth Plan Period. Its scope was enlarged to bring more
districts under its coverage. So far 582 districts, 3286 Tehsils/Taluks/
Blocks/Anchals and 509 Sub-Divisions have been covered under the
Scheme. A sum of Rs. 343.33 crore (upto 10.03.2005) has been provided
to States/Uts since inception (1988-1989) of the scheme.
Underutilisation of funds
3.57 During the 9th Plan period, the outlay under the scheme of
Computerisation of Land Records (CLR) was Rs.150 and at RE stage
it was reduced to Rs.171 crore, out of which the expenditure was
Rs.169.14 crore.
During the 10th Plan funds provided under the scheme are as
under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Expenditure
2002-2003 35.00 35.00 31.18
2003-2004 40.00 40.00 35.77
2004-2005 50.00 50.00 42.82*
2005-2006 100.00  -  —
*As on 10.03.2005
3.58 When aske d for the reasons for shortfall in expenditure during
the first three years of the 10th Plan the Department has replied that
the reason for shortfall of expenditure during 2002-03, 2003-04 and
2004-05 is that the funds earmarked for the NE States could not be
released fully as these States had not utilized the funds released earlier,
and therefore, did not demand additional funds.

47
3.59 When asked about the position of funds earmarked for the
North-Eastern States under the Scheme CLR during 9th and 10th Plan,
the Department stated that upto the 9th Plan, there was no provision
for earmarking funds under the scheme of CLR for the North Eastern
States. However, during the first 4 years of the 10th Plan period, Rs.
26 crore were earmarked for the North Eastern States as per break up
given below:-
Year Funds earmarked for N.E. States
(Rs. in crore)
2002-2003  5.00
2003-2004  5.00
2004-2005  6.00
2005-2006  10.00
3.60 The position of funds released to North- Eastern States and
utilised by them under the Scheme of CLR is given below:-
 (Rs. In lakh)
Name of the 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-2005 Total released Total
State since inception utilized
Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 0.00 0.00 75.30  57.08
Assam 0.00 0.00  0.00 335.50 212.00
Manipur 0.00 0.00 0.00 188.23  68.07
Meghalaya 0.00 0.00 0.00 28.00 28.00
Mizoram 0.00 20.00 0.00 442.96 355.56
Nagaland 8.25 0.00 15.00 193.55 127.15
Sikkim 0.00 82.70 0.00 200.73 129.77
Tripura 0.00 0.00  148.00 491.80 289.22
3.61 As per Performance Budget since inception of the scheme,
the Ministry has released Rs.344.86 crore as on 28 February 2005. The
utilisation of funds reported by the States/Union Territories is
Rs. 220.21 crore, which is approximately 65 per cent of the total funds
released.

48
3.62 When asked about the reasons for huge under spending of
the total funds released since the scheme was started, the Department
has stated that under the scheme of CLR, the various activities viz.,
development of suitable software as per the State’s requirements,
undertaking basic data entry work, verification, validation and backlog
of the data entry work, site preparation and setting up of computer
centres at tehsil level, etc. are time consuming processes, therefore,
States are taking time to utilize the funds released earlier. In addition
to this, lack of administrative will and focus on early completion of
the scheme has also resulted in underspending of the funds released.
In order to expedite the pace of implementation of the scheme and
timely utilization of funds, interim milestones/targets have been fixed
under various activities which are also being reviewed at various fora.
The Cabinet Secretary also had a review meetings on 13th August,
2004 and 22nd November, 2004 with State Revenue Secretaries and
Revenue Ministers wherein progress of CLR was reviewed.
3.63 The main findings of these Conferences are:
(i) The overall pace of progress of implementation of the
scheme was not satisfactory;
(ii) The activities under the schemes were not taken up on
mission mode;
(iii) There was no clear-cut focus given by State level authorities
to the Implementing Authorities to take up this scheme in
earnest.
(iv) Instability of tenure of Senior Officers of Revenue
Department at State level.
(v) No specific timeframe was fixed by States for completing
the different activities under the scheme.
3.64 The Secretary further informed the Committee as under:
“As far as computerisation of land records is concerned, it is given
hundred per cent by the Government of India, but for the other
one SRA & ULR, it is 50:50 sharing between Centre and States. In
fact, the most outstanding example in this regard is Bhumi Project
in Karnataka which was funded under the same scheme.
…Cabinet Secretary had convened a meeting of Revenue Secretaries
of all States. In that meeting three categories of States were framed.

49
In category ‘A’ States of Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Rajasthan,
Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Pondicherry, Sikkim and Andhra
Pradesh and NCT Delhi were asked to complete the target by
March, 2005. In category ‘B’ the States of Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal,
Himachal Pradesh, Tripura, Mizoram, Daman & Diu, Dadar Nagar
Haveli were asked to complete the target by June, 2005. In category
‘C’ the States of Bihar, Punjab, Jharkhand, Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh and Nagaland were directed to complete the target by
December, 2005. However, I would like to inform the Committee
that we will have to extend the time for another three months
because the scheme is yet to be completed. However, in various
States like Karnataka and Goa it has been completed. This is an
important scheme.”
3.65 As r egards the proposal of the Department to utilise the outlay
during 10th Plan, the Committee have been informed as under:
“During the financial year 2005-2006, it has been proposed to cover
additional 500 tehsils/taluks/blocks and 500 sub-divisions,
difference of the revised unit costs for already sanctioned tehsils/
taluks, setting up of Monitoring Cell at the State Headquarters to
monitor the progress of the implementation of the scheme,
additional funds to States for completion of data entry work and
imparting training to Revenue officials on software application and
digitisation of Cadastral Survey/Village Maps, which will enable
this Department to utilize increased outlay under the Scheme of
CLR.”
3.66 Pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee in their
earlier reports, the Department has started State-wise targets for various
activities i.e. simplification of rules, procedures/ registers/formats,
completion of data entry, setting up of computer centres at tehsil level,
imparting training to Revenue officials, according legal sanctity to
computerised copies of RoR, levying user charges, etc. under the
scheme of CLR and the State Governments have been requested to
adhere to these targets.
3.67 When asked about the names of districts which have no land
records, the Department has stated that in Meghalaya most of the
land belongs to the tribal community and ownership, distribution and
its use are governed by their tribal customs. Management of land in
7 districts of this State is entirely different from the prevailing system
in other States, and do not have proper land records, that is why this

50
scheme is not implemented in these districts. The Union territory of
Lakshadweep also has no proper land records.
3.68 The Committee had pointed out while examining Demands
for Grants (2004-2005) about slow performance in the States viz. Assam,
Bihar, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Manipur and Uttaranchal
are lagging behind in the implementation of the CLR scheme and
these States have not shown much progress in the implementation of
the scheme of CLR.
3.69 When asked about the latest position of the implementation
of the scheme in the above mentioned States, it has been submitted by
the Department that the States of Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, have started
the basic data entry work and in the State of Uttaranchal, data entry
work is at an advanced stage of completion.
3.70 Accor ding to DoLR Revenue Officials were not computer
literate/friendly, which hindered the progress of implementation of
the scheme of CLR. To change the mindset of Revenue officials in
tune with the technology and environment, the Ministry has provided
funds to many States to make their Revenue officials computer literate/
friendly in order to update their land records through Tehsil computer
centres on a regular basis and run these centres smoothly .
3.71 According to the information furnished to the Committee Lal
Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA),
Mussoorie has been entrusted to evaluate the implementation of the
scheme of CLR in few States out of which it has completed evaluation
study in the states of West Bengal and Karnataka and submitted the
Report to the Department.
3.72 The evaluation study in the remaining States is being entrusted
to National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD). When asked about
the reasons for assigning study to two different agencies LBSNAA
and NIRD, it is submitted that Since LBSNAA, Mussoorie has a
separate Centre for Rural Studies (CRS) funded by this Department,
the work of evaluation has been entrusted to it for the States of
Karnataka, West Bengal, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. If one organisation
alone is to undertake evaluation work for all the States, it will take a
long time, the possibility is also being explored to entrust evaluation
studies to the National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD),
Hyderabad which is an autonomous body under this Ministry.

51
3.73 The Committee note that although Computerisation of Land
Records is a cent percent Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the utilisation
position since the inception of the scheme is not very encouraging.
Out of Rs. 344.86 crore released, the utilisation position is Rs. 220.21
crore, which is approximately 65 percent of the total funds released.
The Committee find that the scheme was recently reviewed at the
meetings of Cabinet Secretary with the State Revenue Secretaries
and Revenue Ministers. The said review found that the overall pace
of implementation of the scheme was not satisfactory. The various
shortcomings enumerated include, lack of focus given by State level
authorities to the implementing authorities, and instability of tenure
of Senior Offices of Revenue Department at the State level. The
Committee appreciate the initiative taken by the Cabinet Secretary
in this regard and would like that a follow up of the various issues,
as raised at the review meetings should be done.
3.74 The Committee further find that at the aforesaid review
meeting convened by the Cabinet Secretary, the deadline for
completing the targets was fixed. The States were divided into three
categories. Category A States were to complete the target by March,
2005, Category B States by June, 2005, and Category C States by
December, 2005. The Committee find that even after the intervention
at the level of Cabinet Secretary, the targets were further spilled
over by three months for States. Karnataka and Goa have completed
the targets. The Committee feel that further pursuance and a more
pro-active role of the Union Government is required in this regard.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the further development
of the said targets by the respective State Governments.
3.75 The Committee further note that in North Eastern States,
the implementation of programme is even worse. Out of Rs. 491.80
lakhs, Rs. 289.22 lakhs is the utilisation position. The Committee
find that the various issues, in case of North Eastern States need to
be tackled in a different perspective keeping in view the fact that
tribal ownership, distribution and its use is governed by the tribal
customs. The Committee would like that various bottlenecks being
faced in the implementation of the scheme should be reviewed in
consultation with the State Governments and local bodies in such
States which may be in a better position to suggest the remedial
action.
3.76 The Committee further note that another issue which need
to be tackled particularly for North-Eastern States is non-existence

52
of land records in some of the North-Eastern States for example
Meghalaya State and Lakshadweep Union territory have no land
records. In other non-Eastern States too, the land records may not be
proper. In view of this scenario, the Committee feel that the success
of computersiation programme depends on the position of land
records in various States and Union territories. Thus some sort of
coordination should be maintained with the two schemes of the
Department SRA & ULR and Computerisation of Land Records.
Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land
Records (SRA & ULR)
3.77 With a view to assisting the States/Union territories in the
task of Updating of Land Records, a new Scheme was started in 1987-
1988 namely, ‘Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating
of Land Records (SRA & ULR)’  as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
Under this scheme, financial assistance is provided to the States on a
50:50 sharing basis between the Centre and the States. However, some
Union territories are given 100 per cent financial assistance under the
scheme. The funds are provided for early completion of survey and
settlement operations by induction of new technology, strengthening
of training infrastructure for pre-service and in-service training of
revenue/survey and settlement staff, creation of facilities for
maintenance and storage of land records, selective strengthening of
revenue machinery at various levels etc.
3.78 During the 9th Plan period, the outlay of the scheme was
Rs.40 crore but year-wise allocation was Rs.92.60 crore and at RE stage
it is reduced to Rs.87.60 crore, out of which the expenditure was
Rs.86.18 crore.
3.79 The details regarding BE, RE and expenditure incurred during
the first-three years of 10th Plan and BE for the year 2005-2006 are as
under:-
(Rs. in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Expenditure
2002-2003 35.00 20.00 20.73
2003-2004 25.00 25.00 24.46
2004-2005 20.00 20.00 17.66*
2005-2006 40.00 - -
*As on 23.03.2005

53
3.80 As per information given in Performance Budget all the
States/ Union territories have been covered under the Scheme and
funds to the tune of Rs. 280.84 crore were provided to the States/
Union territories as Central share upto 28 February, 2005. The utilisation
of funds reported by the States/ Union territories is Rs. 186.24 crore,
which is approximately 66 per cent of the total funds released.
3.81 When asked about reasons for huge underspending with the
States/ Union territories when compared to the releases, the
Department has stated that due to resource crunch, the States of Bihar,
Orissa, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and most of
the North-Eastern States are finding it difficult to provide their
matching share of 50 per cent funds in time which has resulted in
unspent balance with the States.
3.82 During the course of evidence the Secretary stated as under:
“Up till now we were looking only at the revenue record, but it
has also been decided that we should integrate the registration of
documents with the revenue record so that both are computerized
and automatically the registration results in updation of record
and vice-versa. When you are registering, you can see the revenue
record also. In fact, a Committee has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (WD) to look into this and integrate
both registration process and revenue records because in many
States, registration is done by a different Department and revenue
records are maintained by a different Department. Both should be
integrated so that the land owners can get information.”
3.83 The Department further elaborating on the plans to ensure
cent percent utilisation of earmarked funds stated as under:
“States have been requested to undertake survey/revisional survey
where it has not been done earlier with the use of modern
technology like Total Station & GPS, which requires huge
expenditure. Therefore, States may ask for more funds for the
Survey & Settlement operations, which will enable this Department
to utilise increased outlay under the Scheme of SRA & ULR.”
3.84 During the course of examination the Department has further
informed that during the Conference of State Revenue Ministers/
Secretaries, organised by the Department from time to time, the
Department has requested the States to make regular budgetary
provision for the State share for proper implementation of the scheme

54
of SRA & ULR. The Planning Commission was once again requested
to re-consider the proposal of the Department of Land Resources for
enhancement of funding pattern from 50:50 to 75:25 between the Centre
and the States and 90:10 for the North-Eastern States under the scheme
of SRA & ULR. The Department has informed that the 12th Finance
Commission’s Report provides more resources to States which should
enable them to meet their matching contribution.
3.85 One of the main objective of the Scheme is setting up of
survey and settlement organistations, especially in the North_Eastern
Region, where no land records exist. The States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram and Nagaland have no proper land
records.
3.86 When asked about the latest position of land records in North-
Eastern States, the Department has informed that the system of land
records and land administration prevalent in the rest of the country
does not exist in the hilly and tribal areas of the North-Eastern States,
no cadastral survey has been carried out there. In some of these States,
there is no proper legislation regarding land and land-related matters.
Though individual ownership of land has developed in some areas, a
good deal of land is still owned by the community. The North-Eastern
States have been requested to carry out survey and settlement where
it has not been done.
3.87 The position of funds released and utilised by the North-
Eastern States since inception of the scheme of SRA & ULR is given
below:
 (Rs. in lakh)
Name of the States Funds released Funds utilized
Arunachal Pradesh 173.75 150.97
Assam 459.45 202.00
Manipur 60.18 0.15
Meghalaya 50.00 50.00
Mizoram 1465.79 1208.79
Nagaland 661.72  574.54
Sikkim 146.46  63.45
Tripura 630.83  267.14
Total 3648.18  2517.04

55
3.88 Funds have been provided to North-Eastern States for survey
operations with the use of modern technology, construction of training
institutes and record rooms and purchase of office equipment for the
Revenue Department.
3.89 At this, the Committee pointed out that State Governments
of Mizoram and Nagaland have started survey and settlement with
the financial support from Government of India under the scheme of
SRA and ULR. The Department has also informed that the Survey &
settlement operation has not yet been completed in the States of
Mizoram & Nagaland.
Monitoring
3.90 The physical and financial progress of the scheme is being
monitored by the Department through Quarterly Progress Report. The
Department has stated that most of the States/Union territories are
furnishing QPRs in this regard. However the States of Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Jammu & Kashmir and Union territories of Chandigarh,
Dadra & Nagar Haveli are not submitting QPRs regularly to the
Department. These States have been requested to submit QPRs
regularly.
3.91 The Committee find that the major problem being
encountered by some of the States viz. Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and North Eastern States is
the difficulty to provide matching share of 50 per cent. The
Committee find that in most of the schemes of the Department of
Rural Development and Land Resources Centre and State’s share is
75:25. Moreover, another scheme related to land records viz.
‘Computerisation of Land Records’ is a 100 per cent Centrally
Sponsored Scheme. The Committee observe that land records are
the important documents not only for individuals but also for the
Government which can be used for the purpose of making planning
in different sectors. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need
to review the existing 50 per cent matching share by the State
Governments.
3.92 The Committee understand that there is a proposal to review
the existing funding pattern from 50:50 to 90:10 for North-Eastern
States and 75:25 in case of other than North-Eastern States. The
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance should further be pursued
in this regard and the Committee be apprised accordingly.

56
3.93 The Committee further find that the 12th Finance
Commission has provided more resources for States which should
enable them to meet their matching contribution. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the details of the 12th Finance
Commission’s recommendations. The Committee note that during
2005-2006 the allocation for SRA and ULR has been doubled to
Rs. 40 crore. The Committee strongly recommend that the Department
should take desired steps to ensure that objectives of maintenance
of land records are achieved in different States. The issue regarding
matching share as recommended should also be finalised
expeditiously to enable the State Governments to maintain/update
land records.
3.94 With regard to the North-Eastern States, the Committee find
that cadastral survey has not been carried out and some of these
States have no proper legislation regarding land and land related
matters. As recommended earlier, these issues need to be tackled in
a different way taking into account the tribal traditions there. The
Committee recommend that the issue of land reforms should be
discussed with the concerned State Governments/local bodies so that
the improvement in the implementation of the programme can be
achieved.
Technology Development, Extension & Training (TDET) Scheme
3.95 Tech nological support is very critical for development of
wastelands. Proper area specific strategy has to be developed keeping
in view the agro-climatic conditions and capability of the soil. The
Central Sector Technology Development, Extension & Training (TDET)
Scheme was launched during the year 1993-1994 to develop suitable
technologies for development/reclamation of wastelands for sustainable
production of food, fuel wood, fodder etc. The main objectives of the
Scheme are as follows:
(i) Development of database for wastelands;
(ii) Operationalisation of cost effective and proven technologies
for development of various categoriers of wastelands; and
(iii) Dissemination of research findings and appropriate
technologies for promoting wastelands development.
3.96 The Scheme is being implemented through ICAR Institutes,
State Agriculture Universities (SAUs), DRDAs and Government
institutions having adequate institutional framework and organizational

57
backup. Successful implementation of the Scheme is expected to bridge
the gap between the existing technologies and the need relevant to the
latest situation. Under this Scheme, 100 per cent Central Grant is
admissible to implement the projects on wastelands owned by the
government, Public Sector undertakings including Universities,
Panchayats etc. In case of the projects on wastelands of Private
Farmers/Corporate Bodies, the cost of the project is required to be
shared on the basis of 60:40 between the Department of Land Resources
and the beneficiary.
3.97 The details of outlays and expenditure year-wise made under
TDET Scheme during the 9th and 10th Plan so far, is as under:
Ninth Plan (1997-2002)
Sl. No. Year Outlay Expenditure Percentage
(Rs. Crore)
1. 1997-1998 8 5.60 70.00
2. 1998-1999 8 8.05 106.25
3. 1999-2000 8 8.70 108.75
4. 2000-2001 12 10.98 91.50
5. 2001-2002 15 9.93 66.20
Tenth Plan (2002-2007)
Sl. No. Year Outlay Expenditure Percentage
(Rs. Crore)
1. 2002-2003 17 13.70 80.59
2. 2003-2004 17 15.08 88.71
3. 2004-2005 15 8.12*  -
4. 2005-2006 17  -  -
*As on 10.03.2005
3.98 When asked about the reasons for the aforesaid lower
utilisation, the Department has stated that the lower utilization under
the TDET scheme, generally, has been for two major reasons. Firstly,
the allocation to NE States does not get utilized fully due to paucity
of fresh proposals from the region and also slower pace of

58
implementation of ongoing projects there. Secondly, all TDET projects
are being implemented by agencies like State Agricultural Universities,
ICAR Research Institutes etc. The expenditure auditing procedure of
these organizations is different than that of the Government agencies/
departments. As such, the Implementing Agencies of the TDET projects
find it difficult to meet the norms and requirements prescribed by the
Finance Division. It takes lot of persuasion and clarification before
these agencies come up with acceptable release proposals. This process
is time consuming and results in delays.
3.99 When asked as to how the Department would meet the
enhanced outlay during 2005-2006 in view of lesser utilisation during
the previous year, it has been replied that due to administrative reasons,
sanction of projects started late this year. All out efforts have been
made to fully utilise the allocation for the year and the Department
will achieve this target successfully. It is also expected that the situation
would improve in the next financial year and the Department is
confident of full utilization of the proposed allocation of Rs.17 crore
during 2005-2006.
Project planning and implementation
3.100 During the examination of Demands for Grants (2005-2006),
it has been submitted that 22 projects were foreclosed on account of
their poor performance and progress and on the basis of progress
achieved and releases made out of 85 ongoing, 28 projects are likely
to be completed during 2005-2006.
3.101 The Committee find that Technology Development
Extension and Training (TDET) scheme, is an important scheme. The
Scheme aims at operationalisation of cost effective and proven
technologies for development of various categories of wastelands as
well as dissemination of research finding and appropriate
technologies for promoting wastelands development. The Committee
further note that State Agricultural Universities and ICAR Research
Institutes are the main implementing agencies of the Scheme. The
Committee understand from the information provided by the
Department that the main bottleneck in the effective implementation
of the scheme is the norm and requirement prescribed by the Finance
Division. The Committee would like the Department to simplify the
said norm which are not acceptable to the research institutes, so as
to help these Institutes to analyse the position and comment further.
The Committee find that wastelands development is one of the

59
greatest challenge before the Government and there is much scope
in making cost effective technology for the purpose. To achieve this
objective, there is a further need to interact with the research
organisations through various meetings, seminars and persuade them
to come forward. The Committee hope that the Department would
take desired action in this regard and apprise them accordingly.
3.102 With regard to foreclosure of projects, the Committee note
that this is a common problem with all the schemes related to
wastelands development. Under TDET scheme, the number of
foreclosed projects is much higher. As per the reply of the
Government, out of 148 sanctioned projects, 22 projects were
foreclosed. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons
for such a huge number of foreclosed projects. They would also like
to be apprised of the total expenditure made for these projects so
far, to enable the Committee to have an idea of the wastage of
national resources due to the foreclosure of the projects.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN SINGH,
15 April, 2005 Chairman,
25 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Rural Development.

60
APPENDIX I
DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES
STATEMENT SHOWING 9TH PLAN YEAR-WISE OUTLAY & EXPENDITURE
(Rs. in Crores)
9th Plan Outlay and Expenditure
1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-2001 2001-2002 9th Plan (1997-2002)
Sl.No. Name of Scheme BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual
Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 41 51 61 7 1 8 1 9 2 0
1. Drought Prone Areas Programme 115.00 100.75 100.75 95.00 73.00 73.00 95.00 95.00 94.99 190.00 190.00 190.00 210.00 210.00 209.52 705.00 668.75 669.26
2. Desert Development Programme 70.00 70.00 70.00 90.00 80.00 79.80 85.00 85.00 85.00 135.00 135.00 135.00 160.00 150.00 150.00 540.00 520.00 519. 80
3. I.W.D.P . 74.50 50.00 53.95 82.10 62.10 62.00 82.00 82.00 83.07 480.00 387.00 386.90 430.00 405.00 376.35 1148.60 986.10 962.27
4. Computerisation of Land Records 20.00 20.00 20.19 30.00 25.00 24.75 33.00 33.00 32.69 50.00 48.00 47.85 45.00 45.00 44.36 178.00 171.00 169.84
5. SRA&ULR 18.80 18.80 18.97 8.80 8.80 9.05 10.00 10.00 10.25 25.00 25.00 24.99 30.00 25.00 23.94 92.60 87.60 87.20
6. Consolidation of Land Holdings — — — — — — — — — 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 0.00
7. Tech. Dev. Ext. and Training Scheme 8.00 7.50 5.60 8.00 8.00 8.05 8.00 8.00 8.70 12.00 10.87 10.98 15.00 12.00 9.93 51.00 46.37 43.26

61
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 41 51 61 7 1 8 1 9 2 0
8. Support to NGOs/Vas Scheme 4.00 4.00 2.60 2.00 2.00 2.02 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.00 0.40 0.40 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.00 8.40 7.02
9. Wasteland Development Task Force 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.98 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 2.98
10. Investment Promotional Scheme 1.00 0.20 0.00 1.60 0.60 0.04 2.00 2.00 0.23 0.50 0.10 0.10 0.50 0.20 0.12 5.60 3.10 0.49
11. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation 1.00 0.30 0.04 1.00 0.25 0.16 1.00 1.00 0.99 1.00 0.26 0.20 5.00 0.20 0.05 9.00 2.01 1.44
12. Communication 4.00 1.50 1.42 3.00 0.75 0.37 3.00 3.00 2.99 2.00 0.92 0.86 0.50 0.50 0.26 12.50 6.67 5.90
13. Board Secretairat 1.50 1.50 1.27 2.00 2.00 1.42 2.00 2.00 1.71 2.50 2.45 2.38 3.00 2.10 1.68 11.00 10.05 8.46
Total Plan 318.80 275.55 275.79 324.50 263.50 261.66 324.00 324.00 323.60 900.00 800.00 799.66 900.00 850.00 816.21 2767.30 2513.05 2476.92
Non-Plan
Secretariat Economic Services 0.20 0.19 0.14 0.25 0.24 0.20 0.26 0.25 0.17 0.90 0.89 0.84 0.99 0.97 0.84 2.60 2.54 2.19
Total Plan & Non Plan 319.00 275.74 275.93 324.75 263.74 261.86 324.26 324.25 323.77 900.90 800.89 800.50 900.99 850.97 817.05 2769.90 2515.59 24 79.11

62
APPENDIX II
DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES
STATEMENT SHOWING OUTLAY AND CORRESPONDING EXPENDITURE
DURING TENTH PLAN (FROM 2002-03 TO 2005-06)
(Rs. in Crores)
10th Plan 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-05 2005-06
Sl. Name of Scheme As As agreed  Exp. BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE RE Actual BE
No. Proposed by  as on Exp. Exp. Exp. as on
Planning  22.3.2005 22.3.2005
Commission
12 3 4 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 21 31 41 5
1. Drought Prone Ares Programme 1600 1500 842.45 250.00 250.00 250.00 295.00 295.00 295.00 300.00 300.00 297.45 353.00
2. Desert Development Programme 1200 1100 607.63 185.00 185.00 185.00 265.00 195.00 215.00 215.00 215.00 207.63 268.00
3. I.W.D.P . 1900 1800 997.98 387.00 380.00 354.45 335.00 329.00 312.90 368.00 368.00 330.63 485.00
4. Computerisation of Land Records 500 400 111.41 55.00 35.00 31.18 40.00 40.00 35.77 50.00 50.00 44.46 100.00
5. SRA&ULR 200 200 61.60 35.00 20.00 20.73 25.00 25.00 24.46 20.00 20.00 16.41 40.00
6. Externally Aided Projects (EAP) 365 365 194.28 63.00 60.00 59.00 66.00 51.00 55.28 80.00 80.00 80.00 80.00
7. Tech. Dev . Ext. and Training Scheme 100 90 36.90 17.00 16.00 13.70 17.00 14.00 15.08 15.00 15.00 8.12 17.00

63
12 3 4 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 21 31 41 5
8. Investment Promotional Scheme 100 71 4.51 1.00 0.10 3.13 0.10 0.10 0.96 0.10 0.10 0.42 0.10
9. Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation 5.95 2.95 4.85 0.54 1.20 0.50 1.20
10. Communication 1.05 0.95 1.05 0.36 1.70 1.20 1.70
New Initiatives 1000 1.00 0.00 0.00
11. Pradhan Mantri Grameen Jal
Samvardhan Yojana 200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
12. Bio Fuels 10.00 0.20 0.00 50.00
Total Plan 5965 6526 2856.76 1000.00 950.00 917.19 1050.00 950.00 954.45 1261.00 1050.00 985.l2 1396.00
Non-plan
Secretariat Economic Services 8.39 3.81 3.62 2.68 3.66 3.43 2.83 3.48 3.43 2.88 3.44
Total Plan & Non Plan 5965 6526 2865.15 1003.81 953.62 919.87 1053.66 953.43 957.28 1264.48 1053.43 988.00 1399.44

64
APPENDIX III
OVERALL POSITION OF THE PROPOSED, AGREED TO ALLOCATION DURING
EACH YEAR OF 9TH AND 10TH PLANS
(Rs. in Crore)
Scheme 9th Plan Allocations 10th Plan Allocations
Proposed Agreed/ Proposed Agreed/
Actual Actual
IWDP 3360.00 1148.60 1900.00 1800.00
DPAP 700.00 705.00 1600.00 1500.00
DDP 1430.00 540.00 1200.00 1100.00
CLR 332.46 178.00 500.00 400.00
SRA & ULR 326.00 92.60 200.00 200.00
TDET 106.00 51.00 100.00 90.00
Others 291.00 52.10 100.00 71.00
Externally Aided — — 365.00 365.00
Projects
New Initiatives — — — 1000.00
Total 6545.46 2767.30 5965.00 6526.00

65
APPENDIX IV
STATE-WISE WASTELANDS OF INDIA
(Area in Sq. Kms.)
Sl. State No. of Total Geog. Total Wastelands % of Wastelands
No. Districts Area of distts. area in distts. to total
Covered Covered Covered geog. Area
12 3 4 5 6
1. Andhra Pradesh 23 275068.00 51750.19 18.81
2. Arunachal Pradesh 13 83743.00 18326.25 21.88
3. Assam 23 78438.00 20019.17 25.52
4. Bihar 55 173877.00 20997.55 12.08
5. Goa 02 3702.00 613.27 16.57
6. Gujarat 25 196024.00 43021.28 21.95
7. Haryana 19 44212.00 3733.98 8.45
8. Himachal Pradesh 12 55673.00 31659.00 56.87
9. Jammu & Kashmir* 14 101387.00 75444.24 64.55

66
12 3 4 5 6
10. Karnataka 27 191791.00 20839.28 10.87
11. Kerala 14 38863.00 1448.18 3.73
12. M.P . 62 443446.00 69713.75 15.72
13. Maharashtra 32 307690.00 53489.08 17.38
14. Manipur 09 22327.00 12948.62 58.00
15. Meghalaya 07 22429.00 9904.38 44.16
16. Mizoram 03 21081.00 4071.68 19.31
17. Nagaland 07 16579.00 8404.10 50.69
18. Orissa 30 155707.00 21341.71 13.71
19. Punjab 17 50362.00 2228.40 4.42
20. Rajasthan 32 342239.00 105639.11 30.87
21. Sikkim 04 7096.00 3569.58 50.30
22. Tripura 04 10486.00 1276.03 12.17
23. Tamil Nadu 29 130058.00 23013.90 17.70

67
12 3 4 5 6
24. Uttar Pradesh 83 294411.00 38772.80 13.17
25. West Bengal 18 88752.00 5718.48 6.44
26. Union Territories 20 10973.00 574.30 5.23
Total 584 3166414.00 638518.31 20.17
• UN-Surveyed area (J&K) 120849.00
• Total geographical area 3287263.00
Source: 1:50,000 scale wasteland maps prepared from Landsat Thematic Mapper/IRS LISS II/III Data 10,000 sq. kms = 1 Million Ha.

68
APPENDIX V
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 29 MARCH, 2005
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Mohan Jena
5. Shri A.F. Golam Osmani
6. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
7. Shrimati Tejaswini Seeramesh
8. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
9. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrai
Rajya Sabha
14. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
15. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
16. Shri Penumalli Madhu
17. Dr. Chandan Mitra
18. Dr. Faguni Ram
19. Prof. R.B.S. Varma

69
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A. K. Shah — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Land Resources)
1. Shri M. Shankar, Secretary
2. Shri V .S. Sampath, Additional Secretary
3. Smt. Lalitha Kumar, Joint Secretary
4. Shri M. Aslam, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives
of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
on Demands for Grants (2005-2006).
[The representatives of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of
Rural Development), were then called in]
3. The Chairman thereafter welcomed the representatives of the
Department of Land Resources to the sitting. He drew their attention
to direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural Development)
on Demands for Grants (2005-2006). The Secretary , Land Resources
briefly explained to the Committee the overall position with regard to
the allocation and expenditure during the 9th Plan (1997-2002) period
as well as the projections of the Department during the 10th Plan
(2002-2007) period. He also dealt with various issues and enumerated
the problems being faced with regard to the implementation of various
schemes of the Department. The Committee then discussed in detail
the issues related to the examination of the Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) of the Department with special emphasis on major Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Department. The representatives of the
Department clarified to the queries of the Members and were asked to
send written replies thereto which could not be answered during the
sitting.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT (2004-2005)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF
THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 8 APRIL, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1345 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Singh— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shri Mohan Jena
4. Shri Subhash Maharia
5. Shri Hannan Mollah
6. Shri Anna Saheb M.K. Patil
7. Shri P . Chalapathi Rao
8. Shri S. Sudhakar Reddy
9. Shri Nikhilananda Sar
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Sita Ram Singh
12. Shri D.C. Srikantappa
13. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Kumari Nirmala Deshpande
15. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
16. Shri Penumalli Madhu
17. Shri Kalraj Mishra
18. Dr. Chandan Mitra
19. Dr. Faguni Ram
20. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
70

71
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri V .K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Shah — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee.
*** *** ***
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the draft
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Land
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development) with a slight modifications.
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
aforesaid draft Reports on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Minutes not related to the subject have been kept separately.

APPENDIX VII
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Sl.No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations
12 3
1. 2.12 The Committee note that the concept of
allocation of 10 per cent exclusive outlay
of each Department/Ministry of the Union
Government for North Eastern Region
including Sikkim was started since
2000-2001. After that, whenever the
attention of the Department has been
drawn towards underspending, a common
reply stating that allocation for two area
specific programmes DDP and DPAP is
being made every year, whereas these
schemes are not in operation in these States
has been furnished. The Committee while
noting the concept of allocation for North
Eastern Region find that 10 per cent lump-
sum allocation of the overall outlay of a
Department is earmarked exclusively for
these areas. No scheme-wise allocation is
being made. If that is the state of affairs,
the Committee fail to understand the logic
of the Department in this regard. The
Committee feel that instead of furnishing
such reasons, the Department should stress
for increasing the scope of the schemes viz.
IWDP and land records. The position of
land records in said States is very poor and
hence need more attention. The detailed
analysis in this regard has been done in
the subsequent part of the report. Here the
Committee would like to emphasise that
the outlay can be used for this sector after
having consultations with the concerned
72

73
12 3
State Governments. The Committee would
like the Department to explain the position
in view of their aforesaid observation so as
to enable them to analyse the position and
comment further in this regard.
2. 2.13 The Committee after analysing the data as
indicated in the aforesaid paras of the
report find that Rs. 561 crore has been
allocated more than the proposed outlay
during 10th Plan. Not only that, the outlay
provided during 10th Plan is more than two
times of the allocation made during 9th
Plan. The scheme-wise analysis further
indicates that the allocation during 2005-
2006 has been increased in all the schemes
specifically under the schemes meant for
computerisation and updation of land
records where the hike is 100 per cent.
However, if allocation scheme-wise is
analysed in the context of proposed
allocation, the data indicate that excepting
scheme meant for land records the
allocation provided is lesser than the
proposed allocation. Further if the trends
of what was proposed scheme-wise by the
Department and what was eventually
allocated scheme-wise during 10th Plan is
compared to 9th Plan, the data indicate that
the difference between proposed and agreed
to allocation under each of the schemes is
much less as compared to 9th Plan.
3. 2.14 With regard to the position of expenditure,
the Committee note that during 9th Plan
the underspending was to the tune of
Rs. 290 crore. The reasons as indicated by
the Department include cut imposed by the
Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimates
stage. Further if the expenditure is

74
12 3
compared to Revised Estimates during 9th
Plan, the underspending comes to the tune
of Rs. 36.48 crore. During 10th Plan the
underspending is due to lesser utilisation
in North Eastern States.
4. 2.15 The Committee conclude from what has
been stated above that the data indicate
quite a favourable performance of the
Department as compared to the other
counterpart Departments of the Ministry of
Rural Development viz. the Department of
Rural Development and Drinking Water
Supply where the actual allocation is far
less than the proposed outlay of those
Departments. The better allocation position
is also due to very good expenditure
position shown by the Department under
several schemes. The allocation and the
efforts made by the Department need to
be continued in a bigger way keeping in
view the gigantic task of huge areas falling
under wastelands in the country. The
analysis in this regard has been made in
the subsequent part of the Report.
5. 2.16 The scheme-wise analysis has also been
made in the subsequent part of the report.
Here the Committee may like to highlight
that the Budget documents of the
Department indicate that the releases to the
State Governments/ implementing agencies
are considered as spending. There is no
mechanism to analyse the performance of
projects being undertaken under different
schemes due to long gestation period.
Further the foreclosure of projects
specifically under watershed schemes
indicate that the physical performance of
the projects may not be so satisfactory as

75
12 3
the data with regard to financial
achievement indicate. The Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to evolve some
sort of mechanism for evaluating the
performance of different projects. Some sort
of grading indicating poor, satisfactory or
very good may be indicated against the
number of projects being undertaken in
various States. Besides, another mechanism
can be to have some system indicating the
projects at First stage, Second stage, Third
stage etc. Such type of analysis would
enable a critical evaluation of the projects.
The Committee would like the Department
to consider the said aspect and apprise the
Committee accordingly.
6. 2.30 The Committee disapprove the way the
new schemes are proposed and outlay
earmarked without any planning or
preparedness on the part of the
Government resulting in blockage of outlay
in the resources starved economy of the
country. They note that Rs. 1,000 crore were
earmarked during 10th Plan for the ‘New
initiative’. The two new schemes viz.
(i) Renovation of Traditional Water Bodies,
and (ii) Development of Bio-fuel’ were to
be launched. Initially Renovation of
Traditional Water Bodies was proposed to
be under the Ministry of Land Resources
but finally the Ministry of Water Resources
was chosen as the Ministry to handle the
aforesaid scheme. The Committee find that
the handling of watershed projects by
various Ministries of the Union Government
viz.  Ministries of Agriculture, Water
Resources and Land Resources is the main
cause of such a state of affairs. The
Committee in their earlier reports have been

76
12 3
expressing their concern in this regard. The
issue of convergence although decided in
principle, is being delayed by the
Government.
7. 2.31 There is uncertainty over the fate of another
new scheme ‘Bio fuel’, for which Rs. 50 crore
have been allocated during 2005-2006. The
Secretary during the course of oral evidence
acknowledged that Jatropha plantation
envisaged under the scheme is neither
proven nor cost effective. The use of
Jatropha plant for Bio-fuel is still at the
experimental stage and TERI is preparing
the project report. Not only that, the
viability of Jatropha plant and other issues
relating to its plantation like the need for
irrigation, farmers willingness to plantation
etc. are still to be debated. Without
examining all these issues, the detailed
Project Report (DPR) for the scheme is
being prepared for obtaining clearance from
the Planning Commission. Although it is
acknowledged that no expenditure can be
made under the scheme, an allocation of
Rs. 50 crore has already been made during
2005-2006, thereby blocking the resources.
While the Committee are not against
initiating novel schemes as part of energy
security like Bio fuel, they feel that before
launching the scheme, its viability should
be ascertained. The technology should be
tested and proven only then the decision
to launch the scheme should be taken and
allocation for the purpose provided.
8. 2.32 In the aforesaid state of affairs the
Committee express their strong reservations
on the issue of handling of new schemes.
They strongly recommend that before
launching a new scheme Planning

77
12 3
Commission/Ministry of Finance should
analyse the proposals of the concerned
Ministry. Only after initial home work is
done, and all the things are ready for
implementation, allocation should be made
as blockage of outlay earmarked for non-
viable schemes deprives the other
established schemes of their due allocation.
The Committee strongly recommend that
their concerns in this regard should be duly
communicated to the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance and also
to the Cabinet Secretariat.
9. 2.37 The Committee find that total wastelands
in the country is 63.85 million hectare. If
forest area (under the jurisdiction of the
Ministry of Forest) and untreatable land is
deducted, the total treatable area comes to
around 30 million hectares. The Committee
find that as informed earlier [reference para
2.18 of 2nd report (2004-2005)], the
Government had planned development of
wastelands amounting to 40 million
hectares. Further as per Wastelands Atlas
there are varying estimates of total
wastelands in the country, however, no less
than 37.5 million hectares are currently
expected to be available for viable
treatment.
The Committee find from the position as
given above that perhaps there is no clarity
on the issue of minimum wastelands that
could be developed in the country. The
Committee would like the Department to
clarify the position in this regard since the
data with regard to minimum treatable
wastelands is the necessary input for future
planning.

78
12 3
10. 2.38 Besides the Committee find that Atlas
indicating the district-wise data of
wastelands by employing the scientific
remote sensing satellite data products was
finalised on 9 March, 2000. Five years have
passed since then, as per Department’s
reply, efforts are being made to update the
data. The Committee would like to be
apprised when the exercise of updation
would be completed. Besides the
Committee also feel that there should be
some mechanism to update the data
periodically so as to know how far the
efforts of the Government could result in
actual treatment of land. Besides updation
of data would also make the position of
slippage of treated land again into
wastelands clear.
11. 2.42 The detailed analysis of the allocation
proposed by the Department, Budget
Estimates indicating the availability of data
and expenditure position has been made
in the preceding part of the report. So far
as the overall scenario of wastelands
development vis-a-vis outlay required is
concerned, the Committee find that there
is an urgent need to allocate more funds
to complete the development of total
wastelands in a stipulated timeframe. The
Committee note that wastelands when
developed can be a major economic
resource for the country . Besides there is
an urgent need for the proper and
integrated planning for the purpose.
12. 2.43 The Committee were informed that it will
take 17- 18 years to develop the wastelands
with the existing pace and outlay of the
Department. The Committee find that other

79
12 3
Ministries/Departments of the Union
Governments viz . Agriculture, Water
Resources etc. are also having schemes for
watershed development. Huge resources are
being allocated to these Ministries also.
Besides State Governments may be having
some schemes for tackling the issue of
development of wastelands. Unless there is
some sort of coordinating mechanism, no
meaningful conclusion indicating the
position of coverage of wastelands in the
country can be arrived at. As indicated in
the preceding para, the final decision on
the issue of convergence of the efforts being
made by Union Government cannot be
arrived at even after the concurrence of the
Planning Commission in this regard.
Pending decision in this regard, the
Committee may like to recommend to the
Department to evolve some sort of
mechanism by which the efforts made by
several Ministries/Department/State
Government could be coordinated so as to
have a clear cut position of scenario of
wastelands development. Only when such
a data is available, a time bound
programme for tackling the issue of
wastelands development can be made.
13. 2.46 The Committee find that a large part of
wastelands to be treated are is in the States
of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat
and Andhra Pradesh in terms of districts.
The Committee feel that there is a need to
frame a State-wise and phase-wise
programme for development of wastelands
in consultation with the concerned State
Governments on priority basis.

80
12 3
14. 2.47 The Committee would also like to
recommend to study international
experience in the field of wastelands
development so as to have exposure of the
technologies and policy formulation being
made in this regard in those countries. Such
a study will help the Government to take
the benefit of the positive experiences of
these countries.
15. 2.55 The Committee are pleased to note the
results of impact assessment studies
commissioned by the Department in 16
States covering two hundred districts. These
studies evaluated the impact of watershed
programmes IWDP , DPAP and DDP in the
areas covered. As revealed by said studies,
the programmes have positive impact on
net sown area, gross cropped area sown
more than once, the increasing of option of
irrigation, fuelwood and fodder availability.
Besides the studies reveal favourable impact
by way of increase in household income
and wage employment. The Committee
note that the favourable impact of these
studies should be widely publicised. The
various field level agencies, State
Governments, NGOs and all those involved
with the watershed programme should be
made aware of the findings of the
evaluation studies. Such an exercise will
definitely motivate the State Governments
and all other concerned to take more and
more projects for the purpose. Besides
emphatic reports should be presented to the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance
while presenting budget projections so that
adequate outlay could be provided for
different schemes.

81
12 3
16. 2.56 The Committee further find that the Union
Government has brought an ambitious
legislation viz . ‘The National Rural
Employment Guarantee Bill, 2004’ which is
being examined by the Committee. The said
legislation seeks to provide 100 days of
wage employment to each BPL family in
rural areas. The Committee find that 60 per
cent of expenditure under all area
development programmes goes for wage
employment in the project area. Further the
impact assessment studies have indicated a
favourable impact on employment
generation in the areas covered by the
programmes of the Department. The
Committee observe that the watershed
programmes can help the Government in
achieving the objectives of the aforesaid
legislation. The related issues will be
examined in detail while the aforesaid Bill
will be examined by the Committee. The
Committee would like to recommend here
that the various revealations regarding
wage employment should be discussed with
the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission and the Department of Rural
Development so as to have some integrated
planning to achieve the objectives of the
aforesaid legislation.
17. 2.57 Further the Committee find that ‘Hariyali’
guidelines of the Department emphasise the
convergence of all the programmes of not
only of Union Government but also those
being implemented by the State
Governments at the field level. While
appreciating the formulation of said
guidelines the Committee feel that there is
an urgent need to implement the aforesaid
guidelines since the other Ministries and

82
12 3
State Governments are involved in this
regard. There is an urgent need to discuss
and debate this issue during the various
conferences, seminars held where State
Governments and other Ministries
represent. Besides the said guidelines
should be publicised widely. To motivate
the State Governments, the impact of
convergence should be studied carefully
and the success of the States/districts which
could have positive impact, should be
replicated in other States/districts.
18. 2.63 The Committee in their earlier reports have
been recommending to review the position
of DDP and DPAP blocks since these blocks
were identified a decade back. Since then
the situation may have changed. Many
more blocks may need assistance under
DDP & DPAP programmes. Besides, State
Governments have been requesting for
coverage of additional blocks. The
Committee appreciate that a Committee
under the Chairmanship of Shri S. Partha
Sarathi has been appointed for this purpose.
The said Partha Sarathi Committee will
submit the report within six months. The
Committee would like to be apprised of
the recommendations of the said Committee
when finalised.
19. 3.21 The Committee note that around 65 per
cent to 70 per cent of IWDP funds are
meant for committed liabilities for on-going
projects during entire 9th Plan (1997-2002).
For instance the Committee find that during
2000-2001 and 2001-2002 out of the total
outlay of Rs. 480 crore and Rs. 430 crore
the major portion of Rs. 350 crore and
Rs. 200 crore was for committed liabilities.

83
12 3
The Committee feel that with more and
more committed liabilities for the ongoing
projects, it will be difficult to achieve the
set targets of development of wastelands.
Since more and more money would be
needed for committed liabilities, it would
result in lesser new projects and similarly
lesser coverage of additional wastelands.
The Committee further note that on an
average the gestation period of a project is
four to five years as indicated by the
Department. However, the data show that
some of the projects started in 1997, 1998
are yet to be completed. Thus a project may
continue even after completion of seven to
eight years. In this scenario the Committee
feel that there is an urgent need to
periodically evaluate the performance of
projects. As recommended in the earlier
part of the Report, the projects should be
evaluated at certain specified stages, say
first stage, second stage and some sort of
grading should be given. The Committee
urge for stricter monitoring on the lines
suggested above.
20. 3.22 The Committee note with concern the issue
of foreclosure of projects. They find from
the data made available to them that out
of 630 projects sanctioned since 1995-1996,
13 projects were foreclosed. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the details of
the funds allocated for the said projects and
the stage at which these were foreclosed.
Beside the detailed reasons for foreclosure
of the these projects should also be
indicated so as to enable the Committee to
come to some meaningful conclusion on
wastage of national resources and comment
further in this regard.

84
12 3
21. 3.23 The Committee find from the State-wise
data furnished by the Department that
certain amount has been indicated as to be
recovered and recovered from each of the
States. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the details on which account
the outlay was to be recovered and
recovered from these States to enable the
Committee to review the position in this
regard.
22. 3.24 The Committee further note that in North-
Eastern States during 2004-2005, the number
of projects sanctioned is almost half of the
number of projects sanctioned during
previous year. Underspending in North-
Eastern region is the major area of concern
as pointed out in the previous Reports, and
indicated in the earlier part of the report.
Not only that in North-Eastern States,
10 per cent of the allocation for DPAP and
DDP is also being made available although
no DDP and DPAP areas are there in that
region. In view of the aforesaid position
there is an urgent need to sanction more
and more additional projects under IWDP
in North-Eastern Areas. The Committee
would like the Department to take the
desired action in this regard and apprise
the Committee accordingly.
23. 3.25 The Committee find that some of the States
have taken laudable action like coordinating
units at the State level as has been done
by Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and
Nagaland, identification of district level
Institutions/NGOs as has been done by
Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh need
to be replicated by other States urgently.

85
12 3
The Committee would like the Department
to take desired steps in this regard.
24. 3.53 The Committee find that though the
utilisation performance under DPAP and
DDP programme has been satisfactory
during 9th Plan and first three years of the
current plan, a lot more is to be done in
DDP areas in some of the States. The
Committee find that keeping in view the
area as large as around 199 thousand
square km. in Rajasthan, 96 square km. in
J&K, 55 thousand square km. in Gujarat,
the quantum of funds are barely sufficient
to accomplish the task. In this connection
there is a need to enhance the funds for
DPAP and DDP programmes. The
Committee hope that Government will do
the needful in this regard.
25. 3.54 The Committee find from the data
furnished by the Department that the
problems under three watershed
programmes viz. IWDP , DDP and DPAP are
common. As pointed out in the earlier part
of the report relating to IWDP , the major
area of concern is foreclosure of projects.
Under DPAP 1764 projects have been
foreclosed till date. Similarly under DDP ,
300 projects have been foreclosed till date.
The Committee feel that huge national
resources are being wasted by foreclosing
the projects under such important schemes
of the Department. The Committee would
like to be informed of the outlay spent on
these projects, alongwith the stage at which
these projects were foreclosed. The
Committee would also like to be informed
of the specific reasons for the foreclosure
of these projects so as to enable them to

86
12 3
analyse the position and comment further
in this regard.
26. 3.55 Another important area, the Committee
would like to comment upon is the need
for active involvement of Panchayati Raj
Institutions in DPAP and DDP programmes.
The Committee find that Mid Term
Evaluation of DPAP and DDP programmes
has indicated favourable results in covered
blocks in terms of productivity of land,
vegetative cover and water table. The
Committee recommend that DPAP and
DDP projects should be so framed which
may take into account the needs of
common man at grass roots level.
27. 3.73 The Committee note that although
Computerisation of Land Records is a cent
percent Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the
utilisation position since the inception of
the scheme is not very encouraging. Out
of Rs. 344.86 crore released, the utilisation
position is Rs. 220.21 crore, which is
approximately 65 per cent of the total funds
released. The Committee find that the
scheme was recently reviewed at the
meetings of Cabinet Secretary with the State
Revenue Secretaries and Revenue Ministers.
The said review found that the overall pace
of implementation of the scheme was not
satisfactory. The various shortcomings
enumerated include, lack of focus given by
State level authorities to the implementing
authorities, and instability of tenure of
Senior Offices of Revenue Department at
the State level. The Committee appreciate
the initiative taken by the Cabinet Secretary
in this regard and would like that a follow
up of the various issues, as raised at the
review meetings should be done.

87
12 3
28. 3.74 The Committee further find that at the
aforesaid review meeting convened by the
Cabinet Secretary , the deadline for
completing the targets was fixed. The States
were divided into three categories.
Category A States were to complete the
target by March, 2005, Category B States
by June, 2005, and Category C States by
December, 2005. The Committee find that
even after the intervention at the level of
Cabinet Secretary, the targets were further
spilled over by three months for States.
Karnataka and Goa have completed the
targets. The Committee feel that further
pursuance and a more pro-active role of
the Union Government is required in this
regard. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the further development of the
said targets by the respective State
Governments.
29. 3.75 The Committee further note that in North
Eastern States, the implementation of
programme is even worse. Out of Rs. 491.80
lakhs, Rs. 289.22 lakhs is the utilisation
position. The Committee find that the
various issues, in case of North Eastern
States need to be tackled in a different
perspective keeping in view the fact that
tribal ownership, distribution and its use is
governed by the tribal customs. The
Committee would like that various
bottlenecks being faced in the
implementation of the scheme should be
reviewed in consultation with the State
Governments and local bodies in such
States which may be in a better position to
suggest the remedial action.
30. 3.76 The Committee further note that another
issue which need to be tackled particularly

88
12 3
for North-Eastern States is non-existence of
land records in some of the North-Eastern
States for example Meghalaya State and
Lakshadweep Union territory have no land
records. In other non-Eastern States too, the
land records may not be proper. In view
of this scenario, the Committee feel that the
success of computersiation programme
depends on the position of land records in
various States and Union territories. Thus
some sort of coordination should be
maintained with the two schemes of the
Department SRA & ULR and
Computerisation of Land Records.
31. 3.91 The Committee find that the major problem
being encountered by some of the States
viz. Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand, Rajasthan,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and North
Eastern States is the difficulty to provide
matching share of 50 per cent. The
Committee find that in most of the schemes
of the Department of Rural Development
and Land Resources Centre and State’s
share is 75:25. Moreover, another scheme
related to land records viz. ‘Computerisation
of Land Records’ is a 100 per cent Centrally
Sponsored Scheme. The Committee observe
that land records are the important
documents not only for individuals but also
for the Government which can be used for
the purpose of making planning in different
sectors. The Committee feel that there is
an urgent need to review the existing 50
per cent matching share by the State
Governments.
32. 3.92 The Committee understand that there is a
proposal to review the existing funding
pattern from 50:50 to 90:10 for North-

89
12 3
Eastern States and 75:25 in case of other
than North-Eastern States. The Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance should
further be pursued in this regard and the
Committee be apprised accordingly.
33. 3.93 The Committee further find that the
12th Finance Commission has provided
more resources for States which should
enable them to meet their matching
contribution. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the details of the 12th
Finance Commission’s recommendations.
The Committee note that during 2005-2006
the allocation for SRA and ULR has been
doubled to Rs. 40 crore. The Committee
strongly recommend that the Department
should take desired steps to ensure that
objectives of maintenance of land records
are achieved in different States. The issue
regarding matching share as recommended
should also be finalised expeditiously to
enable the State Governments to maintain/
update land records.
34. 3.94 With regar d to the North-Eastern States, the
Committee find that cadastral survey has
not been carried out and some of these
States have no proper legislation regarding
land and land related matters. As
recommended earlier, these issues need to
be tackled in a different way taking in to
account the tribal traditions there. The
Committee recommend that the issue of
land reforms should be discussed with the
concerned State Governments/local bodies
so that the improvement in the
implementation of the programme can be
achieved.

90
12 3
35. 3.101 The Committee find that Technology
Development Extension and Training
(TDET) scheme, is an important scheme.
The Scheme aims at operationalisation of
cost effective and proven technologies for
development of various categories of
wastelands as well as dissemination of
research finding and appropriate
technologies for promoting wastelands
development. The Committee further note
that State Agricultural Universities and
ICAR Research Institutes are the main
implementing agencies of the Scheme. The
Committee understand from the
information provided by the Department
that the main bottleneck in the effective
implementation of the scheme is the norm
and requirement prescribed by the Finance
Division. The Committee would like the
Department to simplify the said norm
which are not acceptable to the research
institutes, so as to help these Institutes to
analyse the position and comment further.
The Committee find that wastelands
development is one of the greatest challenge
before the Government and there is much
scope in making cost effective technology
for the purpose. To achieve this objective,
there is a further need to interact with the
research organisations through various
meetings, seminars and persuade them to
come forward. The Committee hope that
the Department would take desired action
in this regard and apprise them accordingly.
36. 3.102 With regard to foreclosure of projects, the
Committee note that this is a common
problem with all the schemes related to
wastelands development. Under TDET
scheme, the number of foreclosed projects

91
12 3
is much higher. As per the reply of the
Government, out of 148 sanctioned projects,
22 projects were foreclosed. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the reasons
for such a huge number of foreclosed
projects. They would also like to be
apprised of the total expenditure made for
these projects so far, to enable the
Committee to have an idea of the wastage
of national resources due to the foreclosure
of the projects.